Okay so Veronica would you
please take the roll Senator
Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos present.
Senator Hamblen
Senator Neville.
Senator poker.
Committees.
Senator so.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator with.
I think you Senator Stefanics.
Yes I'm present okay.
To get Senator sold on yes I
understand good morning everyone
this is this might be our last
meeting of Senate conservation
and before we start with our
bills I wanted to thank you
again all of the staff who have
been working for this committee
and Trevor Reilly is our system
operator.
Veronica Ortega.
Is the committee secretary her
assistant.
Excuse me is Mariah Martinez.
To enter.
For.
Not on mute okay so going on to
thank the staff I'd like to
thank Lucinda Folsom and Vicki
Gavin who are the committee
analysts.
Then surely Baca and Bridget by
NAC who are the major pool
analysts.
And Thomas seed and Cody Morrow
who are the minority analysts.
And and my niece is my personal
secretary who is not working
from the capitol and I'd like to
thank all of our staff for all
the incredible work they've done
off session they've kept us
moving and sometimes committee's
work until the very last second
of the last week but as I said
this might be our last meeting
so I wanted to give a shout out
to everybody for their good
work.
So let's move on.
To our very first bill of the
day which is house bill seventy
six as amended and the.
Title of the bill is E. I. B.
environmental improvement board
permit denial for poor
compliance and Representative
Christine Chandler is the
sponsor and she is here so
please take it away
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and nice
to see you committee I do have
an expert witness and her name
is Sandra Lee and Sandra is the
environmental protection
division director and this is an
agency bill and I guess I kind
of like to think of it as let's
level the playing field bill and
by that I mean it it allows the
department to ensure that they
take into account whether or not
someone seeking a permanent or
present permit holder is
complying with their permitting
requirements offering accurate
information on there permit
applications that they don't
have a history of poor
compliance or illegal conduct
those kinds of things so it adds
to the air quality permitting
provisions the ability of the
department to consider in the
application process very just
activities that an operator may
have engaged in that some may
consider improper well we would
consider improper for example
agency representing a material
fact failing to disclose
information having that kind the
convicted failing to get a
permit before construction one
one would have been required
those sorts of things madam
chair and committee and with
that I think I'm done with my
piece of the presentation I
don't know if miss you know you
would like to supplement madam
chair if you so desire.
Missy lead you want to proceed.
Madam chair members of the
committee thanks for hearing HB
seventy six this morning
Representative channeling
provided an excellent overview
of the bill I just want to add
that H. B. seventy six will
allow New Mexico to address
significant non compliance in
the way that many other western
states do including states like
South Dakota Oklahoma and Kansas
in addition it will make the air
quality control act more
consistent with other
environmental statutes in New
Mexico the also have similar
provisions such as the solid
waste act hazardous waste act
and the water quality control
act thank you.
Thank you okay let's go to the
opponents first Trevor.
Let's give everybody a minute.
Well you know it's so we only
have two bills let's two men and
a half each.
However have you identified the
first speaker.
The time we have a very.
And and what we're hearing from
opponents first thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy therapy and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association.
Legislation was first introduced
new okay has repeatedly broader
concerns about the bill to the
environment department our goal
has always been to provide a
pathway for both the agency and
industry to be successful
unfortunately the department has
been unwilling to make
amendments protected pursuant to
our suggestions therefore I must
again stand in opposition to the
bill for the following reasons
first paragraph he should be
amended so that the environment
department cannot retroactively
apply the law to an operator's
current permit this could simply
be resolved by placing the word
after July first twenty twenty
one between issued pursuant on
page eleven second paragraph P.
three grants the NMED unlimited
scope to review an applicant or
permit ease entire compliance
history or anywhere in the
United States this is in
contrast to Texas that limits
the reputed Texas courts and EPA
actions a similar limitation
should be included here and
finally third in paragraph P.
five prohibits an operator for
receiving a permit in New Mexico
if they have ever had any permit
or revoked or permanently
suspended for costs under the
environmental laws of any state
in the United States this
section is overly broad it
allows NMED to deny an
application because at some
point somewhere a permit was
revoked the paragraph should be
amended to say any more permit
for these reasons the Moga urges
members of the committee to
oppose house bill seventy six
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Next Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy with
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we respectfully
oppose house bill seventy six in
its current form this
legislation may be used to
substantially delay air permit
applications and further
increase costs to businesses
that are seeking to obtain air
permits in New Mexico and we're
concerned about the scope and
lack of clarity in this bill for
instance why are we relying on
other states to determine New
Mexico's economic future section
P. subsection I penalize
applicants and permit cheese in
New Mexico if they had a permit
revoked permanently suspended
under the environmental laws of
any state we're concerned about
the amount of authority this
bill gives the HSD interviewing
applicants passed even if the
applicant has taken substantial
steps to correct past violations
and demonstrate rehabilitation
it's also unclear what is needed
to make a final inspection to
you or what the standards are
for rehabilitation and
reasonable period of time in
section R. this regulatory
uncertainty creates an unstable
business environment the
chambers concern will deter new
business from coming to New
Mexico or existing business
she's staying thank you so much.
Ex Manchester.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Agim
Winchester with the independent
patrolmen's association are
concerns for this bill from the
broad nature of the new powers
that will be given to the
environmental improvement board
in the discretionary authority
without specificity on what
grounds the board could deny a
permit
the bill allows the E. I. B.
also to go back as far as ten
years to search for violations
and really doesn't stipulate if
any correction to violations are
counted for or given credit by
the E. I. B. in making its
evaluations
the for the more as just
discussed there are provisions
to allow out of state records to
be applied to in state
permitting
we feel this doesn't really
represent due process especially
as there are extenuating
circumstances in any permitting
process specifically in cases
where by an operator may agree
to a penalty to more quickly
remedy the situation
Finally it an unintentional
mistake under this bill could
lead to a company not being able
to do business in New Mexico in
the way that the permit reach
one chair in the the penalty box
source say you're always in the
penalty box so the in closing we
agreed that there is a strong
need for compliance and we're
always working for members to
make sure that we're up to speed
on operating procedures however
we do feel that this bill simply
is too harsh in the way it's
written thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Our whole.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee our call
representative Devin Energy in
opposition to house bill seventy
six women say first that if
you'll look at page six of the
bill the air quality control act
already grants the environment
department the ability to deny a
construction permit if the
construction or modification
will not meet standards will
contribute to air pollution or
violate any other provision of
the air quality control act
that's existing law further.
Because H. B. seventy six allows
the revocation of current
permits it inserts a dangerous
element of risk that was not
present when the facility was
initially permitted.
Devon energy has spent years
making investments in the
millions of dollars and laying
out their business strategy H.
B. seventy six puts all those
investments in jeopardy because
permits that went through a
thorough overview and analysis
by the state could still be
revoked by someone who believes
the initial analysis was
incomplete.
For these reasons and the damage
that it causes we stand in
strong opposition to this
legislation thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you next.
Next we have where is the.
Afternoon chairman members money
was Corbin Casteel and I'm a
registered lobbyist for
centennial resource development.
And all the gas operator Lea
County New Mexico.
For all the reasons previously
mentioned we respectfully oppose
house bill seventy six it will
greatly harm my client's ability
to continue producing the
natural resources that
contribute to over forty percent
of New Mexicos budget funding
schools hospitals among many
other beneficiaries.
Centennial's a leaner
environmentally responsible
exploration has already
undertaken and intense
initiative to reduce emissions
to less than one percent in Q.
four twenty twenty and as a long
industry leaders and efforts to
reduce methane and greenhouse
gas emissions at appropriations
legislation such as this is
duplicative of existing
enforcement regulation and
wholly unreasonable putting
lawfully operating businesses in
the state of New Mexico at risk
of essentially being shut down
at the whims of the bureaucratic
construct.
Since then was far from being
the largest operator in the
Permian but back contributed
over forty five million dollars
to state revenues and royalties
and taxes and twenty twenty one.
And like many of our competitors
my client's ability to do
business in New Mexico in the
future will be and out of
legislation like this becomes
law the great state of New
Mexico it will push jobs and tax
revenue into Texas I
respectfully ask you to vote no
on this bill thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you next.
I see Michael Miller but he's
muted.
Michael Miller wishes to speak
he needs stunned mute.
Go on forever.
Mr Kirk.
Good morning madam chair and
members my name is misty Currier
and I am a registered lobbyists
are strategies for sixty
speaking on behalf of our
clients Occidental petroleum and
plains all American pipeline we
respectfully ask you to oppose
house bill seventy six we echo
the concerns raised by others
today and we hope you will
please consider them these
companies employees and many
others throughout New Mexico
industry strive every day to
adhere to statute and
regulations to protect our
homeland and our environment
this legislation would hold New
Mexicans at fault for mistakes
and issues caused by others in
different locations please let
New Mexicans continue to do the
quality work I always try to do
and please oppose house bill
seventy six thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
Thank you for next.
Jason Weaks.
Morning madam chair members many
Jason Weaks registered lobbyists
for targa and XTO we definitely
appreciate the intent of this
legislation and certainly want
the department have the
regulatory authority necessary
the night permit applications
for entities that are violating
New Mexico laws.
However as drafted target next
year oppose this bill and truly
believe it will create
significant uncertainty in
predictability within the
relevant regulatory environment
New Mexico.
As drafted the bill basically
gives the department the ability
to port existing permit for
infraction or legend fraction in
another state that has nothing
to do with the entities New
Mexico based operations when oil
and gas company makes a decision
development to to develop
infrastructure in the state they
commit significant resources
monetary and otherwise towards
the construction and management
of that infrastructure.
When making the decision about
whether to invest in New Mexico
and develop infrastructure here
or somewhere else that company
is going to look at this
provision and shy away from
investing in the state the
bottom line is that all of the
company's operations that is is
that all of the company's
operations can be shut down or
suspended for tax violation in
Pennsylvania they will avoid New
Mexico as much as possible what
current regulators may never
consider that as a possible
option the language of this bill
does in fact give them that
authority which is simply
untenable and could lead to
almost catastrophic consequences
for company that is otherwise
acting as a good actor in the
state for those reasons and the
other stated we oppose this
legislation thank you.
Thank you next.
Lastly we still have Michael
Miller.
That set in rural.
Everyone else who signed up
isn't.
Michael Miller do you wanna on
mute so you can speak.
This is Mike Michael Miller
our points have been made thank
you.
Thank you.
Is there anybody else on this
zoom who wishes to oppose this
bill.
Please raise your hand.
The proponents.
Yes hello good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is these cattle standing
in strong support of HB seventy
six on behalf of the Sierra Club
Rio Grande the chapter and are
over thirty five thousand
members and supporters in the
state of New Mexico HB seventy
six would allow the New Mexico
environment department to revoke
or deny air quality permits from
polluters significant non
compliance history such as
felonies from environmental
products submitting false claims
that false information and
having a plan by mental permit
revoked no other state
regulators already have the
still available to them under
the solid waste act the water
quality act the mining act and
the hazardous waste act.
Not something over air pollution
and seven New Mexico counties
for more than five hundred
eighty thousand people call home
it's close to exceeding federal
limits and bad actors to make
the situation work Wirth New
Mexico is open for business as
we know we can hear in the
opposition saying that nobody
will want to be here we want
those to follow the law and
respect our community and health
so I respectfully ask you to
please vote yes on HB seventy
six thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members the opportunity to speak
today hurts and comments about
the jeopardize ation of
industrial investments and the
environment department's conduct
that I'm gonna let this you I
speak to those because you just
will be much more knowledgeable
if you'll permit me because it's
our last meeting I believe
together Senate conservation
logistical more broadly about
this bill I think this bill is a
category of bills around
enforcement current conservation
or environmental protection that
go broadly to the relationship
between New Mexicans and the
industries and businesses that
operate here the central
question is who gets to hold who
accountable.
We've got a very basic
accountability bill in front of
us here today as asking a very
simple question who works for
who who owes who in the
situation I think the average
New Mexican would be absolutely
shocked to learn what this type
of enforcement is not currently
available to the Environment
are you simultaneously overdue
and badly needed going for I
think that this is something
that should be that should be
passing you madam chair thank
you so much for the option to
speak today we've had a
wonderful year this committee
and I appreciate the opportunity
set up in support of this bill
on behalf of conservation voters
Mexico.
Thank you next please.
You.
Committee members and sponsors
of this bill my name is John
Brown pandemic Franciscan sister
and the director New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with thousands of faith
communities all over the state
and faith we very much support
HB seventy six we have a such a
history of pollution in the
state it is costing taxpayers in
cleanup is hurting the health of
current and future generations
and because ordinary people of
New Mexico in time energy and
money to try to get cleaned up
that we should not have to be
doing I heard some of the
previous speaker say well there
might be a bad actor in another
state and they're penalized in
the state as a person of faith
and of in our religious
traditions we believe that you
need to be doing the right thing
everywhere it doesn't matter
where your business yes and if a
player is the player than there
are good players and they need
to have accountability in all
senses
interface traditions we look at
three like its tool in making
decisions of this sort is
economics people communities and
the environment it seems like in
the state we often have a one
like it's still and it is only
economy and it doesn't take into
consideration the communities
the common good and are coming
home so we greatly support this
bill and I want to thank you for
all of your hard work in the
session and it's still not over
so I'm very much in support of
this thank you so much.
Thank you next.
Representative.
Hello my name is Antoinette
rants I live in southern New
Mexico and I'm fifteenth
generation new Mexican I'm
concerned about air quality
issues and their impact on my
two young children I firmly
support H. B. seventy six
because this bill improves
overall err quality protects our
outdoor economy and levels the
playing field for small oil and
gas operators by not permitting
companies that routinely cut
corners and disobey loss this is
common sense legislation has
already law in Texas and Arizona
as well as many other states
please vote yes on SB seventy
six by doing so NMED will have
more consistency by bringing air
quality provisions in line with
those of New Mexicos hazardous
waste solid waste water quality
and mining acts thank you
committee members for your time
and your service.
Thank you next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jon
Goldstein and I am here
representing environmental
defense fund we stand in strong
support of house bill seventy
six we've heard from some
members of industry this morning
with concerns about this bill I
guess my view is that
environmentally responsible
members of industry need not
fear this bill I in fact I think
it would be a benefit to them
by empowering NMED to deny
permits to their last scrupulous
colleagues they would be you
know raising up and and
providing economic benefit to
environmentally responsible
businesses that are cutting
corners and trying to cut costs
as already mentioned this bill
also brings New Mexico into line
with its western neighbors and
brings our quality control act
into line with similar
provisions in other
environmental statutes enforced
by the environment department so
for all those reasons and
reasons are you stated we stand
in strong support and ask for
you to as well thank you.
Thank you next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee today I'm speaking
on behalf of our state methane
pollution table the fact that
this type of provision already
exists in the hazardous waste
act the solid waste act the
water quality act and the mining
act make it seem reasonable that
it should also apply to the air
quality control act that actors
should not receive air permits
especially in a state where we
have multiple counties within a
hair's breath of becoming out of
compliance with because it
federal ozone standards the
argument that a polluter will
leave the state if they have to
comply with the law seems
counter to the realities of the
location and amount of
production which we see and oil
and gas extraction which is
exclusively correlated with the
price of oil and gas we stand in
strong support of of HB seventy
six and hope for your vote in
favor thank you so much for all
of your service in the session
and we look forward to
continuing our work together to
protect our air thank you.
Thank you.
Next and.
Hello thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Andrew Baker and I'm a
registered lobbyist with Health
Action New Mexico as well as a
recent graduate of the U. N. M.
culture population health I urge
you to vote in favor of house
bill seventy six this bill is
not unfriendly to business but
friendly to health this bill
creates accountability for those
who choose to pollute well it's
nice to be able to regulate
appropriations within our own
borders many oil and gas
producer's exploit the
separation between state
governments to continue
pollution and other states if
this bill is unfriendly to
business it is only unfriendly
to those businesses would put
their profits over the health of
our people and our environment.
One of the provisions that I'd
like to highlight in this bill
is that it provides penalties to
operators that refused to
disclose required information
but that required information is
what people need to make
informed health decisions if
people don't know when venting
and flaring is happening they
can't change their schedule to
avoid that pollution if the even
if they want to.
Even if this bill doesn't pass
I'd like to speak directly to
the to the producers here and
encourage you to provide more
information to the people that
live near your operations.
I've been an advocate for
environmental protection and
health and I believe this is a
strong build pushes in that
direction we know that there are
deleterious health effects from
living near oil and gas
pollution people are speaking up
people are suffering but we
don't have the institutions to
elevate their voices to the same
level as those corporations that
operate across state lines and
with that I would strongly urge
you to vote in favor of this
bill thank you.
Thank you next.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee my name is it
is hard and I'm a registered
lobbyist progress now New Mexico
we stand in support of this bill
for all the reasons stated
already this morning I would
also like to mention
as the as something to think
about and and contacts this
morning The New York Times is
reporting
about the rise in gasoline
prices as related to
international things as they
happen which do affect oil
prices here in in New Mexico and
and the way that the industry is
able to operate but in that
article eight comments about how
chevron is expected to spend
fourteen to sixteen billion
dollars that's with a B. over
the next couple of years and
further exploration and it just
it strikes me that it industry
that is able to spend that kind
of money constantly on
exploration for its continued
use of the industry and and and
and its products isn't deterred
by financial penalties in the
way that other industries might
be and it really is it really
does take strong
Yeah the strong enforcement and
the strong regulations of
something like this bill to to
really enforce the kinds of
health benefits as brought up by
other folks this morning so I
just wanted to bring that to the
committee's attention thank you
for your time.
Thank you.
Right I see suit sure permanent.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is sue
Schurman.
And I would like to speak in
support of H. B. seventy six as
in New Mexico resident.
For the reasons stated
previously I support laws that
will increase accountability for
environmental contamination and
better protect New Mexico's
environment and the health of
the community end of the
workers.
Which will make New Mexico more
attractive to businesses.
Because they will want to move
here and bring their families
here and raise our children
here.
Thank you to Representative
Chandler for sponsoring this
bill and thank you madam chair
and committee members for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else who wanted
to speak as a proponent.
Please go ahead.
Committee members thank you for
having me I am the editor
Christodoulou the Adelante
progressive caucus political
director and an environmental
engineer and as an environmental
engineer I knew and learned
about the horrible things we are
doing and spewing out to our
environment this bill will help
level the playing field and by
golly when I.
With screening for potential
romantic partners I wish there
was an H. B. seventy six for
that as well so please voted to
pass on H. B. seventy six thank
you right.
Okay so I see no other
proponents and the first
committee members Senator souls.
Thank you madam chair
And Representative Chandler
thank you and certainly any
questions I have if you've got
an expert that you want to have
the more do I I certainly
understand as well on page
twelve wind ten it was very
interesting one of the opponents
for it read section I did said
had any permit revoked our
permit the suspended under the
environmental laws of any state
or the United States and I read
it the way they read it but they
left out the word for costs can
you please tell me what the word
for because in that Osby you why
it's important.
And madam chair and senator I
will defer to my experts help
elucidate you.
Chair
of the committee of for cause
means that there was a good
reason to revoke that permit
that environmental permit it's
not a tax law it's an
environmental permit that was
revoked because it was so
egregious that the violation was
so egregious that state or the
US felt like they had to pull
that permanent.
Madam chair representative and
an expert yeah so that's why I
thought it was important to go
back through that because that
phrase for because with I just
that specifically left out of
the comment that was made by the
owner of that bill and for
because I think is the important
piece of that particular thing
that these are not permits that
were just pool because of any
small environmental law or
slight oversight or because I
think he did like as you
indicated was very egregious
on page twelve one thirteen.
and that whole section it says
in making a finding under
subsection of this section of
the department or local agency
they consider Ecker it
activating and mitigating
factors what advocating a group.
Ag renovating and mitigating
factors we.
Madam chair and senator I will
defer to ms easily.
What chair members of the
committee thank you so
Department leeway to consider
the circumstances in front of
that so for example if you have
somebody who had a permanent
hold in another state because
they intentionally admitted
pollution's above their permit
levels really intentionally
spilled toxic waste on the
ground rather than having it be
just a matter of negligence that
would be an aggravating
circumstances.
Mitigating factors is if they if
they have had a good history of
New Mexico that the ability that
they have demonstrated
compliance we would consider
that and allowing that permit
holder to maintain that
permanent or to not have that
permit revoked so that's what
that means against the
department a little bit of
leeway as we consider under what
circumstances are permit should
be revoked or denied.
So madam chair and and senator
and this usually you live the
mitigating factors allows the
department that if somebody is
been a good actor within the
last eight years this was ten
years ago nine years ago that
this does not necessarily apply
they can kind of get a clean
bill of health the new start
unlike what was said and
commented in the the testimony
that they would forever be held
about or how good they were was
paraphrasing the test money
mitigating factors means if you
show that you're a good actor
now that we can overlook that is
that accurate.
Madam chair and senator I I
think that's very accurate and
of course that's the whole point
of that provision we recognize
it companies have the ability to
change their practices and we
would expect it would so that
they would comply with this
provision.
Thank you and so I just wanted
to clarify some of the
misinformation that was being
stated that this was yeah one
bad incident would forever hold
them yeah what I'm able to
function in New Mexico and that
I think that's that's inaccurate
I'm now starting on page eleven
line twenty two and then
finishing page twelve wind.
Four
we're talking about the you know
if somebody's been convicted in
a court.
Within ten years immediately
preceding of the date the
felony read upgraded to
environmental crime or crime
defined by the state federal
involving for being a restraint
of trade price fixing bribery
part those seem like pretty
serious crimes to be not just of
some small oversight in my
reading that accurately.
Madam chair and senator yes you
are I mean you know it's a
felony their their highlights
we're not talking about Mr
meters were talking about felony
violations crimes really
relating to restrain of trade
price fixing those are serious
types of incidents that we we as
a state would take seriously and
should take seriously.
The madam chair and and senator
where they are the the opponents
seem to indicate that the the
department could kind of
Really the only here because
they don't like you know what
Senator wearing that day could
prevent a permit because you
have something in the past.
Protection that that's not the
case that though this really are
pretty serious crimes that that
were intentional that were
designed to deceive or defraud
or mislead.
Madam chair and senator.
Yes and I would point out this
bill is very specific in terms
of the various things as the
Department must rely upon before
they consider revoking or
denying a permit other states
have very broad laws that simply
say things like a pattern of non
compliance I would imagine
Senator and madam chair that the
companies would feel more
comfortable when there is a list
of items that they know that are
at issue and that they need to
comply with and if I may I'd
also like to defer to Mizzi
leave she wants to supplement
that madam chair and senator.
Madam chair members of the
committee I also just want to
point out that these go to
the issue of trustworthiness we
we rely on industry to be
trustworthy as they work with
the department we have to
inspectors it can go out into
the field we can't be checking
up on industry all the time we
rely on them to provide us
honest and truthful information
so that we can demonstrate that
they are in compliance with
their permits and if we have an
untrustworthy operator who has
been convicted of a felony or
has been charged for the treaty
violation with it makes it
really difficult if not
impossible for us to do our
jobs.
Thank you madam chair as many
people know yeah my field is
really is education and some of
the opponents to this bill
indicated that what happened in
another state should affect
somebody coming to New Mexico
and I think it's kind of like I
would hope that if somebody has
been convicted of a crime
against children or schools or
lost their job for a serious
ethical behavior than other
state that I think that are all
of them into New Mexico if
they're going to be a teacher
here and I think if things go if
the bank type of thing that you
can't just run to another state
start with a clean bill of
health so to speak for crimes
that you might have committed
elsewhere and so I think there's
very much is a bill that
protects honest operators and
make sure it protects New Mexico
from bad actors that are in
other states and for me I always
try to prioritize people over
profits and I'll continue to do
that every time thank you I
think this is greatly needed and
any honest good operators within
the oil and gas industry from
what I read has nothing to fear
from anything that is in this
and in fact it will protect them
from getting lumped in with bad
actors thank you madam chair.
Thank you I next have a Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I am proud
to say that I served on the
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
City of Albuquerque air quality
control board when we got rid of
the Albuquerque brown cloud and
what I saw there was
collaboration between the state
and the city was really really
required and we did it by
dealing with the nose no no burn
days with wood stoves and people
started buying which does it
didn't of emit particulates we
also did it with regulating so
that people put water down when
there was construction so that
though the dust didn't go out
into the air and so I was really
proud of that and so I'm very
happy to see I I I guess I was
remembering that we could revoke
a permit for somebody lying on
their application and so I just
really like this can because
it's an agency bill
I'm very familiar with the state
agencies and when they do HSD
bills they take a lot of input
did you take input from the
mocha and IPA in New Mexico and
oil and gas company's in
developing this bill madam chair
I I know the agency did and I'll
defer to ms yearly to respond in
more detail.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you Senator for
that question we certainly did I
just want to highlight that a
number of these amendments came
forward in the house state
governmental action Indian
Affairs including putting the
ten year limit in paragraph he
said all those infractions
underneath that we're not
internet they didn't go back for
ever but they put a time frame
on it so that was included we
also limited of the Courts to
any convictions in any state or
United state court because
industry was concerned about
international convictions so we
made that change.
which allows the applicant or
permit holder to submit an
action plan demonstrating their
ability to come into compliance
and maintain compliance that was
included at the request of
industry chevron specifically as
a matter of fact then the floor
amendments were also
Introduced at industries request
specifically Robert had a
conversation with secretary
Kenny around the timely audit
that would if I were discovered
during a timely audit would not
be considered in revocation or
denial that seems fair we want
to incentivize artists and that
other language that would limit
our ability to deny or revoke if
somebody constructed without a
permit was worked out an
an extensive negotiation between
Representative Chandler
Representative ninth grade at
the request of industry to and
which if the applicant was
firmly believe that there are
missions would not require a
permit and went through the
proper calculations and then
discovered that that would that
would not also cause for
revocation or denial and so we
we worked extensively with
industry and every amendment
that isn't here today is
basically at the request of
industry.
Thank you.
You hated when you you amend the
bill to accommodate people and
then the phone against your bill
just rhetorical question thank
you I will be proud to support
this bill.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
Thank you Representative
Chandler
in Taos caught off guard today I
thought we had to easy built in
this sounds like you're trying
to put us on business again in
Italy County I I just want to
madam chair and representative
to to bring in to some alignment
for up there should be a Lopez
really help clean up the air
quality in Albuquerque I just
want to let you know there still
number ten on the list and and
you guys do not have fracking or
any of oil production in
Albuquerque but I want to tell
you that of the first some blue
is Anthony New Mexico and and
and I understand what you're
trying to do I I do not see the
imminent problem I live in Lee
County madam chair and and
representative of forty five
foot from my house is all well
and we've learned to live with
of the not always but the of the
quickening next to us but I want
to tell you so if you go down
the list of the top ten with
Albuquerque being of the ten
most
polluted city but you have
Anthony Las Vegas New Mexico
which has mountains all around
it tells which is beautiful
scenery chaparral Deming thank
you get to Farmington.
And I know they've got the whole
issue of that hot spot where the
coal emits from underground then
comes the seven is Hobbes aria
Sandia heights Shiprock in
Albuquerque so.
Madam chair and senator
Representative if you're trying
to clean up the air quality I'm
wondering why you're not
starting your secretary of state
how this bill is going to help
Albuquerque cleanup air quality
of what you put the reason for
the bill beyond trying to shut
down for all guests and take our
largest of.
Donor to our to our budget but
beyond that we're the other
reasons for the bill I'm sure
Senator Representative.
Madam chair and senator first I
would dispute the fact that any
anyone here is attempting to
shut down the oil and gas and in
fact what we are really.
Sorry.
Madam chair and Senator.
This bill.
Gives an advantage to those
operators who are complying with
the law.
Who are not convicts of Force of
serious crimes who are honest on
their applications who have not
been found to have committed
fraud those businesses who have
complied with our laws are given
the advantage because what we
are doing is ensuring that all
those who are not are are
closely regulated and the
ability of the department to
Stop have them stop doing
business in the state is there
so this is a pro oil and gas
bills a pro good business bill
and I believe that most of the
people who testified against
this bill would like to say that
have nothing to worry about the
state are no doubt in compliance
with the laws and I'm happy to
for to my experts as well to
respond to
Senator and madam chair.
Yes thank you madam chair
Senator guy ADA goes this this
is
a bill that will allow will
level the playing field for
businesses New Mexico has a lot
of really good operators who are
in compliance with the law in
compliance with the law if it
applies to anybody I don't know
who that would would be because
we're not asking for that
information I do feel like this
will benefit our operators
because they don't have to
compete with those bad actors
and maybe coming in from other
states so I this is not until
the shut down oil and gas we
work well with oil and gas this
is a bill to provide better.
A more level playing field and
allow them to better compete and
not have to compete with poor
find for compliance operators.
Thank you madam chair and
representative in that and then
I guess I go back to the
confusion because with the
Senator Sedillo Lopez it made a
statement that if you work well
with all these organizations
whether in opposition I've been
getting emails for awhile and I
know one of the issues was the
ten year limit that they'd
intended dash for five year
limit
Madam chair representative were
you brought that five year
number and if you were why did
we settle on ten years.
Madam chair madam chair and.
Etcetera I'll defer to Mizzi Lee
to answer that question.
Madam chair members of the
committee that the tenure would
make the air quality control at
consistent with the ten year
limit in the solid waste act
hazardous waste at and the water
quality control act we believe
that it would providing
consistency across those acts
that will be a better use to to
all industry not just oil and
gas.
Thank you for that day and and
that brings me to my point I
don't think that we've got to
buy in from industry
international providing it even
though you're looking for
consistency that we're going
what can my my next question
madam chair and.
Representative is on
The burden of proof necessary
change to
In your bill what is that burden
proof that's that's needed to be
able to show that you are a bad
actor or that it is a bad actor.
Madam chair and senator
Representative
madam chair and senator I would
ask menacingly to answer that
question she's very familiar
with the process.
Madam chair members of the
committee under the HB seventy
six an applicant or current
permit holder would submit a
disclosure statement to the
Department which covers the
criteria in paragraph PED so
they would have to disclose that
they are an environmental
challenge if they had a permit
revoked in another state because
of the increase in violence at
all violations whether they've
been convicted in the court you
know so so there is
that's the burden of proof.
Okay madam chair and
Representative then then I guess
my question is in looking at at
the new session why is.
Section see on page six of
section C. not adequate it to me
in reading that section C. up
from a light five to twenty one
to me I thought that gives us
the.
You would meet the standards and
and I'm wondering why that is
not sufficient Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and senator up all
units are briefly and then I
look for Committee lily this to
me
we simply talks about when and a
permanent and be denied for
reasons that are not included
within the amendments that we
are are suggesting.
In some I'm saying is that the
ad after provisions are not
certainly part of sections and I
would ask Miss Suazo lead to
supplement my answer.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee that is
correct this applies to only one
type of permanent just making
sure that that's clear
and then
conditions for terminating
modifying revoking a permit does
not include the items that are
in H. P. seventy six.
Well thank you for that on
chairman.
Representative I I I guess I've
still
The way I read.
Section see I thought that would
be adequate but I'm not I'm
turning in and don't play one on
TV but madam chair and
Representative what if an
employee makes an unintentional
error on a required permit does
a whole county get current
penalize for dissenting voice
how does that work.
Madam chair and Senator if you
look in language there aren't
words like knowingly
misrepresented refused to
disclose have been convicted by
those are not unintentional acts
well as miss easily to
supplement but I believe that
answers the question madam chair
and senator.
Madam chair and senator that
does answer the question thank
you.
Okay well madam chair and.
Representative I guess my thing
is I'm I'm worried on it and
trying to understand the
worrying about that permitting
process of work but if
management if management changes
Let's say.
Article sales someone sells out
If they had an outstanding
record of and there.
If they.
New company purchase is an area
that had
So well so we're not
permitted or they worked
a really good well maybe they'd
had issue your permitting
process with the new company
that had a good record would
they now be considered in
trouble and or and penalty with
your permitting that you got a
looking back at the ten year
period I just bought that asset
with that now makes them a bad
company Madam chair
representative I'm madam chair
and senator that question has
been asked in a number of the
hearings that we've had to date
and the answer is no the
environment department is is
happy when a good actor by a bad
actor so good practices can be
implemented but I'm happy to
allow asked that misty Lee
supplement.
Madam chair Senator no
supplement if you are absolutely
correct Representative Townsend.
Okay
That doesn't my wife takes the
problems at home but.
Madam chair and
Representative the
To me that the the.
Gracious actions
or the fact that there's
revocation we reserved just for
actions is there anything in
here and and there again
For a small issue is it penalize
just like you would have for the
gregis action and how do you
determine the difference
I guess I'm having a hard time
seeing how you're saying that
it's going to be a fair play for
we're looking at only bad actors
I I know we've had a fire
recently or a pipeline Lea
County burst and caught on fire
I don't think that totally makes
them a bad actor that's back
nature or rupture the line
whatever cost it but I'm just
trying to see how
You would differentiate between
the good actor in the bad actor
if it's a minor issue.
Would you have natural that left
turn Representative.
Madam chair and senator I think
the the bill on its face
describes egregious incidents
and that is what would be
finding on the department I'm
happy to for madam chair Missy
Lee she wishes to supplement.
Yes.
Excuse me Sir Senator Schmedes
as well.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
If this does not pertain to
minor violations or even.
Some ongoing compliance issues
in the state it pertains to
environmental Fallon's paint to
paint it pertains to line on a
permanent change to withholding
information a minor violation
would not make them
Would not allow us to revoke or
deny a permit for that.
Thank you for that and and go
back to the face of the bill it
Madam chair of the
representative said it says
based on poor compliance history
and I would say that if you had
for five minor violations that
that might services to be a bad
actor and if I'm wrong on that
I'd appreciate clarification
madam chair representative.
Madam chair and senator what
line are you referring to it's
actually page one line thirteen
it's in the name of the its says
the night permit application
based on poor compliance history
and to me Madam chair
representative like give me a
look back on what the
The company's done in and
they've had multiple small
instances or not majority of I
just wonder at what point it
services to pay it on your bill
Senator.
Representative.
Madam chair and Senator yes I
now see what you're saying
you're talking about the title
well I believe what is binding
on the department is the
statutory language and that is
not page eleven through thirteen
madam chair Madam chair
representative but you corrected
me earlier on the basis of the
bill is what you're talking
about and so I went to the base
of the bill and that's where it
talks about for compliance
history and that's what I was
trying to get with my prior
question and you brought up the
patients bill so I just wanted
to go back to that to look and
that's where my fear is that
there are multiple issues in the
past we've got a ten year went
on a now that we're looking if a
good actor had.
Small issues would that not roll
up to a major issue for your
bill Madam chair representative
Adams.
Madam chair Senator now.
Thank you at center is used on
the floor.
You're all healed thank you for
the time thank you so much
Senator smitteez you have your
hand up yes thank you very much
madam chair and thank
representative
It is he is always on you know.
I I I sometimes make comparisons
to medicine and health care and
I mean I don't see in general
what the big deal is about
saying you know if you're Alan
you know we're we're gonna hold
that against you because you're
in now
You're you're you know you had
especially felonies that are
within the same.
the same industry that's what
I'm really getting at and and so
for example will will sometimes
get applications from
physicians from other states and
we'll do these background checks
and they'll say that you know
some Medicare fraud thing going
on you just say well one of the
best person to bring on board
you know and I don't I don't see
what would you know I mean that
that seems to be an appropriate
response each so I don't I don't
have any problems with that
about the bill or about and a
lot of the things that have been
said
I do have some questions I mean
some things that
Do concern me to some degree and
that is.
As you want on mute.
I'm sorry miss internet issues
and can you hear me now yes.
The some of the concerns I have
are oh sorry I'm having some fun
keeping the video off so that
was some of the can the the
concerns I I wanted to you know
so like let's let's take a
pension reform I I I believe
that when a government kind of
makes a promise to someone.
We we shouldn't change and so
when we hear that the the pair
bills and things that come
through if if it breaks a
promise that has been given
grant to to retiree I'm gonna
base to vote against the bill if
they want to make sure we're not
doing that here with the
permitting process and it seems
like we might be so
Representative I mean so these
permits are going to be multi
year permits in New if this bill
passes.
Are you with the conditions of
that permit change could we now
revoked that same permits on if
if something.
Changes now.
Representative Chandler.
Madam chair and senator I if I
need for to Missy Lee yes.
Chair Senator could you please
rephrase your question I'm not
sure I understand thank you
sorry so let me go back and so
are the bottom of page eleven
madam chair and experts
it says so denied the permit
application I've no problem with
that like I said I mean we get I
get applications for my own.
You know practice and we we do
nice things based on prior
history if there's that that
behavior in the past that's
concerning but the it's the
revoking alright so let me let
me come up with just a specific
hypothetical let's say we have a
committee meeting.
Ask you to restate the question
so the question is can people be
Find or denied based upon prior
fractions well not denied so I
I'm trying to clarify so.
The deny is not concerning to me
but it's the revoking so if we
have a company that comes in New
Mexico we say we're gonna give
you a five year permits and give
it the last year but now are we
saying we can revoke that same
permit now because we're gonna
change the purposes of that five
year permit we're gonna change
the conditions.
Madam chair so if we have
information that a permit holder
was convicted of a serious
environmental felony in another
state the we should we we would
be able to to do that I I want
to know we do have one type of
permit that is a five year
permanent and we would just
came in for renewal we also but
most many of our permits are
forever permits and are not
would not require them to come
in and talk with us unless it's
a modification so yes we we
could if we found out that there
is a serious infraction in
another state
yes that that we could do I do
want to point out that at
industries request we added a
provision that I think help
address this issue and that's
and that's paragraph are in
which an applicant feels like
they are in compliance they can
demonstrate compliance they can
put provisions in place that can
guarantee their their compliance
that we would could consider
that and allow them to maintain
that permanent.
Okay thank you and and madam
chair and representative expert
that's probably my my biggest
hang up with the bill like I
said I I have no problem
creating this statutory language
to deny permitting.
net new permitting especially I
think makes it's we're just
gonna common sense but the it's
in and it's I think it goes back
to what you said expert I'm
sorry to get your name but it's
it's the fact that we are we can
retroactively revoking existing
permit under different
conditions from where the permit
was initially granted as in
combination with tying that to
other laws they're also subject
to change from other state it's
and so I've heard a lot of we've
done a lot of colonel justice in
my committees have been public
affairs in the Senate Public
Affairs in the house and
where let's let's say actually
this was brought up by one of
our committee members about sex
crimes
we're I've made the argument
that are other states laws and
felonies seem to be converging
and there's a there there
doesn't seem to be a ton of
partisanship in and if with
those crimes with those types of
allergies and so but even though
even then there's been a lack of
willingness for this legislative
body to tie our criminal code to
other states critical because of
the concern there is well what
if what if Texas through
Oklahoma's to to strict so we
don't want to tie our laws our
criminal laws to those states
but now I'm here because.
And in a granted there's a lot
of partisanship over this this
area
now we're saying well we don't
mind being strict we don't mind.
Tying our our our criminal
penalties and and and and
collateral consequences of crime
to other states.
And so I it's it's a little
conflicted to me because I I do
have a concern we just say Hey
we're gonna wanna trust all the
other forty nine states and and
if you have a you know if if you
know or again changes their laws
two years from now well it's
it's gonna have a domino effect
it's gonna change our law
the environmental law that we
are it may not make sense for
New Mexico now something's doing
all of the fraud I mean that's
you know that that that's fine I
mean that's not a concern of
mine but because of the the
rampant partisanship Amman are
you know around environmental
law we're gonna now hi are
states.
To a a what I'd call maybe a
shifting shifting foundation.
To a lot of other states that
may change their laws create new
felonies
or whatever they're they may do.
And a permit that we granted a
few years ago all of a sudden
the conditions change where we
can now say well.
California change their law last
year and yeah we gave you this
permit three years ago but you
know what you know here's an
issue now so we're going to
revoke it I just that just seems
unfair to me.
and that's really my only hold
up with this bill it really yes
otherwise I feel like I would
support this bill because it a
lot of it's just common sense
but I I just I just have that
hold up I I I really do so thank
you Madam thank you what is the
committee.
There is a crime Senator Sedillo
Lopez and the second from
Senator souls.
I move to table.
There is a motion to table which
is non debatable.
So Branik a please call the vote
on the tabling motion.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen no Senator
Neville yes Senator pope.
No Senator smitteez.
Yes.
Senator souls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Senator in terms of
Mannix now.
Okay.
I think you were back on the do
passed motions of Veronica
please call the vote.
Senator surrounded.
Senator Gallegos no ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville no.
Senator pope.
Just.
Senator committees now Senator
souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Chairman CENIC's yes.
K..
Hi three.
I thank you Representative
are you having to pass a motion
we are now.
Thank you we are now going on
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five.
And.
I thank the sponsor is senator
Sanchez Joshua Sanchez is that
correct.
Yes Mr.
Okay so senator Sanchez to
resent your bill.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I bring this
bill today excuse me one second
it is ten seventeen and we will
be hearing testimony and taking
action on this bill before
eleven AM thank you
Representative please proceed
thank you madam chair.
I bring this bill today because
of.
Me and my constituents to see a
problem with the Conservancy
district here we have higher
taxes and fewer projects being
done.
And we're inserting a salary
cap.
On current law we on Senate bill
for twenty five.
H. six.
Yes the lines eleven through
thirteen.
Our board of directors shall
hire an employee or issue a
contract employee service adding
salary level that he sees a
sorry level the state engineer
established or she went law.
And all we're doing is setting a
salary cap on.
The Conservancy district.
with this bill madam chair.
I would that I will take we can.
public comment.
You have an expert witness.
No madam chair I don't okay
thank you however let's go to
the opponents first and I have.
They are listed with you
opponents many proponents so
let's get one minute each.
This is John Thompson.
Madam chair.
Yes good morning madam chair up
my name is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district.
Madam chair we respectfully
oppose this legislation as we
believe that this would limit
the ability to retain and
recruit top tier talent and ties
the hands of a duly elected
board madam chair our chief
engineer position requires a
very diverse qualifications that
knowledge of federal state local
tribal governments knowledge of
hydrology finance ecology and
engineering madam chairman make
this job very difficult to fill
in very difficult to recruit for
madam chairman I would also like
to note that that our our
salaries are not funded out of
general funds and I would like
to know madam chair that
recently in the news we've heard
that the largest school district
in New Mexico APS is seeking a
new superintendent and and I
would venture to guess that that
superintendent salaries not tied
to that of the secretary of
education and I would lastly
question if this is a precedent
that we would like to set in
statute madam chair we ask that
you you table this bill and
again we respectfully oppose
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Are there any other opponents on
this soon.
Okay let's go to proponents.
Senator.
There's only one in the room
Cathrynn Romero.
What.
Phone go ahead Catherine.
Yes ma'am thank you good morning
madam chair and all members of
the committee I cap Romero and
in support of bill for twenty
five for my for my family of
farmers located in blanket
County area we are frustrated
with the increase of taxes meet
barred local Conservancy
district of the taxes are
increasing but we are not the
any much needed maintenance or
improvements with the digit cold
working gate or turnout we
currently will be having several
issues
with the covertly condition
breaks this year because of the
issue have been been taken care
of
It breaks up north of us because
shut off of water to us while we
are irrigating of my husband and
I and several instances have you
our own personal construction
equipment such as backhoes brush
hogs and loaders to aid with
broke convicted and debris
blocked of walking Culbert not
only for ourselves but our
neighbors the Conservancy's
reasons for not responding was
not having the equipment
available either due to
maintenance of repairs no
employees available during or
after hours unfortunately
farming it twenty four seven so
emergencies do happen at night
and and therefore there are no
operators to operate the machine
from what I understand there
funding for over time was cut it
do you in that those are things
we hear why they are unable to
address the situation I believe
this bill can help resolve some
of these problems if money can
be allocated from upper
management salaries of to the
purchase of new equipment over
tied monies for.
The employees who are actually
able to contribute and help us
farmers
during normal and emergencies
situation
thank you all for hearing out of
my family's personal struggle
than experiences and concerns
with the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district of god
bless and have a great day.
Thank you were there any other
proponents.
Okay committee members.
Senator po.
Madam chair and and sponsor a.
Thanks for bringing the bill
forward guess what I'm
struggling with is what is our
role as a legislature in this
manner
just hearing some of the
concerns of what we're just
stated I don't know if this is a
salary issue
I think it sounds more like a
leadership issue and who's
leading the organization if if
that's where these problems are
so Representative at this point
I I can't support the bill I I
need more information I I just
don't know that yeah I don't
feel confident making a decision
like this without really
understanding the role and and
what the impact is so thank you
madam chair thank you sponsor.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You're on mute.
Thank you madam chair for.
Wait excuse me center city
office Senator Sweetser do you
have it you wanted to respond.
Madam chair did you want me to
respond but for all the
questions and then I think I
think that was a statement that
was not a question so we don't
respond to statements you can
you'll have a closing.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I have.
Have a question either at I just
have a comment after my father
lost his election for for share
of when I was growing up he
became a ditch writer for awhile
I think you did it for about
over here it's really really
difficult work to try to
accommodate everybody's
interests and that he used to
get community members to fix
ditches and it's really hard
work and I have also had the
opportunity to work with the
current
the current director and I am so
incredibly impressed with his
work and I just don't think it's
good policy to have a an
individual problem and then and
then somehow.
Hi Mister director with the
salary cap and and and actually
I wasn't aware that the that the
state engineering made so little
my gosh we should increases that
way because this is very very
difficult work water is I will
not be the governor should
increases our we don't we don't
get involved in that for good
reason but water is the most
important issue facing us and we
should have the best people on
and so I I move to table this
bill.
Senator you can't debate and
then again I'm sorry I move to
what is it I.
Now you can't do it you know
this bill right now I realize
that await okay so Senator
Gallegos and then Senator
Hamblen.
Senator I appreciate the the
bill before so I I I wanted to
correct some things from my
From Senator Sedillo Lopez I
also had
a property in Colorado we had
the secretary
All of our jobs for voluntary we
no one got fate I understand the
Conservancy is bigger or larger
and that's sort of the line as
going to go down I appreciate
what Sedillo this is family did
you know on the sectors but I I
don't remember ever getting paid
for any of the work I did but
can you tell me madam chair and
senator how many of people are
on the Conservancy.
Madam chair Senator I requested
that information I.
Twice now and I haven't been
provided that the last thing
that's on the on their websites.
Nine two thousand eighteen or
nineteen I believe was two
hundred six.
Employees yes ma'am thank you.
And and Mr madam chair and
senator then I was going to ask.
So the costs associated cost.
How does that get divided up
does the state pay it or doesn't
do the members pay.
Madam chair Senator so the way
the concerts just the people
that live within the metal
organic Conservancy district
have to pay tax and only those
people pay a tax.
And that's what pays the
salaries of the Conservancy.
So just in two thousand
seventeen they have an operating
budget of eight million dollars
with a total of eight million of
salaries out of twenty four
million dollar budget.
Currently today they have a
twenty four million budget still
other salaries at thirteen point
five million.
Current CEO is making three
hundred thousand three thousand
dollars short of three hundred
thousand dollars state and the
way this salary has gone up and
increased as they raise the
taxes on the people that live
within the Conservancy district
could be farmers to be a
residential in a subdivision.
The taxes have been raised forty
percent in the last
Five years.
You madam chair and center the
reason I like what you're trying
to do is bring us back into the
real world number so it would be
in my view if the culprit you
schools wanted pay three hundred
thousand for their school
superintendent than those people
that live in Albuquerque school
districts would be taxed for the
salary line is that similar to
what you're doing here.
Madam chair Senator in this area
it is the taxes within that
district I don't know how the
school district workers back
home from the general fund at
for their salaries I'm not sure
exactly how this the school
district works madam chair
center here right it it doesn't
work that way in in the school
district and and I I know that
to me if you had to spread that
cost directly to the residents
of Albuquerque things would
change there too so I just tried
trying to draw the comparison
that if we had a live in your
world I would be complaining to
so for that reason all stand and
and you madam chair and and
etcetera and understanding all
the work we did every year in
our secular system was voluntary
I would love to the had that to
two hundred seventy thousand
dollar a year job and to be able
say that I was still working for
the people but with that all
yield I stands for your bill
madam chair I think you thank
you for your time thank you
senator guided us and you and I
truly appreciate the acequia
workers as well we next have
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Sanchez for bringing
this forward just to.
A question and committee is
their board of directors for the
Conservancy district.
Madam chair Senator yes there's
a board of directors for the
Conservancy district I believe
there are seven
order directors okay great thank
you madam chair thank you
senator Sanchez because this
this bill concerns me because
you know the the folks who've
spoken about this with valid
concerns this seems to be really
be more of an issue that needs
to be presented to the board and
the district and not something
so directors capping one
person's individual salary and
you know where I see as you and
I are both learning this
freshman senators that the
issues that are brought up here
things that can be handled by
capital outlay requests and
junior money and working
together with agencies involved
to address those concerns I
don't necessarily see it as
something that's is appropriate
is is targeting one individual
salary so I do appreciate it I
do hope that that you're able to
as their representatives are
Senator able to kind of figure
out ways because all of us are
right but I I I I I feel that
this particular bill that is so
targeted is is not necessarily
the the most effective use of
our time today thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much Senator
souls is next.
I move to table.
That is a non debatable motion
there are a few of the people
who wish to speak if the motion
fails we will go back to the
speakers so running would you
please call the vote.
Senator servant.
Senator Gallegos no to table.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville no to table Senator
poke.
Yes Senator smitteez.
No I like to explain previous.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes to
table.
In chairman Stefanics.
Yes and Senators meetings to
explain it so.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
just this this seems a little.
I don't know what what the word
is just very very aggressive.
Your generous salary three
hundred thousand dollars I I I'd
be curious.
Is this person possibly the
highest paid state employee you
know public employee in the.
official in the.
In the state I don't know what
the answer that question is.
But
but that's the.
It just seems like there needs
to be more some more
accountability there
I also believe there are some
Selleck as put in place for the
other Conservancy districts so
I this this district from the
presentation seems to be a it an
extreme out wire.
And although I respect some of
the comments made about a local
all decision here we we seem to
be stuck with an extreme out
wire that the state can come in
and just kind of make things
more equal throughout all
Conservancy districts so that's
why I voted.
No to table.
Thank you very much the tabling
motion was of five yeses three
knows.
So committee members if you were
not on at the very beginning I
wanted to I spent time thanking
our staff and I'm gonna do that
one more time this might be our
last meeting today
first of all Trevor Reilly our
system operator.
Runanga Ortega our committee
secretary her assistant in the
committee room was Mariah
Martinez.
Then we had loosened up full
cell and Becky Gavin as our
Committee analysts.
Surely Baca in rigid bein act
from major analysts pool Thomas
C. and Cody Morrow from the
minority analysts pool.
A committee members I want to
thank each and everyone of you
we've had a very successful
season there might be another
bill but right now there are
none on our list of bills that
have been referred to our
committee.
We will not even if we get
another committee referral we
will not be meeting Saturday.
We might resume on sat on next
Tuesday if we receive another
committee referral but for today
it looks like our business is
completed and I would thank you
very much I think everybody in
the public the participated in
this committee thank you and
have a great day.
Me may I just say I really
appreciate the leadership of
this committee we heard every
bill and
it was really well done thank
you madam chair thank you as
senator Neville.
I think I just accidentally left
my hand okay thank you for your
leadership and running a very
good committee thank you madam
chair well thank you everybody
and please have a great day
we're gone.
