is not being heard till
Saturday.
Which is not possible because
Senator Munoz is not in the
state on Saturday.
So, uh, the agreement now is
that this bill, Senate Bill 23
will be heard on Thursday
morning first thing, Senator,
and I apologize for all the uh
miscommunication. We're gonna
start at 7 a.m. so they have
plenty of time to talk, right?
Well, I think I could drag
myself in here at 8:30 again, so
the committee members, why don't
we do 8:30 on Thursday morning
to make sure we get this done.
Thank you very much.
But Senator Munoz, wait, you
have the 2nd 1.
all these
Yes
Right.
What?
OK, so for the public, uh, let's
clarify, uh, once we post the
agenda online and uh on the door
that's how the agenda will stay
and uh in order of
For any miscommunication going
forward, the printed matter is
the word, OK?
So let's move ahead, a Senate
bill 29, Senator Munoz, Water
Project fund appropriation.
Good morning, ma'am members of
the committee that this is the
normal water bills in 2029, but
this just has a little more
money in it. Normally we fund
them at 169 million annually. We
bumped that in preparation up to
222 million for the next year so
that we can start to move these
projects along and as we move
forward in changing capital
outlay in the way we do that.
So, uh, the state engineer's
office, uh, is on board NMFA
manages the money in Mexico
Finance Authority and Marquita
Russell is here.
As my expert witness, and so
with that we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Russell. Would you
like to say thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
is the uh sponsor has mentioned,
this bill is important to
funding all of the projects that
will appear before you later on
House Bill 115, um, this is, uh,
that's our annual authorization
bill, and once again we have
more demand than we can fill
with the money that's been made
available so the money in this
bill will allow us to fully fund
those projects, um, and would be
able to actually fund the
complete.
Portion of those projects as
opposed to shaving them down as
we typically have to do.
Thank you.
Uh, is there anybody in the
audience here to support this
bill.
Is there anybody here to oppose
this bill.
Online
OK, uh, online there's one in
support of the logic water
project fund appropriation, and
3 in opposition to uh about this
bill.
OK.
So, um,
Since, uh, we have some
opposition. Let's hear from the
opposition first on uh line.
Supportive or opposed? OK.
So we'll wait for that person.
Here in the room, um, let's
hear, um.
How many people again were
supporting this. If you would
line up to speak.
And you'll be handed a
microphone. Is there a
microphone?
No, madam chair, it was your
tone, right?
It was your tone and and you
said you in opposition? What?
And they just all went away.
I'm gonna learn to do you know,
I guess that's how my mother
acted I'm gonna learn to do that
over in my committee.
Good morn, good morning, Madam
Chair and committee members. My
name is Marielle Nnai. I'm with
New Energy Economy on behalf of
5000 members now. We aren't
stand in support of this bill
and thank the sponsor for
bringing it.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hannah Case Woods. I'm a
government relations specialist
for New Mexico counties, and we
stand in support of this bill.
Uh, water is a crucial resource
for both health and economic
development in our counties and
we're in favor of this bill.
Online we have Bill Lee who
would like to.
Madam, thank you.
I appreciate the time this
morning. My name is Bill Lee
with the Galum McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce. We stand in
full support of Senate Bill 29.
It effectively uses the strong
state revenues which have
significantly increased with
Senate Bill 29, you can close
the funding gap and without it,
many counties and municipalities
will be forced to continue to
kick the can down the road on
critical water infrastructure
needs. Gal McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce also sees SB
29 is far more efficient at
fully funding and completing
community water projects then
the piecemeal approach of
capital outlay that often
results in increased costs from
dragging out the completion of
these projects. We asked the
committee to give a due pass to
SB 29. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Now we've had so little uh
testimony. Is there anybody else
in the audience who wanted to
speak for or against this bill.
Is there anybody else online who
wants to speak for or against
this bill.
Zoe Kraft, please go ahead.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is Zoe
Kraft and as Yucca's
spokesperson here today, I'm
grateful to speak in support of
SB 29 on behalf of our members
and supporters. Yaka strongly
supports Senate Bill 29 because
water is life, investing in
water infrastructure is critical
for the well-being of our
communities, ecosystems, and
future generations.
New Mexico is fa facing a
worsening water crisis with
prolonged drought, contamination
threats, and aging
infrastructure endangering our
ability to provide clean and
reliable water. This $222
million dollar appropriation to
the water project fund is an
essential investment in water
security, ensuring that
resources are available to
repair, upgrade, and build the
infrastructure necessary to
protect our state's most
precious resource.
As climate change accelerates,
we must take proactive steps to
ensure that our water systems
are resilient, equitable, and
sustainable. This funding will
help communities, especially
rural and tribal communities
modernize their water
infrastructure, prevent waste,
and protect drinking water
sources from contamination. We
urge, we urge lawmakers to pass
SB 29 and commit to long-term
solutions for New Mexico's water
crisis. Investing in water
infrastructure today means
protecting our state's future
and ensuring that all New
Mexicans have
to clean and reliable water.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK, that concludes a public
testimony now on this bill,
Senate bill 29. So we're going
to committee members for
questions and comments. Senator
Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
Thank you for this bill. It's
really, uh, very, very sad water
is life.
And uh it is going to be the
most decades, um, but I have a
couple of questions. One of them
has to do with the, the
technical.
The technical funds, um, as I
understand this.
Um
At least what it what it says
here is the NMFA would lack
clear authority to award and
expend any funds above those
needed for 2025 projects,
resulting in a need for
additional action by the
legislature in 2026 to ensure
funds aren't stranded.
Projects are typically given for
4 years to extend the water
trusts board awards.
So one year expenditure period
authorized by SB 29 may limit
the utility of the funds.
Was that intentional?
Mary, I just don't see that
issue there, Madam Chair.
It's our FIR.
So Madam Chair, I think there
are a couple of things um that I
would just mention one is that
uh the authority that's given to
us in this bill limits the
expenditure, um.
For this year and next, this
fiscal year and next, it doesn't
necessarily limit it to this
year's projects, so there is,
um, the $100 million gap.
For the existing projects I, I,
I guess I would note, yeah, I
guess I would note that that we
typically have to shave our
projects fairly significantly.
Last year alone, we had 10.
that asked for about $145
million and ultimately got about
10% of that amongst the 10
projects, so we shaved those
projects fairly significantly,
uh, as we go to award these
funds between when they.
in. So with the additional funds
we could actually fund the
larger portion of the project.
Absolutely, and I got that. But
so you're not concerned about
Is the way this bill is written,
restricting that you don't see
that as a problem?
I just wanna make sure
we don't see that as a problem
and just if you take Gallup who
wants $16 million for their
sewer plant and maybe only got 8
out of the out of the bill. This
would now allow them to come
back and say, all right, that,
that's already been approved by
the water trusts board. Let's
add the additional money and
let's complete the project and
move on.
So it's the gap filling function
that that really saves it from
that problem.
OK. Madam, as we move into
Capital Alley and changes in
Capit Alley, you know, we're
gonna start saying if you have
water projects, they need to go
to the water trust board first.
They have the bulk of the money
they can complete projects. We
had additional money and so we
aren't saying, oh well, here's 5
million over here and I got
350,000 in capital over there. I
got
100 over here and so as they go
to the water trust board and say
they're 20 million, 40 million,
whatever the number is water
trust board can determine, OK,
can you phase it? Can we
complete it at one time? Is that
available? That's why we're
focusing on filling up the water
trust board in that bucket
because every year we've only
put $100 million. Now let's go
ahead and move it up to 350
million. So when next year's
project phases come, if there's
a balance left over that
Marquita has then will
additionally pump another 2.
It made me more than 200 gaps to
fill those gaps so we're not.
I mean, capital outlay is hard
to do. I mean, I, I live where
water is really, really want to
talk about water's life and
water is precious, right? Watch
people haul water every single
day to rain, snow, sleet, and
hail to try to survive and pump
it from their trucks to their
house and, and keep the pipes
from freezing.
But as we do that, we need to
complete projects because we're
not good at completing projects.
We need to complete projects and
we need to fund them fully and,
and we have the money and the
opportunity to do that right
now.
Thank you. Well, I defer to you,
Mr. Chair.
You know, better than I, how
this works, but it did bother me
to see it in the FIR.
Um, and then the other thing
that the FIR said was that
normally um the fund is
transferred by DFA and not given
directly to New Mexico Finance
Authority as stated in the bill.
Why the change?
Is there a reason, Madam Chair,
there's a technical element that
the finance authority can't
receive direct appropriations
from the uh legislature so it
typically goes to an
intermediary agency and then
transferred into the fund.
And that's why it's
Um, Madam Chair, I believe
that's correct.
That that's current law.
OK.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator
Just
Hawaii.
And those listening understand.
This appropriation, is it for
specific projects?
Madam Chanen, no, the projects
are embedded in the water trust
board and so those projects are
already on that House bill.
Everybody that got approved and
adopted is included in that
House bill. This is just adding
additional money. The only
appropriate 100 million is what
we gave him last year that we're
going to authorize those
projects, but if there's
projects that are short.
That they said we're going to
use these projects. I don't know
if you have a project in Artesia
or not, but if they're short and
they only gave them 5 and they
need 10, they can come back and
give them the full amount.
And so this is just giving the
money, the projects are in the
authorization bill, and when
that crosses over, they're
short, they could come back and
say, well, let's just complete
these. Um, we know that the
senators intent is to do this
again next year, and, and as we
do that then.
That
projects fully.
So Madam Chair and Senator, what
we're doing is, is, uh,
We're funding on faith.
I mean, we're putting money into
The Water Trust board, who will
then reallocate.
that
Based on the projects that are
approved. Is that correct?
Not a reallocation, maybe in
addition, right? Yeah, yeah,
addition not reallocating taking
from another to another but
adding wherever project is
short, 5, 10 million, they'll
now have an additional 2202
million to fund those projects
that we're approving in-house
bill.
So, um, I'm chair and senator.
The allocation and the
geographic distribution of these
monies. Do we have any idea how
it's distributed across the
state.
I'll leave that up to Mary.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
Senator, we do have a sense the
84 projects that are authorized
on onsen on House Bill 115, um.
Are
I'm sorry, it's house
206. My apology, senator. These
numbers are starting to run
together. Um, there are 84
projects of 62 of them are in
storage conveyance projects, so
it's, we know the types, uh, it
does have the list of projects.
I don't have the county
distribution, but it's got a
wide distribution across um the
storage projects applied for 100
and almost $200 million alone.
So those are your water tanks
and your, uh, pipe projects, um,
the, that's the bulk of the
applications without this
funding, we won't be able to.
Fund all of those, um, and we
would not be able to fund the
other, uh.
22 projects that represent
treatment, uh, conservation,
flood control, and watershed
just madam chair and expert of
Senator.
Why wasn't the
The appropriation.
Added to the House bill so that
people that are voting on the
bill could see what they're
voting on and where that money
was insurance, I believe that's
called log rolling because we're
making an appropriation and then
we're determining projects and
so I don't think you can do that
in the same bill.
And so as those projects are
vetted.
Through the water trust board,
then we automatically in house
Bill 2 currently just add an
appropriation.
We want to be very clear that
we're not picking projects
ourselves, they're picking them
legislature's not picking them
there the water trust board is
picking them. We're adding
additional money. They've had
the expertise and done pretty
well getting projects done in
100 million out every single
year that we're always in that
shortness, so we just want to
make sure we're very clear in
what we're doing and how we're
doing it.
Madam chair and I'm, I'm not
sure I understand why that would
be log rolling we put
appropriations on bills all the
time.
Why would that be?
Well, you want to be very clear
in an appropriations bill, what
exactly it's for and where it's
going and then DFA has to make
the transfer, right? The
legislature can't make the
transfer and so it's just to be
very clear on how we're doing
this, so we're not, maybe it's
not log growing, but an
appropriation we're not doing
any statute changes. That's just
a warning the projects and so we
want to be very clear that we're
not seeing here's 222 million
more for just these projects we
need to keep a line of
separation.
Madam Sharon Senator, I
appreciate it. I just
personally, I'd like to see.
The appropriation in the bill,
so exactly what we were spending
the money for.
Uh, I can, and the people
listening can go to HB 206 and
see the projects. I mean, I get
that, but as we both here today,
We're voting on
A list of projects that are in
the house that we don't, so.
And Jason just to clarify,
that's an authorization bill,
right? This is a funding bill.
That may be the clear line of
separation separation that we're
authorizing projects or already
including the funding, the 100
million is in house bill too.
And now we're adding an
additional 20.
Madam chair Senator, I, I, I
understand that. It just seems
like we're um
Me
I mean, we're putting money in
the fund and this deal, I get
it.
But we don't really know what
it's being.
You just know that we're putting
money where it's always gone.
In the water trusts
And
Where
Which we all agree with you,
there's nothing more important
in New Mexico than water, and we
need to protect it. I'm, I'm not
arguing that. I'd just like to
see the projects on the, on the
bill that I'm voting on. So when
people in my district say, what
did you vote for? I'll say,
well, I voted on 220 million
for.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
OK, Senators Scott and Senator
Riel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
what is the total?
volume of dollars.
Being appropriated to this task.
25, 26, is it a 100 million?
Plus the 222.
Mm-hmm
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chairman,
uh, Senator, there is a a
standing earmark that the water
project fund receives a
severance tax bonds, and that
amount of money is expected to
be this year an unprecedented
level of 160 $160 million.
That's an incredibly high
amount. It's still
are less than the request amount
that's coming in, so this
additional money would add to
this year's pot of funds and
with total the initial requests
made on the fund.
Um, our applicants because they
know how much money they're
expected to receive and we tell
them what the application amount
has to be capped at, they, they
will apply for less money than
they need, so they'll apply for
a smaller project than is
otherwise ready to be completed
and that's what this $222
million allows for them to
actually apply for the amount to
be awarded the amount necessary
to complete the project that
they're ready to undertake. Um,
so with this.
We, we met, um, Mr. Chairman, I,
uh, Madam Chair, I see a little
bit of.
Um, I see a little bit of
confusion and I apologize, uh,
but when we have uh the water
trust board limits the amount of
money that can go to any one
applicant. It's a percentage of
the funds available.
When we see the initial
requests.
Um
Our applicants know by having
watched this for years that they
are not going to be awarded the
amount that they have requested.
And as a result, if they apply
for $20 million but can only get
10, we're gonna require them to
have $10 million in their pocket
to be awarded for the full 20
million.
So what they end up doing is
applying for a smaller scope of
project.
So that they don't have to match
those funds. That's really,
it's, it's a, it's an
unfortunate.
Um, exercise that our applicants
have to go through to match
their request to the amount that
we will award as opposed to the
amount they need.
So that that's what the
difference is, the 300 and $380
million is the amount of money
that was initially requested.
That's what we believe is to be
fully ready to proceed and
without these dollars, we will
be scaling back our projects
fairly significantly to match
the amount that they could be
awarded as opposed to the amount
they need.
And I, I hope I clarified that.
Madam Chair, expert, you've
given me, given me a bit of a
headache here, but I, I think I
understand.
The process
So
Each of these entities that are
requesting funds, or they
required to have any local skin
in the game.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
um, they are required to have a
minimum amount of skin in the
game of 10%.
Um, and it may actually get
smaller depending on, you know,
how big a community they are and
what they're their local income
level looks like, uh, but they
may have to apply for, they may
have to put in, contribute more
if they can't um get full
funding from the water trusts
board. So for instance, Portalis
had applied for $60 million.
Um, we last year we scaled them
back to a $20 million
application request.
And they ultimately were funded
of $20 million and they were
ultimately funded for 7 million.
So they had a $60 million
project that got.
Scaled back because of the of
the.
The amount of application that
we would the maximum that we
would allow for if they'd
applied for 60, they would have
had to come up with $40 million
on their own. They applied for
20 they would just have to put
the 10% up, so it is a little
bit of an exercise that our
applicants go through knowing
the amount of award that they
give, so we only fund full
projects. They apply for 60,
they can only get 40, uh 6, they
can only get 20, they have to
come up with 40, so that happens
regularly so that.
While we have, um, you know,
technically about $100 million
gap in the amount of
applications, we believe that
there's much more ready project
to go than what was when we
limited our applicants to. OK,
and Madam Chair, so before any
of these are approved.
There has to be some reservoir
of money that will fully fund
These projects such that we
don't turn a shovel full of
dirt.
Not knowing that we.
Wouldn't be able to finish.
Is that accurate?
Madam Chair, senator, yes.
OK.
Mm
Madam Chair center one, just one
last question.
Uh, with respect to the $380
million in total that were
discussing about here today.
How does that compare with
For example,
The last 4 years of history.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, the
amounts that are being requested
last year and this year are
larger than typical. We're also
seeing more from cities and
counties, so we used to see a
lot of small mutual domestics
with much more modest project
scopes in hand, as the dollar
amounts began to get bigger and
applicants began to realize that
they could actually undertake
larger, uh, projects like in
Truth or Consequences and
Portalis, a major water
projects, um, they started
turning their application.
over to the Water Trust board.
So we're now seeing many more of
your municipalities showing up
in those. We went from about a
handful to 2025 cities showing
up in in this water trust board
bill, um, and they have larger
projects because they have
larger communities and and
larger regional areas to cover.
So we are now seeing much larger
requests coming to um the Water
Trust board in the last year and
this year in particular.
And Madam Chair.
Center expert is this a
consequence primarily of growth.
Or aging infrastructure or
Some combination of both
upgrading facilities. Why are we
needing so much money, so much
more money now just because we
have it.
Madam Chair, Senator, it is, um,
primarily aging infrastructure
and cost of infrastructure
improvements. Cos have gone up
dramatically, and our aging
infrastructure, again, it's
really hard for a community to
undertake a $20 million project
when they can only get 5 million
at a time, so, uh, it's, it's a
combination of those two things.
It is not growth, Mr. uh, Madam
Chairman, Senator, we're not
seeing growth from these, we're
seeing aging infrastructure
replacements, leaking, uh.
Lines being replaced, that sort
of thing.
And
And Madam Chair expert is.
What would any or all of this or
some of this be a consequence of
The regulatory environment.
Madam Chair, uh, senator, there
may be 1 or 2 lead place lead
replacement lines, but no, this
is typically aging
infrastructure that communities
have been uh.
Tackling and grappling with for
quite some time.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your answers and thank
God for all of you.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Senator Munoz, uh.
Miss Miss Rossell, I feel like
I've known you all my life now.
I do have questions regarding
this particular bill whenever
you're talking about the mutual
domestics, is there still a
minimum number of members that
belong to a potential mutual
domestic before y'all can.
Grant one of their
application.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, senator,
there's never been a minimum,
um, typically the barrier for
small, small mutual domestics
accessing the water uh project
fund is the the local match or
in some instances, um, the the
ability or desire to undertake a
portion of that match that
project is debt, um, the water
trusts board has been working
over the last 3 years to modify
its policies to um reduce the
barriers for small systems.
to access that fund.
And Madam cheered, that is a big
problem as we have seen
throughout not just my area but
throughout the state because
there are.
The constraints are there for
the people do not really have
the money to get any engineering
help or anything like that, they
can't, they can't make a match.
So therefore these.
These citizens are still hauling
water, they're still.
Doing everything necessary to
try to get their homes where.
There is
Good water for them, but
Whenever we are
Not coming to the aid of those
people that do need it the most.
I just wanted to make sure that
there was not a minimum number.
Before
The board,
Um, Madam Chair, there is not a
minimum number, and I, I note
that last year you made some
changes to the water project
Finance Act which allows us to
use water project funds for
technical assistance. We are
undertaking that initiative now
so that very small water systems
and get help with planning so
that they can access that fund,
um, again next year and again
next year that same bill last
year amended the water Project
Finance Act to include
wastewaters and eligible use
those applications.
will begin accepting
applications for wastewater
later this summer, so it's, we,
we expect to see some pent up
demand from the wastewater
applicants, all the more
important for us to fully fund
as many of these water projects
as possible this year so that we
um have a, a good use of the
funding next year that it all
doesn't go to water and that
some of those wastewater
projects can be funded.
And Madame Chair, I would like
to commend Miss Russell for her
help over this project. This is
a small.
Area in in between Roswell and
Dexter that was.
It was very urgent that they get
some water, but they didn't have
the funds to hire anybody to
help them out with the
contractual part of the
engineering part of it. And so I
think this is the impetus for
where that came from, and the
need was there and they stepped
up and did the work and I, I do
want to thank.
Madam Cheer, Senator Minnoz and
Miss Russell.
Whenever we're talking about the
aging infrastructure, uh, the
cost of the infrastructure now
whenever we're talking about
replacing.
Storage tanks and
municipalities, and that is no
small task, right there. It is a
big amount of money that they're
requesting.
I know that uh there was a
request last year that I, it
took my breath away whenever I
found out what one of those
tanks was going to cost because
it had failed.
And it really, really surprised
me.
Madam Chairinerinos.
is there.
Anything in the water truss
board that allows.
An entity or a municipality or
an area of the state to apply
for emergency funds.
Madam Chair, Senator, no. OK.
And Madam Madam, there is money
at DFA that if there's an
emergency flooding, any other
emergency. I believe we put 10
million in last year and then
they could apply for it if there
was any emergency in local
government. I don't know what
the balance of the fund is
today, but.
There is money in DFAdam I'm
sorry, what, what agency did you
say that was?
A DFA of Finance. OK.
And the reason I'm bringing that
up.
We saw what happened down in the
southeastern corner of the state
this year.
We had devastating forest fires,
followed by the flooding.
Redosa was.
Under pressure with
All of that that went on.
Rosal experienced that with that
8 inches of rain in 4.5 hours.
It was blowing out lines like
you can't believe.
I got notice from the mayor of
Dexter that that morning that
all of their sewer lines had
ruptured.
I didn't know if any of this
could be put back to.
But working through the uh.
The Water Trust board.
To be able to get
Engineering help as far as all
of this mess went, because I
mean it was.
It was unbelievable what we were
seeing down there and I know
that.
Some of these issues also may be
applicable to the Las Vegas area
as well.
Some Madam Sharon and Senator
when the then governor declares
an emergency. I mean, that's
750,000 she may have to.
20 of them or 30 of them in
those cases. And, and then
they're eligible to use those
funds through home and security.
They're eligible to use those
funds through Homeland Security
for any of those needs for
maintenance repairs, so they
have to hire engineers, they can
uh get the money and do that. I
mean, this is a fun, it's, it's
a process on when the timeline
starts when the timeline ends,
that would delay the executive
order of the money and DFA would
be the quickest.
to that. And Madam Chair and
senator, I do appreciate that
response sometimes working with
Homeland Security there was
something else, uh.
It's y'all go ahead and do the
work and then we'll might refund
you. We have seen that happen
before, so there is a problem
there. The emergency measures
that the governor did take, we
do appreciate that because the
need was there. I can't remember
now how many if you combine both
of those, all three of those
communities that were hit the
hardest, which is rid us of then
Roswell and then Dexter. I don't
know how many homes were
destroyed. I don't know the
total amount of damages for all
three of those areas right now,
but it was.
big, big deal.
Madam Cheer and.
Senator Minz, I'm flipping here
through my notes.
Um
You said that $18 million in 20
let's see.
And then
In 2024, the legislature
appropriated $50 million to the
water project fund and then an
additional funding of 18 million
was a cost overruns.
Tell me a little bit about that
please.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, Senator, as
this year, as you saw this year,
we have greater amounts of uh
requests that we have funding
available. Last year, the
legislature appropriated $50
million to the water project
fund to help make many of those
projects whole. Again, we had to
scale back significantly even
with that additional $50 million
we scaled back significantly the
awards we were able to make. I
mentioned 10 projects last year,
applied for a total of $145
million.
and they were scaled back to
about 10% of that. Um, so we
have to scale back because the
demand is so great and these
projects are costing more than
they have before, and they've
been put off for quite some
time. So that was the $50
million. There's an $18 million
appropriation that was also
received or cost overruns uh for
projects that applied and were
awarded prior to 2024, so there
are projects that got stalled as
part of COVID, a lot of
projects.
particularly in a smaller
communities, ended up stalling.
Then when they finally were able
to get out to go forbid those
projects had escalated
dramatically. So the, the $18
million was for cost overruns
for projects prior to 2024.
And Madame Chair and was
uh Senman yes, Miss Russell.
That's what I.
I wanted you to point out
because those overruns, whenever
it first goes out to bid that
number changes dramatically in
what we're experiencing right
now, and I do get that.
Madam Cheer.
Senator Munoz.
Miss Russell
In the uh analysis from NMFA.
He states historically, the
office of the state engineer
receives 10% of the
distributions deposited into the
water project fund annually for
water rights adjudication.
And 20% of the money dedicated
to water rights adjudication is
allocated to the administrative
offices of the court. I'm going
to kind of gig the office of the
state engineer right now.
I've been up here 21 years now.
And all I've heard because I'm
very interested in water and the
preservation of it and making
sure that we put our, our water
to good use, but I've been
hearing about the office of the
State engineer, making sure that
adjudications do take place.
I'm not going to ask you either
one of y'all to respond, and I
don't really see any, uh,
Faces at state engineer's office
change all the time, so I, I'm
not recognizing any faces out
there.
But this adjudication process
and I understand what they're
doing there we are fully
adjudicated in my basin and, and
then CID.
But I'd like to know from the
office of the state engineer,
what the status is in regard to
the rest of the state on the
adjudication of.
Process and how it how it is it
progressing in the Rio Grande
Corridor, but that's another
question for another time. So if
anybody from the office of State
Engineers out there listening,
yeah, I stopped by my office. We
can have a cup of coffee and
talk about this. I think it'd be
very interesting.
And uh
Let's see, where's the other one
And it all of this, all of my.
The rest of my questions do you
have.
Reference back to the
adjudication process of the
state engineers, madam Chair.
Um, and the Interstate stream
commission, I'm assuming there.
But I get what is, what is going
on here, the cost of trying to
build anything anymore is just.
Out of control.
It really is.
Um
I, I too would like to see what
the projects are and be able to
tell my constituents what we are
spending that much money on.
Uh
Can you tell me, Miss Russell
and Madame Chair and Senator
Munoz, what is the timeline for
making applications for.
Fiscal year 200.
It would be for 2026, fiscal
year 2020.
Madam Chair, the senator, the
application process takes
approximately.
15 months between when you apply
and when you are uh able to get
awarded for funding. It starts
with a notice of intent that
begins either in July or August,
uh, depending on when the
legislature um schedules the
finance authorities last
oversight committee meeting.
Um, but then there's a
recommendation made by the Water
Trust board to the legislature.
Those are the projects that
appear, those 84 projects will
appear before you won that
authorization bill. It comes
through uh the.
There's a an additional
readiness review that's done.
They're ranked and then they're
recommended by the water trust
board to the Finance Authority,
typically in May or June of each
year, and then the finance
authority takes action typically
in June. Uh, they have 3 months
to then meet all of their
readiness and we can then start
closing on the process. So
that's why I say it's not a
great and the senator mentioned,
it's not a great source of
emergency funding. I would note
though that projects that are
either uh communities that are
either trying to mitigate damage
from.
Um, um,
Potential damage from an
emergency or to heal from
emergencies will get higher
prioritization as a result of
the process they go through. So
while they're not a great source
of funding, if you're trying to
stave off an emergency or get
over an emergency, you typically
are going to be very highly
rated and likely uh one of the
first to be funded.
Thank you for that response, and
Madam Chair, I do want to.
I express my gratitude to Miss
Russell for the technical help
that she has given to some of
these small mutual domestics
that are trying to get up and
running. Thank you very much for
that. That's all the questions I
have. Thank you all for your
responses. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions or comments?
Is there
There is a motion for a due
pass.
And the committee secretary will
call the.
Senator Cervantes, Senator
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes.
Senator,
Senor, yes, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Yes.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Cia Lopez,
Lopez, yes, Senator Stephonics.
Esophonics, yes.
by a vote of 90, you have a
unanimous due pass from this
committee. Thank you very much
for coming. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you and uh I am
asking the uh vice chair to run
the next two bills while I
present. Thank you.
This one.
Even
I understand we have a committee
substitute coming around.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, um.
Today we're here to present
expanding the authority of the
state forester and you do have.
A committee substitute.
I moved the
uh.
We
I miss committee substitute for
Senate Bill 33 for discussion
purposes.
Thank you, Senator Eel.
Thank you. And today, uh, we are
all aware of the wildfires that
we've had going on around the
state.
We also are aware or maybe we're
not aware that the insurance
department and the state
forester and several other
private entities have gathered
into a task force to talk about
what would benefit our state.
How we can
our homes.
Excuse me.
How we could protect our homes
from losing their property
insurance. So there are a few
bills that are going through the
legislative process that are
supposed to be complimentary.
And today representative Harlan
Vincent is with me. He and I, of
course, have had lots of fires
in our districts, um, I just
recently have given up, um.
Lincoln County is part of my
district, but I have parts of uh
San Miguel in my district as
well that went through uh fires
and unbeknownst, uh, there are
fires all over the state.
Everybody suffers from fires,
and then the after effects of
the fires, the flooding, and
then our winds in the state. So,
uh,
Today, the state forester, Miss
Laura McCarthy has, uh, will
present the details of this
bill, but I'd like to turn to my
co-sponsor for any uh
introductory comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, senators. I
appreciate you listening to this
bill today and
I really appreciate everybody.
Getting on board with the theme
of trying to keep these
wildfires from devastating
everybody's communities and.
I just know one of these days
we're gonna to smarten up and
we're gonna start doing thinning
and logging, and we are going to
harden homes and we're gonna put
in buffer zones where people
don't have to experience this
devastation because after and I
know and and this is not just
about Lincoln County, that's
just the most recent one.
But
After these fires go through and
people's houses have been
reduced to rubble.
When they've been there for 50,
50, 60 years, they have nothing
to return to.
And we're not taking care, we're
not managing our forests. We're
not managing our state lands,
right? We're not managing our
properties right? And if we can
just get to the point where we
can start working on this.
And we have a good clear
direction on how to do it.
You're gonna start to see a lot
of the interns.
Prices go down and, and
insurance companies are gonna
want to insure your homes
because they know they're safe,
but right now it's just so
unpredictable because our
forests are just so thick, so
thank you for your
consideration, and I'll turn it
over to Ms. McCarthy.
Madam Chair and senators, I'm
gonna boil this bill down to 5
essential things that it does.
The first is it takes an
existing task force, the fire
planning task force that's been
in existence since 2003 and adds
representatives to it.
Uh, who are missing from that
conversation in the form of the
superintendent of insurance,
the.
The Department of Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management, the insurance
industry and a fire scientist.
As well, it will increase the
responsibility of the fire
planning task force to cover the
development of wildfire prepared
standards for homes and
structures. And that's important
because right now, we're all
over the place in terms of those
standards and we're not uh
consistent in any way, which
makes it really hard for the
insurance industry to know what
they're getting.
The second thing the bill does
is creates a new authority for
home hardening responsibility
and
Right now, the forestry division
has
Been working for 20 years to
influence the management of the
national forest and to assist
private landowners with
management of their forest.
And we can
Help you with removing the trees
right up to your structure, but
the research about how homes
ignite is really clear that the
0 to 5 ft around your house is
the most important because
that's where embers collect.
And nobody has the jurisdiction
over providing technical
assistance, training, and
potentially grants for home
hardening.
The third thing this bill does
is provides local government
with the opportunity to build
their capacity to do home
hardening assessments.
And to work at the neighborhood
scale because if I don't do the
work around my house and my
house catches fire. It's
probably gonna ignite your house
next.
As well
There's a component of uh
enabling local government to
work on buffer zones, that is
thinned areas around in that
interface between the forest and
the community.
The 4th thing the bill does is
uses grants as an incentive.
And uh 5th is the emergency
clause.
As well, if you saw the FIRs,
uh, the bill asks for an
appropriation, a special
appropriation that is of $20
million that was in the
executive recommendation.
And
Staffing is a critical need.
This, uh, if this bill passes,
it's a new responsibility for
the forestry division. It's an
area where, uh, that would
require extensive uh staff
capacity that we don't currently
have. I'm not an overestimator.
I don't pad numbers and I
believe that with 4 staff we
could deliver on the promise of.
this program.
Thank
The, um, Madam Chair, the
superintendent of insurances
here is uh a witness so she
could
You want to say anything, Ms.
Cain?
Would you, yes.
Here we go.
Would you give her like
Mm.
Let's see, uh,
Madam Chair
apologies, uh, I didn't expect
to speak, but I'm glad to have
this opportunity, uh, we have
been working, uh, closely with
the forestry uh department and
uh uh with uh with the other
agencies that have been
involved, it's really a whole
system that has to happen here
in the forest, in the
communities, and in the
individual hardening, the uh
uniform standard we're talking
about is the IBHS standard,
which is a
an independent group but funded
by the insurance industry that
the that the the hope is, and
we're starting to see it in some
filings in other states that
once we have IBHS standards, uh,
insurance companies will
continue to write, hopefully,
and also we're seeing discounts,
uh, the hardening, I'm sorry we
didn't have IBHS here today.
We've had them in other uh
interim meetings and the key
really is having each home
having a 5 ft.
Uh, clear zone of nothing, no
whatever, which is the strongest
thing. The other is closing your
vents. If you saw the fires in
California many times they said,
oh, we can't know which house
it's gonna go next because we
see the embers have gotten in
through the vents and then a
strong, uh, you know, roofing
system, but it has to be from
top to bottom one house can't do
it as we've, as you've
mentioned, uh, we need the
forest cleared. We need the
breaks between the forest and
the.
community. We need community,
uh, hardening, and then we need
enough individual homes
hardened, which is why, uh, you
know, the issue of grants is
very important for the the uh
homes that don't have it. We're
introducing a fair plan bill
which somebody heard of which
requires mitigation once you get
in the fair plan within a year,
and hopefully grants for people
who can't afford it and
increasing the numbers. So this
is a total coordinated effort in
the bills we're presenting uh to
uh to the legislature this
session.
Thank you, Madam Superintendent.
Would you like to sit, um, with
the group so that you'll be
available for questions.
So Madam Chair, we're, we're
ready for the proponents and the
opponents. OK, thank you.
How many in the audience are
here to support this bill?
Is there any
But in the audience who opposes
this bill.
OK
Given that, why don't we have
like
Yeah, uh online, that's right,
thank you. Nobody online? OK,
thank you. Um, so why don't we
have 5 representatives of the
proponents to speak in favor of
the bill.
Madam Chairman, committee
members, thank you. My name is
Mark Fisher. I'm a commissioner
in Lincoln County, also the
chair.
Um, I spent
during the fires and the floods
actually visiting the
devastation trying to protect
people from fires, and I know
that.
The mitigation efforts that
we're talking about in this bill
work.
We lost over 900 homes to fires
in Lincoln County.
Uh, that includes the village of
Riidoso.
And also out in the outlying
County.
People cannot get mortgages
because they can't afford the
insurance. They can't afford the
insurance because the insurance
companies feel that the risk is
too high. The air correct.
This program will allow us to
harden these homes in a way that
we can reduce the risk and the
insurance will follow. That's
how that works. I live about 20
miles away from the scene of the
fires.
My home, my ranch is completely.
Hardened against wildfire, but
my insurance cost raised 2 x
last year.
Because what they do is they
charge the whole state and
increased rate because we have
some areas that are so
susceptible to wildfire, so it
is very important for all of us,
but particularly our region.
To have this program so that we
can bring uh um.
The investment that we need, we
can bring our families back.
They can get mortgages, they can
save their investments or
lifetime investments and this
system works. I'm telling you it
does. So the thinning, the
barriers, the wild fowl urban
interface that needs to be
protected along very much which
this bill talks about, which is
the hardening of the homes is
very important. I thank you,
Madam Chairman, for your time
and interest.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gus
Pedrotti. I am a firefighter
paramedic with Albuquerque Fire
Rescue. Albuquerque Fire Rescue
is in strong support of the
Senate Bill 33, and you can see
behind me there are many other
folks in uniform. This is a bill
sponsored by chiefs and
departments around the state.
Um, this type of mitigation
strategy is nothing new in the
fire service. You can see it in
your urban areas as well, fire
marshal's office, material
sciences, all of these things
allowed us to complement the
hard work crews are doing to
make sure that we can have the
impact we're supposed to.
It's time for us to step up and
meet that challenge with
wildland urban interfaces too.
Work on these programs, and then
also the grants allow the public
to participate, allow people to
get involved in protecting their
homes, protecting their
neighborhoods, because as it's
been noted, it takes everyone,
right? Fires spread through wind
through superheated gasses,
embers, homes burned hot because
of plastics in the homes, and
this is a crucial step we can
take to defending our entire
state. So we urge your support
of this bill and for
firefighters across the state,
thank you very much.
Thank you. I just want to remind
everyone that we uh that the
posted rules are 10 minutes for
opponents, 10 minutes for
opponents since we don't have
opponents, we have a little bit
um more flexibility. I just
wanted to make clear what the
rules are. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Camila Feibelman. I'm the
director of the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter, and I'd just
like to put the bill in a bit of
context. New Mexico is getting
hotter and drier faster than any
other state in the union, and
what that means is that we've
got more ferocious fires, so we
have to step up and understand
what is the cost to climate
change in our state, whether
that be
loss of homes, loss of property,
loss of life, and if we don't
get prepared to meet that
challenge, now the cost will
continue to be greater. So the
16 member task force makes a lot
of sense to us. Things I hadn't
known about closing your vents,
getting rid of your doormat,
getting rid of the porch, um,
the, the, the porch where they
can catch fire, so these are
common sense things that we can
do to address the outside.
impacts of fire as a result of
climate change.
Thank you, Mr. Moore. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Brent
Moore and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the American
Property casualty Insurance
Association, uh, the New Mexico
Association of Realtors and
Allstate Insurance Company. All
of them stand in support of this
bill, and I'm gonna focus my
comments on the insurance impact
of this bill, as we all know.
Uh, wildfire risk is a
significant risk in the Western
United States. You've seen
recently the wildfires in
California. We've had the fires
in Riodos, so it is a
significant risk and the
insurance industry is looking at
that risk and assessing it and
reacting to it. This bill will
help to reduce that risk and
will help to start to address uh
the impact that that risk has on
obtaining insurance, we urge you
to pass this bill.
Thank you.
Mr. Gino.
with
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Conroy Chino, and I represent
the Pueblos of Taos and Acoma.
And the two hubble, uh.
are deeply connected to to the
land, and that includes
mountainous forests and also
springs and lakes and the
rolling hills that make up the
traditional homelands. They're
also very concerned about
protecting natural resources and
sacred sites and human life from
wildland fires and extreme
weather conditions, but they
also recognize that it's
important to partner with the
state when it comes to
mitigation efforts. Tas, for
example, has utilized the
existing um uh tribal forest
Protection Act to network with
the state.
Forestry division on this
medication efforts.
Uh, they also have a presently a
wildland preparedness program,
much of that funding comes from
the federal government by
formula. And so they need
funding to be able to address
the accumulation of fuel in the
high mountainous areas that
surround Tas Pueblo.
And so for those reasons, Madam
Chair members of the committee,
uh, the to public strongly
support this legislation in
hopes to be able to access some
of the funding that's going to
be needed to uh to address uh um
much of what has been described
here and to manage tribal
resources and also to be able to
arrive at policies and
agreements with the state
through the state tribalation
Act. And for those reasons, but
I'm sure we support the bill.
Thank you.
If we have one more.
Madam Chair, oops, sorry, Madam
Chair, members of the community
or committee, Tim Johnson with
the municipal League, um, on
behalf of the municipal League
in the 106 cities we represent,
uh, we appreciate the sponsors
bringing this bill.
Um
Uh
Leave it, I mean, New Mexico
being proactive in something, I
don't think we hear about too
often. This is actually a
proactive bill, which we
appreciate and I can tell you as
part of my role on the insurance
side of the municipal league,
um, it does work the defensible
spaces does work. Uh, I was in
Riodoso. I was with
Representative Harlan for
probably 3 weeks, uh, and
unfortunately a lot of
subdivisions and neighborhoods
burned down, but many of the
properties that we insure
through the village of Riidoso,
uh, were
due to having these defensible
spaces, so I didn't understand
the science before that. It was
very clear and obvious when she
got on the ground that this
works very, very well, and
again, we appreciate this and we
stand in support of it.
We're almost up to the time, so
if these these second two
comments can be very brief. Good
morning, Madam Chair, Senators
Randy Varilla, state fire
marshal. We strongly support
this bill. We'll work closely
with Ms. McCarthy and OSI to
continue to provide training for
our state firefighters to
continue. Thank you, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee, um, Vince Martinez on
the interim CEO of the New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association as well
as uh senior adviser to
Tri-State Generation
Transmission. We support the
bill.
We would recommend that maybe
utilities are added to that
committee.
You know, our insurance has
doubled in cost and been cut in
half our our coverage as well as
we have.
Uh, why, uh, um.
Vegetation management programs
and and um and and fire
protection plans in place so.
Anyway, thank you.
Thank you. No opposition, but
requests for a change.
All right, um, why don't we let
one person, one or two people,
how many people do we have
online?
None. Excellent. OK.
Um, so let's now go to the
committee. Do we have any
comments or questions?
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
And sponsors. This is a
It's a good effort, um.
Can you tell me, um,
In the committee substitute.
Are there any Mexicans that are
excluded from participating in
this project.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Madam Chair and senator, uh, you
and I did talk and we did amend
um the bill to include New
Mexico residents and the number
of structures that would be
covered would be done by rule.
Um, so that that your change and
some other comments led to
changing throughout the entire
bill, that's why we have a
committee substitute.
Well, and I do appreciate that,
and I appreciate the, the
sponsors of opening it up with
more people. I think it's, you
can't have your neighbor burned
down and protect yourself, and
we all understand that
regardless of where they're
from.
Um
But my, my question, I want to
make our our uh residents of
Pueblos and tribal lands are
they?
Are they also covered in and can
participate in this project.
Senator Townsend, please go
through the.
Madam Chair and senator, yes.
And Madam Chair, and um
Senators of
Unincorporated areas are also
covered, is that correct?
Madam Chair and Senator, yes.
Um
Madam Chair and
Um
Answers
Have we gotten any indication
what the insurance companies may
How much relief they may give to
New Mexico.
Because of
This expenditure.
Senator
Could you use some microphone?
I'm sorry
madam chairs and go through the
chair,
what we're seeing is, uh, as
some in the one filing we have
with some uh hardening
requirements is about 20%.
Decrease that the issue we're
struggling with though is where
they're going to write.
Right now we're not seeing many
companies riding up in Riodoso.
Again, why we're looking at the
fair plan.
So, Madam Chair, and um
Expert
Why are they targeting a.
Uh, Madam Chair, senator,
usually after a a fire along the
lines that we've seen, uh,
companies, uh, declined to write
for a number of years. Uh, we're
probably going to see that in
Los Angeles as well.
Madam Chair and Representative,
when it's burned down, it seems
like there's a damn little
chance of a fire. Why did, why
that? OK.
And Senator, uh, the, the
underwriting, uh, approaches of
insurance sometimes are, are uh
um a problem to ferret out, but
I will say in Riidoso, this is
the 3rd fire that they've had
within a few years, so I can't
totally criticize their, their
concern about risk.
So
Madam Chair and expert, are you
telling me that you're condoning
the actions of insurance
companies,
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, not at
all. I just don't have the
nobody has the authority to
force the insurance industry to
write certain places, which is
why we're.
Focusing on this hardening so
that they feel that there's the
risk is lowered and they will
come back in and again, that's
why we're trying to put the uh
uh the insurer of last resort in
the fair plan bill uh to cover
the Riidoso, uh, properties as
quickly as possible.
Madam Chair and Representative
expert. I wasn't.
I wasn't trying to nail you
down. I just wanted to make sure
that the public understood that
you are not supporting that with
your answer.
Um
I would, um,
If you
respond real quick? I'm sorry
I mean Representative Townsend,
Madam Chair.
One thing I want to make
completely for all the insurance
people, we do not want to get
away from traditional insurance.
That's not the plan. The plan
is.
There is just they don't um I
do, I think they do understand
the urgency.
But while everybody is figuring
out what we're gonna do with
insurances.
Our financial institutions can't
work.
Our realtors cannot work and our
people can't come back home and
all we're trying to do is give
them an option, that's it.
And map representative, I
appreciate the heck out of that
because that's exactly what
needs to occur.
Um
I, I would, uh, encourage.
He
Insurance superintendent to, to
help us.
As legislator protect whether
they're in alto or in northern
New Mexico.
These insurance companies have
written policies for decades.
Knowing full well
What
was occurring.
And, and they have profited
greatly.
From those.
Um
Payments and the, and, and the
risk associated. And just
because you have a fire.
Or you have a flood, or you have
any other
Type of disaster.
To quit supporting.
New Mexico residents is, I, I'm,
I've, I'm, I'm, I'm ready to
take them on for that, because
they have profited for years and
years and years.
And now that
Places
Burned down
What we want is thinning and all
that has occurred. I mean,
there's nothing left.
Taking those people, they, they
now have the lowest risk of
anyone in the mountains and,
and.
And by testimony today, we had
insurance rates that were going
up 2 X and 3 X.
I have a hard time, uh, with
that. I don't believe it's fair
to New Mexicans and that, and
And the process of raising
The rates and Jo, New Mexico
because of a fire in
A high country.
caused me great concern. I mean,
I know like distributed across
the state, but we've got to work
on that. That's, that's just not
fair.
Uh, I do appreciate again very
much the committee substitute
and open it up to more people, I
think it'll be good.
Um
$20 million based on the fires
that we've, I mean.
We have burnt in New Mexico
about 1.1, maybe 1.2 million
acres.
It's like 424 square miles.
Of New Mexico with torched.
A lot of that reason is because
we have allowed our forests to
become completely overgrown.
And some of the groups that
stood here today and said, you
know, this is global warming and
all this other
The fact of the matter is, the
reason that we have had the
fires, Madam Chair.
is because we let the amount of
fuel.
Grow up and, and be deposited in
our forests.
And we do not have the capacity
to put it out once it starts.
If you look, madam chair, to our
friends.
And tribal communities that I'm
familiar with.
They have done an excellent job
for years. You and I know that
we watch it all the time. They
forest didn't burn.
Because they took the time to
thin and clean up their forests.
And you can play with this
politically if you want to about
being global warming, but the
problem is, we didn't take care,
we didn't clean up our forests.
And we desperately need to do
that because that's the greatest
thing that this legislature
could do.
is to create more water flow,
getting more straws out of the
ground.
Getting the humidity raised in
those forests where we had
flowing water and more access to
water where we could put fires
out. So,
I'm, I, I strongly support your
effort.
$20 million is not much when you
divide it over all the.
Have you done the calculation,
how much is that per family that
was impacted, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
Madam Chair and senator.
The $20 million is a start and
uh I think it works as a pilot.
And
We're gonna need to.
It was a fire planning task
force select.
12.
Or two places where we put that
$20 million in order to get the
neighborhood scale of impact.
The uh amount per household, uh,
would really depend on.
Uh, how many local governments
are interested in.
Uh, doing the work.
To put this in place and then.
What remains a a minimum of 50%
for the.
Grants
For home hardening and the
estimates for IBHS from a
presentation a few weeks ago was
in the neighborhood of 500 to
10,000 per grant for the home
hardening work, assuming the
structure already has a classic
roof.
Madam Chair and representative
is, is this appropriation in HB
2, if you got it sewed up. I
mean, do we know we have the
appropriation.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, as you
know, uh, House Bill 2 is still
in development then when it
comes to issues the house
numbers and it could end up
there.
I'm being positive and hopeful.
I'm sure, I'm here to support
you. I think that's a good place
for it to wind up. We need the
funding. I, I wish we would have
got this support for.
in a chair.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Cervantes.
Madam Chair, excuse me, um,
Senator, uh.
Your thoughts, I support your
bill, but I have some thoughts
that you may want to consider as
you move to finance and perhaps
for a substitute there.
Uh, the composition of the
Of the uh
Representation, I think it's on
page 4.
This is for the um
Composition of the task force.
On your subparagraph 5, which is
lane 15 on
On page 4
Right now that existing task
force as a representative of the
Forest Service appointed by the
governor.
That's existing right now. The
governor has that appointment. I
think you probably should
consider retaining that
authority in the governor.
Uh, the reason is that you're
striking the authority from the
governor, but you're saying
governor after consulting with
the Forest Service, we strike
that language as you have it.
There would have to be a
representative of the Forest
Service on this task force, and
I don't know that you can compel
the federal government to be
part of a state task force. You
may be able to do so, but you're
essentially saying you'd have to
have somebody who know Forest
Service on the state task force.
You may not be able to do that,
um, and I think the existing
language is probably better,
which is to consult with the
Forest Service, but to have the
appointment by the governor.
Otherwise, you probably, you
might actually have a vacant
seat.
That's a thought, um, you've
also added some other
individuals including the
superintendent who's here. I
think there was a good
suggestion made earlier. You may
want to include utilities, at
least my experience is that
oftentimes these fires are
started by electrical overhead
line utilities and um watching
what we're seeing in California
probably gas utilities as well
too, so, um, you know, we get
what we're watching the tragedy
of California having electrical
uh representatives of large
utilities probably make some
sense and
on page 6, I think you're too
specific over here, which is
when you're adding language that
The, um, the consideration
should be
Um, making a 5 ft zone.
You'll, you'll see that language
they're making a 5-foot zone
closest to and surrounding
structures non-combustible. I
think that's a little
micromanagement, to be honest
with you. Um, there may be some
sometimes when structures need
to be closer than 5 ft and don't
all need to be non-combustible.
Uh, within 5 ft, you should
really leave that up, I think,
to the, to the task force, and I
think you really probably in
that sentence.
Uh, or with a semicolon on on
line 18, then go to the
judiciary. I know you all love
doing this, uh, but, um.
Uh
I, I, I think we don't want to
be sitting here saying you gotta
have 5 ft, non-combustible
materials, and then you don't
define what is support
surrounding structures. I don't
know what that is. So I put a
tool shed out back next to my
house and it's got to be
non-combustible if it's within 5
ft of my house, that may be a
little bit too.
Aggressive I think.
So that I think that probably is
a little bit too too specific.
I, I would just leave that up to
the to the what you've got right
now, which is that they should
consider non noncombustible and
ignition resistant building
materials.
Maybe even include the language
there for national standards for
defensible space requirements. I
don't think you need to have the
words that say, including the 5
ft zone.
closest to surrounding
structures being noncombustible
that.
It's a little bit probably too
specific. Those are just some
thoughts I would suggest to you.
Maybe another committee set up
when you go to finance and then
get my last questions.
Madam chair and to Senator
Townsend's point, you got a $20
million appropriation.
The way the bill is structured,
if you don't if if does the
governor only have governor
can't change that number.
Um, so she has to sign the bill
presumably between other days
hass signed the bill in its
entirety or veto it.
0, is that right?
You can't whine at be doing
anything.
So, um, Madam Chair Senator,
thank you for that. Uh, usually,
uh, Senate Finance can strike
the amount of money and send the
bill on without the uh
appropriation in it so that they
could put in a preparation into
uh.
The budget
But it is correct that once it
gets into the budget, the uh
executive has. And I, and I, I
don't know that she can strike
the appropriation of this bill,
madam chair, I'm sorry, but has
the authority to strike the
appropriation bill, but you're
right. I mean, hopefully you'll
get the number right over at
Senate Finance. I don't know if
she has the authority to strike
the appropriation.
Bill
It's not an appropriation bill,
so I don't think you can line I
don't veto this but and that's.
For those folks in the other.
guy who was just here.
Madam Chair, so, uh, are, are,
well, I guess I should say
Senator, are you interested in
making a motion to that effect
or I think I heard you say these
are just suggestions for the
next committee. It's really,
it's really I don't want to slow
down the bill and, and I think
it's important, so I don't, I
don't want to start to train
them in.
I don't think this committee
wants me to like judiciary over
here when necessary, you know
the chair of the chair I'm
looking at her smile on her
face,
is that your preference to just
make, uh, any changes you accept
because the next step would be,
was that friendly, but uh is it
your preference to just uh look
at these issues as you go to the
next committee?
Um, I believe the next committee
is finance, so I, I know that it
will be scrubbed when we get
there. OK, so you probably have
a.
A committee
Sub or I was talking about the
extra member, the, the
uh oh I suggestion of, of adding
the utilities of it. Do you want
to take care of it here or
there?
Well, we will take care of it
there. I'm having a chorus here.
OK, madam chair, um, absolutely.
Thank you.
Um, Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Question for any of the
presenters.
I was
The $20 million.
Number arrived at.
What science.
What
Representation of need.
How did we come up with 20
million bucks.
Madam Chair and senator, as I
mentioned that number was in the
governor's executive budget
request.
There are a lot of competing
priorities for special
appropriations and
20 million is a number that is
significant enough.
To really get some meaningful
work done and is also uh aligned
with uh budget reality.
And Madam Chair, Miss McCarthy.
Do you have any estimate?
Of the total scale of the
problem.
Madam Chair and senator.
Uh, we know that the total scale
is far more than 20 million and
Also in the executive request is
800,000.
For wildfire mapping and uh to
determine.
Uh
Hazard and risk.
And if that funding is
appropriated, it will allow us
to retain a contractor.
To um
Really improve our understanding
of.
Where to invest first.
Uh, and that be a, a great
benefit to the state if you uh
look at other Western states
that have fire risk.
There use of mapping technology
is much more sophisticated than
ours.
And Madam Chair, Miss McCarthy,
I believe I heard.
The phrase total coordination.
Used during a portion of your
presentation.
But it appears to me that we
are, and this is to Senator
Townsend's point.
We're leaving out.
Of this $20 million
appropriation perhaps.
The most important element.
Which is
Not hardening the homes against
wildfire.
But rather preventing the
wildfire from getting to the
home in the first place.
Do we, do we not have
Or perhaps a better question
might be, Madam Chair, Miss
McCarthy, is any portion of this
$20 million.
To harden the forest.
Against
Wildfires
Madam Chair and senator, I'm
gonna answer your question in
two parts. Uh, the first is that
Uh, we have about 500 wildfire
starts per year in New Mexico
and 80% of those are human
caused and I don't mean arson. I
mean accidental.
Another of the special
appropriations requests in the
executive budget is for a public
education campaign to reduce the
number of human-caused
wildfires. We've looked at what
the state of Utah did, uh, along
these lines exactly and they
reduce their number of human
caused wildfires from over 1000
to under 300 in a 3 year time
period. So that.
Is an important component of.
Stopping wildfires before they
start. Now regarding the forest,
uh, I'm the state forester.
I've, uh, myself and our staff
are.
Completely committed to doing
everything we can to improve the
condition of forests.
Uh, the fact is, though, that uh
if you look at the top 100
watersheds in New Mexico in
terms of their wildfire risk.
95 of those are in the national
forest and uh try as we may, uh,
we.
are not, uh, successful at
getting.
The tree thinning that's needed
at the scale that's needed.
Uh, we will not stop working on
that, it is the core activity of
our division and that's why the
staff request is so important
because if we, if the bill
passes and we don't get
additional positions. I will be
forced to take 4 people.
Off of tree thinning projects
and put them onto this, which,
as you've suggested, uh, would
not benefit the state.
And
Madam Chair,
Miss McCarthy, to what extent?
Yes
Is it possible to engage
The private sector.
In these projects, it looks to
me like.
We have two options here.
And we can either burn these
trees down or we can cut them
down and turn them into lumber
to build homes with.
So
Are there any efforts as a part
of this expenditure.
To get the private sector
involved.
In some of these projects.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
There is additional legislation
that's gonna be coming up,
we're, we're trying to stand our
sawmill back up in Mescalero.
We are trying to turn a lot of
the thinning into an economic
driver to show them that it's
not just us throwing money that
that timber.
does have a monetary value.
We also have a bio plant that is
being discussed, that wants to
come in to Lincoln County and.
Whatever we can't use as far as
timber.
Then that that overage can be
taken to this bio plant and they
can, you know, they can make
fuel, they can make electricity,
they can do something with.
The timber that needs to be
pulled out. Now, when you are in
Lincoln County and you're coming
off of Swiss Chalet.
And you see how much timber is
left in the forest. It is still
a problem now it's all standing
up.
But as soon as it starts to dry
out.
And it starts to lay down and
the wind's blowing it all down,
it's gonna look like pickup
sticks in there and we're gonna
have it all over again.
So
Yes, this bill has the hardening
component to it. It also has the
buffer system component to it,
and I know that if we, if we
continue to add to this
legislation, it, it will build
to the point where we're working
on our houses, we're working on
our buffer zone and then we're
working on our forest and we're
reducing fuel.
And I mean reducing fuel.
Mound chair.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you folks for your
answers.
Thank you, Senator Scott,
Senator Yazel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate you all being
here today, this, this bill is
so important.
Oh, madam chair.
Repres Senator Scott.
As one of my questions, so I'm
going to let that one go, but my
next question has to do.
Uh, with the analysis that we
got from the Department of
Justice, and I was noticing on
your setup of the committee
members, let's see if I can find
it again.
That you do have.
It's
dropping all this. Sorry.
Clear
Hold on here. Here it is on page
5 of your bill starting on line
13. You have a representative of
a state-based property insurance
carrier Trade Association
appointed by the state forester
after consulting with the Office
of the Superintendent of
Engineer.
Would that be a voting member,
Madam Chair.
Senator Stefani and
representative.
Madame Chair and Senator, yes.
Hm
Wow
I'm kind of
Taken aback by that, uh, this is
a person.
That is the insurance carrier
traits.
And we know how that person and.
That person, whoever it may be,
I'm, I'm not.
Yeah, I am kissed and
dispersions, I guess.
You don't think that person will
be influenced by the private
sector.
Madam Chair, Cinderel.
You know, I guess we need to
give them the benefit of the
doubt first and wait just a
minute we've given the US Forest
Service the true state
that's true and Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I, I completely
understand those sentiments, and
I think that we are as a state.
As a group
we are gonna start pressing the
Forest Service and they need to
know that they are mismanaging
our forests and they're burning
our people's houses down.
And with.
With the one of the bills that
I'm running on the insurance, I
have been in constant contact
with the private industry.
And they're not, I would say
that uh they're not as happy
with the bill as I am.
However
Our people have been evacuated
out of Ridoso and cannot return.
They have nothing to come home
to and until the private
traditional insurance comes up
with a solution.
Then I guess we're just gonna be
at odds with each other.
And with this at least at least
we know I have one a private
insurance person that told me
that they are going to start
looking at modeling and the
modeling is gonna be through,
um, satellite.
And they're gonna look at areas
to see if they can cover it and
see if they can't.
At least if we have someone from
the private sector that's
telling us that kind of stuff
and how to get ahead of this.
Then you know, I think they
would have a really good seat at
the table.
Ma, madam.
Representative Vincent instead
of having this, this is just my
thoughts, y'all can do whatever
you want to on your bill, it's
your bill. It.
Why not have this person sit in
as a consultant or an advisor
instead of as a voting member of
this very important bill. Uh,
that would be my suggestion,
y'all can play it out however
you want to, but that is a
concern of mine.
Madam Cheer
What we were experiencing in our
state is catastrophic forest
fires and they do create their
own weather.
And we've seen that happen in
the past 2025 years we've had
the Scott Abel fire. We've had
the little bear fire just down
in my area. We've had the
McBride fire, we've had.
Uh, I've already said Scott
Abel, and I can just go on and
on and on like that. But
whenever I am attending meetings
way back before I ever became a
legislator.
It was public lands right that
that committee that was.
Representing
3 or 4
Counties, I think at that time.
And there was a presentation
given by.
In Mexico Forester.
After years and years of
research that a healthy forest
was a force that had no more
than 50 trees per acre.
That model right there.
was able to sustain the wildlife
that was on there.
It was able to make sure that
under that the uh grass and
everything was able to grow
because sunlight would hit it.
But we have an environment
department that has shut down
every logging mill in the state
of New Mexico.
We have trees that are still
standing due to the US Forest
Service and
To some extent to our New Mexico
forestry division.
That are now blowing down and
that is evident by the little
bear fire that took place.
17 years ago, is that, am I
correct in those dates? I think
that's about the time frame for
that.
And it's ugly. It's eerie
driving through that particular
area.
What is happening now, what is
growing back is nothing but
scrub and cedar.
And we know how much water
cedars take.
What we are creating.
By them not doing the job that
they're supposed to do to manage
our forests.
is we're creating an environment
where a wildlife cannot survive.
Where water will not flow again
and we've got scar scars so bad
on that bare dirt.
That one there is a flood.
And it will flood again folks.
We know what's gonna happen
there, the erosion that's gonna
take place, the houses that are
gonna be washed away, and I feel
for those people that have lost
their homes that have lost their
business due to the negligence
of the Forest Service.
And
I agree with the comments that
have been made.
That this $20 million is going
to be a drop in the book.
But whenever I get calls from
the Tula Rosa area.
In the farming area where these
people are surrounded by side
rail sprinklers like green
pastures growing and their
insurance rates have gone up
300%.
There's a problem, folks.
He's gonna be able to afford
insurance.
That's my concern.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator,
um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
move a due pass on the committee
substitute.
Or Senate Bill 33.
in a second.
And they do not pass on the.
Original.
Mhm
And thank you, motion motion by
Senator Hamblin, seconded by
Senator Pope.
Wow. Would you take the role?
Yeah.
Senator Cervantes, Senator
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator.
And herself, yes, Senator
Hamblin, Senator Hamblin, yes.
Senator Pope, Senator Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes.
Senator Dia Lopez, yes, I still
Lopez, yes, Senator Stephonics,
phonics, yes.
Madam Chair, you received a
unanimous to pass on your bill.
Congratulations.
Onto finance.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you members of the committee.
Uh, is, are you gonna be
Sorry.
Yes.
Madam Chair
OK.
Could someone please get the
handout and.
So there's a handout coming
around?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, today I'm
presenting Senate Bill 34, uh,
and this amend amends an
existing statute, and it's the
night sky Protection Act
amendments with me today, I have
Peter Liscombe and Jim Price as
my uh expert witnesses and they
will explain themselves as well.
So in this bill, Madam Chair
members of the committee this
was brought to me by the
advocates that are here today,
and I know it's opposed by
several entities as well. They
are wanting to bring our state
statute into alignment with some
of the national uh standards
that are there in the country
for dark skies. This act would
strengthen the night sky
preservation efforts.
It would help increased tourism.
It would be a benefit to
wildlife and nocturnal animals.
Light from fixtures shine up no
more than 10 degrees below a
horizontal plane and useful
light shines down on roadways,
campuses, has parking lots,
playing fields, cattle grounds,
ranches, farms, etc.
So uh for that I would like to
turn to the witnesses, the
experts to go ahead and explain
the bill further.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Peter
Lipscomb. I'm the vice chair of
the New Mexico Dark Sky chapter,
which was established in 2003.
It is one of the nationwide
chapters and worldwide chapters
of Dark Sky International, which
is based in Arizona.
Um, so today, um,
I just got a couple of uh
opening comments that I'd like
to share.
Um, related to the origin of the
New Mexico Night Sky Protection
Act in 1999, New Mexico
legislators later.
Took a proactive and forward
thinking, um,
Um step in declaring New Mexico
night sky as something worth
protecting and the New Mexico
night sky Protection Act was
originally passed to regulate
outdoor night lighting.
And to preserve and enhance the
state's dark sky while promoting
safety, conserving energy, and
preserving the environment. Um,
so it seeks these goals
principally by requiring
shielding of lighting fixtures
and to direct their light output
downward.
The act is not curtailing the
growth of light pollution. We
have seen a great increase in
light pollution due to changes
in technology over the past 26
years, primarily LED lights. Um,
so,
To become more effective, um,
the act must reflect the current
technology, and incorporate the
current best lighting practices
and principles. Now, the
principles and practices protect
the night sky, but they also
provide illumination necessary
for nighttime safety and
security, uh, for pedestrian and
vehicular travel and for work
and play.
So the bill before you updates
the existing night sky
Protection Act in small but
impactful ways. The principal
improvements are a to require
full shielding of light fixtures
and be to expand the
applicability by modifying or
eliminating several exemptions.
The existing act requires
shielding the update full
shielding.
Under the new standard, light is
more focused downwards,
specifically, 95% of the light
below 80 degrees from Nadir,
which is the point directly
below a light fixture. There's a
diagram on the handout that you
have, you can refer to that
illustrates that point.
Um, so,
The the main thing about having
the 5% only above the 80, 80
degrees is because as we've seen
increases in light pollution
throughout the state.
Um, most of that light that is
above the 80 degree plane.
It actually contributing the sky
glow above our cities is also
contributing to intrusion into
neighboring properties from the
light on its property of origin.
Um, so we could think of that as
a stray light or spill over. Um,
so that's the main reason why
we're looking at 80% with no
emissions of more than 5% above
that plane.
So the existing act that
contains several exemptions. The
update removes or modifies
exemptions for applications
where lighting engineers believe
that a well designed and
installed compliant lighting
provides the required
illumination as well or better
than the current practice.
So there are several other minor
changes which are listed, um,
and we are happy to answer
questions.
Anything to add there?
Madam Chair and committee
members.
The shielding
I used to own a lighting
business. I'm familiar with
lighting and the shielding and
80 degrees below horizon gets
very confusing.
There's a beautiful example
right in this room. If you look
at the paneling there, you see
the light coming down from the
fixture. You do not see the
light source glaring into your
eyes, yet this room has
beautiful lighting. It's
indirect lighting, the lighting
is focused where it needs to be.
Um
It's not like 30 years ago you'd
have track lighting here,
shining lights in everybody's
face, so we've made the
improvements in lighting and
interior lighting and all we're
asking to do is take this.
Outside, protect the night sky,
um, you know, people say dark
skies. Well, we want this, we
want this sky lit up by the
stars. Let the migrating birds
see the stars that they navigate
by and not have stars coming up
from below them to confuse them.
Um, there's the, I think one of
our members sent the committee
an email about an AMA statement
on the necessity to preserve
that for human health.
You know, and, and if we want to
look at human life, there's big
effects.
Naturally
I'm an interested person. I get
night skate newsletter every
month. There's just research
after research after research
that shows how disrupting our
circadian rhythm, we are diurnal
people, not like nocturnal. It
can affect pregnancy. It, it.
Can affect strokes. There's all
types of evidence we're coming,
we're, we're coming up with.
And, you know, we have a
community that is very active.
We have 9 dark sky parks here.
That brings people um doing a
tabling at Petroglyph Monument.
I met a lot of people from
Oregon who come here to see the
stars because it's too cloudy
there. That's.
Great
That's great astrotourism is a
great thing. And just one more
point I'd like to make.
There's a very important
telescope south of Albuquerque.
That
Observes missile launches,
local, you know, White Sands
missile range or
Others they keep track of
satellites such as the two
launched by North Korea
recently.
They measure asteroids and
meteors, so we know if we need
to get a Bruce Willis crew
together to go to space and blow
it up so it doesn't hit the
planet or I'm not sure how they
do it. That telescope cannot
turn itself north over
Albuquerque because of the sky
glow due to light pollution.
So we're kind of blinding
ourselves in our own natural or
our own national self-defense
by, by not controlling the
light.
And I know you're lighting gets
very confusing. There's numbers
for lumens. There's numbers for
this. There's numbers for that.
Um, it's not that tough to do.
We kind of didn't go with an old
uh current rating because that
rating is going to be going
away. There's gonna be a new
rate classification system, the
type of light fixtures that
might be that which are
available but we are common
becoming more common might be
classified as LC2. We don't know
which way the industry's going
exactly, but just as you can see
in here very well and you don't
have any glarry light bulbs, the
peripheral lighting.
is um indirect.
You're not having the glare of
the lighting. Imagine living in
your house with no lampshades on
your lamps.
All we're saying is we just need
to add the lampshades outside
lighting.
Or control it as we control
water here.
We know that water that goes
beyond what we're watering,
water that goes on on the
sidewalk into the street. It's,
it's wasted. It's a waste of the
energy to get the water there.
It's a waste of the water itself
and all we're saying is if you
think of light as water, let's
keep it in the yard and not
spill it all over and not waste
it.
Thank you, Mr. Price. How many
in the audience are here to
support this bill?
And how many in the audience are
opposed to the bill?
And online, we have 2 people um
supporting the bill and one
person opposing the bill. So,
um, we have 10 minutes, our
rules are 10 minutes for uh each
side, so why don't we go ahead
and start with the opponents,
um, and go for 10 minutes, you
among your sides uh among
yourselves decide which of you
are going to speak for 10
minutes.
Please, thank you.
First, I would like to express
my gratitude to senator
Stefaniks for being
accommodating and generous with
listening to our current
concerns through this process.
Thank you, uh.
Senator Stephonics and the
Committee for the opportunity to
make a statement. Diane Aragon
Ianero and I'm the uh president
of the New Mexico Outdoor
Association advertising outdoor
association and the vice
president of Lamar Outdoor
Advertising. I would like to
respectfully uh state our
opposition to the dark sky Bill
34, that would have a tremendous
economic impact on the billboard
industry and other businesses in
the community. Uh, this outdoor
lighting requires
s would cost us millions of
dollars to comply with the
changes in Bill 34.
Uh, what is even more
And a bigger impact to the
community is the elimination of
the light exemptions. Imposing
darkness after 11 o'clock would
not only be dangerous because of
safety, but crime would increase
in New Mexico, uh due to the
darkness.
Uh, rural communities in the
state of New Mexico would be the
hardest hit with the imposed
lighting changes.
Uh, please also consider that
billboards and other business
lines are not located in
national parks. Uh, darkness
surrounds these parks without
changing the current
legislation, adding requirements
and exceptions in Bill 34 will
cause a tremendous burden to New
Mexico businesses. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
I thank you, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here to express our
opposition to the Senate Bill
34. And while we really
appreciate the efforts to reduce
light pollution, this bill
causes some serious challenges
for industries that rely on safe
and effective outdoor lighting.
The Senate bill imposes enhanced
shielding requirements for
businesses that could force them
to retrofit or completely
replace the current lighting
systems they have. Large
corporations can absorb this
cost, however, our small and
medium sized businesses cannot.
We have several industries that
the demand proper illumination,
not just for efficiency, but for
worker safety. Many construction
projects also occur at night and
restricting visibility could
compromise their safety and
endanger workers everywhere.
Applying a one size fits all
approach to outdoor lighting,
fails to consider the unique
needs of our industries that
require flexible and adaptive
lighting solutions. For these
reasons, we respectfully ask
that you oppose this bill. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
senators and on the committee. I
serve as market manager for
Clear Channel Outdoor in
Albuquerque. We manage
billboards across the state.
Additionally, I serve as the
vice president to the Mexico
Outdoor Advertising Association,
where Clear Channel is a member.
Uh, we pride ourselves on
community stewardship, acting
responsibly in the best interest
of our local advertisers and
communities who significantly
contribute to both the
Albuquerque metro area's economy
and the broader state economy.
We also work closely with city,
county and state entities.
to disseminate public messages
via our billboards. We contend
the current proposed dark skies
regulation for New Mexico is
overly broad. Businesses with
on-premise signs greatly
outnumber billboards and would
be affected by this bill. The
bill unfairly singles out
advertisement signs. Billboards
contribute less than 1% to light
pollution, um, which the aim,
which the bill aims to reduce.
I
The concern we have with Clear
Channel Outdoor as well of our
association is this could damage
our business here. This would
wind up costing us millions and
millions of dollars and the New
Mexico companies that we work
with as well as they have to
retrofit their businesses and so
they could no longer promote
their products and services,
especially in the city of
Albuquerque when we have so many
people that are working
different shifts uh throughout
the the evenings. In conclusion,
uh, you know, on a side note,
I'd like to mention crime is a
big concern for me as well.
We already deal with that on a
regular basis, um, in terms of
uh the things that we have to do
in Albuquerque, as well as the
surrounding areas. So in
conclusion, I appreciate the
opportunity to speak before this
committee today, and I
respectfully urge you to vote no
on Senate Bill 34, and I thank
you for your time and your
consideration.
Thank you. Could you, could you
state your name for the record?
I didn't catch it. Brenda
Begley.
Oh, sorry, Brenda Begley B G L E
Y.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair and
committee members. My name's
Chris Soto. I'm with Clear
Channel Outdoor Billboard.
Senate Bill 34 negatively
impacts New Mexico's business
industry.
And decreases public safety.
outdoor is strongly opposed to
this bill. SB 34 is primarily
directed toward the outdoor
advertising industry.
It adversely affects the ability
of billboard companies to
operate in New Mexico.
The costs to comply would be in
the millions.
The current dark dark skies bill
in place already is sufficient.
As outdoor lighting fixtures on
advertising advertisement signs
on interstate ander primary
highways are exempt.
SB 34 also negatively impacts
any business.
That uses outdoor lighting
fixtures, including on-premises.
Signage
I strongly
urge you to vote no on Senate
Bill 34. Thank you.
We have 4 minutes left. Thank
you. Morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, registered lobbyist for
the hospitality Association,
very much respect and appreciate
what the sponsor is trying to do
with the rill and bringing it.
However, we have some concerns,
um, you know, we, uh, travel and
tourism does use signage on
their own buildings to promote
their, uh, lodging facilities.
We don't worry about the current
signage because there's a
grandfather provision, but we
also are improving signage on an
ongoing basis, and that will
increase costs. We'll have to go
out, we'll have to make sure
that the new signage is
compliant, we won't be able to
get an old piece of signage,
maybe a retro sign and put it on
the building and make that, you
know, like kind of a cool retro
feel in terms of promoting the
facility. Also, we worry about
public safety, um, quite
frankly, vagrancy and vandalism
is huge problem for travel, uh,
facilities throughout the state,
particularly in Albuquerque.
And some of the more urbanized
areas, Cruises as well. And we
often are improving lighting in
our part in our parking lots and
in the areas where customers are
coming in, where they're
checking in to make sure that
they can see and they're very
visible, um, that cameras can
pick up potential acts of crime
and so this will limit that
ability to eliminate eliminate
those spaces, and if we see that
there's a dark spot, we want to
get more lighting and put that
lighting in those areas to
prevent that type of crime,
we'll have to comply with the
statute.
it will be more costly. We might
not be able to light it up the
way that we want to light it up.
So long story short, we think
that this will have a negative
financial impact on the
businesses and that it will also
potentially create a safety
issue for visitors of hotels,
and also it could impact our
ability to actually market
ourselves in the way that we
would like. For those reasons,
respectfully, the hospitality
Association stands in opposition
of the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. You have 22 minutes
and 30 seconds for 2 more
speakers.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz,
registered lobbyist for NAO
commercial real estate
developers in New Mexico. We
stand in opposition to this bill
as well. We do appreciate the
intent of the sponsor, but for
the reasons previously stated,
the increase of cost and safety,
we also stand in opposition.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. Sorry, thank
you, Madam Chair, Al Park,
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the New Mexico Auto Dealers
Association, and we likewise
really appreciate the intent of
the legislation, our dark skies
are part of what makes New
Mexico, New Mexico. And it's
something that we as New
Mexicans typically and generally
enjoy, but we do have concerns
about the legislation in
particular about the potential
cost for businesses going
forward and 2, we also do have
uh
re-echo the concerns about the
public safety for many of our
car dealerships, they've got
lights around at all hours of
day and night, including motion
lights and oftentimes the
dealerships have been victimized
by crime and it's a concern that
if those lights cannot be
operating, and I understand it's
prospective, but it is a concern
with respect to honestly, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, the cost and public
safety. Thank you.
Thank you. So now you, the
Proponents have 10 minutes.
And I'll let you decide how you
want to spend that 10 minutes.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman and senators. I just
want to correct a few of the
misconceptions that have been
started by our opponents. Could
you tell us your name? My name
is Nicholas Noir.
Um, I think the first is they're
talking about enormous costs
being imposed on existing
businesses and others to comply.
The fact is that this
legislation, grandfathers all
existing installations, so
nobody's required to go out and
change what they have today.
It applies to new installations
of lighting, and it applies to
replacements of existing
lighting, but there is no
obligation for anyone to do
anything today based on this
legislation.
Um, I think I would also
I want to say that we have to be
concerned not only with these
impacts, we have to be concerned
with what kind of damage is
being done by these
installations and all of these
people, the advertisers have to
take responsibility for the
light pollution that they are
generating.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, my name is Gayen Gessler.
I'm a resident of Los Alamos,
um, retired from Los Alamos
National Laboratory. I'm an
astronomer and a member of the
state council of New Mexico Dark
Sky.
First about billboards, they can
be lit from the top down, which
satisfy satisfies completely the
requirements of this
legislation. The, the thing that
we object to is sending light up
into the sky. Um, so it's just a
matter of changing where the
light comes from and where it
goes to. It's not a question of
how much light there is.
I volunteer.
At the Los Alamos Nature Center
where my passion is to get kids
excited.
science and about nature.
I present planetarium shows
there, and I take telescopes out
to elementary schools and star
parties. It's a joy to hear
their oohs and ahs.
When kids see the rings of
Saturn for the first time or the
craters of the moon.
Or a distant galaxy with their
own eyes.
Through a telescope.
Children are the future, and
getting them interested in
science, ensures a future supply
of talented scientists and
engineers to keep our
technological society running
and our world safe and secure.
I got interested in science
myself as a child growing up in
the 1950s and 1960s under the
dark and starry skies of the
Yano Estaccado in eastern New
Mexico.
Light pollution has increased so
much in the 60 years since that
I worry that today's and
tomorrow's children do not and
will not see the dark skies that
inspired me to become a
scientist.
I urge, I urge this committee to
vote to do pass on Senate Bill
34 to help preserve New Mexico's
dark skies into the future.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Camila
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter.
We dozens of excursions to
nature with hundreds of
participants all around the
state from camping, uh,
nighttime snowshoeing are dark
skies are key to connecting
people with nature. There's
nothing like the grandeur of the
Milky Way, seeing shooting
stars, feeling and momentarily
connected uh to the vastness of
our universe, but
life in that light inevitably
encroaches. This bill helps us
foment our outdoor recreation
industry while using common
sense approaches to lighting,
and that's where we come to the
issue of urban light pollution
as a parent living in an urban
environment trying to get your
kids to bed when you're
surrounded by bright blue light
is something we need to attend
to and as with most
environmental legislation.
Existing lighting is
grandfathered in. This gives us
a chance to start to build in
the newest technology that keeps
us safe, but keeps us healthy.
Thanks. Thank you. And we have
uh 2 people online, uh, John
Holtzman.
Hello, can you hear me? Yes, we
can hear you.
My name is John Holtzman. I'm
the chair of the State Council
of the New Mexico chapter of
Dark International and an
emeritus professor at New Mexico
State University.
I stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 34, a natural night
sky is a great resource that we
have in New Mexico in many ways,
culturally, economically, and
ecologically, and it attracts
people and businesses to the
state.
And the basic thing here is we
can protect this resource
without sacrificing anything.
All Senate Bill 34 requires is
that we put light where it is
needed on the ground. There are
no lighting curfews, no
restriction on the amount of
light to be put on the ground.
We just need to acquire the
light doesn't go up into the
sky. No one's up in the sky to
use it. Only the birds, and they
don't want it.
Thank you.
And last we have Derek
Wallinson.
Hello?
Yes
OK. Uh, yeah, so, uh,
Uh, honorable chair and
honorable committee members,
thank you for your time today.
Uh,
My name is Derek Wallentine, so
I strongly support SB 34, the
outdoor light requirements and
exemptions. Basically, light
pollution is dramatically
increasing across the state
despite the 1999 law. Secondly,
Many of us are recognizing the
values of responsible lighting
in a natural night sky.
Economic impact, tourism,
residential communities, small
businesses, uh, worker safety,
including oil rigs where the oil
industry is recognizing that
responsible lighting can be
safer than excessive lighting.
Security responsible lighting
can provide better security by
not having blind spots at your
business or uh while driving
down the road.
National security as mentioned
earlier, monitoring, tracking
satellites at near Earth
asteroids.
Human health, balancing our
melatonin labels and Sleeping
better, lowering stress and
cancer rates.
Ecology, pollinators and
migratory bursary here in New
Mexico as well. Most good De
Apache, for example.
Energy and money savings, less
wasted light means less wasted
energy and more money in your
pocket.
Respecting property rights, the
right to protect against light
trespass is very important to
property owners and, and to all
of us are on our own dwelling.
Human appreciation of our place
in the universe, as mentioned by
Galen, uh, cultural resources,
multiple cultures here in New
Mexico have connections with the
night sky.
Uh, and of course, scientific
study, uh, uh, we have 3
research universities with
millions of dollars invested in
programs and major
observatories. Amateur
astronomy, there's lots of
interest here, multiple amateur
groups and for tourism and
remote observatories. So we have
the special resource.
And what we responsible I think
it's very, very simple. Just put
the light only where you need
it.
Not where you need it, uh, when
you need it and only in the
amount that's needed.
Uh, warmer color light is better
for health, ecology and better
blends with our cultural
heritage, and that's not even in
the bill.
Uh, responsible lighting reduces
lilo glare and light trespass
and preserves all the values
just listed.
Uh, and, and as uh John Colman
was pointing out the existing
lights don't need to change in
the bill, OK? You don't need to
worry about that. There's no
retrofit. Uh, so that's just
completely wrong. This is future
lighting. Please support this
bill in favorably pass it out of
the Senate Conservation
Committee. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Wallenstein.
Do you have anything else, madam
chair? No, thank you, Madam
Chair. We're ready for questions
and comments. Senator Hamblin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the conversations
about this because I think many
of us have received numerous
emails for both sides. Um, what
I would, before I, I get to my
questions, I would like to uh
encourage the use of the term
exempted just because of the
problematic history and
troubling, uh, meaning behind
the term grandfathered, um,
especially for communities, uh,
um, especially for our black
communities. Um, the, the
questions that I have and, and
I'm wondering about this is
As somebody who advocates for
our protected public lands and
uh understands the impact uh of
bright skies. I'm wondering if
This can be determined
regionally and, and I, I would
like to provide some context for
that. Obviously, we have White
Sands National Park, which has
the full moon nights once a
month, um, where you see folks
who are very much a Star Wars
fans out there with light sabers
and it's absolutely fascinating
to see, um, and, but it's also
one of those things where it's
reverse negative, where the sand
is white and the sky is dark.
Um, the Oregon Mountains, desert
Peaks National Monument, you
know, we are 15 minutes away
from Las Cruces.
But in rural parts in my
district.
Lighting is the biggest concern
because of safety. They want
street lights.
out there.
Their concern is not whether or
not they can see the stars. They
want to be able to make sure
that their children are able to
walk to and from school at dusk
and not have to get worried
about being hit by a car.
Um, they're worried about
safety. They're worried about
crime. And so I'm wondering if
this is something that can be
determined regionally rather
than a statewide mandate.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'm gonna
have Mr.
Mr. Liscom
Madam Chair and Senator Hamblin,
um, so regarding, yeah, could it
be done on a regional basis. Um,
we do have um satellite imagery
from the uh variable infrared
orbiting satellite constellation
that is created heat maps for
the state of New Mexico and we
can, you know, part that out
into different regions to see
exactly what the impact is. Um,
so that's information that that
we can consult.
And used for guidance, um, as
far as the uh your your question
and concern about um safety and,
you know, being out on the
sidewalks at night or or
wherever. Fortunately, the
technology has evolved to a
point now where street lighting
can be done in a fully shielded
manner and illuminate what is
meant to be seen, the sidewalks
or the um or the roadways, um,
here in Santa Fe, there, there
had been a retrofit project in
2021.
that
uh replaced a lot of the
antiquated old lights with LED
and the uh the choices that you
can make um to get the proper
fixtures, certainly would be up
to the local jurisdiction. Um,
so that's, that's another piece
I think that pair as well with
the idea of looking at something
on a regional level.
OK, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I appreciate that.
Um, just because I, I, what I
worry about is that your
infrared maps might say in San
Miguel in my district. OK, you
all need more, uh, you, you
can't have lighting and yet
those resents want lighting.
They absolutely want lighting.
So you know that that's the
thing that I'm concerned about
is that, um, you know, that this
is going to mandate lights being
put into an area where the
community members don't want
them.
Adam Chair, I don't know if
there needs to be necessarily
responsive the bill sponsor
wants that or not. Um, I, I see
her having a conversation.
OK, so could you, Madam Chair
and Senator, could you rephrase
the question, please? Sure,
Madam Chair, I will. Um, I want
to make sure that this is not
imposing something that a
community doesn't want.
Right, so
thank you for the question. So
we don't want to impose anything
on a local community. Those are
the things that can be decided
by the local planning and zoning
and the building departments for
those locations. What we're
trying to do is set something
that can be a statewide minimum
standard, um, that they can
model off of.
OK, thank you very much. And by
all means, I am very much a big
proponent about astrotourism. I
think, you know, we have these
opportunities to do that, so I
don't want it to come across is
that I don't agree with what
you're asking. Um, I'm just
thinking about what my district
is asking for and concerned
about, but also the business
community and so, um, in, in my
job, I represent small
businesses a lot and uh they're
talking about this, and I, and I
do appreciate that it's all new
lighting.
Uh, to be to to be considered
for this to be shielded uh for
this standard, but I'm
wondering, salute, um, I'm
wondering if there were
conversations with the business
community to talk about ways to
achieve what is, what has been
deemed as responsible lighting.
Were their conversations with
that madam chair.
Madam Chair and Senator Hamblin,
yes, we, we have engaged in
dialogue with the outdoor
advertising association. We have
engaged in dialogue with New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association,
um, so we are trying to get
information where we find ways
that are cooperative approaches
to handling the lighting in in
those situations.
Thank you, madam chair. My last
question is, um, you know, I'm
wondering if there are
incentives for small businesses
to change their lights, and, and
the reason why I ask this is
because I know our local utility
provider provides those rebates
for businesses to change out
their LED lights, but those are
mainly in the building.
Um, however, uh, small
businesses are going to be
seeing a lot more challenges
when it comes down to being able
to operate their business and so
I can.
Understand that this is looking
at like another tick mark for
another expense for a small
business that is doing their
best to keep their doors open.
So I'm wondering if there were
and if anything came up in your
conversations about incentives
to help small businesses.
Apply for that so that when they
do change out their lighting or
when they do get new lighting.
That they are able to that it's
cost efficient for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Would you like to respond?
Madam Chair and Senator Hamblin,
so um regarding discussions
about incentives with
businesses. Um, yes, of course,
the utilities are doing that. I
just wonder, on a statute level
with something that state
legislation, how would we, how
would we fold that in? Um, but I
can say that we have not had
discussions with businesses
about that very topic.
Madam chair, if I may, I, I
would encourage that just
because in some cases, you know,
the conversations were here and
yet you're your fact sheet says
all new lighting and so there's
certainly a disconnect in the
conversation in terms of what
this bill is going to provide.
And what our businesses are,
are, are legitimately worried
about.
And so, um, one of the things
and, and when it comes down to
the incentives, I don't think
that's necessarily something
that the legislation should
mandate, but I do think it's a
good faith effort on behalf of
your organizations to do that,
um, is to help those businesses
find those incentives, um,
because they're gonna have
enough on their plates in the
coming year in terms of expenses
and how to keep their doors open
and uh I, I, I would imagine
that every single person here
that's talked that's been on
opposition completely
understands the importance.
Of our dark skies. Um, that's
why we live in New Mexico.
Um, and it's something that we
all covet, and I think, I think
there are opportunities for
compromise and for being able to
figure out where concerns are
and how to help alleviate those
concerns while still being able
to accomplish this goal, uh, of,
of making sure that not only our
pollinators, which I'm a big
supporter of and did a couple of
years ago, pollinating, uh,
bill, um, you know, I think.
We have an opportunity for
compromise that the voices can
be heard and that this can
actually be achieved, um, given
the opportunities, and so I
would just encourage that. I
mean, I appreciate the
opportunity and thank you for uh
for um.
Giving me that opportunity.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Scott.
Uh, Madam Chair, for this my
questions would be really brief
uh.
Know that we're running out of
time, but Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, you do.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, Senator worth
encouraged us to finish our
agenda today because once we go
down to the floor, we're going
to a joint session with the
house on American Asian Day, and
he felt that it would be
important to continue our work.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and Madam Chair,
you realize.
that you're trying to sell this
bill.
A senator who had his vehicle
broken into.
In a dark parking lot, so
In an urban environment.
It seems like
At least
Historically
More light
As equated to less.
Criminal activity.
Could you address them
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
thank you. Thank you for that
question, um.
You know, I understand that
ironically because I had a
neighbor who was against this
because he didn't want his
catalytic converter stolen,
which is a device on his car to
protect the environment.
Um
Yet, you know, he's OK with
herding pollinators, there is
not conclusive research that
lighting.
Zal's cry
A lot of bad lighting, and I
know I have sold lighting. I
have sold lightings to medical
complexes who had stalkers at
night and I went and they asked
why are you reducing the light,
you know, I'm saying I'm even it
out so you don't have the bright
and dark spots where a stalker
can hide or a criminal can hide.
Um, the.
Good lighting
Reduce lighting.
That lets the human eye adjust
better will actually reduce
crime. A dark parking lot is,
you know,
Going back to what somebody is
saying about the crime in
Albuquerque.
There was a there was a hotel in
Albuquerque on Mana Boulevarded
with an extremely well lit
parking lot that had a trailer
full of guns stolen out of the
parking lot, um, had a family
from Germany visiting. This is
very embarrassing for New
Mexico, that special needs child
who needed special food and if
you go up and down Manal
Boulevard in Albuquerque, those
parking lots are extremely well
lit.
Lighting alone does not deter
crime. Their studies in Sweden
where they've done brighter
streets.
And it's actually increased
crime then um dimming down the
lights. It's a tough thing. We
are not pro-crime, you know, and
also I want to say we are not
anti-light.
You know, this is an odd thing.
We're not anti-li. You can do
street lights that are shielded
and don't shine up in the sky.
The where you were parked, they
can do lighting that is shielded
and doesn't.
Heard the sky. We just want the
lighting focused and when it's
focused and when here we're
working in reflected light, we
can see everybody's faces. It's
not like the old lighting they
would have done, you know, very
glary fluorescent where, you
know, you'd have a hard time
what we call in the lighting
industry facial modeling.
So good lighting can, it, it
helps. But lighting alone does
not prevent crime, and I know
that the law enforcement
community has been taught that
um there's a lot of research
that's showing well controlled
lighting is a better deterrent,
and I, I'm sorry about your
vehicle, you know, it's a
violation. I, I totally
understand that, um.
But, uh, good lighting can do
it, not necessarily a lot of
lighting, not necessarily no
lighting, but good lighting can
help prevent crime.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair.
Madam chair, Mister Liscombe.
I'm from the
Southeast part of the state
where drilling rig.
Operating at night is visible.
Hm
10 miles.
And these locations.
Because of the nature of the
activity.
24 hour operations.
Heavy machinery
A lot of risk involved.
Need necessarily to be.
Incredibly well.
Could you address
The concerns
With these industrial locations.
In their 24 hour operations.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
thank you for uh your question.
Um, we have engaged in dialogue
with members of the New Mexico
Oil and Gas Association, in
particular, um, recently, and I
don't know how many have seen
the uh the dark sky designations
for sites that were um that were
managed by Franklin Mountain
Energy, two of them were fresh
installs and, and one was a
retrofit. Um, they have found
that the improvements that were
made
into that lighting which is
controlling it from being, you
know, spilled out sideways or
going up into the sky has
actually enhanced their workers'
safety and uh I have the uh a
quote from the director of their
operations who shared about
this, uh, her name is Miss
Overby. And she was uh, you
know, she was very, very
positive about the benefits, um,
and the impact it will have
overall on the uh surrounding
community reducing that light.
Um, along with that, I just want
to mention that there is a dark
for the Park Alliance, which has
formed. Um, there's a lot of
national parks, Carlsbad
Caverns, uh, Chaco Canyon, um,
others including agencies like
the Bureau of Land Management
and the state land office that
are all engaged in this
discussion with uh people in the
Permian Basin and the oil field.
Um, so we have found that, you
know, the lighting can be done
in a way that
Actually makes it so that those
24 hours around the clock
overnight operations can be
properly lit and accessible by
workers at the last moment they
don't have to go run around
throwing on lights to get out
there, but they are properly
shielded and directed, and it
has enhanced the worker's
safety. Um, we have been, uh,
we've been fortunate to, to be
able to talk to them and we look
forward to more conversation
with New Mexico oil and gas and
the companies that rep that is
represented by them.
Madam Chair, Mr. Liscombe, I
don't know what.
Representative from Franklin
Mountain told you, but
I have very recently.
Driven by some of those.
Completion operations where the
location.
Completely ranked.
With
portable
Or
Lamp, high intensity.
Generator
White plants
And
I can assure you
That the folks that are on those
locations.
Don't want
Less
Their interested.
In being able to safely operate.
With more
Uh, thank you.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, Mr.
Liscombe.
Export for your answers,
appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator Scott,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thing scares me every time I
touch it, so.
Um
Madam Chair and and senator.
Does Asha have lighting
requirements for work. Yes, um,
Madam Chair, and Senator
Townsend, thank you for the
question. Yeah, OSHA does have
requirements and, and, uh, of
course, if that's something on a
federal level, then I guess it
would supersede anything that
would be on the state.
Um, ma'am chair and
And
Senator of
You're correct, but I believe
your bill would do, but
Although, and I understand in
practicality with that.
In order to get large work
areas.
Say
Under this
E
You have to add more lighting
fixtures.
In order to disperse the same
amount of light.
across a, a, an area so that
That lighting specification is
male. So it will cost capital
dollars.
Um
On page
Mm, uh, page 4, line 9.
Um, under section 2.
I just want to clarify some of
the statements that have been
made today in committee.
It says
As of July 1st, 2025. However,
when existing lighting fixtures
are replaced.
The replacements are subject to
provision provisions of the
night sky Protection Act, is
that correct?
Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend, yes, that, that is a
correct reading.
So to say that their
grandfathered for a
Ever is not true. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair.
I,
I apologize.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend.
I made a living off of selling
lighting, and I will tell you.
I got out of the business in LED
came out, but I used to sell
thousands and thousands and
thousands of light bulbs.
Light bulbs were the all manned
fixtures you're discussing.
Every year
Nothing, none, none of this,
it's a mechanical product, it
wears out.
And it will require replacement.
All lighting does
Madam chair and expert.
But I'm, what I'm trying to make
is we all understand lights wear
out. OK. That's not the
question.
Like
My point is.
The the statements have been
made.
The existing lights were exempt,
and that's really not true
because this provision of the
bill says as a
When they are to be replaced,
they must meet the provisions of
this new requirement. Is that
correct?
Yes
OK.
Um
Just on a
Kind of
More simple note.
Are you, uh, suggesting that we
like flagpoles.
Senator again.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend by
federal law, the flag flag has
to be lit.
This does not make any exemption
to not like the American flag.
Madam chair.
Is there a difference in the
methodology that is required to
light the flagpole.
Many flagpoles 30 40 50 ft tall.
Do not have lights on top
shining down. They have lights
shining up.
Is this bill
Providing for a change in that
process.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
no, no, this bill does not, um,
Does not it
Does not interfere with lighting
the American flag.
Can you show me where that
provision is, um, Madam Madam
Chair and Senator Townsend, I
believe because it's silent on
that.
Um, and federal law supersedes.
State law, the American flag
will still be lit.
Madam Chair, and, and.
Expert
I don't blend, and I would tell
you that if you want to.
That's I
Under the.
The night sky requirements.
I don't see that exemption. I
see exemptions for
Arming
Many other things, but I don't
see exemptions for that.
Um
I, uh, Madam chair and
And
Expert I.
No, 80%, 85% of New Mexico.
There's
There's lots of areas of
Dark spots.
the Milky Way and and I agree.
I, I mean, I spent.
Much of my early childhood
either horseback or on a
tractor, and I got to watch the
Milky Way.
And
There's nothing
prettier than the night sky,
ever.
Woke up, my sleeping bag in the
middle of the night, you can.
Pretty nice place, but this
bill.
I'm afraid it's not ready for
prime time. I'm not gonna be
able to support it.
I understand what you're trying
to do, but I think it's just
It needs some work, so.
I pretty much. Thank you,
Senator Townsend. Senator
Cervantes.
That was quick.
Um, I can, I can do better.
You were great.
You were great.
Don't
Thank you, man. Um, I share some
of the same concerns that Hamlin
expressed, we represent both of
us parts of Santa Teresa, but
also communities like Anthony
Sunland Park.
Um, chaparral, it's always
challenging for me as a local
elected official because in
those communities, if I could
apportion all my money and
capital like the outdoor
lighting, that's what the
communities would want. They
want that kind of outdoor
lighting.
Um, right now the existing law
that you would change.
Provides an exemption from this
requirement for worker safety.
And I think worker safety has to
be paramount.
To uh the enjoyment of.
stars and I, I love them as much
as you do, and I'm fortunate
that my house are beautiful
skies, but I, I can't say that
that is paramount the worker
safety, and you're taking that
out.
Um, and that exemption, you're
also taking out the exemption
for farms, ranches, dairies,
which are important in my, my
community, uh, you're also
taking out the exemption that
would apply to manufacturing,
industrial, and oil and gas, um,
in the future and so those are,
I think worker safety in those
areas is, is very important.
I um
I wish you could see the faces
when you're sitting up here.
It's kind of fun to see the
audience faces, you all don't
get to see that, you know, when
you make a statement that uh
outdoor lighting does not deter
crime. Really, you undermine
your credibility entirely. I
mean, you should see all the
faces in the room. It's
everybody began giggling, uh,
because nobody's gonna believe
that.
Um, and you can tell me studies.
Suggest otherwise, but otherwise
it's an insult to my
intelligence to tell me that um
that outdoor lighting does not
deter crime.
So I, I can't buy into that.
Um, and, and the one good thing,
Senator, and I know you don't
mean that as an insult to my
intelligence senator at all, um,
the, um, one of the things that
I think is
Fortunate here is that.
Uh, I don't see any mechanism in
here for enforcement.
Um, and you're nodding your head
affirmatively, Senator, so I
think that's right. So there's,
there's no enforcement, there's
no consequence, there's nobody
enforcing this law, so if I'm
right about that,
Um, if I'm wrong please correct
me, but if I'm right about that,
this kind of, you know, my, you
know, my position's gonna be,
uh, which is this is uh a
memorial, uh, because it's nice
to think about beautiful stars
and skies, but if there's no
consequence to not doing this.
There's nobody charged with
enforcing it. There's no
penalties or fines, um, I, I,
again I, it's a nice thought.
Um, and you've heard others
refer me to as as the kind of
that's called the Hallmark card,
you know, it's a, it's that kind
of thing. Uh, ultimately though,
I do agree with, I think some of
the comments. This really is a
matter for local, uh local
control. I don't remember who
made the suggestion.
Of of districting but.
In a former life, I practiced
architecture and we relied a
great deal as a county
commissioner, you were a county
commissioner too, Senator, uh,
you know, you and I used to do
planning and zoning and codes
enforcement and a building
permits and special use permits
and all those kind of things.
I, I think that's the right way
to handle these, these kind of
issues is to allow local
governments to decide that there
are parts of our, of our state
and our communities, counties
and our cities, it should be
absolutely beautiful. The skies
and the other parts that need to
have uh some economic
development opportunities as
well.
So I'll have to oppose your bill
respectfully.
Anyone else?
So Madam Chair, I don't know if
you want to roll this bill over
and work on some of these uh
things or if you want to take
the vote now.
Madam Chair.
It's permissible I'd make a
motion.
And unfortunately, motion to
table is undebatable.
Um
So would you go ahead and call
the roll?
This is a vote to table the
bill.
Which doesn't mean it can't come
back.
Uh, but
For now
For today it would be on the
table.
If this, if this motion, so just
to explain, if this motion
succeeds, um,
This bill will not proceed
forward, and it would stay on
the table.
Would you take the role, Madam
Secretary?
Senator Cervantes?
Nurse Wantus, yes, Senator
Charlie.
Charlie, yes, Senator is out.
Roel, yes, Senator Hamblin. Yes.
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope.
No
And Pope? No, Senator Scott.
Senator Scott, yes.
Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez.
Yes to table explain my vote.
Censorship, uh, Ceria Lopez,
yes.
And Stephonics.
Esophonics? No.
OK, Senator Hamlin, you'd like
to explain your vote. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate
this because I think the intent
is there and I think we
understand what what what should
be achieved out of this. I think
there's some really important
conversations to have still, um,
and, and to identify and address
those and I and I feel confident
in the, the Senate sponsor, um,
that those conversations will
occur. Uh, so that's why I
wanted to explain my vote
because I do feel that we'll
we'll be seeing this again after
the senator, uh, and all of you
have those conversations with
the, the concerned.
uh in the room. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
And to explain my vote, I didn't
ask any questions, but I am very
concerned about um
Did you explain your vote?
Uh my explaining my vote is um I
really felt strongly that this
worker safety provision really
needs to be in there. I, I.
Uh, there are OSHA provisions,
but I think that that should be
primary, uh, and I hope you can
bring this bill back. I
definitely support it in
principle.
Uh, but I do, I agree, so, um,
with that, and I also know who
the chair is of this committee,
so I wouldn't be surprised if it
comes back.
Oh, to announce the vote, the
vote is, thank you.
The vote is a motion to table
succeeds on a vote of 7 to 2.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, we will
only bring back this bill if
there's um a desire from a
tabling.
Uh, motion
and a and a committee
substitute. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Senator Haamie is here and we're
ready for your bill, Senator
Jaramillo, as I turn over the
gavel back to the chair.
I can
Senator, please proceed. Your
last, uh, bill of the morning.
We want to start this, Madam
Chairwoman, members of the
committee, thank you for hearing
us today. You're gonna be
hearing the bill today about a
land grant meced, and I
represent rural northern New
Mexico where land grants are
part of our culture and our
heritage. Now land grants were
given by the King of Spain to
the Spaniards that came up the
Camino
Senator, please proceed. Your
last, uh, bill of the morning.
We want to start this, Madam
Chairwoman, members of the
committee, thank you for hearing
us today. You're gonna be
hearing the bill today about a
land grant meced, and I
represent rural northern New
Mexico where land grants are
part of our culture and our
heritage. Now land grants were
given by the King of Spain to
the Spaniards that came up the
Caminore
to ensure that they established
homelands for the king of Spain
and the heirs such as your.
South Senator Senio Lopez,
generations of New Mexicans who
have lived on this land when
Mexico took over and it became
part of the of Mexico land grant
meeds were continued to be
recognized by the Mexican
government as uh as the land
grant and the heirs who could
live on it.
The state of New Mexico looks at
land grants as political
subdivisions. With this bill
does would add the Santa Cruz de
la Cananada land grant into
statute 2 years ago, a bill was
signed into law which looked at
clarifying which land grant
meeds are currently political
subdivisions of the state
governed by the land grant
general provisions specifically
naming 26 active land grants
that are covered by the general
provisions fund, which can be
found on chapter 49.
Article 1 of the New Mexico
statutes by adding the land
grants into statutes, Madam
Chairwoman, Federal and state
agencies, other local
governments and private
institutions like banks know
which land grants or local units
of government, which also allow
them to receive state funding,
Senate Bill 47 will add a 27th
land grant, which is Santa Cruz
de la Canama to be covered by
the general provisions, which
once again is found on chapter
49, Article.
one of the state statutes, land
grant has met all requirements
to enter into statute. Now
joining me today is my expert
witness to my left, Arturo
Archuleta of the New Mexico Land
Grant Council and to my right,
president of the Santa Cruz de
la Cannata land grant Don Bustos
and the secretary of the Santa
Cruz de la Cannada land rat
Brian Martinez, and I'm gonna
hand it over, Madam Chairwoman
to Arturo Archuleta for some
brief comments.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh,
again, my name is Arturo
Archuleta. I work for the New
Mexico Land Grant Council, um,
the New Mexico Land Councils in
support of this legislation, um,
we recognize that it was
important a couple of years ago
as senator Rail mentioned uh to
recognize land grants, um,
specifically by name and statute
that we makes it clear, um,
prior to that, the general
provisions sort of just applied
to those that are applied to and
it wasn't always entirely clear
and so we do have some land
grants that fall outside of the
general provisions.
Such as the Santa Cruz like in
other land grant or um land
grants, however, they're just
not currently recognized as a
political subdivision, and this
would provide them Senator
Arrami mentioned that
opportunity to um receive some
of the funds available, uh, as
well as some of the authority on
that's granted under that
statute.
Thank you very.
And if you don't mind, Madam
Chairwoman, if our president can
say a few brief comments and our
secretary, please go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and honorable members
of the of the of the
legislature. My name is Don
Bustos. I own a small farm in
Santa Cruz. It's called Santa
Cruz Farm. I named it after our
land grant, and I named it after
our church Santa Cruz Church.
I farmed the same land my
ancestors farmed for over 330
years.
I the agricultural area.
Several years ago, members of
the community got together and
we followed all the regulations
and requirements from the state
to become an official land grant
for Santa Cruz. We've done over
2 years of monthly meetings
we've posted them, we've done
everything that's required of us
and we're asking permission now
to become part of the state
statute. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Brian
Martinez, uh, I grew up in
Chimayo, also on a ranching and
farming, um, community, um.
I come here today, uh,
remembering my great great
grandfather Juanumno Martin, who
provided testimony to the uh um
court of private land claims,
uh, to, to substantiate the land
grant back in the mid 1800s and
so today I'm
Here, uh, and honoring his
spirit, as, as the secretary of
the land grant, I'm also
prepared today to discuss how
we've prepared administratively
and
statutorily to be to, to become
a, a, a, a recognized um um land
grant.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We're ready to listen to those
and support an opposition and,
and looking forward to hearing
comments and questions from the
committee.
How many in the room are in
support of this legislation?
How many in the room are opposed
to this legislation.
Um, just in the interest of
time, um, you do have 10 minutes
to, to, and we have some
flexibility since there's no
opponents, but if the supporters
could just get in line and make
their comments.
You have 10 minutes?
Total.
And on Zoom we have uh Jose Luis
Ortiz who wants to, so just so
in allocating your time, just
remember there's somebody on
Zoom as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
community members Camila Romero
with the New Mexico State Land
Office. The Land Office stands
in support of this bill. Thank
you.
Madam Chairman,
It's
senators of New Mexico. I'm here
in support of uh the land grant.
But I need to explain something
to you. This was never a land
grant.
Until 2006.
This was a veal.
There were only 3 villas in New
Mexico.
Santa Fe, Albuquerque and Santa
Cruz.
In 1898.
The United States Supreme Court.
Took away approximately 533
acres of property and gave it to
Santa Clara Pueblo.
The 1924
Pueblo's Lanz Act.
took that property back away
from Santa Clara.
Paid them for it.
And yet
To the day
They claim ad administrative
authority over these properties.
You go to Santa Cruz itself.
You go to the neighboring
communities, Santo Nino.
San Pedro, you go to La Mesa.
Or the uh senator.
Lives
And where my daughter lives.
They're barely outside the
boundaries.
Santa Clara Pueblo.
I'm here to tell you.
Well, let me tell you to start
out with, I'm here because
Representative Alcorn.
Whose recently passed away and
we buried last two weeks ago.
Was
A cousin of mine through
marriage.
And he
Had a memorial passed in 20016
that the indicate offered uh
To bring back um the um
Not the land grant, but the
villa.
And that memorial went to the
Attorney General's office.
Attorney General's office was to
come back and tell the
legislature whether they uh
were in favor of the memorial or
not.
Just recently, uh,
representative Jaramillo, oh,
I'm sorry, representative.
Uh
Susan Herrera.
Brought me the information about
that memorial.
And
When we read that memorial,
We're under the, I, I instantly
knew that
That memorial was written, uh, I
mean, the response to the
memorial was written to somebody
who didn't know anything about
the 1924 Pueblo Las Act. That's
what I am here today to tell you
that anything you read about any
pueblo that's adjacent to a land
grant.
Needs to read the 1924
Pueblozac.
We were told by two lawyers that
that act was lost.
Between the district court in
Denver, Colorado, and
Albuquerque, New Mexico, so that
Nobody knew anything about that
until Malcolm E. Bright.
Antonio Esquivel.
Both wrote about
the uh land grant.
I'm in favor of this.
I'm not necessarily in favor of
we went before.
I went before.
Now we the
Uh
State land grant council.
And I explained to them.
Immediately
The chairman of that council.
Instructed
Uh, Arturo.
And uh his partner Jacob.
To take away the land grant.
Because they had not followed
the laws that changed twice
after 2006, they had no, no
right to call themselves a land
grant.
I'm in favor of this. I'm not
necessarily in favor of uh
honoring somebody that uh would
not keep the land grant going.
Who is currently a president of
land grant.
I have told him twice he should
resign.
He hasn't he hasn't resigned.
But
I'm in favor of the land grant.
And I would like to go ahead and
ask you to vote in favor of it.
Thank you. Your time is up and,
uh, and what was your name, sir?
Alfonso Duran. OK. Thank you. We
have one person online, um.
Jose Luis Ortiz.
Moi when was the last, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Jose Luis Ortiz
Eunis. I am a farmer from
northern New Mexico, an heir to
the Santa Cruz de la Canalla
land grant, among other land
grants, as well as the
corresponding secretary to this
board. I just want to say that
this board, as well as the
extended members, members of our
committees, volunteers,
community members at large have
worked tire tirelessly in the
last
3 to 4 years to really bring
this to the table. We have
followed all statute
requirements, all legal
requirements. We have brought on
new membership. We have garnered
support from the greater
community at large and also have
built intentional relations with
our neighbors. We really think
that this is the missing
element, the missing piece to
help the Espanola Valley really
rise up from the struggle that
we've seen over the last 100
years.
We all know the situation
within.
the espanola Valley, we see a
future that revitalizes
agriculture that uses our water
and our land in the most
appropriate traditional ways we
see a revitalization of our
culture, our tradition, and our
rootedness in our history and
also just to mention that most
of the heirs to the Santa Cruz
land grant, um.
are dispersed throughout
northern New Mexico and also
throughout the southwestern and,
and the United States in
general, uh, but also we are
part of the diaspora of the He
subtle people who are indigenous
community members, part of a
really deep, beautiful history
of New Mexico and a, and an
incredible group of members of
our community at large. We're
really in support of this and we
really want to see the Espanola
Valley, the Santa Cruz land
grant, all of our neighbors
flourished.
With this decision, this will
give us access to really
important capital, really
important resources and support
and also give us the designation
to assert our community's
willpower to continue to thrive,
survive and live in our
ancestral homelands. Thank you
for hearing me. God bless you
all and enjoy the rest of the
session. Thanks again. I voted,
I hope that you vote in favor.
Thank you. Um, and since we had
no opponents, I'll just turn it
over to the committee.
Does anybody have any questions
or comments? Yes, um.
Senator Charlie
Thank you, chair, and thank you,
um, Senator Jaramillo to our
guests for being here with us
today.
Um, I want to start off by, by
recognizing.
Important for me to reclaim this
power in this space. It's that
we're all on native land.
Regardless to act and
Sequential decision.
are, in fact, the, the
roundhouse here is in a situated
in a very important place for um
indigenous.
So, um
Madam Chair, my, my question, my
first question.
I, um, how will this impact
potentially impact the publics
of OK and when gay and Santa
Clara.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you for that, for that
question, Senator Charlie. We
have a deep and rooted
relationship with our native
pueblos in northern New Mexico,
and most of us are mixed culture
between native and Hispanic. And
so it wouldn't impact the water.
Right now, what we do is the
land grant is already
established. This would just put
them in the statute to ensure
that we can apply for capital
funding. And here's an example
on how they could ask for, for
funding from the
State and for what they need.
The Catholic Church has run out
of land to bury people in Santa
Cruz. The land grant could then
work on clearing an area that
they would allow the church to
come in to bury anyone that they
need to, but they might need
some funds to help them get that
done. Whether it's clearing the
area of shrub and and any type
of debris that's there, um, this
wouldn't impact our
relationships. This would just
ensure that they're in statute
since they're already a
landlord.
Uh, Madam Chair, one more
question on that, um, I did hear
that that conversations with the
neighbor, neighboring
communities have happened, but
I'm wondering how will this
potentially impact access to
cultural sites that might exist
within the current land grant.
Thank you for that question,
Madam Chairwoman, there would be
no impact. And so currently on
what we're seeing on the land
grant, there aren't any, but if
some were found, there would be
no impact. We'd want to keep our
relationship with our pueblos
that we've had for over 400
years in the Espanilla Valley.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um, I
just wanna.
Uh, one more comment which is,
um, President Bustos. I just got
a text from my husband who said
you're one heck of a farmer and
so I just wanted to acknowledge
that in the space as well. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator or me for bringing this
is what makes New Mexico.
I am, I'm interested to know.
What
I mean we've talked to Senator
Charlie talked about water
rights. I mean, what does this
mean to the to this area? I
mean, what benefits exactly?
Art can be derived for it. What?
Why did they support it? Um,
Senator
Madam Chairwoman, great
question, Senator. It's part of
our fabric of who we are as
northern New Mexicans.
And Parentes are members of the
land grant. And so not just
anyone can join the land grant.
You have to have the lineage
that came when it was
established to stay within that
land grant. Now, land grants are
trying to learn how to be
self-sufficient and generate
funds for the people on the
ground, and I'll give you an
example in Abi, I mean in Tierra
Maria.
They just recently acquired a
building off of one of the major
state roads there on which
they're going to try to turn
into a gas station and the
cultural center where people can
stop and it would generate.
for the land grant. So this
would ensure that land grants
can start to generate funds for
the years, but can also tap into
state funding like capital
outlay to assist them on what
they're trying to do.
And I'm sure, um.
Senator, thanks. I, I.
Did not realize.
Uh, that benefit was immediately
derived from this, so I
appreciate that. I
Is, are there groups that are in
opposition. I, I could talk to
the gentleman, uh, for an hour
about the history of which I'm
interested in, but
Are there, is there opposition
that's outside of this room that
we should know about?
Madame Chair and senator, not
that we're aware of. Northern
New Mexicans have respected land
grants and what they mean to his
spinal culture, and we haven't
had any opposition in our area.
Including Pueblo's um.
Madam Chair, chairwoman and
Senator Charlie. As a matter of
fact, I got off the phone with
the OK we get governor who asked
similar questions as yours when
I assured him that it wouldn't
impact any type of water rights,
the Pueblo student support when
we spoke this morning.
Thank you, uh, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Cur just.
A couple of questions, Senator.
Is any
Where is the title to this land?
Just today.
And does this piece of
legislation.
alter that in any way.
Madam Chairwoman, Senator,
thanks for the question. I'm
gonna, I'm going to let our
expert witness our archita take
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Scott. So the um
The bill itself, all it will do
is recognize the Santa Cruz de
la Cannata Langrann as a
political subdivision with the
board, um, and, and the title
that was belong to the Santa
Cruz de la Cannada land grant is
just those parcels of property
on which have not been
privatized. So it's just the
common land. So, uh, in the
instance of Santa Cruz de la
Cannada, it's all the lands that
they received in their patent,
um, that have not been uh
privatized through individual
ownership, uh, largely this
includes like some of the
arroyos, um, some of
areas that that aren't developed
um where the Asequias run
through, that's all part of the
common lands and so title to
those lands uh was vested in, in
the Santa Cruzola Kenyatta land
grant through the US uh patent
process through the adjudication
process, uh, and then it does
not impact um those privatized
lands, but it does provide them
sort of jurisdiction over those
areas in in terms of
representation of the community,
the ability to access capital
dollars to, for example, fund um
community center on some of the
funds that they received.
the operating they could put
towards a programming for the
local community and so this just
provides them a local government
status that will provide them
the opportunity to uh support
their community.
Thank you for the answer and
last question, Madam, what
percentage?
Of the lands contained within.
The area are privately held.
And what percentage would be
held.
I.
Community
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Scott, a majority of the uh.
And uh within the Santa Cruz
land grant is privately held. I
do not have a percentage for
that. That's something that
we're hoping the New Mexico Land
Grant Council can help us with
uh in terms of our mapping, um,
uh.
A lot of the common lands were,
were removed um during the
patent process. Uh, so we went
from 46,000 acres down to 4600
and change. And so as a result
of that, um like um Miss. George
Gillette was um elaborating on a
lot of our um our um
Langren lands are again a royals
and easements on longerseys and
such, um, but I hope to gather
that data soon, as soon as we
become a fully functionally uh
political subdivision and can
acquire some funds to do some,
some GPS mapping and uh get some
answers that we could provide
the legislature.
In the future
Manager.
Mm.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your answers.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments?
I'll just take my privilege to
chair to say that I'm an heir to
the Domeland grant and as you
know that uh I was actually on
the VIA when we returned the
Domain Hill to the land grant
and uh they also have a very
wonderful museum that they've
created because they're a
political subdivision, so, um.
I will now ask the
The secretary to take the role.
Oh, actually,
I'll make that
I cannot make the motion, but I
would like to. May I hear a
motion? Motion for due pass.
So we have a motion, Madam
Chair, would you take the role?
Sinner Cervantes, Senor
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator.
And herself, yes, Senator
Hamlin, Senator Hamblin, yes,
Senator Pope. Yes. Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Center
Cio Lopez, yes,
Senator Lopez, yes, San Stefanis
and Stephonics, yes.
Senator, you have a well.
Um,
senator, you have a unanimous
due pass.
On behalf of the land grant,
