And I I I'd say that the
it's going to take a different
approach in the future and that
will be the main focus of of
Mister Lopez and Mr Smith the
sixty million acre feet per year
of back in the time when when
the compact was negotiated the
states agree to equitably split
Wyoming Utah Colorado and New
Mexico.
It was required or is required
to deliver seventy five million
acre feet.
averaged over a ten year period.
and that amount is measured.
Kind of mid basin at what they
call the eight very gauge which
is just downstream from Glen
canyon dam.
negotiated it and international
boundary and water commission
water treaty that apportioned
one point five million acre feet
compact was negotiated and that
was between the four upper basin
states and that's that's when
the states agree to
apportionment amongst them and
feet per year if the water is
available for the.
and and due to the the current
hydrologic situation New Mexico
is consuming roughly half of
But it does make it also a great
pleasure to the after going over
the basics of the compact rules
in the approaches to introduce
for eight years as the director
of the Interstate Stream
Commission in the Richardson
administration.
with a colleague also in the.
also roughly four years as the
US bureau of reclamation
commissioner appointed in the
Obama administration so he's
eminently qualified to be our
this presentation start.
Thank you Mike and and chest
fenics thank you for this
going on in the Colorado River
there's it's been kind of deemed
an emergency and I'm gonna try
and explain what the nature of
that emergency is so
to the numbers that that Mike
was was talking about the total
that has been apportioned on the
Colorado River is seventeen and
