We're pleased to have all our
representatives with us today
running would you please take
the role.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Neville.
Senator poker.
Present.
Senator smitteez.
Senator so.
Senator Sedillo Lopez your.
And Mr CENIC's.
We have five.
Thank you very much so this
morning members we have four
bills that we will try not try
but we will accomplish in two
hours
and the some of these bills are
things that we have heard before
in our committee and some of
them not but have unanimous
approval from the house so we're
going to proceed and the very
first bill is house bill fifty
one as amended the environmental
database act I have
Representative Gail Chasey and
Senator Mimi Stewart so
Representative Chasey would you
like to kick this off.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's
nice to be in the Senate
committee and as we all know
unique circumstances so I also
have an expert with me today
need to come in and attorney
with the Audubon society Judy
and I were actually in one
school together and
Judy and Senator Stewart and
Representative Georgene Louis
and I have worked on this
project for the over the interim
and during the pandemic and I
think that probably Senator
excuse me to the COVID spent a
lot of time on soon.
House bill fifty one would
create a single map map based
website centralizing the state's
basic environmental data the
database with then be searchable
by agencies by industry and
public it would include
information like threatened and
endangered species locations of
oil and gas wells rare plant
data and locations of hazardous
waste sites right now all of
these data are available from
different agencies but it's not
in one location and with that
I'd like to turn this over to
wait but let me say one more
thing that is that
I think one of the perception of
the bill is that it's just too
and.
Benefit the environmental
community but in fact in New
Mexico.
And in other states that have
these kinds of websites what we
have found out is that industry
uses the the website's quite a
bit and in New Mexico we got the
data on how much industry access
to individual websites I want to
in New Mexico the industry was
using these websites twenty
eight percent of the time state
agencies forty seven percent of
the time in other states
Well I think this comment when
we get to so I don't have to
search through here and I think
she's got everything by heart at
this point so with that
manager I'd like to turn it over
to this coming okay miss comment
if you would spend about five
minutes six on your part.
Okay good morning madam chair
and members of the committee for
those of you who don't know me
I'm Judy come in New Mexico
policy director for the Audubon
society and so like
Representative Chasey said it's
a very simple bill basically all
we're doing is trying to
consolidate data that the
agencies are already posting on
their websites but we want to do
this because right now it's
really hard to figure out a
complete picture of what's
happening in the state and so if
you want to know for example
everything going on in a certain
part of New Mexico you have to
dig through a lot of different
agency websites to try to piece
it together which is hard for
agencies and industries and the
public to figure out so this
would put everything on one map
so that all the years would be
on a single map based site any
user could zoom in on an area of
the map and see right away
everything that's going on in
that spot and so this will help
the public and it'll also help
agencies have a comprehensive
view of what's happening so I
don't know if you all know this
but some agencies are now hiring
landscape level planners and
people like that so those
employees would benefit from
being able to use an easily
searchable map that has other
agencies on it as they try to
make plans and decisions.
And we also as Representative
Deasy mention to believe that it
will be useful for industry
project proponents as they
navigate their own process of
securing the HSD permits because
that tends to be complicated to
and they have to go to a bunch
of different agencies to figure
out their own their own kind of
time line for doing that
we model this idea on a similar
tool that the game and fish
department already has for
species data the natural
heritage program at UNM manages
that game and fish site already
and that's where some of the
data that Representative Chasey
was talking about doctor who's
already using the data the issue
was talking about the existing
game fish database that we have
so you NM is willing to manage
this additional kind of expanded
database table and a lot of
other states have more
comprehensive databases like
this and find it really useful
so we we did a presentation this
bill at the water and natural
resources interim committee in
November and we had a
presentation then from someone
from Virginia who showed kind of
how the use of our comprehensive
database with lots of different
agency data on it to use in
their decision making.
I'm and so the last thing I
think I'll say and then I guess
we could move to public comment
is that because we want to
consolidate data the agencies
already have on hand the process
is pretty easy and relatively
inexpensive I will note that we
did several amendments on the
house side to make it very clear
that this is data the agencies
are already providing uploading
so it's not requiring reporting
of additional data it's just
consolidating data that they're
already doing
and we also made some tweaks to
that to expand the
confidentiality section so as
members of questions about this
amendments weakened addresses
to.
I think I'll stop there and
we're happy to answer questions.
Thank you Representative Chasey
do you want any of the other
sponsors to speak.
Here.
I don't see Senator Stewart with
us.
Representative Lewis I I don't
see them okay so I think we will
now go to comments from the
public committee members to for
those of you who joined us we
now have eight of the nine I
think we're only missing Senator
Schmedes unless he's on but what
I started out saying is we have
four bills and we will complete
them in the two hours they are
either duplicates of Senate
bills or they have unanimous
approval from the house floor so
we're proceeding with this bill
house bill fifty one as amended
on the list I have several
people in support in a couple of
people against so we will start
with the opponents Trevor and I
think we're only gonna go I and
I each for a minute since this
is a duplicate bill.
I was a big sigh from somebody.
However any opponents.
We have
insignia.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Beverly it's in good executive
director of dairy producers of
New Mexico while we understand
what this bill is trying to do
and make it easier for both
industry and agencies and
members of the public we have
some consternation about some of
the info that has to be required
might be personal and might open
our producers up to frivolous
lawsuits which we experienced in
the past in New Mexico as well
as attacks from anti animal
agriculture extremist which has
happened in other states
I think that's about it we we
we'd be happy to help work on
this bill to help not provide so
much personal data that we thank
you for your time thank you.
Thank you and next Trevor we
have Jim Winchester.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Gen Winchester
with independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
I do want to mention that we do
stand respectfully opposed to
this bill we do understand the
need for operators to adhere to
regulatory requirements and
associated report or a recording
requirements however we do feel
that this
bill does a put an additional
layer of burden on operators are
our concern is that
there will be additional
reporting requirements that will
be added on that will
disproportionately punish small
independent operators who don't
have the armies of lawyers and
compliance officers to process
paperwork
we do believe that all this
information is readily available
and we're concerned that we're
setting precedent here of
focusing more on environmental
reporting then environmental
protection itself so for this
reason and many others we do
stand opposed thank you.
Thank you very much next.
On that with average service
speak we have a DC Lauren
Patterson has our interest.
Speaking against.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you chair Spano ex members
the committee lord Patterson on
behalf New Mexico cattle growers
association our membership
opposes I speak fifty one we
believe it to be an unfunded
mandate for multiple agencies
creates a database that
currently already yes HB fifty
one currently offers no
assurances that private data
will be protected our membership
waves an open and fair
government that there it be used
to single out our target an
individual or business thank you
chairman.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else that is opposing
this bill.
You see any Hans Gruber.
Okay we're moving on to the
proponents will hear from I sure
go ahead.
First we have Judy Williams.
Morning chair semantics and
members of the committee my name
is Judy Williams and with the
league of women voters of New
Mexico we support HD fifty one
as amended.
Yes I believe that a publicly
available and coordinated
database will improve
transparency the general public
government agencies and other
users will have easier access to
information about Bayern mental
resources and how decisions have
impacts on them thank you very
much thank you next.
Next we have Greg Peters.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
repeaters public lands and
wildlife advocate for
conservation New Mexico here to
stand strong support.
One thousand.
Is this call and Senator
presentation this common sense
bill addresses the simple need a
well coordinated centralized
repository to everyone across
the state Texas this will lead
to more comprehensive and
smarter multi jurisdictional
land use planning by state
agencies hello industry
advocates state permitting
process sees and provide more
transparency to the public
granting it more equitable
access to state data.
Agencies will be able to see
everything going on at once and
no agency or department will be
asked to disclose any
confidential information
agencies are not required by the
bill to disclose anything
purpose not already provided to
the agencies chair members of
the committee we urged passage
of HB fifty one is amended thank
you for your time thank you very
much next cover next we have
Tiffany Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee I did not register to
speak in support of this bill.
Okay thank you.
Next.
Good morning I'm chained
Committee members my name is and
for that rents and I'm an
organizer speaking in support of
HB fifty one on behalf of the
New Mexico chapter of the Sierra
Club representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters this bill would
create an interactive database
of state environmental data in a
searchable map format the
publicly accessible database
will combine existing data from
seven agencies the database will
be helpful in aiding agencies to
make better wholistic decisions
and will help the public
understand what's occurring in
their communities on state line
an example of data that would be
in the interactive database of
it that is an interesting clued
Spence is not limited to public
health data there and endangered
species status state parks
active oil and gas wells utility
scale solar and wind projects
and locations of impaired water.
Thank you for your time today.
Thank you very much next.
Michael backs.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Michael to defenders of wildlife
we are strongly support the bill
as previously stated this would
help coordination collaboration
between state agencies
oftentimes are our natural
resource agencies in New Mexico
are criticized for being stove
pipe and not coordinating well
enough and this would greatly
increase their ability to do so
as well as increase transparency
for the public as someone who
often uses databases managed by
both the department of game fish
the New Mexico environment
department I can speak person to
the fact that it can sometimes
be frustrating having to flip
back and forth between them and
not having a centralized spot to
provide all that information and
so for those for these reasons
we support the bill thank you
thank you next.
Lastly we have Mary Feldblum.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee of Mary
Feldblum and I represent earth
works well and gas
accountability project and I'm
not going to repeat what others
have said but I do want to
emphasize that this quartile
does not include any information
that isn't over the public and
secondly as a former academic
this is not only useful for
communities environmental groups
the industry and agencies but
students and when they do
research papers and I I just
think it's a wonderful bill and
I think the Sanchez for doing
this thank you.
Thank you very much now we're
going to circle back are there
any opponents who did not speak
if you would raise your hand.
How many proponents are there
that we did not hear from.
Okay thank you very much up
Camilleri was on okay thank you
Camilla are you an opponent or
proponent.
Okay so we're not hearing
anything of Representative
Chasey did you want to say
anything before we go to
questions and comments from the
committee.
Madam chair thank you very much
I turned off my care workers
might to increase my band with a
little bit so I may do that
again yes we actually do have a
couple of for this although I
think Mary Feldblum sent is
probably helpful in that this is
this is only data that's already
available to public there are no
additional reporting
requirements of the agencies we
also have the cost funded
through junior money from
Senator Stewart and on the house
side so that's that's what we
will do U. N. M. is where the
database will be in have a very.
Rick confidentiality policy and
that we can ensure that we made
a lot of the amendments
technical amendments to that
were required the district in
the house it was common wanted
to make one quick comment.
Very quickly thank you madam
chair representative JC I was
going to say most of our
Representative Deasy said I
think the only thing I'll add is
that
when we were talking to the
agencies about this and we've
been talking to potential users
about this it's true that the
agencies are already reporting
this and so the information is
available but I think it's
critical to understand the
difference between available and
accessible and just because this
information is available
somewhere in the back of HSD
website doesn't mean that it's
user friendly and actually
accessible to the public and
even to agencies so all this is
doing is consolidating that data
so that everyone can see it all
at once and you know I'll just
repeat that the statement again
that this isn't requiring any
additional reporting
requirements which just talking
about consolidating data.
Thank you Mr common we're going
to questions comments from
committee we have Senator
Gallegos and then Senator
monkeys.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative just a few
questions and I understand that
you're trying to gather all the
data into one area that was
reason we didn't go to do it.
Representative Chasey did you
hear that questions I I I I
didn't hear.
The question was.
The question is why did you not
go to the department of
information technology for the
collection.
This call then respond to that
Mr madam chairs pardon me go
ahead yes.
At thank you madam chair and
senator Kay goes up I did speak
to do it over the summer during
the interim when we were
debating how to do this bill in
the best way possible and they
were interested and available
and helpful about how this might
work there the reason we ended
up going to UNM instead is
because they're already running
this very similar tool for the
game and fish department that
already is kind of a map based
database for game and fish data
and actually all the the data
required from the game and fish
department in this bill in HD
fifty one is the data they're
already using on the existing
online tool for that department
and so since you and I'm kind of
already has the infrastructure
in place for the game and fish
tool they just seemed like a
better fit to make this expanded
expanded database.
Thank you Senator Gallegos used
on the floor.
Madam chair and and and for
would appreciate that but I I I
thought that was the intent to
do it whenever they're put into
existence to be able to House
transformation.
Question madam chair and
Representative is on the cost I
know energy minerals next
restrict our department and made
a.
Point that they are.
How many of mask made
I guess more more staff
Did you have discussions with
them on what it would take and
we're we're gonna come up that
money.
Representative AC yes yes madam
chair and and senator guy and
ghost we did and I think that I
believe that revise their FY are
This Madam you spoke with them
right.
And madam chair and senator
again yes yes so we had at least
one conversation with every
agency during the enter and
EMNRD originally had estimated
to FTEs they did revise that
down to one they told me they
really think they only need a
half but they put in what has to
be safe
and part of the reason for that
was that and I didn't know this
until the inner a lot of their
data is actually not already
digitized so they're gonna need
to digitize some data that isn't
digitally at system of their
data still on paper which is a
little crazy so some of that
digitizing and stuff that they
need to do anyway
other agencies of not projected
costs for this because it's
stuff that they're already
reporting on their websites
anyway but that was the reason
that EMNRD have a cost
associated with that all the UNM
projected cost is stuff that is
covered with junior money so.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Representative expert witness.
Yes No I'm gonna go into the the
information part of it how would
we ensure the private
information property rights are
not violated in is there are
mechanisms in place on how we
gather distributed if you're
gonna have it on a website or
somewhere for the public to see
what they're gonna be filters in
place that will protect some of
the rights.
Madam chair and senator Gaydos.
There are there are protections
for private property and I I'm
gonna let this call then
explained that I.
These are data that are already
available go ahead madam chair
this Madam.
Madam chair and senator again
those yes so there's several
ways that private information is
protected for one thing it's
already data that's it's only
data that's already reported
anyway so that's part of it but
then we do have a pretty
expansive confidentiality
section that section four of the
bill on the last page so you'll
see that they can't post
anything that's confidential I
by law we included not posting
sensitive biological information
that's because sometimes for
threatened and endangered
species there's a risk of people
going out and purposely harming
or collecting species so if
there is that risk that will be
posted I'm anything required to
be confidential for safety or
security reasons won't be posted
any kind of sensitive
archaeological information will
be posted and then you'll see at
the and we we added an amended
section and on the house side
transpacific we know that no
information that's not already
provided this agency will be up
there I do want to also draw
your attention to.
I'm on page six.
Subsection eight.
That is a section where so
basically the way the bill works
is it lists the required data to
be up loaded and then originally
we had a kind of more expansive
additional section that said
that agencies could upload
additional data if they thought
it would be helpful and in
conversations on the house side
and there was concern that that
additional data would mean data
that is either protected or
sensitive or private in some way
and so we amended that section
to say that any additional data
that's upload it beyond that the
years that are specifically
required has to be agency
developed data so that means any
additional data the agencies are
posing has to come from the
agencies it can't come from for
example a private individual on
top of that I will say that UNM
has an additional privacy policy
about what data they post and
that does cover some of that the
private information to so
there's a couple years.
So Madam chair representative
miss home and then with that
agency information would that
just be public lands.
I'm madam chair and senator
Gaydos yes so this only requires
data from state agencies so
that's data that they're
collecting about their own
jurisdictions.
Okay.
Representative then my next
question is will be using this
information possibile mated in
in in in that wondering about
hackers are we gonna have
anything in there so people will
be causing havoc with the system
I can envision that you know
someone just playing with the
computer can get this detail out
that's why the question on who
will be the main user of it and
what we're gonna do about.
Appearing for hackers.
Madam chair I think that we
answer the question about why
the bill is needed I think that
as far as hackers go I think our
entire.
Our entire system in the home.
This whole country is is someone
at risk when you consider the
breaches security breaches that
have occurred this isn't set up
so that the users manipulate
data.
And this committee will confirm
that I believe.
Madam.
Representative I appreciate that
I must've missed the detail on
why the bills needed but who's
gonna be the main user of this
information.
The state data show that the
state agencies use it that
industry years isn't that the
public uses that and that
Students.
And local governments.
Okay Chairman representative
that goes back to my original
question I just I'm trying to
wonder why we're doing this and
and I I must of
in trying to get on late
whatever the reason I didn't
understand the original premise
of the bill is the first certain
organization or is it just for
general use I'm madam chair and
senator guy a ghost anybody
could use the data right now
anybody can go to these
individual departments and
search through their data and
come up with that what this does
create a single place to go that
is a searchable database and it
actually provides a great
transparency or data that
already exists within the
agencies.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative I guess I was
trying to find out the reason
for the bill but a lot of times
I'll get certain constituent
groups interested in something
and what I do the bill for both
but that all yield thank you
thank you very much we have
Senator Montes and then Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Chasey it's a
nice to stay here forever
committees while.
The bill that you have is going
to come to Senate Judiciary
Committee so will support
product there and I take much
time today I I always support I
think it's a good idea we have a
lot of work done by employees of
our state I work are there
gathered a lot of information I
think it's good for the
taxpayers the public to be able
to have that information we
gather it so I think this bill
for transparency purposes I
would suggest that you look at
section three sub section Hey a
little bit looking through that
I see quite a bit of ambiguity
at.
Racial language what I start
this committee district I called
before it language so requiring
a database be user friendly
doesn't really mean anything to
me.
And I think that a lot of times.
That language to be eliminated
from a bill and keep our
statutes will cleaner and really
not do any harm at all so I
would just look at subsection
acting frankly subsection I can
be eliminated it's all it reads
almost like eight purpose of
section of the bill but all I
look forward to your your
thoughts about that you don't
our sure.
The other thing too is
subsection do.
Refers to it says that the
database I shall.
Include your shop provide access
to the state's environmental
data.
The state including gives a list
of thanks but but before the
list begins it says shall
provide access to the state our
mental data and that that may be
right broadly to is actually
state.
you Miss.
Our advocate U. S. data I don't
know exactly what that would so
I understand the list I think
the list a very good idea but
you may just want to.
The opportunity there is take
out the requirement of access to
the state's environmental data
because that that could really.
Arguably a lot of this so those
are just some general thoughts.
I look forward to seeing your
bill it Judiciary thank you.
Thank you on the Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
thank you hi I will actually
hello.
I'm just gonna give my
perspective I'm not a Judiciary
so senators about this point
there are more important than
what I would say but I would say
that yeah I I would say leave
access to the state
environmental data including was
because including and statutory
verbiage
means including but not limited
to and so the way I interpret
this is this is a minimum that
must must be provided and if the
agencies want to provide more I
think that's great so so I would
suggest at least five for that
in Judiciary and then the other
thing about the purpose of the
senators about this and I have a
different perspective on
purposes of bills I like for
bills to have guidance in case
there is litigation since we
don't officially have
legislative intent that is a way
for the legislature to express
and I really I think that that's
great to understand that the
database should be user friendly
I think there's a common
understanding what that means
and you know what providing for
transparency interagency
cooperation information those
are all aspirations that will
give guidance to the people
interpreting this interpreting
the statute which will which
will primarily be the ones
implementing it because I doubt
if they'll be any litigation
about the statute because it
simply directing agencies how to
how to behave and I I was gonna
ask about confidentiality but I
think you address it very well
with that Senator Gallegos is
questions.
Because there are very very good
strong confidentiality
provisions in their and since
the data is already reported.
I I I just didn't I I don't see
that issue
and I also just wanted one of
the question just curiosity
because I support the bill does
matter what the answer is just
curiosity how does this bill
work with the date the water
data act.
because I I think that's a
fantastic.
Obviously because you know it
it's really important to get all
of the resources all of the
water data which is everywhere
in one place and that's
happening
with the The New Mexico
this is going to New Mexico is
to school mining and I can't
remember the new name of the
Indian Sapporo
This is going to be a U. N. M.
so I'm just wondering will there
be coordination of those the two
maps.
Madam chair I'm gonna turn that
went over to the is common.
We miss COVID madam chair and
secretary Senator Sedillo Lopez
that they short answer is yes so
during the inner we did talk to
them at New Mexico tech about
the Watergate Act I also had
conversations with Stacy tenants
and and Melanie Stansbury about
that right now the water data
excite is really geared towards
kind of reporting and so it has
reports and data like that it's
not exactly Matt players in the
same way so it's a little bit
different but but yes will
coordinate is the short answer.
You know I think that that would
really really be important to
see the relationship between
this data and the impact on our
water I'm very concerned about
that now with climate change and
and all of that you know the
drought we're going to be
experiencing or have experienced
and so I I think that it would
be really valuable to have a
relationship between them even
the map making capacities I
think this is really one of the
most important environmental
bills to come along in a long
time I'm very I'm thrilled that
you are doing this and I
supported strongly.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Hammond.
Madam chair no questions just
I'd like to motion for the past.
Thank you very much is there a
second thank you.
Okay that we have a motion and a
second.
Veronica center Gaydos serving
you asking another question.
No ma'am must not take my hand
down sorry thank you thank you
very much Veronica would you
please call the vote.
Senator Cervantes.
Yes.
No ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville vote no.
Senator poke yes.
Senator Schmedes.
Senator souls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes sorry in thank you.
Senator smitteez.
In terms of an X. yes.
There's six.
Thank you very much
Representative Chasey you have a
do passed from this committee
good luck in the next one thank
you so much thank you.
Madam chair the Senator produce.
You're on a way to.
And I'm sure you're gonna say
something about your next
committee.
No matter madam chair
We really we're losing you after
madam chair.
I'm sorry.
Do you want to call in.
Madam chair.
We got madam chair is this any.
At.
Madam chair don't worry about
it.
I'm sorry okay we got that
entire thing there okay you want
to try again.
So I really should Senator Lopez
said that there's a common
understanding only I when it
comes to.
Okay Sir Senator Cervantes in
the middle of your sentence you
went on mute again.
Yeah.
To note that Senator Lopez said
that there's a common
understanding of what is a user
friendly when it comes to a
database I just gotta tell you
madam chair members committee
what that might my young
daughters considered to be user
friendly what I consider to be
user friendly is very different
my experience with the zoom
platform even today suggests
with Google made sense and Cisco
and everything else I don't have
a common understanding of what
is your user friendly thank you
madam what.
We will consider thank you thank
you so much and congratulations
Representative Chasey by okay
we're moving on to house bill
eighty nine they help the soil
tax refund
Contribution option
Representative Chatfield
Representative Gail Armstrong
and Representative Christine
Chandler in the past
Representative Nate and small
and I.
Sponsored the healthy soil
program so I'm very happy to see
this come forward so
Representative Chatfield are you
leading the charge here.
Thank you madam chair you are
here in the in the members of
the committee.
I am happy to bring before you
this morning house bill eighty
nine.
It's an act relating an optional
designation for a personal
income tax refund contributions.
For administration of the
healthy soil program at New
Mexico State University of this
program funds agricultural
practices that helps create
healthy soils and helps to
create salsa contain organic
matter up plenty of
live organisms integrating it
helps create route requests are
close together and range land.
it better is healthy soil has a
better moisture infiltration so
it helps us have more more water
it slows evaporation and helps
stop Eurovision.
Show this bill doesn't ask for
any money from the state it just
creates a little box on your
income tax return and the if you
want to use yes some of your
money if you're one of those
people fortunate enough to have
a little bit of.
Every back for you taxes that
they you can donate that money
to the healthy soils program or.
There are currently several
other ones that you can check of
auction and donate that money to
the animal care fund the our
shelter Fund The New Mexico
housing trust fund the share
with wildlife was created for
more boxes you can check in and
the share your income tax refund
if you want to with the healthy
soils program.
And the manager I have a couple
of expert witnesses rob Hirsch
and Katey yes.
Mr Hirsch.
All right madam chair and
members of the committee Sir can
you hear me OK yes I'm very
briefly okay very briefly this
is a great way to raise public
awareness and funds for this
program without requiring
additional state appropriation
and the healthy soil program is
really important because it
supports the stewardship of
farmers and ranchers statewide
and it also supports public
health because there's more
nutrients in the food we grow
through the healthy school
principals like Representative
Chatfield said we can have more
water infiltration from this and
as well as carbon sequestration
in we just want to say that of
all the programs that there are
about seventeen of this tax
option that people would have
for their refunds there's no
program that currently supports
agriculture in our producers so
this would be really helpful in
that regard so finally we we
also want to say thank you so
much for Madam chair for
sponsoring healthy soil Act back
in two thousand nineteen and we
acknowledge that there's been
unanimous bipartisan support for
this in a very broad support I
should say for example the
farmers the rocky mountain
farmers union of the New Mexico
association of conservation
districts The New Mexico acequia
Association the Sierra Club New
Mexico Public Health Association
and many others have supported
this so we very much thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you and also the second
expert of Katie get got get get
this.
Thank you madam chair it is
Katie and I am one of the New
Mexico eight of the healthy soil
program that New Mexico
department of agriculture in the
interest of time I'll share with
you what the program would do
with the national dollars
contribute voluntarily through
the tax rebate.
Yes.
That is to award funds through
in the form of grants to are
eligible entity communities
those are tribes nations and
of loans land grants that I
think you have.
Water conservation districts and
New Mexico state university's
cooperative extension service so
that those entities can provide
technical assistance to farmers
and ranchers and other land
managers to improve your soil
health additionally we work for
those eligible entities so that
individual farmers and ranchers
can improve the land of the they
have control of whether they own
or lease or managing.
thank you.
Thank you very much this did
pass the house sixty seven to
zero is there anybody here
are opposing the bill.
We will I'm not asking for
comments if the proponents want
to just raise their hands go
down to the reaction box at the
bottom of the full screen to
raise your hand.
You one two three four.
I.
Great thank you very much for
being with us this morning
Senator souls madam chair I
would we would do passed.
I'm.
Okay Senator Hamblen did you
have a question no I would just
like to third that that motion
because I'm very excited about
the opportunities I've worked
with agency gets before and and
it's at New Mexico State
University and so I'm very
excited about that so I'm into
CS to Klay of third motion in
the past madam chair thank you
okay so we're on a good could
you please call the vote.
Senator sirventes yes.
A goes yes ma'am Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Neville both yes
Senator
yes.
Committee.
One or two.
Senator committee.
I'm sorry yes thank you Senator
so yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
In terms of annex yes.
Unanimous thank you
Representative you have to you
have a unanimous vote who is
your Senate sponsor on the
floor.
We will now for sure what you
have okay so there's several of
us who are willing to just let
us know.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much we're now going on to.
House bill ninety two safe
drinking water testing Fund and
we have Representative Gallegos
and Representative Herrera.
Representative Gaydos welcome
and warning us welcome I mean
Herrerra and guy a ghost please
bill welcome here and wanted to
proceed thank you so much madam
chair and members of the
committee I am pleased to
present and co sponsored the
safe drinking water testing bill
house bill ninety two this will
ensure that communities across
New Mexico continue to have
access to clean drinking water
the best way to protect our
communities from contaminated
water is to test the water
regularly this bill will ensure
the fund use use to pay for most
striking water testing in New
Mexico remains solvent.
Without cutting testing services
to water systems large and small
urban and rural over the past
twenty seven years the water
conservation fund has benefited
hundreds of public water systems
throughout the state by
supporting their essential work
to provide safe and reliable
drinking water to New Mexicans
essentially this bill does three
things increases the currency
from for the first time in
twenty seven years from three
cents per thousand gallons of
water produced to the of five
cents per thousand gallons of
water produce this translates to
an increase of about forty cents
per month on an average New
Mexico household water utility
bill less than five dollars a
year.
Secondly it requires
environmental department to
prepare and make public and
annual summary revenues and
expenditures and third and
finally it changes the name of
the one of the funds from the
water conservation fund to the
safe drinking water testing fund
so that the name is reflective
of the services of the fees
provided to the drinking water
systems across New Mexico and
madam chair at this point I
would like to make co sponsor to
say a few words about the bill
if if that would be appropriate.
I certainly Representative
Herrera thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee I'll like my colleague
I'm proud to co sponsor this
bill I believe our communities
deserve a government that is
committed to providing safe
clean drinking water for all of
our citizens you read the
newspapers and watch the news
go online you'll find that there
are states like Michigan and New
Jersey at currently dealing with
the with that contaminating
drinking water in their
communities serious health
issues so the people living in
those communities especially
young children and the large
financial impact that has on our
on communities with already
tight budgets I just two of the
most visible at ramifications of
not ensuring clean drinking
water for a citizens I'd like to
thank the following
organizations The New Mexico
municipally the New Mexico
association of counties The New
Mexico rural water association
the rural communities assistance
corporation and the New Mexico
environment department for
making sure that safe drinking
water for a citizens is a
priority in our future and at
this time madam chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to ask that the following
experience a with this is that
be allowed into the panel on
that would be Rebekah ruse she's
the water protection division
director for the department of
environment Joe Martinez the
drinking water bureau chief and
that a day for day the the
executive director of the New
Mexico municipally thank you
thank you very much okay Rebecca
Roose let's hear from you
please.
Thank you madam chair good
morning good morning members of
the committee it's an honor to
be here with you I will be brief
I'm more interested in and any
questions that come up but I
generally speaking
Representative Gallegos and hard
did a great job giving an
overview what I just want to
emphasize as the consequences of
this bill not passing I'm which
is important to not understate
the program has been in place
for twenty seven years and over
that period of time the state
has become I'm very adept at
using this funds to support
public water systems across the
state nearly one of them are or
over a thousand of them.
And I particularly in our rural
communities that payments that
they make into this fund are
they get a really great return
on investment by virtue of not
having it and pay out of pocket
for the testing that they're
required to do to ensure the
drinking water they deliver to
customers is safe and if we
don't increase this fee based on
the fact that over twenty seven
years our costs have gone up
naturally I if we don't increase
the fee the department will be
cutting services that means
that.
Instead of the department
covering costs of all the
sampling across the state for
these water systems the water
systems are going to have to
start paying for much of that
sampling themselves I mean they
be paying the fee at three cents
the currency and then also paid
more for sampling costs that we
can't afford to cover because we
can't pay lab bills with money
we don't have in the fund I'm so
that really as the heart of the
matter we've made some other
improvements to the find are
sorry to the bill
based on our close coordination
with municipal league and other
partners in the last couple of
years as we try to tackle
insolvency are pending and
solvency of the fund and we look
forward to further engagement
with you this morning thank you
and with that just in the
interest of time at I think Joe
Martinez will stand for
questions and and help with that
when the time comes I'll turn it
back over to you madam chair
into ours our house Sanchez.
Thank you and then AJ for candy.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee aged forty with
the municipally it this piece of
legislation is.
It has months and months and
months of work in it I have to
thank the sponsors and really
the entire executive team on
building this piece of
legislation this is something
that the environment department
Jackson Representative
department it truly is a
partnership with local
governments yes the administer
this program.
Yes the it's an enterprise model
in the does need to be increased
is because as Rebecca.
Explain it the department runs
out of money it's on our
smallness analogies to pay for
this in a very inefficient
matter they have the ability to
run the our of peas and get a
much better pricing model and we
can get individual this really
is a partnership the department
is putting your work into this.
They took the resolution from
the municipal we built into
their this this piece of
legislation in and so the fact
that so much work has gone into
it to actually build it
correctly which really
reinforces the partnership and I
really do mean that because
everyone has come to the table
and done their part to make this
a success so I think the
committee I think the Sanchez.
Amber questions thank you madam
chair.
Thank you
could we see of however I didn't
receive issued on this are there
any opponents.
Yes we do have
we have let's hear from the prom
up all of permanent first
please.
No we had none we have I
proponents.
Out is there anybody on the zoom
who is an opponent of this bill
please raise your hand.
Okay let's hear from two maybe
three proponents.
Yes we have done John to shop.
Thank you I wanted to Jon J. the
public works director for the
city for tell us I'm also the
president of the New Mexico
environment quality association
and we do fully support this
bill the importance of this
cannot be over stressed the fact
that this will allow all the
communities of the New Mexico to
maintain compliance and a high
standard for the drinking water
for their services yes it is
paramount to us the fact that
the environment department has
chosen to partner with this is a
tremendous and with everything
that they're working which it it
is going to be a good thing for
all small communities.
Thank you very much next.
Next.
This person.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
bar sometime the deputy
executive director for New
Mexico counties for the reasons
that have been stated we stand
in strong support of this
legislation the environment
department that with us prior to
the session explain the details
addressed any concerns that we
had and we applaud the sponsors
for bringing this forward we
think the certainly helps those
communities most in need thank
you.
Thank you.
Next we'll do one more less the
Connor.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee my name is bill
Connor I'm executive director
New Mexico rural water
association we stand in support
of this bill as the.
As it's been stated earlier.
This this fund was was started I
believe and I.
Nineteen ninety four.
At three cents per thousand and
has not been increased since
them
it it was up as expected I
guess.
would have been the phone with
any within about a year at if
this increase did not go through
it's a
Very beneficial for is generally
very small systems and in the
state of New Mexico and the
therefore we stand in support of
this thank you very much.
Thank you now we're gonna go to
questions and comments and
discussion from committee
members Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator you are on the chair yes
thank you madam chair I was
wondering about in just twenty
seven years since the last time
we did this fund was wondering
if we could I noticed that the
bill has a report on November
first new year the department
shall make available to the
public and annual summary of
testing fund revenue
expenditures
I just wonder if we should
trigger an automatic review for
increased
based on that report or
something I don't know why I'm
just throwing that out I'm gonna
vote for the bill anyway you
don't have to do that that so I
I just throwing that out as a
way of not having to wait twenty
seven years and the funding on
the on the brink of insolvency
next time it's it's my only
thought about it I think it's an
excellent bill and of course I
supported.
Thank you very much Senator
Gaydos.
Madam chair and Representative I
wanted to welcome the vice
chairman of the guy goes caucus
in.
Representative Herrerra I do
have just a couple of questions.
What is the testing for what
what are we looking for as far
as in our water.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and thank you vice chair
Gallegos.
you know.
Overall we're looking for
contaminants it could be people
matter it could be that teria um
anything that not
You know anything that doesn't
make our water purity and and
able to drink.
Thank you madam chair and and
it's just because I and I know
that all communities do it but
not hurtful we're testing for do
they have us right in on how
safe our water is.
What and madam chair in the.
Senator I will defer to expert
witness Mr is to see if she can
answer that prime more clearly
than I could.
Thank you madam chair Senator
guy goes on the barman
Department in addition to
managing this testing program we
also to oversee regulatory
compliance of public water
systems across the state and we
track our regularly weekly daily
changes and compliance status of
water systems and what that
means in practical terms your
question as is a particular
water system seeing receipt and
says of any particular
contaminant so we track that we
work closely with water systems
to help them return to
compliance and address
whatever's causing the water
system to not be producing water
of that the quality that is
required for public health
protection.
Thank you for that I just know
that you know we're always gonna
have water problems chair and
representative
Representative rule years ago
asked me to give some money to
because the New Mexico which did
not know where it was but he was
willing to to fix our water
system because it very very few
people but they had a real poor
water cistern water is always
going to be important I question
is do we know where New Mexico
Water ranks nationally and or in
the world I I I pretty proud of
what I think our quality water
is chair New Mexico just
wondering how we rank in other
places chair representative.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you senator I don't I I
don't know but I'm going to
refer to Mr Martinez I think you
would I have that information.
Thank you madam chairman Senator
unfortunately I don't have a
specific ranking for how are
water ranks as compared to the
rest of the country I do know
that we are very lucky in New
Mexico to have fairly good water
quality across the state we do
have some areas that that you
have some some contaminants that
are of concern and and we work
with these water systems that
have those contaminants on a
daily basis to ensure that
they're providing the safest
water possible for their
communities.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Gallegos we
rarely get to vote on the same
bill same way so thank you again
this time I just couldn't
close it out back in the sixties
were redone are late can our
ranch which I just recently sold
in Colorado we have to speak it
coming up from underground
spring my younger brother.
made a statement we should
bottle it and sell it I remember
telling his job is person I knew
because who would buy a bottle
water so with that all year
thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
Seeing no other questions
Representative Gallegos you want
to close.
I'm sorry.
Which again starts oh yes I'm
asking the representative if
she'd like to close and then I
can come back you if you want to
make a motion.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee as
you can see this is it may not
be a glamorous bill but it's
something that's very important
especially to rural New Mexico
and I would ask for your vote
today.
Thank you very much
Representative for being here
both of you and all your experts
Senator guy a ghosts.
Almost two passed thank you and
I will second.
running could you please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Neville yes
Senator pope.
Yes Senator smitteez.
No.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
In chairman CENIC's yes.
Eight two one.
Thank you very much you have a
do pass thank you for coming to
our Senate conservation
committee this morning thank you
so much members of the committee
and madam chair thank you.
These.
Senator Sedillo Lopez would you
chair now because I'm going to
present the next bill with the
two house members.
Of course.
Will you be going first chair
yes so let me go start this is
house bill one of the three
utility operator certification
act changes the house Sanchez
our Representative Phelps
Anderson and Representative
William Madrid and they're both
on and they will speak after I
do
our expert witnesses are Rebecca
Roose and Joe Martinez
both from the
Environment Department.
And I'm pleased to sponsor house
bill one oh three on the Senate
floor I was very careful and not
taking on this bill until I knew
that the rural wastewater
operators would support this and
that they would not be any
conflict but this the adjustment
the first one in fifteen years
would give current and future
drinking water and wastewater
operators in rural and urban
communities both greater support
and flexibility for required
certification exams this is an
effort by state government to
improve conditions for workers
and families at the local level.
Water and wastewater utility
operators are essential public
health workers who must step
came professional certification
to ensure that local utilities
protect members of the public
and our natural resources.
This bill will enhance and
modernize the way that fifteen
hundred utility operators obtain
the required certification
testing by adjusting the fees
for the first time since two
thousand six.
Through this legislation the
environment department who
administers the operator
certification program will
continue its partnerships with
the department of workforce
solutions and the association of
boards of certification to
better support local operators
to access to computer based
testing.
Although this bill increases
fees many local utilities and
operators we'll see in net
savings by cutting travel costs
and time away from the plant in
order to take the required.
Yes for this reason and others
this bill has the support of
groups that represent the people
who will be directly impacted.
Mexico municipal league The New
Mexico rural water association
New Mexico water and wastewater
Association the association of
counties and the utility
operator advisory board.
At this time I'd like are co
sponsors from the house to speak
and then the expert witnesses so
Representative Anderson and
Representative Madrid I'm
turning it over to you.
Thank you madam chair room this
is a.
willing to dream and I'm glad to
be able to us also co sponsored
with so Representative Phelps
this is a good bill that helps
under legislation in the rural
parts or people have a better
chance to get this training to
the symbol of workforce for the
commission there is a in our
local areas all over the state
were traditionally was only
three parts of the state they
were able to get testing done
and that's rules cost were
approved for the return I think
you know by the consequences of
in that not act in this bill you
will have outcomes of for water
wastewater utilities that may be
affected due to an adequate
testing and training
opportunities for utility
operators provided for Central
Services Armenian and
retrospect you have the front
end as a Senator products and
and this is the middle and the
back and the poor really close
to home for us in the in the
local and rural areas I think
this is even are advantageous in
the in the urban areas of our
state they get the same benefits
so this and more comedians this
allows the trickster new
trainings to go on that I think
is necessary to keep our water
safe with that being said the
madam chair I do now you'll to
Michael's but to the correct
sponsor Phelps Anderson
Representative thank you.
Thank you Representative Madrid
and madam chairman I'm gonna be
short to the point of I think
you should we get into our
discussion about the legislation
is very simple we're asking for
a be increased for the
certification exams that are
conducted annually in New Mexico
historically those exams are
given in Los crucis Albuquerque
and Santa Fe
earlier this year the
environmental improvement
Department
got together with workforce
solutions and came up with a
testing plan certification
testing plan that's available at
all workforce solutions sites in
New Mexico madam chair that is
simple for means that if you're
the wastewater operator in a
lighted New Mexico you no longer
have to leave your home your
work your family travel across
the state.
Often spending at least one
night away from home in a hotel
in incurring costs in order to
take the certification exam so
now we have a.
A methodology which is
appointment of an operator
leaves a lot of drives to ROZ
screen it gets shared ten
o'clock take see Sam and gets
back by mid afternoon I think
this is a very rural friendly
piece of legislation that is
sort of born out of a pandemic
but none the less carry forward
offers a remarkable opportunity
for rural New Mexico to
participate not only in
certification exams but also
expanded to training
less expensive forms of training
for these critical employees
delivering safe waste water in
the well drinking water to New
Mexicans with that Madam
chairman we stand for questions.
Thank you Representative
Anderson director Bruce do you
want to speak on this.
Thank you madam chair it we also
just a few quick things to it to
reinforce really at the heart
what's in this bill I'm we have
adjusted our existing fees are
essentially doubling several of
those types of fees but again we
expect many of the operators
water and drinking water and
wastewater operators across the
state to see and that savings
because they'll be spending less
money are traveling to to take
their exams and that's that's
essentially I think why there's
broad support from the people
who are paying the fees that
we're trying to increase support
this bill and and if you
increases there and because it
really is it's a workforce
development bill and workforce
support felt it affects
communities in every corner of
the state thank you.
Thank you does that conclude
your presentation Madam I didn't
know if Mr Martinez wanted to
say anything Mr Martinez.
Although I'll keep my comments
brief I think our
representatives are senator and
director Bruce did really good
job explaining it again no this
bill will allow us to provide
computer based testing in the
communities where our operators
live and work and and we think
it's it's a really beneficial
bill for our our unities with
that will.
Thank you do we Trevor I don't
have any kind of list or
anything do we have any
opponents to the bill no one
signed up against this bill we
have one proponent okay let's
hear from that proponent.
Is that Miss is present.
Bills Connor okay okay.
bill Connor.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is bill
Conerly executive director of
New Mexico rural water
association we stand in support
of this bill in the past for
many years there have.
Been line test given on the
state New Mexico each year.
Of those tests were primarily up
and down the I. twenty five
corridor.
I was the only opportunity
through the year for operators
to test.
This bill will enable operators
to test pretty much on demand.
At any of twenty two locations
around the state.
That saves them both time and
expense traveling to these tests
but it also makes it of.
Are here and good changes for
operators because they can yes.
For various certifications when
they're prepared to test not
have to wait to travel to go
somewhere so.
I merrily for that reason and
and and that just overall better
I think for operators as all
across the state we support this
thank you thank thank you Mr
Connor I see Joyce Parsons
pandemic are doing speak in
support of this bill or vote in
support okay Mrs present.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee yes sometimes
during difficult situations
ingenuity and creativity abound
and this we think this bill
capitalize is this it really
advances resources like
technology it reduces costs for
local governments you have to
pay per diem as was mentioned
we're a large state and being
able to offer these types of
important services in rural
communities not taking people
away from their families not
taking time with rather jobs we
think is invaluable so thank you
for bringing this forward we
stand in full support for New
Mexico counties thank you Mrs
Mrs partisan I see is a ms I
wonder are you speaking in
support of this bill yes I am
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Camilla I
woman representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters in support of H. B.
one oh three anything that makes
a keeping our water resources
clean and healthy for our
communities easier and more
efficient is something we're in
favor of we think the department
founding forward thank.
Thank you Mr chairman are there
any other supporters or
opponents anybody else on on the
call that wants to speak about
this bill.
Well thank you madam chair would
you like to make some comments
before we go to committee.
I think thank you madam chair
the department has to work with
many stakeholders to make this
reasonable when.
Mr said something about doubling
the fee she's talking about
doubling them from thirty
dollars to sixty dollars cetera
so we are not talking about
anything over a hundred dollars
so that we can try to
accommodate
individuals so that they don't
have to travel long miles they
don't have to stay overnight in
a hotel they don't have to take
a day or two off of work but
they will miss some hours of
work to travel to the work place
of.
Department site and to take the
test and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Senator Gallegos I see your.
Year ended up.
Madam chair and representative
mentioned in Madrid.
I like your bill and I just had
a few questions and
Madam chair may just center that
in the twenty two locations
statewide.
Our calls better Hobbs in those
areas and if so what facilities
are they using.
For the testing.
So madam chair let's have miss
Russi into that or Mr Martinez.
Mr Mr roots or Martinez whoever
things the.
This position to answer that.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator
the locations of the testing
that we're using our our
workforce solutions our
connection centers there's a
twenty of them across the across
the state.
can you all hear me by the way
yes yes yes okay
So the the two communities that
you mentioned are locations
where these testing facilities
are located as well as several
others across the state.
Thank you for that and and I was
hoping that was the answer we've
got a brand new or remodeled
workforce connection center
there in Honduras.
I like the idea I know the.
Price is going up that
and one of the testimony as it
said that its on demand I think
that'll really help whenever
people not have to go all in
Albuquerque
Senator Papen and testing so
with that I yield I just want to
clarify at those locations that
opportunities thank you madam
chair and.
Thank you committee members any
other comments.
What's your pleasure.
I move a do pass madam chair
also.
That was was that Senate Bill
renewable energy renewable thank
you I'm sorry I can't see your.
And then second by Senator
Gallegos
Mr chair would you call the roll
please.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos this.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville well yes.
Senator pope.
Just.
Senate committees.
You're on mute mute yes can you
talk mute now at this hearing
test my vote is yes thank you
Senator south.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Interment annex yes.
Okay and I'm sorry Senator
wanted.
The senators so long as you're
on mute.
Two one okay what.
The voting no I excused Senator
Cervantes K. so eight all right
so I think it's unanimous you
have a you have a do pass thank
you representatives and Senator
excellent Bill thank you very
much
Back to the committee committee
members we have completed our
work for today we are going to
the floor at eleven eight AM on
thirsty we have three house
bills so we might be as fast on
Thursday Saturday we have to
Senate bills that are coming to
us as emergency bills
And I'm totally blanking one is
Senator Steinborn.
And one is.
Senator Hermio who is now I
don't think he's ever been in
front of our committee yet so
on Saturday morning right now we
have those two bills if we have
anything else will let you know
but I think it should be a short
morning on Saturday but who
knows.
Thank you very much for coming
this morning and we will see you
on the floor thank you to
everyone who attended the Senate
conservation committee meeting.
We're now recessed.
