Senator Gallegos.
Well I just I just love it every
switch back and forth list of
school.
Well not on mute Senator Senator
Campos we can hear you.
Out of it.
This.
So we don't get thank you.
You put everyone on mute.
Thank you now running please
proceed.
okay Senator so what does.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you.
Senator Neville.
Senator pope.
Senator Smitty.
Here.
Senator so you're.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Stefanics present.
Six present thank you very much
we have a quorum so we're going
to proceed so members who said
happening today
We are hearing house bill fifty
seven as amended first because I
had Representative McQueen on
the agenda for quite a few days
so will take care of him then go
on to senator Wirth and
Representative Chandler percent
bill sixteen then we will
consider a vote on a
reconsideration for Senate bill
three twelve.
And then Senate bill three
thirty four we are rolling over
we will not be hearing Senate
bill three thirty for today
thank you very much so
Representative McQueen and.
Which is one of the Armstrong
switch Armstrong.
Madam chair Gail Armstrong okay
and is there a Senator on this
as well.
Madam chair representative
because once our center wouldn't
in center work okay thank you
and I see Senator Woods the
senator Wirth also on.
Okay so Representative McQueen
please proceed.
And I am on Senator Wirth thank
you very much good morning
everyone.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for a scheduling us this
morning is pleasure to be here
see a loss miglior faces I've
been over in Senate yet this
year so it's going to be here
house bill fifty seven.
Is the prescribed burning Act
and I'm doing today with my
experts of the lower McCarthy is
our state Forster and Cheryl
beta who is deputy general
counsel EMNRD and they've been
intricately involved in the
drafting and of this bill in all
the work that went into it.
Which which all touch on.
So we have we here in New Mexico
in the southwest have the over a
hundred year policy of fire
suppression.
The Southwes is a fire adapted
ecosystem and we came in and we
took fire out of the picture and
as a result we have densely
overgrown forests in the risk of
devastating
forest fires so not just fires
healthy fires.
That you know sort of sweet
through gently and clear out the
underbrush really devastating.
The fires the cause all sorts of
native problems so we have a big
task ahead of us and just to
restore that healthy function of
our force and it starts with
thinning it starts with treating
the forced to come back to a
help the place where they can
have a safe and effective fire
fire is is the the follow up so
we don't treat the forests with
fire I mean we don't then the
forces fire once the force are
unhealthy condition we have the
and we have the right.
The weather conditions that we
can get back with stripper.
We have unfortunately on the
books in eighteen eighty two
statutes.
Eighteen thirty years before
statehood almost hundred forty
years old.
In that statute the current
statutes says that if you start
a fire.
You're essentially strictly
liable for any damages there
because.
And your level for double
damages.
So the strict liability double
damages statutes know what this
bill does is it takes a step
back from that.
If you are doing prescribed
burns and that's the defined
term in the statute so not
burning trash or just you know
starting ran fires but a
prescriber that meets the
statutory definition.
You will be the the beneficiary
I suppose you could say of a
negligence standard which.
What is the more typical
standard strict liability it is
rarely used in the tents is
favored negligence is basically
if you do something wrong if
you're not careful then you're
responsible and that's as it
should be in the bill has it in
additional incentive that yes
you go through the training the
state forestry will set up any
proof become a certified burn
manager.
Then your liability will also be
reduced bill still being a
negligence standard.
Will be reduced to actual
damages instead of double digit
so we sort of have we sure have
three levels the existing level
is strict liability double
damages.
If you're doing a prescribed
burn it's we go to negligence
standard but still that double
damages unless.
You take the additional step of
going through the the training
in doing a prescribed burn and
then you're still but then
you're still at a negligence
standard in actual damages so
one concern that they came out
when we first are working on
this bill was well it's it's L.
community bill.
And far from it it's a liability
I mean this defines the
liability the.
For prescribed burns whether or
not you're careful but it does
not that negligence in.
This bill is an outgrowth of
house memorial forty two which
is passed in twenty nineteen
and.
Through a house memorial forty
two a working group was set up
next two years ago and they and
under the guidance of state
forester McCarthy you know thank
all the stakeholders together
and they talked about you know
what we need to do to make a to
bring fire back to eight yeah by
bringing this the budget by
making an appropriate level the
standard negligence standard
encouraging training.
We think that there will be more
of this.
And we think it will be easier
to ensure this activity.
They'll be easier to interact so
that's a good thing.
For turned over to you Senator
Woods or C. first president
affected make one comment about
and our culture.
So we we first introduced the
bill we were approached by the
ag community and they want to be
explicitly excluded from this
bill in we thought the
definition of prescribed burn
probably excluded them because
we were tired Act burning what
type of earnings yield regarding
ditches or or boring at with
piles in the orchard it's not
really what we're talking about
we're talking about prescribed
burning when you're talking up
running ranges Enforcement so we
thought they were really
included.
They want to be excluded we
thought that was fine so we
added language to explicitly
exclude.
I think I think there is sort of
the realization that they are in
fact subject to this eighteen
eighty two statute.
Which is not the best thing.
And in the house so that we have
another conversation about well
they're still subject to this
eighteen eighties to to statute
strict liability double damages
can we fit them in the bill can
we squeeze them in.
And given all the work that was
done to develop the bill with
the right stakeholders and come
up with something that I think
people are really happy with.
Was there was a bad idea to just
kind of squeeze us in at the
last second.
So so that add burning those
ditches the seals or treat still
are not covered by this bill but
this bill doesn't make them any
worse off it just eight seven
status quo.
In there was certainly a
willingness expressed to revisit
this topic with the right
stakeholders at the table and
figure out what the rights the
solution is for agriculture you
know it maybe it's not regulated
by energy minerals and natural
resources but by the New Mexico
department agriculture maybe it.
For a training program it's a
different program you know with
a different focus and and a
different permitting process so
instead of just lumping
everything together on one bill
we decided to hold off on that
and just go forward with
prescribed burning bill as is.
And then come back and revisit
agriculture.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee with
that look to turn it over to
Interstate Forster McCarthy or
Senator Woods if you would like
to share.
Thank you Representative McQueen
I think if any of your co
sponsors want to say anything
and then we'll go to your expert
witness.
Madam chair I would but I'll
just Senator Woods go first and
then Senator Wirth just couple
words okay thank you Senator
Woods thank you madam chair.
I signed on to this bill when
I go to is still included in the
deal because of the double
jeopardy part of this situation
was very near and dear to my
heart as you can imagine.
I there's many times that that
at nag coach we do use
prescribed burns we do use that
in and as a member of a
voluntary fire department for
many years.
I had great concern.
During these days of high winds
and.
And things what we call
highway Farge and I don't know
if you all understand that
permanent.
But many times they'll be a a
trailer going down the highway
of varying we'll get hot shot mo
drop up the trailer and and
create the
of roadway for our.
And then a high wind situation
the way it goes.
And we call that is many fire
departments as we can muster.
there was a fire.
Up by miss kero.
That the I don't remember off
hand but I think they were ten
or twelve fire departments up
there trying to fight that large
and very rough country.
And we think the state forestry
for for helping us with some
replenish funds that were spent
during that time.
But the bigger.
The bill today talks about for
split.
And I am in total agreement that
we have under brush under a lot
of this force country that that
needs to be controlled we need
to figure out what to do with
that what do we do with things
that are too small to to
patiently cut up to take to the
wood stoves.
What do we do it that material
on on private land we've got a
lot of private force Landen R.
state.
That we need to allow these
people to to gather those should
and I'll make those piles and
and burn those files under the
right circumstances and with
training.
At and I really agree with
Representative McQueen that we
need to have that training in
place to how to do that safely.
And the.
There there's many good things
about this bill that are light
and I think that we need to the
considered bill in the future.
That covers agricultural so.
That's my two cents madam
chairman thank you very much.
There was senator Wirth.
Thank you madam chair and all
the be brief anytime you've got
what's it worth on the same bill
on the same side it's got to be
a good thing cough but I just
really appreciate what
Representative McQueen.
And representative Armstrong
again bipartisan support for
this concept and I just wanted
to remind the committee of
another bill that we finally got
signed in twenty nineteen the
fourth and watershed restoration
act that Representative bandy
and I carried as well.
That I think was really designed
and targeted towards the same
thing and understanding that we
can be proactive when it comes
to our for us or we're gonna be
reacting in horrifying
situations and I just think as
we deal with is our changing
climates and extreme weather it
is more important than ever that
we give.
Both public and private owners
of forest land the tools they
need to manage the force that's
what this bill does it changes a
liability standard that's very
outdated and so I fully support
its and look forward to
continuing many many many bills
with Senator Woods
and finding that sweet spot and
I just and with a shout out to
our state forester Laura
McCarthy in the work she has
done for many years wearing
different hats in moving things
forward in a collaborative way
because that's the other thing
this this used to be a fight and
it's no longer a fight because I
think there's a recognition that
we need to do this together self
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so now Representative
McQueen your expert witnesses.
The.
It's the first regarding an
opportunity to to say a few
words and we have that the
general counsel data to help us
answer any questions.
Thank you Mr McCarthy.
Our Senators I'll be really
brief just to say that there are
twenty one other states that
already have this type of
legislation and in some of them
they have over a twenty year
time period been able to get the
annual acres burned on private
lands up to two million acres
per year which is absolutely an
aspirational goal for us and job
the second thing and final thing
I'd like to say is around the
training and the collaboration
between the energy minerals and
natural resources department of
which we are a forestry division
and the New Mexico State
University cooperative extension
service that will be
implementing the training so we
will be a collaborative process
with stakeholders involved the
designed to training and then be
cooperative extension service
and and are are both in a
position without additional
funding to implement this
program if the bill passes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
okay we are going to the
proponents and the opponents we
start with the opponents first
we actually have quite a few
people on each side signed up
we're gonna hear from
I think we will hear from ten
people on each side if you can
keep it to one minute.
And Trevor please take the
opposition first.
No.
Is Valerie Grohl Grinnell and on
rural million.
One.
Okay we can't hear you cover
very well.
that was tied Hochman.
Coachman.
Okay let's go on.
Zachary stabber.
They are suitable.
Madam chair I'm not sure any of
these people are hearing their
names called I can just barely
hear Trevor on.
I'm gonna repeat who he's read
so far the red Valerie grow
million Todd Hochman Zachary
stopper Kenny Ausubel.
And it might be that let's see
any hands of anyone who wants to
speak in opposition to this
bill.
We have a list of ten or twelve.
Is anybody on this phone who
wants to speak.
In opposition to this bill
however can you see any hands.
No there's no hand raised.
Okay.
I guess there isn't that much
opposition to this bill so let's
go on to the supporters and
let's keep it to one minute
each.
New Mexico.
Ronco.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Nina Conco
and I'm the director of external
affairs for the nature
Conservancy in New Mexico I'm
here today to speak in support
of hospital fifty seven and
tastic Committee support this
bill as well.
The nature Conservancy supports
prescribed burning and New
Mexico through multiple programs
and that works which focus on
protecting restoring our force
of water shots the sponsor of
the bill Representative McQueen
did a great job outlining for
here the importance of the spell
I'll just emphasize two things
one this is an extremely
collaborative process there are
multiple local state federal and
tribal governments involved as
well as agricultural and
conservation NGOs also
emphasizes the science shows us
we need to increase prescribed
burning on private lands now
thank you for your time today I
hope you'll support the spell.
Thank you next to work.
Camilla Mel.
Good morning madam chair
committee members Camilleri was
in New Mexico State Land Office
the state land office strongly
support HB that the seven which
will help reduce barriers to
expand use of prescribed fire on
private lands clarify liability
and established in the
certification and training
program well managed private
lands with insure landscapes and
watersheds benefit not just
private lands but also state
trust lands because of the plant
buyers also threatens rounding
ownerships house bill fifty
seven would expand opportunities
to collaborative Lee plan and
implement prescribed fire
crossed boundaries with the
responsible.
Expanded use prescribed fires in
the right place at the right
time land managers can use
reduce hazardous fuels the store
to ecosystems increase
resiliency of our vital forests
grasslands watersheds thank you.
For the more these beneficial
outcomes reserves our ability to
generate revenue estimate state
plans for future generations
thank you.
Next.
Larson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
parts member deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
was mentioned previously this
was an incredibly collaborative
efforts New Mexico counties
manages a wildfire grant program
we've got over three hundred
projects in the last fifteen
years so we're very familiar
with this issue and we feel
strongly that fire has an
appropriate place on New Mexico
lands to prevent catastrophic
fires in the future with that
this is permissible language for
local governments so we consider
this one more tool in the
toolbox that are happy to have
this brought forward by the
sponsor thank you.
Thank you next.
The city well.
Members of the committee Jesse
develop executive director of
the New Mexico wildlife region
and we strongly support the
fifty seven
there are very few tools
available to our left and
managers for both as of as
efficient and as in as fire in
the lifelong hundred angler I
spend a lot of time recreating
in the outdoors and see first
hand the benefits of prescribed
fire on our landscapes I also
think it's worth mentioning that
prescribed fire is an excellent
tool to protecting our
communities out as a resident of
the east mountains prescribed
fire a fantastic tool that can
be used to protect the areas
around our rural community so
thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you extra work it's in
Crestwood Lasky.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is a time crystal of ski and
they represent the far Stewart's
kids we are twenty five year old
New Mexico based conservation
organization.
And I asked the support house
bill fifty seven I'm also a
prescribed fire practitioner for
over for nearly twenty years and
I was also part of the
collaborative working group
previously described has been
said before prescribed fires one
of our best tools for protecting
communities forests range and
watersheds from drought wildfire
and climate change but it is
being under utilized on private
lands passing house bill fifty
seven will help change that
thank you.
Thank you extrovert the risk
Guerrero.
Yeah good morning madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time this morning
and I want to thank the sponsors
of this bill my name is this
going to legislative and
political organizer with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
presenting thirty five thousand
members throughout the state of
New Mexico I'm not going to take
much of the time to repeating
points made we strongly support
this bill and believe that this
is a this is a good thing to
have for New Mexicans as well as
our natural lands and.
Private lands as well thank you
very much for your day and I
urge you to vote yes on this
bill.
Thank you for listening growing
old.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Kevin
Braunwald on the CEO of the New
Mexico role actor Kwak
Association and on behalf of our
members we support this bill
this fits well within our
vegetation management programs
we have several thousand miles
of distribution lines going
through the forest of New Mexico
there's been laws passed at the
federal level that have
strengthened our ability to
vegetation management as well we
have worked with state forester
McCarthy for pilot projects here
in New Mexico and we believe
that this is another local
option that will further our
ability to
your hands are vegetation
management
And protect our land we have
power lines going to force thank
you very much.
Thank you next.
Edward Rosemont.
We're not here.
Okay let's go on.
Greg Peters.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
today my name is Greg appears on
the public lands and wildlife
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico your to speak in
support SB fifty seven.
The comments made by the
sponsors expert witnesses in
previous speakers I don't know
property owners well prescribed
burning is frequently used on
federal and state lands extent
of use private let's.
Fires are the most effective
tools we have preventing
wildfires and managing the
infants and spread of them on
our lands and surrounding
communities.
Back to the landscapes safely to
protect forests Water Kanemi
Public Health.
Allows us to be proactive when
it comes to managing our forces
openly and by making burning in
the private sector is more
responsible the public speaker
for accidental damage from fire
smoke still gives private
landowners and land managers
critical tools they need to
safely manage their lands for
mitigating the increasingly
severe effects of climate change
record passcode of HB fifty
seven thank you for your time.
Thank you next.
Jason Espinoza.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico coalition of conservation
district we stand in support of
the legislation the net the
shifting of the negligence
standard the provision of
training and establishment of
the certification program will
improve the safety of prescribed
burning to make private
insurance more accessible and
affordable thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next.
Britney Fallon.
Madam chair members of the
committee Dr pretty talented New
Mexico wild I had the pleasure
of helping chairman the clean
and more in the cart the with
the original memorial and I'm
thrilled to see that it worked
exactly as it was supposed to
with that robust stakeholder
process resulted in bipartisan
legislation that we're very
happy to strongly support.
Thank you.
I will circle back opposition in
a minute but is there anybody
else Trevor.
We do have Doug Graham.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Doug Graham the extension for
some buyers specialist New
Mexico State University the
cooperative extension service is
pleased to support this bill
from an educational and
ecological standpoint that is to
say we are capable and prepared
to teach the do's and don'ts of
prescribed fire certification in
addition census is the
conservation committee I
envision ecological component to
this training as well appreciate
your support this bill and we
think the Sanchez for bringing
the legislature madam chair
members thank you.
Thank you.
Is there any one else.
It has not spoken that wishes to
speak.
For this bill lastly on the list
I do have done the Gonzales.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Donna Gonzales and play the
New Mexico Astec Association I
am a farmer and caretaker of the
land in Tommy thought I believe
this will help to improve and
restore efficient water flow and
deliver water to communities
downstream at eight for a
healthier ecosystem thank you
have a good day.
Thank you very much I want to
thank all the proponents and I
want to go back one more time to
opponents is there anybody on
this soon.
That wants to say something
opposing the bill.
Okay we are on to the committee
members Senator committees.
Thank you madam chair thank
representatives and everyone
just wanted to just a real quick
reason for why I am so support
of this bill is this this issue
really is near and dear to my
heart because I grew up spending
summers in kings canyon national
park.
And the highlight for house of
that park and its adjoining
national park sequoia national
park are the sequoia trees and
they are dependent on fire to
survive in these trees lived
three thousand years sometimes
they I won't belabor the point I
know we don't have sick ways in
New Mexico but I I'm very very
familiar with the fact of of the
health that fire can in in Q. to
our forests and so I'm very very
excited and happy to support the
bill today thank you madam
chair.
Thank you
I have first of I want to
clarify Senator bond issue got
on correct.
I'm here with you yes ma'am sure
thank you okay thank you
I received an indication that
there might be a trouble with
the link hi Trevor maybe that's
why we didn't get every all the
speakers I'm next going to
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator gave us.
A good morning thank you madam
chair it is just a very quick
question when I was a child I
recall because of course we use
what of wood burning for part of
our the farm I recall we would
go out in the forest and and
different pieces of wood would
be marked they were either
fallen or dead or whatever and
then we would go and pick up
that would just curious to see
if that's still a tool that is
used for families who are in
need of of that.
That sounds like a question for
state forester.
Thank you.
Madam chair Senators Lopez on
the public lands especially
whether it's State Land Office
or for service to be able and
they do continue to issue
firewood permits of various
types or firewood gathering in
our local communities.
Okay thank you I know it was
relevant to the bill but I just
wondered if that was still
happening in and how that fit in
with this I guess thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
I apologize I keep losing you
I'm hoping thanks to have a
couple of brief questions
then turned and Representative
McQueen are Mr Chairman queen
used to be on energy with them
but I'm wearing it goes back
down the same road with the
Senator Sedillo Lopez on the
fire would would they do permits
ahead of a burn I'm just
wondering if the people knew
that that was going to be
consumed by fire if they would
make an effort to go pick it up
like Senator Sedillo Lopez we
used to go up every year and get
enough of wood for the winter
for my grandfather in our house
so as just wondering if that
would be an option to be able to
give pre noticed of an area
those can be considered be it
you look at two million acres in
the year that's that's huge and
I just want to make sure that we
did have an opportunity to go
take some of the drives of the
downfall.
Then Senator guidance
Can't see you but nice to see
you I think that also has a
question for state forced.
Madam chair and Senator Gallegos
R. as you well know most people
don't want to be taking fire
wood too far from the road so to
answer your question yes
firewood gathering almost always
happens before a prescribed burn
and the prescribed burning is
used in the locations that are
states that are inaccessible and
therefore nobody wants to take
the fire would from those
locations are science is very
clear that he even firewood
gathering is not as effective or
firewood gathering when it is
followed by prescribed burning
and other
other practices is absolutely
the most effective way to
control fire behavior the wanted
fire behavior that would follow.
Thank you for that
and
madam chair and.
Representative McQueen I guess
my next question in that I know
you talked about when the
original of statue is made and I
heard for a little while I lost
during this conversation so I'm
gonna Paul does a I already
gotten some is already gone over
this but currently what areas of
burn is still okay for at to do
I know that you know you talk
about I include anymore and then
it was going to make it really
hard so you did not Adam to this
bill.
For for regular ranch management
what what areas are okay for
them to burn.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos
when I use the term previously
at I I I was being perhaps
number size is certainly into
community is part of our Ag
community and and this is a tool
that would definitely be
available to our ranching
community there is a definition
prescribed burn in the in the
bill we don't think of burning
fuels or teaches or in piles of
the down at the that would in an
orchard as as falling within the
definition of a prescribed burn.
But this bill is aimed at
private landowners to their
benefit and that certainly
includes our ranchers.
Centered the dresser question.
Madam chair and representative
of yes and and then it goes back
to the so I recently sold my
property in Colorado well we had
a second and the secretary would
get together and they would go
we have a lot of read yeah right
up against the the DH and we
would all get together every
couple years and do a control
burn but if I understand that
would not fall under this
category would not protect them
is that correct.
Madam chair Senator Sen Mary Kay
and the excuse me is it a let's
correct
and I I I would underscore what
we're doing with that community
at this stage is is leaving them
in the status quo so the so this
bill doesn't work to their
detriment anyway.
but we do want to come back and
revisit that issue for earning
it teaches and feel.
Ghosted we.
I'm.
Senator Gallegos is being kicked
off two or three times this
morning.
And
Sure there is instability out
there.
And then other lands but perhaps
you could check on our side so
we need your hand is that is it
for a second time.
Madam chair on back on.
Right.
You still have the floor.
Okay so.
And clarify that the inspectors
would not have income to protect
this legislation and so what I
understand.
Representative the center of the
year my answer and it this is
the answer is yes yes thank you
would be left in the current
status quo so there's nothing in
the bill to their detriment but
we would need to come back and
revisit how to address the stake
as and and fuel burning and
other ag uses of fire more
limited scale.
Thank you for that and and I'll
be brief on this next one then
I'm wondering how
in the bill
what would it take what kind of
process with an applicant have
to go through to be able to get
a prescribed burn just for the
permit.
Madam chair center K. is so
there there's an opt in
opportunity for local government
if they want to require a permit
us a permit process isn't
strictly necessary but part of
the the process of the bill.
The state forestry developing a
sample permit that will be
available to counties
municipalities that they want to
adopt it in other they're free
to adopt other you know
ordinances about
time in you know we ended
anything else in there is
actually we we found that we
were thought was pretty good
start from up in return they are
pretty good ordinance so you
know there there's a process to
involved the the local community
but if I recall correctly in
state for some currency will
correct me if I'm wrong you
don't need a permit and less the
the the local governmental unit
has opted into that process.
Thank you for that.
Madam chair and and
Representative my last question
then is to be able get the
training of to be certified.
Is that something you'd go
through the.
The state for service or is that
something you would do local how
would that work.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos I'm
gonna let us do forced to record
the answer the question.
Madam chair and senator Kay
goes.
But training itself will be
offered by New Mexico State
University cooperative extension
service and after an individual
has completed the training they
will submit that documentation
to.
EMNRD forestry division and we
will register them as a
certified prescribed burn our
and that will be the process it
will be very simple if I may
madam.
Chair and senator I just want to
add one thing on permitting and
that is that the Mexico
Environment Department currently
does require a smoke management
permit it's a permit by rule so
essentially a registration all
that is required for prescribed
burning and that would be
unchanged I this legislation.
When I appreciate that and madam
chair and senator Representative
McQueen
in Colorado we just had in there
again my fence line was New
Mexico Colorado boundary but we
just had the alert the fire
authorities that way that when
they saw smoke they knew who was
there and what we're we're doing
but finally I just want to make
final comment I I like the bill
of Congress you peers for years
try to get this on the federal
side because if you look at the
chair of force management from
the native Americans they do a
really good job in its like
wildfires hit their boundary and
go around not because it's you
know protected lands because
they don't have the downfall so
I really like this I appreciate
this and I think it's going to
help us long term in our state
I'm just a have those questions
and I will support the bill
thank you I yield thank you are
there any further questions from
committee members.
Representative McQueen to close.
Madam chair I I appreciate the
opportunity to present this bill
it it's really been a pleasure
working with the Jefferson
McCarthy and surveys that and
it's it's just really been a
great process.
I thank you for scheduling us
this morning.
Thank you what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Madam chair.
Okay well for you passed is
there a second second madam
chair and senator renewable
seconded it running would you
please call the vote.
Yes Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am Senator Hamblen.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
pope.
Yes Senator smitteez.
A very enthusiastic yes.
Senator solve yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks.
Yes so Representative McQueen
and all your Sanchez you have
the unanimous do pass
congratulations thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee.
Members we are now going on to
Senate bill sixteen.
Of you who joined us late.
We are not hearing today Senate
bill three thirty four it is
being rolled over so we're not
hearing Senate bill three thirty
four.
After Senate bill sixteen we
will consider a motion on a
reconsideration of Senate bill
three twelve.
Right now we are on Senate bill
sixteen Representative Peter
Wirth I'm sorry.
Our floor leader senator Peter
Wirth Representative Christine
Chandler.
Representative Chandler get on
yes I see here great.
Madam chair I have worn both
passed so there is no no slides
by the other hands at annals.
So I I appreciate the the chance
to.
Bring this bill back to the
Senate side of this is in a bill
that involves a process for.
Water leasing and it's it's a
legal bill and it's one that
did.
Move through this committee in
two thousand fifteen I was
thinking about it I think only
Senator Cervantes and senator
souls are left from the two
thousand fifteen Senate
conservation committee but
they'll remember a very
impassioned debate then on this
subject and we'll have that
again this morning in two
thousand fifteen it did pass the
state Senate twenty nine to
nine.
And.
I want to say up front that
there are.
Lots of good folks on both sides
of this bill and this is a real
predicament that needs to get
addressed because the basis for
the bill and the reason that
Representative Chandler has also
continued this work on the house
side is I feel strongly that we
have a state statute that has
been interpreted incorrectly by
the state engineer when it comes
to water leasing.
And what happens
this interpretation went into
effect a couple of
administrations ago and it
created a process whereby these
leases of water can happen
before the due process the
notice in the hearing all plays
out and so they can happen
simultaneously R. what the
result of that is that we have
water being moved around at high
speed
prior to notice and opportunity
to be heard.
And I will share screen with you
and go through the process issue
that's in place but I but I want
to let you all know that what's
happened since two thousand
fifteen.
What is that.
There is a case involving the
Carlsbad irrigation district and
the state engineer and involves
leases that were issued over the
potash mines
and a District Court from the
Roswell area a judge appointed
by governor Martinez has ruled
that the statutory language
currently in place
unambiguously does not allow the
state engineer to be out
allowing water leases before
that process as happened what
we've been trying to do in this
bill now for six years is the
port a basically a.
A clause into the current wall
and you'll see on the bill page
two line I that simply says
after the application is made
notice and opportunity for
hearing our legislative and the
application is approved in
accordance with sections seventy
two six dash four three seventy
two six dash six.
And then it transfers the
existing language the least may
become effective for immediate
use.
So now I also am I want to let
the committee know and and I
just want to before I yield to
well I'll walk to the statute
quickly and I'll share my screen
in just a minute if I can madam
chair and see if I get that to
work but there are discussions I
want to be real clear about this
there is a need to have the
ability.
To have water move quickly there
is a need to do that and we need
to get the statute fix to
address that and so
Representative Chandler and I
have been in communication with
the state engineer and other
partners trying to come up with
language the big difference
between this year's effort to
find language and the effort in
twenty fifteen were where we met
with runs full of stakeholders
and never could get to
agreements is it there's a court
case that's about to decide this
if that court case gets issued
and judge Romero's decision is
affirmed this practice stops
cold Turkey and I want to make
sure all the folks out there
that have been using this and
you'll hear from all understand
the consequences and why we
really are at a point here where
we've got to get this fixed and
we're trying to get it fixed you
know the bill this morning is
the straight up cold Turkey stop
statutorily that we think judge
Romero's ruling one as of firms
will apply but I just want the
committee to know that we are
working hard on trying to find a
solution to this problem so if I
can share my screen.
Yes I will help there we go so
what I'd like to do is just walk
you through what I think is the
very relevant section of the
statute and just read through
this and this is the statute
that the state engineer
interprets one way judge Romero
interprets another and that
we're trying to to make very
clear and this is what the
process so it's seventy two six
dash six we're not changing this
but it basically says once an
application is filed under
section a the state engineer
shall proceed with the
provisions of section one
regarding notice of the
application so clearly notice
has to happen.
Be any owner who believes the
owner's Water Rights will be
adversely affected by the
granting of the application may
file a protest.
And then it states the process
for that see if a protest is
timely filed the state engineer
shall hold a hearing on the
granting of the application and
the applicant in the protest and
shall be notified by the state
engineer as to the date and
place of the hearing and then
this is the very relevant
section it judge Romero
highlighted section do.
Yes thank I'm sorry if you look
at a yes did we not change
statute to indicate that the
notice of the application should
be done online as well as in the
statewide newspaper madam chair
I believe that's the twenty
nineteen reference there and I
can look that yes I mean I think
that was we did have that bill
you're correct okay.
So I'm sorry to interrupt please
sign and so the notice issue
however we've done it that's
what's required the key
provision here is section do and
this is what it states if no
objections are filed.
The state engineer may grant the
application without hearing.
If no objections are filed in
the state engineer denies the
application the state engineer
shoveled hearing of requests to
do so by the applicant the
request should be filed with the
state engineer within ten days
after the denial of the
application so you know the
question becomes what is this
language meaning and judge
Romero has ruled that basically
if objections are filed the
state engineer cannot proceed
forward in granting the
application and so that's
created the legal challenge
that's at issue I just wanted to
highlight this for you because I
wanted you to see exactly what's
being discussed.
So with that said madam chair
I'll turn it over to
Representative Chandler also
David Bennett the this is here
as a lawyer experts who does
work with the acequia
association and then this is
kind of an Senator Cervantes
will appreciate this this this
bill is like a law school
reunion for for us because Liz
Taylor one of our classmates
represents one of the companies
that has been using this also I
understand the truck do more as
my former water law professor
who now represents folks is also
going to testify on this so with
that I'm you can take down the
section of the screen and ideal
to Representative Chandler.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Committee members at I
really appreciate seeing you all
today I do want to note madam
chair that I believe are other
coast one of our other co
sponsors is on the line as well
Senator how to Neil so I just
wanted to acknowledge him and
and let you know that he is also
available to comment.
My comments will be extremely
brief Senator.
Wirth did a fantastic job of of
walking you all through the
process madam chair and I don't
think I need to supplement that
I do want to just underscore the
fact that
to me all water users in the
state should be concerned about
the fact that it appears that
the state engineers office is
not following the required
process everyone is negatively
affected by the unilateral
changer the unilateral decision
making that affects all rock
Water Rights those who wish to
transfer those water rights and
those who wish to maintain the
status quo and I think we need
to keep that in mind those of us
who are sponsoring this bill
madam chair are not targeting a
particular industry a particular
area a particular use this from
my perspective and I think it's
fair to say the other co
sponsors on this bill really
just want the law to be followed
it is the law needs to be
checked changed madam chair we
are ready and willing to work
with the state poll Thursday
should ensure that the law is
changed in a fair and reasonable
way and and with that I'll yield
back before madam chair thank
you madam my apologies for I in
no way center Hermio is also on
this bill and I think brings a
very important perspective given
his district up north and so I'd
like to be able to him say a few
words to if I could absolutely
Senator Mario.
Because you're still on mute
Senator.
Good morning madam chairman
thank you for that and thank you
senator Wirth and Representative
Chandler you know I think you
just have been part of our
history percentages here in New
Mexico we have nearly seven
hundred a staff as of right here
in New Mexico two hundred and
twenty of them in my home county
of Rio Arriba now it's part of
our social fabric and resilience
of communities to make sure that
water continues to flow and
because of that our cultures
have thrived right here in New
Mexico.
And so the one thing we do is we
come to the table and we talk
about problems as in the second
community and we collaborate
collaborative Lee provide at.
Find solutions for these issues
that we find that I want to
appreciate the hard work that
senator Wirth and Representative
Chandler put into getting an
exception to effective in the
past and I equally appreciate
the hard work of every New
Mexicans who values enough to
serve a second model that's not
model that I told you that
brings everyone to the table to
have discussions with those
affected and to work
collaboratively to address
issues and most importantly come
up with solutions not be a
second model of collaboration as
an example of active resource
management and how we manage and
successfully maintained our
respective communities for
generations so all that's being
asked here madam chair women and
members of the committee is that
we continue to continue to work
in collaboration the purpose of
this bill is to ensure fairness
and due process of water lease
applications to the state
engineer it's important note
that this legislation does not
remove the ability of entities
such as cities industry farmers
or community water systems to
lease water water leases on it
or and water management tool in
New Mexico what this bill does
do is help the state engineer
operate within existing legal
requirements and provides
clarity to introduce sticking to
eight water about the statutory
requirements protecting existing
water rights this bill also
incentivizes entities to engage
in water planning and meet those
water needs now with that Madam
chairwoman I yield the floor
thank you.
Thank you Mr Bennett yes do you
have a few words as the expert
witness.
Yes madam chair thank you
members of the committee my name
is David Benavidez I'm attorney
with New Mexico a legal aid
madam chair to follow up on what
Representative Chandler saying
we have thousands of water
rights owners in the state
farmers and ranchers and one of
their worst nightmares is that
they would wake up one day to
find some new water user taking
water upstream from them or
drawing water from the same
aquifer as them and threatening
to reduce their water supply now
what keeps that from happening
what keeps that from happening
are some basic features of our
water law that have been
embedded in our water law since
nineteen oh seven and that is
first of all that state law
doesn't allow the placement of a
new water right or the
repositioning of a water right
if that would negatively affect
existing water usage and the
second feature is that before
any water you know water use
would take place existing water
users will always have notice
and a chance to defend their
water right by showing how that
proposed change would affect
them so as Representative
Chandler said these protections
help every water right owners
throughout the state and this is
always been the law you don't
have to be you know no matter
what the size of your farm
whether you're a junior or
senior water right owner you
have the protection and the
assurance of the law
that that
a new water use will not show up
on your block the state will not
have allowed that because the
law doesn't allow that
without the chance for you to
defend it and the legislature
has not made an exception when
it comes to water leases this
after that we're looking at was
passed in nineteen sixty seven
for many decades everyone
understood this statute to mean
just what just what I said about
prior notice and prior chance to
defend your water at it was only
a couple of administrations ago
as mentioned by Representative
worth that.
The state engineer at one point
I simply reinterpreted the law
and began a practice of telling
leaders of water I said it was
okay to begin using water at the
new location even though there
had not been the legally
required notice or hearing and
when that happens it's
devastating to the affected
water users there's nothing they
can do they can file an
objection to the to the
application but typically that
takes a long time a couple years
in some cases to resolve and in
the meantime these are water
users in the area that are being
affected are being harmed and so
that's that's what we're trying
to fix their.
The law doesn't allow this state
is here to do this now the
legislature never authorized to
practice but it's being done and
the bill simply affirms beyond
any doubt that they can't do it
and finally two quick points
madam chair we know that there
are two sides to everything.
Applicants applicants who want
to do this of course are gonna
say that that they're least will
not affect anyone but the truth
is the state shouldn't be giving
people the go ahead to take
water based on only one side of
the story and that's what's
happening and finally madam
chair it is tempting to look at
what people want to do with
these of these unlawful Water
lease practices.
Because many of them are good
ideas and and people might be
tempted to say what's wrong with
allowing it and that's not the
issue we're in a water poor
state there are many more good
ideas for what to do with water
and there is water it's not a
question of that there are good
uses to put this water to the
the the issue is we have to
remember is that every new water
use takes place somewhere and
we're on and it's where other
water users already exist and
are potentially affected and we
can't just we those people's
concerns and rights aside and
the law doesn't allow the state
to do that and with that madam
chair thank you.
Thank you okay we have about.
Thirteen sixteen proponents so
we will first start with the
opponents and we will give one
minute each to each speaker
please however you want to
start.
However are you there.
First we have a B. parity.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy therapy and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
in fiscal year twenty the oil
and gas industry contributed
thirty four percent of the
state's general fund revenues
oil and gas like most industries
is inter dependent on various
factors and other businesses
currently applications to the
office of the state engineer for
water leases follow rigorous
process that allows for the
issuance of a temporary permit
for you water use while
simultaneously allowing for
protest and related hearings
which can sometimes take years
Senate bill sixteen is
essentially a drilling ban with
tremendous impacts on the
industry in the state budget
it's our shared responsibility
to protect both New Mexico's
water and continue to generate
revenue for our schools Senate
bill sixteen would help the
availability of fresh water or
oil and gas operations
devastating to date states
budget well we strongly oppose
Senate bill sixteen today we're
grateful to be working with
Representative Chandler on her
version of this bill and would
appreciate the opportunity to
work with senator Wirth as well.
Thank you next.
In Winchester.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Winchester
with independent petroleum
association of New Mexico I PAM
believes that this bill does
slow down oil and gas use of
water that is necessary to
perform basic operations on a
well site yeah and it does hurt
other industries as well the
bill strips the state engineer
the ability to administratively
allow temporary uses of water
based on already established
criteria that have been well
vetted and carefully considered
this process does protected due
process rights of of other water
right owners to file protests
and have a hearing and obtained
a final decision from the state
engineer and finally we're
specially concerned that this
bill eliminates the state
engineer to prove those
temporary non emergency water
demands which is important to
allow for those temporary
changes in the diversion and use
of water in non emergency
situations so we do respect we
stand opposed thank you.
Thank you next.
Michael one.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Mike
going on with Representative
today representing the New
Mexico mining association and
April's valley are teaching
Conservancy district both
organizations use these
Quarter of that they engineer
allows us to and it's very
important to both specially in
the Michael's valley of artesian
Conservancy district this is how
they the farmers use this to
react to the climate the climate
changes that occur in time to
get the crops and that done of
course the mining industry we
use in our business also so we
stand respectfully posted thank
you.
Thank you.
Next.
Mark Adams.
Let's go on here being
Yes okay my name is mark Adams
I'm an attorney with an office
in Santa Fe and I'm here and we
have been trapped with potash
ridge owns water right and I
just reserves in southeastern
New Mexico.
I wanted to emphasize three.
Point chair first of all the
lease of water rate study
created new water right simply
permission to use and perhaps at
a new location with existing
right.
The second point is that there
will be a hearing.
The application.
It in due course probably after
the preliminary authorization
but there will be a hearing
people have an opportunity to
objective things and be heard.
I third important point is that
the state engineer has never
reversed a decision by a
district office approving a
preliminary authorization.
Process evidently works well and
finally no court has ever
reversed a preliminary
authorization so again the
process seems fair thank you.
Thank you next Liz Taylor.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Senator Wirth
and Representative Chandler
I am Liz Taylor I've been water
water in Mexico for twenty nine
years and I'm here today
representing both the San Juan
water commission and select
energy services both entities
opposed Senate bill sixteen is
proposed but I would like to
thank Representative Chandler
for contacting you to discuss
potential amendments that could
resolve her concerns with
preliminary approvals and allow
industry farmers and ranchers
and others just continue to move
water around quickly therefore I
ask this committee to hold the
bill until new language can be
developed.
Senate bill sixteen is the fact
go the fact of fracking ban and
that alone will drive oil and
gas operators out of New Mexico
taking state revenue in good
jobs with them Senator chelex
customers in the oil and gas
industry has said they are
watching this bill very
carefully and not in a good way.
Of the FIR should have had an
economic component like Senate
bill eighty six the fracking ban
which show that the state budget
will lose billions of dollars
not having preliminary approvals
will also drive up the cost and
lake highway projects and other
construction projects and as
currently proposed the bill
should be held thank you very
much.
Thank you next perles de Mars.
Yes.
Chuck do more as I was a lot
faster for many years of
constitutional law at the at the
law school dinners to New Mexico
and I brought the case Montorio
versus placards which
invalidated the replevin statute
procedures the process ground
I'm very familiar with this area
of the law I have two concerns
that I'd like to express
immediately the first one is
that the holding of judge Romero
I believe will not be sustained
on appeal for two particular
reasons is holding appears to be
that there can be no action by
the state engineer without a
prior hearing up that would
invalidate the forfeiture
statute of New Mexico the
forfeiture statute says that as
a matter of law any person who
did not use their water rights
for a period of four consecutive
years loses their water rights
immediately without any hearing
so that would be invalidated the
second one is the active water
resources management program and
the statutes and the criteria
that are set out of by the
legislature allow the New Mexico
state engineer to establish
priorities within a particular
basin and do the night what I've
described believe Mr Harmel said
during percent height I
calculated as being a very
valuable thing if this statute
is if if this if the judge
Romero's decision were up held
in that process as establishing
a priorities among users would
be also illegal and that would
void the act water resource
management statute finally very
simply there is a yes that
wasn't applied by the judge it's
called.
I'm.
Okay.
Are you can you when did you
stop hearing what when you talk
about a test that out that had
been employed by the judge yes
well what I said was the judge
did not applaud the Matthews
versus Eldridge yes that cat yes
it provides a balancing and
analysis for deciding whether or
not a prior hearing is required.
And the balance of interests are
three factors what the most
important of which is the
effects on the agency and the
expertise of the agency to do
the job that is required without
prior without a hearing and
fully protect the other parties
in the in the system that case
that case held that there was no
right to a prior hearing when
social security disability
building in a budget were being
analyzed and rejected the
procedural due process argument
my recommendation is that these
are important factors this is a
complex issue it has many of
facts beyond that and I think
what should happen here is that
they should commission the state
your direct the state engineer
to do a valuation of all of
these Representative is it
evaluate these particular issues
and come back and explain what's
happened in that in that context
I know it's been done before but
I think that would be a very
important to look at the factors
that are involved there report
that's that's basically my view
thank you so much okay let's go
on Tiffany Rivera.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Tiffany
Rivera and I'm the registered
lobbyists New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau we stand in
respectful opposition to Senate
bill sixteen this morning this
legislation will create further
interference and cause delays on
all water transfer applications
this legislation by exempting
emergency applications will
create a backlog on emergency
application.
Currently every application gets
due process but working continue
to be done and water be utilized
public hearings are taking place
water use during the protest
process is paid back at the
office of the state engineer
finds that the you should not
have happened the office of the
state engineer has almost never
been wrong when granting a
preliminary approval for a water
leak if this legislation passes
a protester basically tell the
application by the time a
protester settled the need for
the approval has passed the crop
will be dead and the projects
will be abandoned this could add
several years the backlog we
think it's farmers who need
additional short term water
supplies in times of drought.
And further revenues from eight
to help farmers and ranchers and
agriculture is not economic for
these reasons we ask that you
propose Senate bill sixteen.
Thank you.
John didn't do a ton human.
The Antonio will give you a
couple minutes.
Thank you madam chair good
morning out members of the
committee I also like to
In my greetings to senator Wirth
and Representative Chandler this
is a really important issue in
and out I think more than
anything what I would prefer to
do is to work on this issue with
stakeholders during the interim
I know there's an urgency here
but I think we can set
reasonable conditions on time
then maybe some other issues
that that we're.
Looking at right now as a matter
of fact in working in in a
possible a committee substitute
but on this bill here of the the
one he's leasing Act already
fully protects the state test
from on wanted leases was
amended in twenty nineteen of
the body six that prohibits any
cases of water from the mistake
here unless unless if required
by the sickest bylaws the state
gives commissioners approved the
lease and so therefore the
worries the Snapple ready
protects the safety is from on
wanted water leases our staff
require approval by city
commissioners before any state
engineer preliminary approval of
a water lease if the acequia has
by laws in place requiring
commissioner approval for water
rights transfers also I just
want to express the the wide
variety of New Mexicans actually
depend on preliminary approvals
under the water you solution act
Russell artesian basin
irrigators routinely rely on
preliminary approvals of
temporary water releases to
efficiently and effectively
avoid over divergence where the
five year accounting period this
year and we're undergoing that
in that area.
Irma transportation relies on
preliminary approvals temporary
release water rights for road
construction projects we have a
number of solar energy projects
one in particular that's going
to replace the San Juan
generating station station the
renewable power that's a
essential to get that
construction in place and
without without the prior prior
priority of approval.
Limit one sorry that's not gonna
happen based on the construction
period and the water rights that
need to be transferred on a on a
lease also the oil and gas
industry and it relied on on
preliminary approval so these
water rights on a short term
basis while the state engineer
is planning to require the phase
out of the use of the fresh
water for oil and gas operations
the immediate halt the
preliminary pools would disrupt
the industry before we have a
chance to look at recycled and
produced water which are we're
working on now with the
environment department and
others just this is officially
available to provide the full
supply of water needed for oil
and gas operations we need that
interim solution others also the
preliminary approval under the
water water use leasing Act is
the only tool available to
address temporary non emergency
water needs in a timely fashion
and so the the what the surface
water code it only allows state
engineer to explain
expeditiously permit transfers
of surface water rights but only
where the applicant can show any
emergency the groundwater Mexico
does not contain a parallel
emergency water right transfer
statutes and so there really are
no provisions for the state
engineer to committee members to
transfer some groundwater rights
that are greater than three
eight receipts.
Limitation of preliminary
approvals into the water use the
city that would generate a flood
of applications that question
really claim emergency or seek
to drill a supplemental well
located miles away from the
original well and ensure just
one final points there is a two
year delay within this
legislation.
And it would remove from our
perspective but we're remove all
incentive for opponents of
preliminary approvals to
negotiate with other
stakeholders we think that the
two year delay would allow
opponents of culinary proposed
to run out the clock allow for
the blankets and currently on
house bill thirty to take effect
then they would have no
incentive to negotiate with
other stakeholders on reasonable
limitations on the length of
time or amount of water allowed
in a preliminary approval that
concludes my remarks again I
look forward to solving this
issue and really would like to
work closely with senator Wirth
Representative Chandler to come
up with something that works for
everybody thank you.
Thank you very much our work.
No Chikara's.
Thank you madam chair not
chairperson deputy general
counsel at the office of the
state engineer I just wanted to
say a few words on the legal
issues raised by the Majority
Leader Mr been of utis and
professor to Mars
first there is no issue under
New Mexico law that it is a
constitutional due process
violation to have a water
transfer and then hearing after
the transfer with the repayment
of water there there've been
cases related to water transfers
before hearing in front of the
courts and there have never
there's never been any
suggestion of violates
procedural due process in
addition to process would only
be about violated if there is
actual impairment and finally
just to to add a local also not
on the Romero.
Judge Romero decision referenced
by the Majority Leader and Mr to
Mars are read of the decision
slightly different well Jennifer
merited did not find any
authority in statute for
preliminary approval seated
recognize correctly in our view
the state engineer's role in
interpreting that statute and
said that the state engineer had
not promulgated through notice
and comment rules allowing these
so there is a possible outcome
where we could after decision on
appeal if the decision is
affirmed work through the
solution through insurance
insured rules we would prefer to
work with the stakeholders on a
legislative solution thank you.
Thank you very much next.
Michael Miller.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
Miller and I represent the
Permian basin Permian basin
petroleum association.
As written we respectfully
oppose Senate bill sixteen one
gas operators are moving to use
recycled produced water in our
operations however we still need
access to fresh water through
temporary transfers the same as
other industries SB sixteen
budget of the leasing Act by
removing the ability to use
water after the state engineers
preliminary.
Ruble with assets without this
feature industry and other short
term users have little need for
the leasing Act for these and
other reasons we oppose Senate
bill sixteen thank you.
Thank you next.
Matthew Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and
members my name's Matt Thompson
I'm Richard lobbyist for Apache
corporation we respectfully
oppose Senate bill sixteen is
written as an industry were
increasingly recycling and
reusing produced water and as
was mentioned by the state
engineer earlier.
Fresh water is needed in certain
phases of drilling and is
primarily available through
these temporary transfers the
current water leasing process as
it is protects existing water
rights as shown by the fact no
preliminary approval by the
state engineer has been
overturned after a full
evidentiary hearing or by a
court.
We believe this is another anti
industry keep in the ground to
factor regulatory ban due to
untenable permitting delays that
will dramatically affect Mexico
revenues thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
Laura Riley.
Madam chairman committee members
I'm Laura Riley representing get
a land solutions our clients
include businesses entities both
in the agriculture and
extractive industry sector our
concerns are with that limiting
the flexibility employment
agency of the temporary leasing
of existing water rights the
office of the state engineer
currently considers impacts on
the existing rights and those
parties who may be affected by
temporary leasing this bill does
not change that what it does do
is create a time period here
which will be detrimental to the
beneficial use of water in these
times of drought and economic
uncertainty in our agricultural
communities farmers and ranchers
currently utilize the leasing
Act leasing Act in crop
management and income
diversification.
This bill limits the markets and
opportunities available to to
those farmers and ranchers for
the reasons stated by others we
respectfully oppose this bill
and look forward to to
addressing these issues sometime
in the future thank you.
Thank you.
I see a couple more hands
however.
Yes Liz Travis.
Thank you madam chair
and and thank you all for paying
attention to this issue in M. D.
O. T. well I'm was Travis I am
deputy general counsel for the
department of transportation and
as written we also respectfully
ask this committee to table or
or not pass this version of SB
sixteen as mentioned before
we're our primary concerns are
with the ability of
transportation infrastructure
contractors to be able to obtain
the necessary water that
currently we we are able to get
by temporary
permits that would not be
allowed if if we have to wait
through hearings and appeals of
hearings we would like to work
with any group in an interim
and would like to be able to
ensure that our contractors
don't have to resort to hauling
commercial water to to public
projects thank you.
Thank you.
Earlier.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Missy Currier and I'm a
registered lobbyist for
strategies three sixty speaking
on behalf of our client
Occidental petroleum for the
reasons previously stated by
other industry leaders and
experts we respectfully ask you
to oppose Senate bill sixteen
this bill would limit and hinder
both well established and
research conservation efforts
and economic development
opportunities across our state
Occidental agrees that water
conservation is paramount
paramount but so was the need to
keep our economy and communities
moving forward thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
Thank you.
I'm seeing no further opposition
and we've gone through our list
will now go to proponents one
minute each.
Paula Garcia.
I'd like to reiterate that we
are on Senate bill sixteen the
water leasing approval with
senator Wirth Representative
Chandler and senator Hermio.
And our first speaker.
All of Garcia.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I
public RCS executive director of
the New Mexico sic Association
we sent a strong support of
Senate bill sixteen because it
affirms longstanding protections
enshrined in our water laws to
protect existing water rights
well there was beneficial
language added to the section
two thousand nineteen we still
think this is important this is
an equity issue in New Mexico we
believe that by fast tracking
water these applications the
state engineer and prioritizing
the convenience of applicants
over the due process rights of
those with existing water rights
that could be affected.
We want to point out that just
because the state engineer of
normalized zone lawful based
procedure that does not make it
right the lots are clear on the
requirement to hold a public
hearing on protest applications
thank you for your consideration
we ask for your support of
Senate bill sixteen thank you.
Thank you next.
Abraham brown.
Early Rivera.
Okay is Abraham brown or Ernie
Rivera on.
Let's keep going I respectfully
declined my turn to speak thank
you.
Okay was that please.
Abraham brown okay thank you.
Aurora Yanis.
Lawrence Garrigus.
Sylvia Vergara.
The lady bird.
Good morning can you hear me yes
thank you good morning madam
chair and committee members my
name is Elaine have worked I
live in Albuquerque as a retired
chemist lawyer planter of work
done water funding issues in the
middle Rio Grande for more than
twenty years I do understand
their budget least water all
leases temporary or permanent
must go through the same
analysis and due process
required water transfer
especially since some of these
leases and their impact will be
semi permanent and long lasting
great example is the village of
Los Lunas word allowed Niagara
bottling plant to transfer water
rights lease from PNM into the
villages Wells to offset river
flow depletions caused by
pumping groundwater the plastic
bottles the surface waters
between coated in elephant Butte
are already over perforated and
educated least water should have
valid water rights but even if
it does how do such what rights
measure up with the more senior
pre nineteen oh seven right and
more water uses are they being
added to the over procreative
system a hearing is required by
the end of twenty twenty the MRG
had incurred Water debt under
the Rio Grande compact it nearly
a hundred thousand acre feet
well still in compliance such
adept does not great in terms of
the Texas V. New Mexico
litigation we heard this summer
transferring water rights
through leases temporary or ones
with no Providence Providence
will likely add to the shortages
we are still experiencing
already could make promised
deliveries and compact
compliance even more difficult
clearly evaluation due process
and hearing are fired please
vote yes on SB sixty thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Peters.
Madam chair members of the
committee Greg Peters public
lands wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
your stand in support of Senate
bill sixteen.
The unlawful practice of
allowing water use these
applicants to use water the
public is granted a hearing has
resulted in decisions that are
detrimental to the owners of
existing senior water rights in
the state of New Mexico.
S. fairness due process and
approval of water use these
applications and protect
existing alerts the bill also
provided to your delete
enactment to allow time for an
equitable and meaningful
stakeholder process identifying
further statutory changes you to
respond in New Mexico's changing
water needs and provide all
watery operates users an
opportunity to be heard we
request that this committee to
ensure that our laws are
clarified in the proper analysis
and due process must be followed
in these applications before the
state engineer your to do
passcode SB six thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you next Enriqueta Romero.
You madam chair members of the
committee I'm speaking today as
a native New Mexican a lifelong
resident of my menu Mexico my
family has a small parcel of
land with irrigation water
rights and the second.
You hear today that these fast
track leases are necessary for
economic development in the more
profitable uses water need to
get the water they need as soon
as possible but I want to tell
you as policy makers that this
is a false choice we can provide
the proper balance and public
policy between economic
development and protecting what
has been here for hundreds of
years we ask you is legislators
to consider that we not allow
unchecked procedure that
prioritizes the convenience of
the applicant over the due
process rights of those of us
with existing rights industries
that need water have an existing
process which they can acquire
water rights they need but they
need to plan ahead for the time
it takes to get stage state
engineer permit what we're the
state engineers office needs
more resources to address the
increasing demands on his agency
so that he can process permits
in a more timely manner.
The statutes do need to be
modernized distracted right
balance then that should occur
in a transparent and inclusive
process thank you madam chair.
Thank you next.
Harold Trujillo.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee of Herrell
Trujillo I'm president of the
New Mexico Azteca Association
one of the founding members
this efforts of the officers
state engineer have heard as
sick as in the past very
severely and that is one reason
that we stand in support of of
this bill we have a simple ask
allow public hearings you know
that is not a a big gas from my
point of view and yet we have
real serious implications when
you mow Water awful fired it'll
go to weeds you loose a green
belt you know those things need
to be considered this bill also
protects serious farmers the
rest of the farmers in the
system are left to maintain and
support the irrigation system
when the water is moved out.
And that just as a.
I think we're setting a bad
trend here it looks like we're
really developing a higher Arky
of use and there is no dust
justification required of the
lease see as to why he needs a
water you know are there other
means can he use more water
efficient practices or recycle
water thank you.
Thank you very much next
Serafini Lombardi.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is that a female invitee I am on
the board of the real Quemado
return maybe realty holdings
real Santa Cruz stream system a
second so ciation representing
thousands of families a greater
Espanola basin who are not only
percent is not a second but also
private well owners and members
of mutual domestics were users
of our public lands and consider
ourselves stewards of the whole
landscape in the waters that
make them drive I am here to
speak in support of SB sixteen
we have to find solutions to our
water needs and we respect that
there are many diverse water
needs we want for the common
good of our greater New Mexican
economy to be uplifted and we
have to do that honoring due
process we cannot say that the
leak while lease fees may be in
a dire situation that's very
regrettable we can't say their
crops value is more than someone
else's who has the establish
water right this is just not
president this is not how we
operate and we very much
appreciate your support and
consideration of SB sixteen
thank you.
Thank you next Erlin Kennedy.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity my name is
Caroline Kennedy I'm a
commissioner on the board of
losses thank you supposed to
this the village office students
Santa Fe counties domestic water
secular system which serves
approximately one hundred eighty
members and has senior water
rights dating back to eighteen
sixty three I strongly support
SB sixteen because it will
ensure due process and protect
the rights of existing water
rights holders including those
in the state kids and community
water systems the state state
engineer should not grant
preliminary approval
applications for new or used
such as that water because this
will ensure that existing New
Mexico always followed requiring
that notice of such applications
beginning to existing water
rights holders in order to allow
them the opportunity to raise
concerns and protests that's
sexes are changing use could
affect their rights please
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you next consults.
Hello good morning madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Donna Gonzales I'm part
of the economy of us that
gathered one day and Tommy stop
an employee of the New Mexico
Astec Association and a proud
board member of the New Mexico
astika Commission I am in
support because water rights are
vital to my livelihood as a
farmer New Mexico a lot insures
that if there is a new use of
water proposed that those of us
with existing water rights are
notified of the new use and that
we have an opportunity to raise
concern you are protest and
public hearing the state
engineer is unlawful these
procedure is taking a short cut
that is not allowed under well
established protections in our
law please pass so that we can
have certainty that our water
property and culture can stay
protected thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Daryl Madrid.
Thank you madam chair in
assisting members of the
committee my name is Daryl
Madrid I am a commissioner on
the seller side on Community DH
here in New watcher our priority
date is sixteen hundred I am
also president of the real that
trauma sticky Association are
representing twenty two a
secular as along with confluence
of the lower Rio Chama below
average you down to my community
watch it and I'm also a board
member on the New Mexico state
association we fully support
past of this bill because we
only have a history to look back
on and that was the incident in
Lincoln County and more recently
and on.
In the lower Pecos region.
Basically the OSCE holds us
percentages are an asset yes to
the letter of the law when it
comes to water usage but yet
they're able to by pass that
that period process as well and
we just want to level the
playing field and make it fair
for all so that everybody can
have access to water that so
vital to our needs thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Next.
Jamie park.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jamie
park and I'm a water law
attorney that has been
practicing in New Mexico for
quite some time I Representative
a number of different
stakeholders and that this
wonderful water world I just
wanted to take a moment to read
to the committee sections of the
Romero decision holding on the
intrepid leases that I think
it's important for all of us to
share.
You have one minute thank you in
particular judge Romero held
that the state engineers
interpretation of the water use
leasing Act as set forth in his
regulations issued to implement
the same make very clear the
process that must be followed to
obtain a permit and the state
engineer cannot because he
desires an expedited method to
address water use needs
sidestepped the process use
interpreted will look to set in
place and Dr Meryl brought
attention to we see regulations
that affirm a hearing must be
held public notice must be
provided and a final decision on
application must be issued
before water can be used
pursuant to a water lease
application so thank you for
your time and please support SB
sixty.
Thank you next this is the ana
Torres.
Good morning madam chair thank
you for this opportunity.
My name is president of Taurus.
I'm a partially on to and the
president of the storm damage in
Lincoln County New Mexico.
We have senior water rights
dating back to eighteen sixty
three on our DH I think my story
hopefully as well will not
become the story of other a
sector job our shop is in New
Mexico.
I want to point out that we are
the one horror story that.
For the state engineer.
In twenty thirteen The Village
ever does so applied toward
leases to move water upstream
from the Honda valley those were
granted preliminarily despite
the fact that there were a
hundred and twenty people that
protest did that temporary
process the important thing for
this committee to understand is
that before a protest could be
held water began to flow under
the temporary transfer it took
six years and we never got a
hearing we ended up resolving
the case but there was never any
hearing provided for these folks
that were protesting and it is
just a shame when I hear lawyers
talk about well there's sort of
due process but it's it's okay
because we need an expedited
process what we need to do is
follow the law I ask that you do
that it's a sad note that a
hundred twenty people had that
spanned nearly seventy thousand
dollars never got a hearing and
never got a valid explanation as
to why this temporary process
was fair I ask you to support
Senate bill sixteen thank you
very much.
Thank you next.
Robert Apodaca.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Robert up without that my
family's been in the.
Are the a second the second
mother open house County for
Jeez the many generations I'm
also consulting with the New
Mexico Seka Commission and we do
stand in support of Senate bill
sixteen for the various reasons
or indicated before it's really
a matter of just due process on
water right transfer so thank
you madam chair and chair
members of the.
Of the
Committee thank you thank you
next.
Garrett.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee this is here at
the and a classmate New Mexico
wild Senate bill sixteen helps
to protect due process in water
lease applications the bill
offers protections in our laws
that ensures that public welfare
and water conservation are
considered water lease
applications please support
Senate bill sixteen.
Thank you next.
Reese Carrero.
Yes hi this is Andres Guerrero
the legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande the chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members in New Mexico
I'm not going to go into a lot
of the electric some really
great points made but we support
this bill and I'm urging you to
vote yes S. thank you very much.
Thank you is there anyone else
The seven on the list and that's
everyone who had road racer and
okay we did hear from fourteen
opponents and fourteen
proponents so Senator Wirth you
want to make any comments before
we go to questions of discussion
from the committee thank you
madam chair I I do I I do want
to address on page for the bill
line I there is an applicability
Clause and this was a compromise
that was put on on the house
side the delays if this bill
were to pass it's not a hard
stop it's got a two year
provision and that was
referenced by some of the folks
that spoke both for and against
but I just wanted to point that
out and and I'll just conclude
before going to the committee
that.
I've been trying to find a
legislative solution to this
since two thousand and fifteen
and the challenges that there's
just it's it's hard to get there
and you don't have a matter
right in front of you and you
can see that level of use of the
statute I think we have a unique
opportunity right now not to put
this to the interim.
Right now in three weeks which
is a lifetime and provided time
we can find a legislative
solution stopping this bill
sends exactly the wrong
embarassing moving it forward
gets us closer gives us the
pressure we need to get to a
legislative suits solution so
happy to answer questions thank
you madam chair.
Thank you we first have Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair.
It's really disappointing to see
the state engineer not not
complying with the statute but
all well to start with some
basic questions
Madam chair what is the mission
what is the purpose of a water
laws in the mission of the state
engineers office.
So I I can you know certainly
take a shot at that so but we've
also got the state engineer on
and I'd also you we've got a an
expert witness who's David
Benavidez has been involved for
thirty years you know we I I
think it's important for you
what's triggering lots of the
discussion that we had on this
bill is that we have a system
that's based on priority and
self older water users are given
priority and so within a senior
water rights has there.
Water impaired our code creates
a process to address that and I
would just note that the
Carlsbad irrigation district
down the Pecos river is the
senior water user and so.
The leases that were granted to
the potash mine.
Triggered you know concern and
protest on their on their behalf
which makes total sense we want
that we want notice we want a
chance to actually adjudicate
the issue the problem is that.
Well that I need to well that
didn't litigation over the water
right is going on the protest
all the water is being used and
the rate is being impaired and
that's the fundamental issue so
that's that's my take I I you
know I don't actively practice
water law and I certainly you
know you'll to David Benavidez
as well if he wants to give
another kind of perhaps more
technical answer but I think
that gives you that gives you
the sense of why this is so
important and and how it all
ties together.
I will thank you thank you madam
chair I I don't know that we
need to go to have just yet
because you went to exactly my
next question is why do we have
a prior use doctrine in water
law and of course if you want to
defer to him for that the whole
purpose of the prior use doctor
yeah and and madam madam chair
and center city of this that's
the whole basis of our of our
water.
It's how we structured water
rights in New Mexico and I think
it's Senator our meal and the
state engineer pointed out there
are some tensions with strict
priority administration and
there's been a willingness with
active water resource with the
beauty of the acequia model
which quite frankly recognizes
that in times of shortest we're
gonna share we're all going to
work together.
And so that decision happens
when all parties are working
together but that's going around
a strict application of priority
which favors the senior water
right and the junior has to turn
off their irrigation if there's
not enough water.
And so so madam chair where is
an impairment than what kinds of
things constitutive garment.
Water right if a prior water
right so madam chair Senators
seated studio Lopez
if.
A groundwater well as put right
next to a senior water right
there's going to be a discussion
on in this case and I'll use
this case and and look at the
Honda valley.
You know at least application
was allowed to go into effect
immediately.
And you have a whole string of
senior water users down below
who were impacted and and and
their rights were being impaired
and they.
Spent the money to go through
the whole process the problem is
that they're chasing.
A decision to already allow that
water to be used and so we just
want to make sure that they're
able to have the discussion
before the water.
Is use and I think that's what
the statute in my opinion again
and I'll just tell you in the
you know if you're you're
another former law professor of
mine so I appreciate the chance
to have lots of terrific UNM law
professors in this debate I just
think we we need to find a
legislative solution and there's
a willingness to to to do that
what I just think that there's a
ticking ticking time bomb here
in judge Romero's decision and
that's quite frankly what's
changed the whole discussion and
I think it gives us a chance to
get to a legislative solution in
a way we weren't able to before
on this bill.
Well and then it seems like you
always get to the question I'm
going to ask before us which is
amazing so what so what is the
purpose of public hearings what
is the why do we have public
hearings of when there's an
impairment.
Yes so it's the so the key the
key kind of due process
components that are are in our
statutes throughout the water
code notice you want to make
darn sure that everyone who's
impacted knows what's happening
and then they have the
opportunity to protest and then
they have the opportunity to go
through a process first with the
state engineers office and then
potentially to go to court as
well up to half of their rights
and their
you know legal issues related to
the water result in a way that's
fair and so someone needs to
make the decision of how this
fits into the total system and
that's what that process is
designed to do.
You madam chair the the state
engineer said that there is of
because if they do the hearings
after that the the remedy would
be that that there would be
repaired the surface water right
that was impaired would be
repaired if there is an
impairment how do you if if
surface waters already run.
How do you possibly what's the
what kind of remedy happens if
there's a host divert the post
at a hearing after the fact.
Yeah Mister chair I shouldn't
guests on this because I don't
know that the majority is I I I
too was kind of trying to figure
out how that would work so maybe
I can yield to David Benavidez
or if the chair once we can get
the state engineer to explain
how that would work I would be
interested in all received both
Miss Mister chair I I may I may
madam chair she's looking at
that was looking at the at the
Senator Wirth and so madam chair
thank you senator we'll go to Mr
Dantonio first and then Mr
Bennett B. this okay.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Of.
One of the one of the things
that we look at and you know
you're Senator Lopez or center
city Lopez made a comment about
state engineer does not follow
the law I I do take exception to
that it's an interpretation
piece of it we issue preliminary
approvals we do an impairment
analysis for the length of the
lease so an example of there's a
ten year lease and we look and
we look at the amount of water
we look at the the duration of
the water coming out the
surrounding areas from the move
from location to the.
Madam chair that's not answering
my question my question is how
is surface water repaired.
Interpretation I will I I can
ask later about why the change
the practice the prior practice
but right now what I want to
know is how is surface water
repaired if they have a hearing
after it's already been approved
I mean after if they have a
hearing after the protest so
madam chair.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I think
you're referring to repaid not
repaired we can deal with the
yeah so.
you say prepare so just curious
about what that was no it's
repaid okay yeah repaid so the
water could be repaid in it's
it's you're you're right it's
it's difficult to do it and in
the surface water setting
because the water's gone but in
a in a groundwater setting it's
easier because you can go after
that water and if we determine
that there's impairments after
the fact.
Then we go back and make whoever
had that preliminary approval
Hey back double pay that that
water or some other means to
pay it back if it's easy it's
easy to do it in a in a
groundwater K. it's harder to do
it in a surface water case and
that's why we started looking
at.
Conditions are on on time if we
were to amend this bill a little
bit further to allow for maybe a
shortened service water lease
preliminary approval in a little
bit longer groundwater lease so
that we could take into
consideration that repayments if
there was impairment after the
fact.
Madam chair so he raised the
issue of the practice Senator we
were gonna allow Mr Bennett is
to also respond thank you.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Lopez there really isn't much to
say because I think you asked
exactly they are the key
question about when due process
is afforded and that is that
if it takes a year for the for
the state engineer to determine
that they shouldn't have allowed
the you know the unlawful least
practice that year can't be
recovered are you can't give
them of water for the year and
that you're they've been harmed
and there's nothing you can do
to take away that harm so that's
exactly the point thank you for
raising it.
You still have the floor but at
least it's the same and and
thank you madam chair I think
that that's really important
because if water is repaid up on
paper
that's worth nothing.
I'm so but that raises the other
issue that went.
The practice changed and
Senator at that madam chair
senator Wirth you said that the
practice change in prior
administrations how did the
practice change was there notice
and an opportunity heard before
the change the practice or was
it just the good cause a
practice as I understand it was
different and that that's what I
recall from decades ago that
there were here prior hearings
so we wanted to change madam
chair and senator city L. Lopez
that's a great question and I
think is it was is perhaps it
was Mr Benavides testified.
Everything works under this
statute one way up until a
certain period of time I believe
it was during the Richardson
administration and the council
for the state engineer.
Took a different interpretation
of the statute and and
basically.
Based on a reading of the
statute began this process is my
understanding and we certainly
could get the state engineer to
to also weigh in on that but it
but it was I'm I'm pretty
familiar with kind of the
history and it was a different
interpretation and again and and
and and and I want to say I
think it's important
you know there's been some
unfortunate situations the Honda
situation was clearly
problematic I think this
situation down with with
Carlsbad irrigation district in
the volume of water involved is
problematic but the state
engineer does way these issues
and you know they try and and
and come up with the right
balance in address impairments
it's just.
The statute says one thing in my
opinion it's being interpreted a
different way why the state
engineer and what makes this
this the timing of this
legislation and the need to find
a legislative solution I want to
be clear I'm trying to find a
solution here it's always
Senator on our meal and
Representative Chandler is we
got a court case that could
simply put a hard stop to the
whole thing and I just that's
that's where it comes from but
it's an interpretation develops
probably twenty I don't know
twenty years ago fifteen years
ago.
Thank you madam chair this is an
opportunity if I could directed
to the state engineer for him to
answer the question that I posed
that he started to answer when I
posed a different question that
is the interpretation issue.
Hello thank you madam chair and
centers to be Lopez and what I
just talking about of course we
do the we do the impairment and
Alice's move from to move to so
to say that there's there's not
due process we would not allow
for a Water Rights pulmonary
approval if we didn't go through
that analysis and typically if
it's a ten year lease we look at
impairments for that entire ten
years but we only granted
preliminary approval until until
we have the actual hearing right
and so are you I'm not sure what
what I was asking is I think the
practice change what kind of
notice happened why did the
practice change okay so madam
chair of the Senate this Senator
Sedillo Lopez up what I remember
the first time it was used in in
prior years
if we were using the emergency
also read authorization of law
within the state of New Mexico
and as I spoke earlier in my
comments the the groundwater
code really doesn't contain an
emergency water right transfer
statute provision if it's
greater than three acre feet and
so I think that what what came
out and I remember this when the
states or construction was
happening and there was some
immediate needs for construction
of for the spaceport and so we
look at the preliminary approval
being granted at that time I
think that's when it really but
we didn't think it was property
grant emerge the authorization
based on an economic.
need of that's that that's where
the preliminary approval came in
the water use leasing Act so.
Still considering impairments of
of move from the move move to
location as long as we went
through that analysis and we
were we were sure that it was
not going to be an impairment
because of then that could limit
prove what was issue and that's
the way it is done today so
there is there is arguably due
process of from that perspective
I understand the arguments
against it on a few cases and
one of the opponents from of the
case in the real hard though
there's there's some there's a
there's probably less than a
handful of New Providence
decisions the state engineer is
made over the years some
preliminary approvals of against
the backdrop of hundreds of good
decisions that have been made to
help with economic development
so yeah I think us there I want
to over answer the question but.
A manager and as this Senator
Sedillo Lopez I think that's my
recollection of how it happened
of course I was gone from the
stages position from for seven
and a half years of from two
thousand the end of two thousand
eleven to twenty nineteen.
Madam chair so a lot of these
cases that you're talking about
that the horn when you haven't
in provident decision by the
state engineer the harm is
irreparable for example what is
the basis of the icy protest of
the intrepid application.
You're you're muted
Elam Madam chair Senator Wirth
is needed.
So madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez I I will yield to someone
in the state engineers office I
think Mr cares who's the lawyer
working on that can probably
directly answer your question.
Please.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and and we in interest
of full disclosure I I have I
was working at the Interstate
Stream Commission for the past
two years and now as of a month
ago deputy general counsel to
the state engineers office so
I've kind of worked both sides
I'm not actively working on that
protest anymore because I a
change positions but the
Interstate Stream Commission
just to just to give a little
bit more
the hell no I I wanted to much
time but I want to I want to
make sure the records clear on
the intrepid
Applications of the Interstate
Stream Commission concern is
that those withdrawals are
street just above the state line
and the water right was not used
for decades so that it was
likely an invalid Water right
and the withdrawals were
essentially a one for one impact
on the.
Compact to leverage from the
state it was not an impairment
of the analysis in the classic
sense for to root for the main
reason that the intrepid point
of diversions potentially be
low socially all other users on
the pictures so nobody is in New
Mexico is not getting water
because of water being taking
out an intrepid what what the
Interstate Stream Commission
concern is is that the the
compact deliveries are are
taking a big hit from a
potentially invalid Water right
and there's there's other detail
to go into but I think that
that's the the large contour of.
So so basically it jeopardizes
our compact delivery obligations
with that delivery that that's
really important and then how
often does that are you familiar
with the forfeiture process
Mr chair I mean Madam chair
Senator Wirth
With the forfeiture process to
those occur without hearing.
You Mr madam chair and says the
levels of Danielle to the
appropriate person in the state
engineers office Mr chair.
Madam chair and on and of.
Senator Wirth Senator Sedillo
Lopez I can let that act this
but the forfeiture statute.
There is the state engineer
could not just go in after
nineteen sixty five I believe is
when there's a notice that's has
to be provided to a to a non
user and so there is a period of
one year that allows somebody
that hasn't use water or is
under a for future
considerations without water to
beneficial use prior to nineteen
sixty five we can do it by
operation of law.
So there is a notice provision
and forfeiture thank you so I
madam chair I'll just conclude
by saying the importance of
these public hearings is a
patient should light on what is
going on in this drought
stricken state with massive
amounts of water in our state
and I I think well I know
there's a search for provided
the hearing but that is the
purpose of the hearings and I
seems to me like of the
interpretation of judge Romero
is right on and and it is
unfortunate that the state New
York engineer at some point
unilaterally change the process
but going they do need to follow
the judge's interpretation of
the law and I'm glad and really
impressed that did the sponsors
are trying to work on this
massive problem in our state
thank you that's all I have.
Thank you very much we next
Senators souls and then Senator
Novell and center city Lopez we
take over from minute.
Yes ma'am thank you.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator Wirth does this.
You anything more than clarify a
portion of the current statute
on the water least process at
two different interpretations.
Madam chair and senator souls
it's my opinion that this would
and.
Any.
Ambiguity takes that there is in
the current statute by making it
crystal clear go through the
notice go through the hearing
before proceeding forward so
it's my opinion that this makes
it crystal clear what this does
what we're doing.
Thank you.
Senator senator bill.
Thank you madam chair US senator
Wirth just to clarify.
How long if we change the SLO to
what you're proposing.
How long the process go as
opposed to were the state
engineer now issues timbers
status I guess and they can do
immediate use of the water how
long would this delay that
process can you give me some
idea there yes so madam chair
and senator bill I think the
state engineer gave you some
sense of how they used to do
this which was using the
emergency authorization law
that's currently on the books
and there is a process for
emergency authorization
you know one of the challenges
is and this is a legitimate
issue for all the different
folks that have been using this
this this new interpretation of
the law you're right there's a
it takes years and that's the
challenge and that's why you
know you do have such opposition
to this because
you know the the.
This goes back we discussed the
other day I mean the state
engineer there's there's funding
issues and getting them the
resources they need and and
there is a full blown chance to
to litigate the issue and so it
goes through a whole
administrative process that can
be appealed so it can take years
and I think that is a fair
question and and if this were to
go in in place what would happen
is what happened prior to the
spaceport and offering the
spaceport is a defining moment
prior to the spaceport all the
way back to.
Statehood when we put the water
code in place they use the other
tools that are available in the
water statute including members
the authorization law that's on
the books to deal with true
emergencies for moving water so
that's kind of a roundabout
answer but if we if we pass this
this process would take.
Would would would result in in a
much longer period of time
before the water could be used
on a preliminary lease Senator
Wirth this is David Benavidez I
could actually clarify something
very briefly on that if I could
take a lot to do yeah madam
chair I could deal.
Yes Mr gonna be this.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Neville it does depend
on whether the application is
protest that are not so my
understanding is that a not to
protest it application for a
lease or for transfer or at
least our application coming
before the state engineer office
takes months and not years it's
really only if there's a protest
application that they go through
the hearing process so it does
depend on
whether there's a protester not
thank you.
Well I understand that Senator
Neville.
Madam chair senator Wirth the
protesters issue but even so it
still take a while to to go
through the process to see if
there is a protest nevertheless
I think that's as you mentioned
senator Wirth that's the basis
of the the opposition.
If if oil company and I want to
get water and there's an
environmental group that does
like oil companies and we're
gonna be looking at the extreme
delays is that a fair assessment
madam chair senator Wirth.
Yeah madam chair and senator
bill I mean extreme quote
unquote that's a term as a
matter of opinion yeah but if
you're if you're a farmer trying
to make enough money off your
farm but it released leasing
some water to pay the mortgage
it's extremely that takes a year
and if it takes in years it's
devastating so.
And and and and madam chair in
Centerville I appreciate you
bring up the issue of of the
market that's been created here
and there is and there's no
question about that and I don't
you know what I have no no and
and and I said that up front I
have no in any way do I
disparage or are those that have
been using this statute in the
way it's been interpreted but it
has created a huge market for
agricultural water to be
released and yes if we change
this I would say that would be
that market would be impacted
unless we can figure out a
legislative solution let's tell
people what the rules are let's
find the right balance and let's
fix this so we don't end up in
situations where it's done and I
think it's the state engineer
indicated these are the
exceptions where it's really not
done right a Honda maybe one of
the whole situation Carlsbad
irrigation district maybe
another so I I'm I'm trying to
find and we're pushing to try
and find that that solution and
I think we've got a three week
window here when we can fix the
statue right now before the
court steps in and then work
then we got a hard stop do we do
we have a concept to where we
can eliminate the years long
process to where the state
engineer to make a decision and
it becomes more or less elected
and it's done in thirty or sixty
days some reasonable time frame
is our thought process to do
that.
So madam chair and senator
Neville I think thirty to sixty
days being reasonable in the
water world.
It's a tough is a tough ask what
I do think that there's a and
and the state engineer testified
to this in front of house bill
thirty in the hearings that have
been over there there's a
willingness to provide does a
time period there's an amount of
water and then you know there's
a lake for that for the least
well we wait so those are the
things that are being discussed
and and again I think we've got
to figure out if there's a way
to.
To provide that kind of sweet
spot that does allow this to
happen but also does make sure
that we're not you're not
forcing you know someone who
disagrees with the state
engineer to wait for years and
spend DML thousands to hundreds
of thousands of dollars in legal
fees all the while well the
water is being used and that's
the you heard that in the Honda
valley with the city of Riyadh
also and that's a perfect
example what should never
happened and unfortunately.
I think it's my opinion that
that the statue doesn't allow
that to happen but the it's it's
an interpretation question and
so that's why we're here.
It's kind of got to be a them
versus us argument and I would
like to point out Senator Wirth
if you're a.
Landowner on acequia for example
when you Alisha water you're
part of the acequia it's not
we're not talking about the big
bad guy down the road it's and
it's trying to get to still in
the water this thank you we'll
talk about one of the neighbors
and that are that strong least
water one thing I wanted to
bring up the this is a property
right in its if I own a farm and
I've got water on it.
My right.
And I get to
most use my property anyway I
want to X. within certain laws
of course but water seems like a
whole different animal I don't
get to use my water.
One thing that is a part of a
statute in you might want to
defer to the state engineer one
of his people is the consumptive
use number we don't figure if a
farm has three acre feet of
water for farming it doesn't get
to use three acre feet for
building a highway and it under
one of these leases and it's I
think it's about fifty percent
of our call right to it's not
all of the water they're only
using a portion of the water
based on whatever the consent to
use numbers are in the state
engineer might want to address
that or comment on that but it's
we're not giving away the whole
farm years literally speaking
we're only giving away a portion
of the water are not giving away
that leasing a portion of the
water not a hundred percent of
everything that that farmers are
actually the amount of diversion
that a farm actually uses if you
leases out here's is a water
rights is probably fifty percent
to review the state engineer
somebody could confirm that.
Madam chair of Centerville yes
you're right the only amount of
water that we that we transfer
out is the consumptive use
questions so whenever we around
for instance somebody that's
using three acre feet per acre
could only transfer two point
one out of four that Houston and
I think the other the answer to
your question senator bill is
the the prelim preliminary
approvals are needed to
implement the intent of the
leasing Act and so without an
expedited process there's really
no need to and that and that the
least impact because it's going
to go through the normal process
anyway so that's that's what the
rate is here and again for for
for that's majority of the
opponents all these stages they
are projected name first right
of refusal on any of the
applications I'm not sure what
happened on the the real Honda
one back in in twenty thirteen I
was not state engineer back then
but but they do have a first
right of refusal on on
disallowing any transfers as
long as they have their their by
laws in place so thank you Mr
chair chair and senator Neville
thank you
and your
last comment to state engineer
mentioned a solar farm we've
talked about highways this is a
there's a perception I think
that this is going for some bad
things that it's not it's going
for a lot of good things in the
I want to make that point is
that water we need to make sure
whatever we pass is expeditious
to the degree Candie and I think
that's probably the basis for
why the interpretation was
changed we we want to develop
the state instead of being
always anti business and always
anti development always last in
everything we want to try to do
things good so somebody a long
way said well if we can expedite
Water situation we can build our
highways faster we can build
solar farms we can build any
number of construction or
development projects and Senator
I I.
No objections of why you want to
do this but I.
Going to multi year situations
is going to devastate New Mexico
it's just that simple and that's
my final thought and I'll turn
it back in yield thank you madam
chair since.
Thank you.
I I I was going to ask a Centers
souls has another question or he
just hasn't of lotus and okay
it.
Renewable and I'll madam chair
your back it's I believe it's
Senator Schmedes next okay then
meetings then Senator that on
this and then Senator graders
okay thank you senator sweeties.
Thank you madam chair Centers
been listening with great yeah
we're learning a lot here
drinking from a firehose.
And I have the and yes some
prior water legislation that
when you bring a water bill in
New Mexico you're gonna have a
committee hearing like this
pretty much no matter what it is
so said that with great respect
for for senator Wirth and I'm
sure he knew.
You know we've all issues that
this brings up I just have a
couple questions Senator Wirth
Madam chair Senator Wirth I
appreciate your when you brought
up the existing statute.
And some of the surrounding
issues I have a question on that
there is a a protest and and
objection would you mind telling
me what's the difference from
the protest in the objection.
So Mister chair and Senator me
is what I'm gonna do is you'll
to David Benavidez the expert
witness we get it exactly right.
Thank you.
I'm madam chair is just a Senate
committees I I believe that they
are the same I see in section
six seventy two yes six that six
that they use the word protest
and objection and I believe they
mean the same thing.
Okay.
Interesting madam chair and
senator Mr Bennett as thank you
I don't know if that would have
changed what the judge's rule
present ruling that had been
But I have to think about that
for a second I wasn't expecting
that answer I guess I thought
they were going to be some sort
of a different so I'll go back
to that statute and and look at
it's at some other point in time
I just want to follow up with a
couple of senator Neville
special things I I just don't
understand and I'm I don't need
a lot of technical detail in
here I just want the simple you
know.
A person answer if that's
possible because I I I don't
want to gets to stuck in the
weeds here but I'm just thinking
that so if you all we're not
some appropriating new water
your were time out leasing and
so I.
I'm thinking of okay you you all
these water rights.
And and if so if you what if
you're not what if you're not
using.
I'm a big portion of those water
rights and then you want to
lease them I mean you do still
have to go through this this
public hearing process.
So miss madam chair and centers
committee I think as a follow up
to the point senator Neville
maybe that's exactly what's been
happening is that you've got Ag
or cultural water that's not
being used for agriculture or a
decisions being made to use a
component for leasing instead of
for agriculture and that's
what's kicking into this process
and so in the state engineer
mentioned so you could have a a
ten year lease
and there's going to be up front
and part of it where there's a
preliminary approval process and
there is there is an analysis
done by the state engineer and
you've you've heard and
discussed that process so to be
fair it's not like there's zero
analysis going on it's just that
happens.
You know up front in the
decision they make in a couple
of months that they decide on
whether to do this and once they
make the session.
The least moves forward even if
after notice someone has
objected and that's really the
the the challenge here is that
it's the window if and I think
Mr Benavidez made this point and
it's tricky I'm trying to stay
out of the weeds but it is Mr
Bennett is made this point
though if there's not a protest
it's going to in a couple of
months everything's going to
move forward after the state
engineer does their their
analysis if there is protest
though that's where the hearing
process and going through that
can take more than a year and I
think that's the frustration and
maybe frustrations the wrong
word that's the opposition that
you're hearing to this is that
if there if these are pro tested
in effect you stop the process
where it's immediately put to
use which is which is been a
process since the spate
spaceport.
Interpretation okay okay so so
madam chair and senator Wirth
that because my my understanding
is one of the big things we
appropriate the water is the the
deeming of beneficial use and so
I guess I I'm I'm hearing the
private property argument of Hey
I I only's Water Rights someone
lease them out but when when you
when you have water right well I
guess I guess we have others
this is so complicated because
you have these these long
standing water rights that words
you know you just you just own
and and other people I think
have there's appropriated.
Due to a certain beneficial use
I'm so I I guess I let me just
just one more question and I I
don't want to I think there's
just too much to go through here
but let's take the farmer
example so do do farmers own.
When they only Water Rights are
they are they just for
agricultural use or do they just
kind of just own them and and
they can do whatever they want
with.
So again it so there's a
property interest in those in
those water rights but they
certainly have the right to
lease those water rights for
some other purpose I I think the
key thing I think in response to
the Senate bill that we all have
to remember that all is that
they've got a property right in
that water but so do all the
other folks that are impacted
potentially by changing how that
water is used right right you're
talking about property rights on
both sides here and that's just
to keep part of this this making
sure that one person's.
Ability to use their water to
different economic manner.
Hearing another person's
property right to the water that
they're currently using and
that's the balance the state
engineer tries to try to find
and that's why we we value so
much.
No due process requirements in
our water code to make sure that
someone's property right is not
getting stepped on without
proper chance to go through the
whole.
Hearing and and make sure that
there's a fair analysis that
happens if there's a
disagreement with what the state
engineer has done and that's
really what this comes down to
Senator Wirth this is David
Benavidez can I had five seconds
to that please madam madam chair
I the at if I could do it David
Benavides yes Mr back then of
the this madam chair Senator Mr
the short answer to your
question is yes at a farmer's
Water Rights is specific.
Is it has a specific years so
every water it has a number of
elements like priority dates and
things like that and one of the
elements is its purpose of years
and so if I'm a farmer my water
right is that type of water
right but through a state
engineer permit process I can
change it to a different years.
Okay great thank you madam chair
that and that's all the
questions I have I think it's
this is super complicated I hope
there's some kind of compromise
that that can be brought and and
maybe I don't know maybe some
exceptions for if the purpose of
the water use when it's
transferred isn't changing much
you know if you have a you know
after culture to different kind
of agriculture will why why go
through huge protest if you have
Siemens for wind turbines and
said you're gonna use it for C.
meant for a highway well okay I
mean you know maybe maybe a
little more flexibility in their
work you have oil and gas to
different oil and gas company
maybe you know maybe have some
flexibility there I don't know
I'm just going on idea
of course with the cabbie out
that I I I I have very little
legal knowledge on this so I I
hope hope people can come up to
some kind of compromise because
I I do you know I I get where
the tension is and I I I think I
understand the obviously have
needs for like a restraining
order right you know you have a
need for temporary restraining
order that doesn't just like
Miley due process and you're
gonna get you know go for that
that full hearing later on sort
of thing so we we developed it
for that other part of Law and
obviously it's much more
complicated I think in the water
use but anyway I'll keep
listening to the debate I've
been real fascinating thank you
for answer my questions.
Thank you next we have Senator
von case then Senator thank us.
Senator run thanks.
Senator Mondays at.
Okay Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair and forty our
appreciate the discussion today.
I'm really glad the state
engineer and Tony is on.
In miss madam chair and in
center I'm just wondering so the
Senate more when project in
Roosevelt County Sen Mark.
They used eight point three
million gallons on that project
that's going to just be a few
would mind madam chair Senator
to ****.
State engineer if your bill were
in place would hamper that when
project.
Madam chair Center guy goes I'm
not familiar with the timing on
and track would likely of likely
if they needed some water of and
we're construction which state
you know that would have but I
can't answer for sure based on
not knowing the details of that
particular issue but it's it's
like the projects are going on
right now in certain parts of
the the state yeah they're far
away from any water source and
their they would really be a
defect that part is very cool.
Well madam chair and senator
Wirth and
Mr Dantonio Act I work for
construction coming we do road
work in the house in the local
hills area and I looked at
drilling wells and.
Waters nonexistent.
And we didn't get that job the
just the water costs which can
be future because of the amount
of of tracking it in in and I'm
wondering that because there
were a ranchers
close by that we could negotiate
with.
For their appointment and I know
that it turns in center
Senator
We've already talked about the
water right you know who owns it
in the percent from three point
zero to two point one is least
is there any way for them to.
Recover didn't demand Schloss so
if someone it sort of goes back
Senator built point if someone's
expecting to be able sell this
water for any reason you know
mortgage or whatever the needs
are is there any other way to
use this water it up for
beneficial use.
Other than to lease I guess I'm
trying to figure out if there's
a way the rancher or farmers
would be able to recover with
what we do with them on this
bill.
So madam chair I'm I'm gonna
yield to Mr Benavidez
for his response.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I was if I understand
your question if someone can no
longer use their water rights
are exercised their water right
for the original purpose for
whatever reason
are they just talk or can they
can they devoted to another use
if that's your question and I
hope I'm not misunderstanding it
answer is yes the answer is yes
and and there is this process
there is a process of
permanently transferring your
water right to a new use in a
new location and that's
substantially similar to the
lease process and there's also
the lease process.
And and madam chair center and
Mr Bennett being upset and I
appreciate that I I just sold
the property in Colorado that I
had since our family that since
eighteen thirty three there's a
gentleman that tried to buy the
property just for water rights
in that time I was told that
meditech to torment people
landed just one water and I was
told that was a permissible for
me to.
currently transfer that water.
It may be the difference between
Colorado New Mexico is because I
didn't have latitude to do that
it is specially I used to find
your attention needs or I let it
go down river.
And so it by didn't have a use
for it still ended up Rio Grande
to recover some of Rio Grande
compact but being that it was
Mike that you asked that I could
sell that includes somewhere
else and I I so that's why I
didn't think that there's any
permanent transferring.
And again it maybe Colorado
versus New Mexico law but
that sort of stumped me because
I didn't think that I have no
other option.
being called right of the.
Do you have any kind of caught
on that mission yes etcetera
etcetera madam chair I Senator
Gallegos it's possible that the
laws in Colorado are different
and the only thing about New
Mexico is you do have to get
that permit so it's it's not
necessarily an automatic thing
but the law certainly allows you
the right to apply to the state
engineer to change the years or
change the location where it's
being used.
Well I appreciate that and and
and just another oddity Madam
chair Senator and yes the water
that came through my property
went through a head gate so was
in New Mexico New Mexico
actually took precedence over it
until actually pass that hit
gate came Colorado waters but my
next question.
The madam chair and senator has
so that to the FY are in looking
at it there's no fiscal impact
and I'm wondering how.
The this state engineer is going
to have.
I wouldn't Senator Wirth
anticipate more legal issues I'm
wondering how they're going
offset that we're if we're
thinking through another step in
this bill later on in life.
Mr chair Senator.
So madam chair and senator I
guess I can't.
You know just the two exactly.
You know what the fiscal impact
might be if this were were to
pass
I just think this and we've had
we've had another debate about
off of bill and it's fiscal
impact when you change the law I
mean you just sometimes it
you've got to do it and see
exactly how it how it all plays
out but again I just I think.
This is the we're we're trying
to go back to the way it was
done prior to you know the
decision to the interpretation
of this lease to do it
differently and so again I think
the state and you will be using
the prior tools that they used
up until.
The early two thousands you know
when this got changed and and
what the actual cost and all of
that I can't I can't give you a
specific answer.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I you know I always
heard we're gonna pass you to
read it later but the I guess my
thing is.
I'm more worried with the
unfunded mandate the we're going
produced but might my next
question actually madam chair
and senator Mike go to the.
The state engineer and what it
is I was wondering if the also
stating chair ever reversed a
decision you know when they've
granted by merry approval and
health that is done.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos to
date we have not had to reverse
a decision on a preliminary
approval there's yeah this is
the one that's in
Senator work product that's in
mitigation but not today.
Okay madam chair and senator and
Mr Dantonio the end of.
If we I guess how often do we go
into litigation and as the court
amber overturning it if you're
not had to reverse the decision
I wouldn't District Court is
never for sure overturn is that
correct.
Madam chair Santo Domingo's yes.
So madam chair center I guess
that brings me the hard my
problem is it seems like we're
trying to pass this bill and
hopefully not create any other
problems it if the system
general working now and and you
know I early on we had madam
chair and senator the staff is
get on and I totally understand
what they go through because
like I say if I don't use my
water goes down in the Rio
Grande compact but there are
always other people the board
meeting that I had one point
time that.
From my called the Chelsea area
of the the box and tells and
dropped from a three to two in
is because we're taking a lot a
lot of water on that weekend and
I know what we're doing I mean
it affects everyone downstream
of you but
My last question madam chair and
senator is
Thank you Vigil supply all
protest do they get participate
and hearing.
Your bid.
Yeah madam chairman I yield to
Mr Bennett heat is who who does
this kind of work and can give
you the specific answer.
Madam chair and senator Davis
yes
it and to put a to partially
answer a question Senator Smith
is
asked before about protest
verses objection just to be
clear there's public notice of
the application and he and
there's one chance you have you
know a limited window of time to
file an objection to the
application and they use the
word objection but then when you
protest your call to protest and
it's spelled the same as
Protestant and but that's why I
said before so objection and
protest are used interchangeably
in the statute with regard to
this yes Senator I was once you
objector protest
there K. A. this process very
much like litigation takes place
only it's administrative
proceeding before state engineer
hearing examiner and the poor
and the protest tents are are
parties to that proceeding.
Well thank you that I am proud
of some some glad I'll be
located courtroom and that that
was my only fear is that we were
going to violate their due
process here.
We we ship them out of the first
things that I I do have a lot of
problems with this you know
we've already talked about a lot
of it no the property rights and
not.
The opportunities for
It other uses you know you talk
about wind turbines I mean
that's huge in our state and if
we are going to continue to be
going down that road I don't
know how they can and and and Dr
Schmidt is was talking about
concreteness not just concrete
we have to have it in the
compaction of the base course
materials can be the some great
and it takes longer water bill
build a firm foundation for
those types of facilities so
what that madam chair all you.
Thank you very much I do not
believe Senator wanted this is
on
so we will now go to the closing
by the sponsor.
Thank you madam chair and I I
very much appreciate the
discussion and I think Center
smitteez definitely.
Hit right on the issue these are
it's a very complicated legal
issue but it's one that I think
involves nothing more important
than than the the central issue
for us as a state moving forward
is our water and and with
climate change and and the need
to deal with water and how we're
going to use water all water is
life in and I just love and I
think it's so appropriate that
senator Hermio brought up the
the acequia model and and yes
the state could have been carved
out that was good work that
Representative Chandler did two
years ago but the reality is
that we've kind of lost the
conversation that's going on
here when you've got rights that
are impacted and things are
happening before there's a
chance to get those that
discussion and get that resolved
so I do not think the right
solution is that suggested to
stop the bill I would ask that
you move it forward I assure all
the committee that we are
working diligently to try and
find a legislative solution and
the huge difference all and with
this from where we've been in
the last six years on this bill
is we've got a district judge
that's agreed with us and a
district judge judge Romero who
set aside the potash leases
based on his ruling that
decision is why all of us on
both sides of this issue should
be trying to find a compromise
and I just want to chair the
committee were working hard to
do that.
Thank you very much what is the
pleasure of the committee.
We do pass.
There's a motion and a second
for a do pass.
Running would you please call
the vote.
Senator serve on this.
Senator Gallegos no matter.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville no and I'd like
to explain my vote.
Senator poke.
Senator Paypen.
Yes thank you.
Senator.
No I'd like to briefly explain.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Senator sirventes.
Chairman Stefanics.
Senator Hamblen was there did
you get hurt I I did she said
yes okay so I.
I don't think you called me and
Center souls is yes.
I'm sorry.
Senator souls and senator so do
Sedillo Lopez yes and terms to
fenics.
Yes.
So that I three in one.
Thank you very much I have first
Senator renewable and then
Senator Schmedes to explain
about.
Thank you madam chair I
understand the problem and I.
Sympathized Senator Wirth what
he's trying to do it seems like
if we passed the bill in its
current form or the judge rules
are kind of the same same
position.
I would hope going forward
Senator you could come up with
some way some methodology.
That you could
In certain time frames or time
limits to where the these
leasing programs can can proceed
on a timely basis years is not
an acceptable thing for building
windmills it's not acceptable
for drilling oil wells it's not
acceptable for trying to
subdivide a a new development in
the community all of these
things need to be slaughter and.
We've got to have a process that
to that is expeditious and
allows us to produce progress in
the state or else a is this
that's another thing is going to
help shut us down that's my
biggest concern thank you madam
chair.
Thank you centers committee.
Thank you madam chair I like to
echo concerns from Senate Bill
but I'm certainly open to voting
in favor of this if it were to
change my my my bottom line but
I can't get past is can these
protests be weaponized.
Would they be weaponized against
you know prejudice to a certain
type of project or person or or
entity let me use a so simple
you know are we just going to
have all the oil and gas
company's protest all the
Siemens projects for wind
turbines and are we going to
have all the you know the solar
people protest the oil and gas
water stuff but I just want to
make sure it's not these
protests will be able to be
weaponized that they'll be very
you know well thought through
and and some process for the LFC
to that a type of protests that
is more about economics and less
about water sort of thing I know
it's more complicated than that
but that's that's where I'll
that's what I'd like to see and
I I have full faith and Center
were here to take a look at that
issue but that's that's my my
probably last for all that I
can't quite clear with the bill
in its current form thank you.
Thank you very much so Senator
and Sanchez you have a do pass
on Senate bill sixteen
congratulations thank you madam
chair we appreciate the
discussion thank you so
committee members it's eleven
forty six
there was a request to
reconsider of Bill we have not
taken any formal action on that
reconsideration is there any
motion.
Sure like to make a motion to
reconsider Senate bill.
Three twelve.
Is there a second on the motion.
Madam chair there's a second
from Senator Hamblen.
Okay thank you there is a motion
to reconsider is there any brief
discussion from committee about
the reconsideration vote.
Yes to reconsider will bring the
bill off the table.
She diesel G. share.
Okay could you please call the
vote on the reconsideration
motion.
Senator Cervantes.
By Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville no.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator smitteez.
I'd like to vote no please.
Senator is also.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
I'm sorry.
Let's see if Senator we were
witnessing Center.
Serve Andi's and Senator
Gallegos are you.
Madam I just received a text
that he is trying to get on it
any cannot be eight C. just said
trying is what has to access.
He's present is just.
I guess we can't hear him or
something but he can hear us.
It is possible for him to call
in.
Okay Texan.
Let's wait let's stand
placement.
We have had a participating
committee member who was knocked
off we'll see if they can get
back on my phone.
Always asking how he's asking
how to call in.
Can the secretary called him
into the store he is rejoining
the the beating that now okay.
Moving dot.
Okay we just sent we just sent
him the secretary cellphone.
Madam chair yes I can hear L.
okay so we are voting on the
reconsideration of the bill
Branik up these just for is
about Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am.
Senator someone just.
In chairman Stefanics.
Yes.
It's.
Okay.
No laying on the table committee
members I want to thank you very
much for spending your Saturday
morning and Senate conservation
have a great rest of the weekend
in committee or not thank you
bye everybody thank you madam
chair.
Everyone.
