Working yes so we have a Senate
joint resolution twelve Senator
Rodriguez magistrate court
property and it might sound like
a strange topic for this
Committee but why don't you
explain why you're here thank
you madam chairman members of
the committee I've got Jason
clack here he's the director of
court appropriations for the
administrative office of the
courts and Madam chairman
members all this is is a
transfer from a state department
to another department of the
state there's no money involved
to transfer some land for to
build a magistrate court
facility over the years we have
fund it little by little this
court facility that's so badly
needed and we finally got to the
point where we have the funding
now the the the General Services
Department is willing to
transfer and would like to
transfer actually not only
willing to transfer for lots
that they have way out there by
Kohl's that's where it's going
to be built in so they just want
to transfer that to the
administrative office of the
courts we can get started movie
thank you madam chairman.
Thank you guys for the Planning
Commission yes I just wanted to
say that this also because I
know some questions have been
asked we'll go to the Planning
Commission for final
ratification thank you and then
Jason witcher thank you madam
chair members the committee I'll
stand for questions why don't
you introduce yourself for the
record please you Jason neglect
with administrative office of
the courts okay so let me go to
the audience is there anyone
here in support of this bill
this joint resolution.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to this joint
resolution.
Is there anyone online about pro
or con about this.
Okay.
So I think we're choosy to
questions and comments from
committee members in center
renewable you have experience
with this.
Okay there is a motion for do
pass is there is there is a
second I just wanna make sure
nobody has any questions or
comments.
Okay with the secretary please
call the roll yes Senator
Fonsi's you Senator that goes
Senator Hamblen yes.
Some of the LFC yes.
Senator pope yes Senator
committee is that our souls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Stefano yes.
Okay by a vote of five to zero
you have a do pass thank you for
coming and being on time thank
you madam chairman members of
the committee pre update this
okay Sir Senator Sedillo Lopez
is presenting Senate Bill
endorsed seventy eight for
Senator Campos.
We're taking committee members
for taking the finance built
first and then we'll jump down
to my bill.
So for the public we are on
Senate bill four seventy eight.
It is Amalie fish hatchery for
Senator Campos.
Good morning madam chair I'm
honored to present this bill on
behalf of Senator Campos it
appropriates ten million dollars
from the general fund to to the
game fish to establish a fish
and a multi of fish hatchery and
this is pretty important his you
know fishing isn't important
tour of of some revenue source
from tourism in our state and I
have here has an expert
secretary Mike Sloan or
department head Mike slowed.
It's just on the way to make any
comments please introduce
yourself for the record.
Madam chair Mike Sloan director
the department game and fish
thank you I just have a very
brief comment that I think this
is a great opportunity for us to
be able to both raise cutthroat
trout and to do other
conservation actions for for
real toads that northern leopard
frogs those kind of species so I
think it would be a an excellent
addition to our facilities thank
you thank you.
Is there anyone here in the
audience to support this bill
okay we got one hand in the back
so Mister truck please come on
up
And is there anybody in
opposition.
Yup is the new nickname.
Okay please go ahead.
Mr Roper thank you chairwoman
and I'm okay with that if they
in.
for the record and Roper tried
unlimited
We follow the built in this
committee it's rare that we get
to talk about fish so I
appreciate that the sponsor
bringing this forward I wanted
to make a few points today just
about the importance of fishing
we're supportive of new
investments in our hatchery
system because fishing is such a
significant component of both
our outdoor recreation and our
tourism industry in the state of
the kind of drive that point
home we can talk about a little
bit of data from the department
I'm to our rivers for example
the San Juan in the rate goes in
recent years we've seen over a
million angler days and what
that means is a million times
doesn't mean a million people
and fishing one day but it does
mean that each year they're been
a million visits to those rivers
I could be me going five times
and I would count for I angler
days but that's a really
significant at a number of
people enjoying our rivers for
for fishing the the other point
I would make is that in recent
years the state is sold early
from the most recent you're
aware of a data for the states
all over two hundred thousand
fishing licenses that revenue
accounts for about a third of
the department's annual revenue
when you account for
associated federal funds and so
fishing is a really significant
source revenue for the
department also in our
communities where fishing occurs
we also think it's really
important that the state
consider more general fund
appropriations to support this I
think if they go back to the
richer to ministration for the
last time that the legislature
has appropriated general fund to
the Department and we think
about how significant our fish
and wildlife are to people all
across the state and and the
economic contribution we think
it's really something that that
this body should be considering
in the future so I this my
comments today and thank you
very much for the time.
Thank you very much for coming.
Is there anyone else in the
audience that wanted to comment
on this.
Okay committee members.
Questions comments Senator pope.
Thank you and
thanks for sponsoring this bill
and bringing it forward
Just a question I am I support
the bill would just little
understanding on this so it's
ten million dollars
nonrecurring so this is just
something that as far as
sustaining us this is something
that the department will be able
to to take care of after the ten
million dollars is exhausted
madam chair I defer to my
witness director been fished
madam chair Senator that's part
of the reason that we have our
Senate bill two fifty for the
fee increase bill that will
allow us to undertake actions
like this are just.
So I have madam chair thank
thank you.
Further questions comments.
Is there a motion.
Over the past chair.
We have a motion is there a
second ago and secretary
seconded by Senator Hamblen.
Could you please call the roll
yes Senator Vontaze Senator
Gallegos excuse Senator have
left yes Senate Bill yes Senator
pope yes thanks committee use
Senator souls Senator the office
yes that's that that yes.
Five out of five zero you have a
do pass thank you very much for
presenting for center Campos
thank you madam chair thank you
senator Munoz please come on up.
Also those bring their
handcuffs.
So we decided to do the
appropriations bills before we
what got into our regular
agenda so that you can get to
committee but we have gotten
quite a few emails about this so
please proceed.
Madam chair members of the
committee we we talk about how
New Mexico's water shortage is
going to happen in the next
couple years.
How much water we Texas what's
gonna happen with produced water
in New Mexico and in talking
with environmental secretary we
came up with
a way to deal with that in the
we claiming that the brackish
water and figuring out how to
recharge our aquifers with
breakfast with clean up water
and so in talking with them
NMED the state engineer of we
have to come up with an idea
that begins to quantify water
New Mexico so.
That's the short of it.
Okay so Senator you have an
expert witness on this no okay.
Get one but.
Well we I have questions for the
department later but is there
and how many people are in the
audience to support this bill.
Okay let me see hands please one
two three four five how many are
in the audience to oppose this
bill.
Okay how many people are online
to support this bill.
No opponents no orders okay
let's hear from three supporters
to start with if you come to the
middle of the room and used a
hand held Mike.
morning madam chair he's that
working for us I can never tell
you okay good morning madam
chair members the committee I'm
playing Avid with New Mexico
State University and we stand in
support of this bill as you can
see from the bill there's an
appropriation directly to New
Mexico State University in the
amount of two and a half million
members of the legislative
education study committee last
year visited our water labs at
New Mexico State University to
see the work we're doing we have
some quality researchers and
grad students working on finding
ways to repurpose water to make
it safe for all types of uses in
this funding goes a long way in
terms of supporting us our labs
are
under resource to say the least
and so this will be an immense
help and we all know we're in a
drought stricken state so this
can make a huge difference in
finding ways to put water to
good use and you know for the
next fifty sixty years for my
daughter and others to have a
chance at living in the state so
thank you and thank you to
sponsors Center when you're.
Thank you next please.
Madam chair members to meet the
demands on director government
affairs for New Mexico tech we
also stand in support there is a
two point five million dollars
appropriation for New Mexico
tech do we have the expertise to
do some of the work that.
The Santo Domingo.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
SB four ninety three and thank
the sponsor for bringing it
forward during a year of
historic surpluses we believe
there's an opportunity to invest
in water desalinization
development infrastructure New
Mexico making New Mexico leader
in this technology in the United
States while also ensuring a new
water resource for the citizens
of New Mexico according to
Sandia national laboratories New
Mexico sits on some of the
largest saltwater brackish water
resources in North America the
chamber believes this investment
in a comprehensive
desalinization approach that
incorporates the environment
department our research
universities and the state
engineers office would position
New Mexico to be more resilient
and prosperous for the next
generation of New Mexicans thank
you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone let's go to
opposition would any of the
opponents like to come forward
to speak.
He need to come to the middle
and hold the hand held and then
we'll go to the.
People on soon as well yes my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy five oh one
C. for
statewide organization with
forty five hundred members and
I'm here just expressed concerns
about this bill if the intent of
the bill was merely to study how
to desalinated naturally
occurring brackish water we'd be
in support of the bill our
concern is that this is a back
door effort to to revisit
produced water and the reuse of
produced water in agriculture
and in other contexts office off
of the oil platforms and that
we've that would we we would be
opposed to that so what we would
like to see is a amendment to
this to defy because most bills
you see the start with all kinds
of definitions and what
triggered our concern was
there's no definition of
brackish water this bill there's
no definition of anything and so
we would like to see that
definition and in that case we
could support this but thank you
very much for your support your
service.
Thank you Mr Gibson anyone else
who wanted to speak.
Please come forward.
I miss Martin good morning my
name.
my name is Susan Martin and I'm
representing the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter we have thirty
five thousand members and
supporters in New Mexico.
It should here I'm gonna have to
read this to you respectfully
the Sierra Club cannot support
this bill as currently written
the bill appropriates over sixty
million to OS the NMED NMSU in
NMAA tech for brackish water
development and reduce we agree
that these agencies and
institutions need adequate
funding to provide the necessary
research and oversight for
alternate sources of water
including brackish water however
this bill is too broadly written
lacks specificity regarding the
use and re use of brackish water
section one of the bill directs
NMED to promulgate rules for the
appropriate mineral level for
this chart is a brackish water
in offer for recharge projects
The New Mexico water quality
control commission regulations
provide water quality standards
for many of the minerals metals
and other contaminants present
in brackish water these
standards have been in use for
many years I've been heavily
vetted by the US EPA and the
water quality New Mexico water
quality control commission one
of our major concerns that the
bill language implies of the
existing water quality standards
should not apply to the use of
brackish water also the bill
only allow six to nine months
for NMED to develop regulations
which is on necessarily resting
on realistic the bill could also
duplicate on going efforts by
NMED to develop regulations
governing produced water and it
produced water act twenty
nineteen for these reasons and
more we oppose this bill.
Thank you
Now go to the system I have
there's no supporters right.
On the show but there are two
opponents there's actually for
now for apartments okay so the
first two I had was somebody by
the name of Sophia and the
second person was Melissa
Trautmann we can hear from both
of them so Sophia please.
And please introduce yourself by
full line.
Hello can you hear me yes.
All right hello my name is
Sophia Jenkins me at the member
mail justice coordinator for
urgent care I'm speaking on
behalf of our care and I urge
you to oppose SB four ninety
three this bill proposes many
different ways for the state to
re use brackish water for
aquifer recharge projects this
raises several concerns what
practice water we talking about
and are we talking about
produced water we know all the
oil and gas industry has a waste
problem what we want to make
sure the idea here isn't to use
fifty million dollars in public
funds try to solve this problem
but this water is to simply too
toxic to treat and putting a
large appropriation of our state
funding into this will only
result in harm is not
environmentally friendly instead
of reusing produced water like
fracking we solution simply stop
fracking and contaminating water
and first place there are better
ways to solve the water crisis
and there better ways to help
New Mexico right please vote no
on just before ninety three
thank you.
Thank you and Melissa Trautmann.
Good morning can you hear me all
right.
Yes.
Good morning everyone my name is
Melissa Trotman I am with
WildEarth guardians
Based here in Santa Fe and I
want to echo the same concerns
already brought up in
opposition.
This is not something that we
would necessarily oppose.
Except for the fact that
there is a rush to rulemaking
timeline.
And there is a lack of clarity
around what bracket what
constitutes brackish water and
for the you know like the
previous commenters we are
concerned that this would
include or imply.
the use of oil and gas produced
water
As a type of brackish water and.
We would like to see an
amendment.
To clarify what exactly.
Brackish water is or could be.
extend any kind of rulemaking
and also even if this isn't
produced water and it's just a
you know from salty grass
aquifer's.
There's more than just minerals
to to be considered in terms of
recharging aquifers you know the
salty brackish water
is also prone to include radium
two to six what's it which is a
known human carcinogen and so
I'd like to see a little some
more specificity around what
parameters would be required for
testing once this practice what
I was treated so again we're
opposed until this excludes
produced water thank you.
Thank you very much okay we've
heard from supporters and we've
heard from opponents of we will
now go to the committee for
questions and answers I have
center renewable and Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Sure for restart this bill does
limited to brackish water.
I'm I'm sorry would you this
bill does limit to brackish
water not to re use correct.
So could you point out that
specifically because that did
come up and six page two.
For brackish re use water
expiration.
Yes for brackish water re use
exploration.
There's nothing to do with
produced water currently there's
a well drilled in Rio Grande and
Rio Rancho that is a brackish
well they don't know what to do
with it and so we put
desalination plants there
they'll be able to start testing
the water and see what happens
when that brackish water comes
up and where the water will go
do we put it in Rio Grande do we
tie into an Albuquerque pipeline
and how to do that.
Okay we'll we'll get into that
in a minute the other thing you
might want to do I see you have
aging with you might want to
look at the FIR the
recommendations department of
environment has
a couple of amendments that
they're recommending at the end
of the FIR on page three of the
FIR center renewable.
Thank you madam chair
The testimony of the opponents
was that.
It doesn't specify what.
What the definition is for the
way I read the first was only
one paragraph renewable research
appropriations for specific
uses.
It is to develop those standards
that's what this is all about is
to develop the standards to
determine what they should be to
re use this water there's a lot
of read not re use of water
we've got very.
highly.
Could the concentrated minerals
and San Juan County
Representative Sandell has a
company that deals with that
water that's why he's one of the
people out there that does that
madam chair and and.
What they they can't rip
protectively reviews it I don't
know if there would be a
economic potential for ever
using that water because it's
very very brackish very salty so
they injected back to working
from and that's what
Representative sandals business
and the number of others up
there do but this potentially
could be used and the waters up
there to determine I guess
that's what you can use it for
and that this is specifying the
various university student
studies.
But I I don't understand the
opposition when that's what the
goal is to determine what it
would take to reuse the water am
I missing something chairman of
the Senator let me introduce
when John Roderick is that water
protection division from the
environment department so he's
here with questions you're
correct that's exactly what it's
for so I share your name is John
John Roderick John Roberts
Roderick Roderick are you also
the Waller creek water quality
control commission.
No I'm not I'm the director of
the water protection division
for the New Mexico environment
department okay sorry Senator
will use of the floor he's going
to have those expert.
Madam I believe.
Certainly happy to do that
The one of the key issues and
the need to study the potential
use of brackish water and how we
get to that is the reality that
was discussed that there are
other things other than salinity
in total dissolved solids to
deal with and so a big piece of
this the purpose for NMED is to
to work judge with universities
to develop the screening
mechanism in the process that
needs to be utilized to
determine.
What has to happen what has to
be cleaned of the brackish water
as was noted there are other
things radium various different
things beyond minerals that need
to be addressed and so that's
the purpose is to develop that
screening criteria
and then to set standards that
would allow for use of brackish
water.
For specific fit for purpose
uses.
And at this point none of those
are identified.
That's my point measures that
that's what the goal of the bill
is is that appropriates money
but it's to basically see if we
can use the stuff and
Maybe we can that we can't but
if you don't study it and
analyze it and develop standards
you do
I I.
We're gonna be getting a lot of
brackish water for a long time
with the local and gas or not
it's going to happen so we might
as well figure out what we're
going to do with the the by
product which is brackish water
thank you madam chair thank you
next I have Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Senator guy it goes
and then Senator Hamblen thank
you minute madam chair there a
couple of reasons I was
concerned about this bill it
apart from all of the emails
that that I got with concerns
one of the suggestions from the
department of of the environment
department was to change the
name to alternative water source
reviews and then it on the last
the last part of the very last
line on the last two lines.
Including water treatment and
desalination direct and indirect
possible you re use reclaimed
wastewater and treated produced
water so that tells me their
intention is to include produced
water and another clue is the
allocation to New Mexico state
because New Mexico state is is
we charged with studying the
potential reuse of produced
water.
So if that amendment I
understand you have a enter that
amendment but this tells me
about their intention brackish
water is not defined here and as
I listen to senator Neville he
is also he's also talking about
breakfast water
When a lot of us would call what
comes up with oil and gas
produced water.
and I'm I'm very concerned
because it also just talks about
mineral content not the
naturally occurring radiation
that occurs in produced water
has a thank you come up from
these deep from these debacles
aquifer's of of brackish water I
I know water is going to be our
biggest thing.
But I would suggest.
That fifty million.
Two of the to match federal and
private funds for brackish water
re use treatment and and also
for destruction is way premature
before these regulations before
we know what these regulations
state of the appropriation to
the universities I don't really
have a problem with with the
university studying this because
we're going to we're going to
have to deal with it
and then the appropriation to
the environmental Department of
course I don't have any problem
with that because they need
additional resources to do what
they need to do with regard to.
To what this this issue and
other issues.
Then.
The state engineer does not have
any jurisdiction of over
breakfast water is that correct
Madam chair.
Senator the.
Who controls brackish water
really.
Is there anyone from the state
engineers office here hello okay
please go ahead madam chair and
thank your with the NMED right
yes okay but we work very very
closely with LFC on multiple
issues at this point in time
it's my understanding that there
are no water rights associated
with brackish water but one of
the reasons that the offices
state engineer needs to be
involved is is eight tied NFI
locations where brackish water
is that we're obviously aware of
women in oil regions but it
needs to be explored other
places and bait to determine you
know if this becomes a viable
commodity.
Then the state may need to
review and potentially attach
Water Roch through those but at
this point that hadn't been
determined and that's part of
what I say will be doing is
trying to identify that role and
how that fits in there madam
chair a few years ago brackish
water which excluded from the
jurisdiction of the state
engineers office and I believe I
I don't know for sure but just
looking at the history I was I
believe that was to facilitate
its use in the oil patch
and he's nodding so so he agrees
with with me so I just think
that there is a lot of
Overlap in people's definitions
of brought of brackish water and
produced water and so I of some
concern.
And of unless this is amended to
define brackish water and
exclude produced water and to
the fifty million for this
design of this plant before we
even have rules is is concerning
to me so without those at least
those changes I I can't support
this this is a small centers the
bills not amended has brackish
water currently in it each each
plan we're told runs I just six
million and during the
interminable of C. the state
engineer is the one that
mentioned these across the state
you know placing one at at Rio
Rancho which there's a well
drilled placing one at sentry
said they're building brackish
water facility in el Paso right
now very large one for brackish
water so they know what water
they need and then placing them
in other areas Farmington Santa
Fe when the Colorado River is
going to get sued and dried up
this summer if we don't get
enough snow pack and maybe we'll
have enough that you know
California is already told
Arizona eight you don't have any
water we're going to cut you off
and we're gonna have the water
course the west if you look up
at the Chama diversion rate that
diverts water to Santa Fe and
down into Albuquerque if they
decide that that diversion as a
legal we end up in a lawsuit
we're gonna be and in five to
ten years with no water this is
a long term plan for New
Mexico's water and we can't look
at the amendments in the in the
F. I. R. that's not in the bill
this is the bill will be drafted
based upon comments from the
state engineer comments from the
Environment Department and then
there comments in the FIR and
were never mentioned to us and
drafting we talked about how how
we get New Mexico out of its.
All water problems that are
coming and coming we're really
quickly just.
Madam chair would you of.
Would you is there a definition
of wreckage Water in statute.
Not that we're aware of madam
chair and senator not that I'm
aware of but that's part of the
rulemaking process that we would
have to engage in he is clearly
defining and moving forward
making if I could respond to the
question
you know with regard to the the
thought process behind NMED's
proposed amendment for that
piece.
My division includes ground
water quality surface water
quality drinking water and we're
charged in groundwater with
protecting groundwater the state
of New Mexico and that has at
least two pieces to it one is of
course preventing contamination
the second is figuring out how
not to use it up.
And and we believe that that
charges us with with.
Doing a thorough review and
evaluation of all potential.
Sources and alternative sources
of water.
To determine if there is any way
to utilize those to offset the
use of fresh water.
Now do we get to yes can ensure
that we're not done with the
science were not been with the
reviews and the studies is
crucial to do that.
You know brackish water is one
and and very likely a primary
source because of the sheer
volume that that we believe is
available in the state of New
Mexico.
But you know I would be remiss
in not saying that we are
charged with looking at
alternatives and faster
currently engaged in all
alternatives were mandated by
the produced water bills to
explore review and develop
regulations for that and we're
moving forward our hope is to do
all of this in conjunction
because much of it has the same
pathways to rulemaking and the
same identification of the
screening process is necessary
for an alternative sources.
Thank you madam chair I also
would suggest that once this
brackish water is clean.
I I would suggest that it
probably loses I it's identity
has brackish water that is
beyond the scope of the state
engineers office and then the
state engineer should come in
but that's not clearly spelled
out in fact excluding brackish
water a few years ago meant that
the state engineer didn't you
know lost its jurisdiction and I
would like to see that change
because I think the state
engineer because we're going to
have to use the naturally
occurring brackish water somehow
now we're using it has has up to
help with oil and gas
exploration which I think is an
excellent use of it but I like
like I said I would support
section three section four
section five but I do not
support section to I just think
it's premature the would go
forward with the plant without
having the rules without having
the studies without having the
regulation and you know
anticipating that the City of
Albuquerque is going to be using
that water when we don't even
have the rules and I think at
the idea of having rules in six
months.
Honestly I haven't seen that
with the environmental
Department it's a painstaking
process involving all of the
stakeholders and there's a lot
of stakeholders we're talking
about water.
Some Madam chair Senators.
If you look in section two of
the bill the error first slide
twenty twenty eight and if you
look at that FY are in in
section one more their
recommendation is that's where
the environment department is
proposing changing that timeline
the other item section five
where they do that according to
my expert witness they're
already doing that in the
vitamin Department.
So madam chair are you
suggesting that you're changing
the rule making timeline or.
Are you suggesting the rules are
already drafted halfway or what
if I'm not sure I think I can
answer.
Madam.
madam chair and and senator we
propose in their to extend the
timeline to do rulemaking
associated with this to the end
of twenty twenty four to give us
about eighteen months
realistically you can't get any
rural rural.
W. Q. C. C. in less than twelve
months because of the public
notice processes and public
involvement to to required we
started last year a interim
prohibitive rulemaking on
treated produced water use that
would prohibit discharge but
would allow us to move forward
with closed loop projects so
that we can do the science to
understand this that pathway.
To a great extent will parallel
what's necessary to happen with
brackish water and it makes
sense to move those together at
the same time just simply
because we don't want to try and
be multiple times in front of W.
QCC opening up the same
regulations.
So while that is in process you
know it it's still in its
infancy we're just getting ready
to start public involvement
process with that rulemaking so
changing the date from twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
four would be a friendly
amendment mention.
Could you tell us the page in
line and that is our section
one.
I miss in this the sponsor are
you up making a motion yes I
move that on page twenty I'm on
page would lead twenty four
twenty twenty three we change to
twenty twenty four.
And now go to the sponsors that
a family member yes okay and is
there a second for that
amendment.
Okay so
madam secretary got that.
Okay is there any opposition to
the amendment.
It is consider friendly and so
we have changed that twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
four okay center city Office you
still on the floor yes the
second of.
The second amendment I'm going
to propose I don't I don't think
we'll be friendly and that is to
eliminate section two of the
bill.
That would be not friendly.
We don't think we're gonna put
fifty million dollars in there
and Senate finance we are going
to put some money just in case
technology catches up where the
rule making is there but we have
a large amount of money we might
as well plan for for future so
within eighteen months they do
have that we're not in session
the money's there and and
they're ready to go and there is
a practice well drug drilled in
Rio Rancho two of them.
Madam chair and I just don't
think we're ready to finance
without I'm not comfortable
having.
Because we will be needing
of where this money is released
to for this of this grant or
this use of the fifty million
which is a lot a lot of money
and we won't know what the
regulations are we don't know
whether what we don't know about
the the Rio Grande if we won't
know about the geology so it is
for that reason I propose.
That amendment are you moving in
I move it to eliminate section
to it and it's been deemed
unfriendly is there a second to
the motion.
The motion dies for lack of
second okay Senator deal are you
still at the four.
Okay without that amendment I'm
sorry I cannot support you will
be voting against okay thank you
center again this.
Madam chair center thank you
actually I just had a couple of
things
in Eunice we take our water from
local all and I think part of
the problem is understanding the
different opportunities
underground so we have areas are
real shallow brackish water that
has cities of drilling to go and
get well started they provide
the brackish water
it's not fresh water but it's
not produced water it's not
doubt deep down hole for the all
use is just a cavity Water that
would be useful in your bill the
way it's set up to be able to
provide us other uses so
madam chair and and etcetera I
guess my question for you is in
and I do appreciate this let me
finish cabbie out of city of
Eunice actually has looked at
building a a facility to clean
up to brackish water of like
five point five million is what
the part is going to cost but
there's a lot of reviews in Mr
chair and senator I'm just
wondering if in your discussions
if you guys are talked to is
also back in November first of
twenty nineteen of.
Search to deal Lopez myself in
smitteez we were in the house
time to Senate
basher grammar came from Israel
to Albuquerque to be able to
help us with technology to just
do what you're trying to set in
rural to be able to prepare
forced usual is similar area
type is what we are and they're
dry they've found ways to be
able to survive.
With low water and so I'm
wondering Mr and in center and
expert witnesses of have any
bill had discussions with
his role at all on technologies
because I think they perfected
already and I'd hate to reinvent
the wheel madam chair the
managers Center I am not
everybody keeps talking about
Israel and their their
desalination plants and how they
have technology but I have had
no conversation with them I
don't think Adrian has I can't
speak for the environment
department was shaking his head
no but everybody goes back to
the Israelis and and the right
Israeli technology and and this
is for the Israelis notes for
New Mexico I don't know where
the technology is I know they're
building a giant one and I'll
pass.
Mr chair Senator that may be
helpful if it's already here
technology wise but I know he's
reached out to more killer will
bring that there like our fourth
or fifth eight trade partners
with New Mexico I think that
might be an Avenue is this bill
goes forward thank you Mr and
madam chair and senator that I
like is that here you are
looking to look forward to see
that that the money's there and
I totally trust year over
finance I know when you get into
that point you only have a
certain bucket of money we're
spending money wisely like
drunken sailors but I would
rather put it in something
that's going to give us some.
The end result this favorable to
us I can see the water will
always be an issue of the madam
chair and center of.
My thought on on the amounts and
and and I know you're just in
rulemaking of the if you were to
have the fifty million do you
think that's an in numbers I
just to beginning number as you
go forward looking at brackish
water.
madam chair center you know the
it's roughly five million
dollars worth they told us to
the plant so we said the NMED
went to and the state engineer
went Unisys said you very
brackish water what levels at
can we start testing that water
can we tested the cell plant so
we can see what comes out and in
six months or under eight month
run on brackish water so we can
see what chemicals leach from as
the wells drawn down that would
be a test deal but
The fifty million is
strategically placed in it says
in certain regions in New Mexico
and so if we find water we find
that it can be used you won't
want to cut out of region saying
or not and it we don't have any
money for T. cell plant for you
will.
We put enough money to put you
know ten plants around the state
roughly.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and your expert witness
and my next question is so if we
are to do this on the diesel
plant we've had a company come
in from Texas that was looking
at putting the cell plant in Lee
County but there principal
objective was to be able to
clean the water up to get it the
Pecos river in the artesian area
is pretty self.
Drop the wreckage Water very
much but what they're wanting do
is work with the state to be
able to pay back the Texas water
compact and I'm wondering Mr
center and gentleman would that
be a.
A viable use of this practice
water if we're able to clean it
up his pay back to the Texas
water compact.
Madam chair and senator I'll
speak to that and I will speak
on behalf of the state engineer.
One of the uses potential uses
that is being explored
whether that occurs for us from
the direct
Flow back into the rate goes or
whether that becomes a
utilization of off or after for
re injection to boost the
aquifer's but it is again we're
we're trying to examine all
possible options to extend our
water here in New Mexico and
reduce the use of fresh water
and certainly if if it is
determined that brackish water
can be treated to a level that
is acceptable for that use and
that is not going to negatively
impact groundwater surface
water.
Then there's a high probability
of it but again that would be
something that the state
engineer will be studying and
exploring to determine if it can
be used that way.
Thank you madam chair and
senator to me I like the idea
just because you don't have to
go back to fresh water because
the way the pickles already set
up and then you would go ahead
and distribute that into Texas
just for a compact but those are
the main questions I had I I
like what you're doing here I
appreciate that there have been
discussions now with fortune
emergency I think we do a lot of
things without rules
we've got another bill coming up
later this gonna force of
elector companies do things with
the even the battery testing is
not complete and I know it's
different topic but I just think
that you guys taking first up to
do this is good for us the state
line also in favor thank you.
Thank you Senator Hamblen thank
you madam chair thank you
sponsor for bringing this
forward and and I appreciate the
conversation from my colleagues
here on this because obviously
there's a commitment to make
sure that we are protecting our
water but also the opportunity
to try and.
In a rural
try make the most of of what
we're what we're doing in the
state and and what we've got I I
do have a couple of questions
and and some concerns the first
is is section one
just the you know with the
amendment the department of
environment so by December
thirty first now twenty twenty
four promulgate rules for the
appropriate mineral levels for
water in the water projects
specified in section three I'm
wondering and and maybe your
expert is able to answer this
madam chair and sponsor The New
Mexico directly have water
quality standards for for many
of the contaminants in the
wreckage Water.
Madam chair and senator I yes we
do are again the issue at hand
that we're trying to explore is
not just mineral content and in
some of our other con comments
in the FIR we have discussed.
Addressing that because of the
other constituents that are
potentially and you know
everything from naturally
occurring radioactive materials
to arsenic to all that the.
Three thousand different things
that could be there we're
currently working with New
Mexico State University to
identify the constituents now
that they are dealing with
produced water.
But it has a brackish component
as well the screening process is
very much the same to identify
what is in this this practice
water source and a very source
the source to determine what's
going to have to be pre treated
and filtered out before it can
be desalinated for any potential
use we have to develop that
screening process and that's
that's the crucial piece the
regulation there may develop
will address as part of that the
necessary screening process that
has to be applied to determine
if it can be utilized as a
source of thank you madam chair
wondering.
will this build change those
standards that you've talked
about in terms of like what that
what you're looking for in the
practice water and produced
waters.
Future Michael yes this.
Madam secretary and senator it
does have the potential and the
intent to do that more than
likely it's not going to read
date reduce those requirements
it's it's more than likely going
to add to create that spending
that the the the.
Requirement to screen for these
other constituents that are
there that we're aware of the
rain water
so it it's gonna require opening
up the water quality regulations
making these changes yes that
will be sent to that.
Okay thank you for that and up
my second last question madam
chair and Sanchez does brackish
water have the potential to
contain those naturally
occurring radioactive materials
because we know produced water
has some other toxins in it as
well and I'm wondering like the
given that the the contaminants
like DFA's that currently do not
have those water quality
standards I think we're we're
looking at something that we
have an established yet.
Madam chair and and Seneal
respond to that
the the reason that they care of
naturally they call of naturally
occurring radioactive materials
is because they occur naturally
based on the the you know the
geologic found structures that
they're coming out of so that's
why it's necessary to screen any
of these potential sources with
the same staff to see what's
there to see what's not we do
have levels set for that you
referenced that the Paphos
chemicals that are currently
being reviewed evaluated by EPA
we're looking at state and some
standard for drinking water
coming from them very shortly
another.
Activity that my division is
engaged with is a toxic
pollutants working group that's
been together for two or three
years developing a list and and
levels of emerging contaminants
including Paphos and other
things that they're proposing to
add to the list and water
quality regulations to make it
more stringent there are a lot
of moving pieces to do with
water and water quality which is
why this is kind of important to
us because what limits us is
resources and and there's a lot
of work to be done and a short
time to do it I mean we can say
we're not emergency after this
last year I would beg to differ
we need to move quickly to
identify any and all potential
sources that can be utilized you
know in the state for water it
affects us our health effects
are industry it affects our
future so it's real crucial and
we are moving as best we can on
a lot of fronts you know to get
this done this will help advance
that work in all those areas
thank you and madam chair and
committee and then sponsor I
think you know there have been
conversations about other
regions of the world that are
doing that are are already in
advanced in us and I and I'm
growing up and I'll pass a very
familiar with the D.
salinization plant I think I'd
I'd like to see a little bit
more exploration into what we
can do so that we don't have to
fix what we don't know that
we're we're trying to do with
this thank you madam chair I
appreciate the time and thank
you sponsors thank you senator.
Thank you madam chair view the
questions I've already been
asked
And and for me I just have a few
concerns with this
this is actually one of the
areas that I can kind of
understand a little bit in here
the end with my chemistry
background
and so I like the fact of right
now we kind of extended the
rulemaking to twenty four
But then we have the money to
appropriate and to move forward
there and I.
I just told you know I like the
fact that we're doing that to
move forward but I don't want
that to be a reason to move
forward for not ready so that's
a concern of mine is that we
really have everything in place
in the rules
I'm concerned about just in
general not having that
definition of brackish water and
then once we determine you know
what the solids are the
contaminants that are in there
that are removed then who kind
of takes over regulating that
we just have to really get this
right you know you're right we
have to move we need water in
the state but we can't move to
faster or ensure that this that
this water isn't usable or clean
or safe and be introducing this
to our representative or for so
I guess I just want to
understand the process to where
we start doing the rules we
start figuring out what these
levels are and what we can do
with this water what what are
some kind of some gates are some
stops to ensure Hey we're not
ready yet and I say that to say
I went down to a and M. issue
and I see the reserves are doing
and I and all all supportive of
this because this needs to
happen
but if you can talk a little bit
about that that are there some
safety stops here that rate
we're just not is there is there
point or we say we're just not
ready yet.
Madam chair and senator
Yes there are and there the the
path forward.
Is not one of creating entirely
new rules that are standalone
this is going to be captured in
our existing water quality
regulations which means that for
surface water discharges to
occur they're gonna required
discharge permit for and it's a
at currently to discharge for
example to a river they would
have to have a permit from
USEPA.
For non pollution discharge
elimination system program we're
also working at NMED to
establish state primacy for
surface water per.
batch Act you to process so
that's going on but currently we
have the capability to work with
EPA with regard to surface
water.
Discharge permits groundwater
discharge permits regulated by
my ground water quality research
and and there is a specific
patient regulations that
prohibits the discharge of any
type of water or chemicals or
anything else that may adversely
affect groundwater and we can
limit in front control that
under our this current discharge
permitting program in fact
that's what's being implemented
and and we propose to use as we
move forward in the other
alternative water uses that
we're exploring we're gonna lock
it into our existing rules and
build off of those we have no
there's no need nor desire to
create something that we need to
take what's already working and
and prove it that's the intent
as I mentioned earlier this
interim rulemaking we're
currently working on with three
D. produced water is prohibitive
right to specifically not allow
the discharge.
Of that water.
For any purpose it has to be
contained it but we want to
allow the continued testing of
closed loop systems we need to
we can get the science and the
way.
So that's part of the rulemaking
how do we put those in and it
may be that the initial
rulemaking is a prohibitive
rulemaking that allows a science
but does not allow the
technology to be released.
That's you know we're science
driven so until the science
tells us it's safe to do that
we're not going we're not gonna
allow.
And registry regulations I
believe that the checks and
balances are there.
We just need the we need to move
forward with the science so we
can determine.
If.
There's a viable use for this
maybe there is maybe there isn't
we don't know that but we do
have an obligation to explore.
Thank you madam chair and and I
guess I'm a little familiar with
I know that brackish well in Rio
Rancho is kind of your my
district and folks talk about
that even nearby in in concerns
so what what is been kind of the
barrier to not having some of
these desalination plants are in
the state at this point so for
is it been this rulemaking what
we're doing I I guess.
It is being HSD we can talk
about what's the major impact of
what the engineer and with the
with the employment secretaries
told us is the rulemaking
process the wells are drilled I
think you think ups.
Center.
Thank you madam chair I I I
might the question was what has
been the why has there not been
any of these desalination plants
currently in our state it was
brought up about a past so at
this point and so I just wanted
understand why we don't have
anything here thank you so far
because the people online was
certainly.
And they let us know and they
yeah.
Madam chair thank you and
senator thank you so.
One of the there's two
components number one the fact
that we don't have rules in
place that really defined how
you could utilize brackish water
what level it would need to be
treated to and how it can be
years the second paste is that
it has been cost prohibitive.
And and so the science of what
you do.
With that the non usable part of
brackish water because you're as
you desalinated you create
effectively a real high high
salinity sorry that you have to
dispose at.
The science is beginning to
catch up
we have visited the south plant
in el Paso but because I'm a
strong proponent on not
reinventing the wheel and I'm
not bashful about using somebody
else's work if science proves
that it's appropriate to move
forward I think that's equitable
use of state time and money to
do so and so we're beginning to
explore those but it just not
has not been to date for the
viable for anybody to pursue
this that's changing as the
water made increases.
Thank you madam chair and and
sponsor
What we also addressing those
rules what we would do with
these materials I would pull out
of the water in the waist what
we would do with that.
Madam secretary in center yes
that has to be part of that the
the rulemaking is what you do
with the waste products and that
goes back to the screening.
Portion of this because
depending on what your screen
for what should be pulled out of
the water can radically affect
what that which product is and
how it then has to be disposed
of under existing regulations.
Thank you madam chair so I have
thank you thank you
I just want to make one comment
before I go to the committee for
a motion.
I believe when we had our
conservation committee dinner at
the very beginning of the
session the table I was sitting
at the entire conversation was
about water and it was about the
it was Israel
methods of bringing water and
having water in an arid country
and how now they have plenty of
water and for us to proceed with
any department any university
studying this without
understanding what that entire
country did to turn itself
around would be silly of us so I
think we need to put it in the
toolbox in terms of that
committee members the we're
ready for motion.
Also there's a motion okay there
is a motion for do pastoral
center guy a ghosts and the
second from Santo renewable.
With the secretary please call
the roll yes Senator want this
excuse Senator Gallegos Senator
Hamblen that.
Senator Neville yes.
Senator pope.
Asked.
Senator maintenance excuse
Center souls excuse Senator
Sedillo Lopez no Senator phonics
are you have all of that Sir
Senator Hamblen no.
Senator pope.
Senator Stefanics.
Yes.
Right.
There is okay we had a tie vote
we are now on a motion for a no
REC is there a second.
There is a motion by Senator
bill for no rack and a second by
Senator guy a ghosts.
With the secretary please call
the roll.
Senator Fonsi's excuse center K.
goes yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen no.
Senneville yes.
Senator pope.
No.
Thanks committee excuse Senators
souls excuse Senator Sedillo
Lopez so.
Senator phonics.
Yes.
Senator the
Bill is laying on the table and
if
I need to look at the rules.
To determine how we would bring
this off the table since it's a
tie vote.
And if we can get our other
members in
let me look at the rules and see
what we can do.
Madam chair the rules are any
mentor voting in the negative
can bring that back up for a
discussion member voting the
positive I think I can bring it
back up off the table Senator
well we have a member here.
Representative yeah set I know
REC yes okay so we'll let's put
Senator Montes on for a test.
And so you have a four three no
REC you are out of this
committee management okay we're
going to go back to the calendar
and I'm doing my bill necks and
Senator Lopez will chair.
I.
Yeah.
And we.
If you difference.
The card.
Thank you for.
Just.
Madam chair you ready to proceed
we are so
Madam chair members of the
committee you have a committee
substitute in an analysis on the
committee substitute that was
prepared in advance for this
bill.
Senate bill four fifty six
incorporate grid monitors the
committee substitute in takes
the original bill incorporates
the grid modernization plans
into the existing bill.
It requires an investor owned
utility but not rural electric
coops to periodically file a
grid modernization plan but the
PRC which includes how the
plants are consistent with the
state's roadmap.
For grid modernization developed
in twenty twenty two.
It establishes a statewide
target of one thousand megawatts
of new energy storage capacity
by twenty twenty eight followed
by an additional one thousand
megawatt capacity by twenty
thirty three for a total of two
thousand megawatts of storage
capacity capable of cumulatively
dual delivering more than eight
thousand megawatt hours of
electricity.
It requires the PRC to determine
the amount of energy storage
capacity each I owe you would be
required to put care or develop
but also gives the PRC greater
latitude to establish additional
energy storage targets.
It requires the I. O. use the
investor owned utilities to
incorporate their assigned
energy storage capacity
obligation into their integrated
resource planning process each
utility undergoes every three
years and it directs the I. O.
used to seek PRC approvals to
build or acquire storage
capacity I have two expert
witnesses with me today.
I have no Roberts who is the
director of energy storage for
the more Merican clean power
association it's in association
with seven hundred
Members nationwide and also
former representative Abbas
Akhil who is an expert in this
area and probably written a book
on it so I'd like each of my
expertise to make short
statements so from the.
Thank you yes No thank you
are both chair vice chair
members of the committee my name
is no Roberts and I'm the
director of energy storage of
the American clean power
association the American clean
power association is the
nation's leading trade
association representing
approximately eight hundred
American businesses that build
own and operate renewable
energy.
In my role I help lead and
coordinate policy and market
development efforts on behalf of
the US energy storage industry.
Senate bill four fifty six
presents an opportunity for New
Mexico to take the next step in
leading and advancing its
transition to clean energy and a
modern reliable and affordable
electric grid.
Energy storage refers to a
distinct technology class that
has the unique capability of
capturing electricity when it's
cheap and abundant storing it in
discharging the energy exactly
when it's most needed most
useful to do so.
Internet storage has uniquely
valuable applications services
they can find and benefits it
can create across the
transmission and distribution
systems.
They can provide electricity
during times of peak demand
absorb excess energy from
renewables during peak supply
reduce energy waste and increase
great efficiency alleviate
transmission congestion Services
back up power for homes
businesses and broader
communities and will be an
essential component of our
modernizing electric grid.
New Mexico's grid modernization
roadmap includes a primary
recommendation to strategically
deployed deployed energy storage
on the New Mexico grid in among
the recommendations the energy
storage advisor group noted that
New Mexico should add eight
hundred megawatt hours of
storage each year to achieve
adequate capacity to decarbonise
by twenty fifty.
Included in this bill is the
establishment of an energy
storage deployment target and
incorporation of that policy
goal into pre existing resource
and system planning process see
it sets a target based on the
analysis and recommendation of
a roadmap for providing the New
Mexico PRC with the appropriate
discretion in determining how
then and what amount of energy
storage's procured to help the
state meet its target.
Similar to renewable portfolio
standard states have used energy
storage deployment targets to
kickstart energy storage
deployment develop energy
storage markets ensure that
their state is on the path to
the point adequate capacity to
complement renewable resources
like wind and solar.
Of the dozen plus.
Sure and the thank you
We are happy to answer any
questions on behalf of the
members American tower
Association and appreciate the
leadership of Senator Stefanics
and will defer to Representative
kill.
So madam chair I'd like
Representative Abbas Akhil to
make a few statements.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for.
Here to speak of I want to thank
the sponsors for this very
important bill because good
modernization was actually
addressed in the bill in twenty
twenty eight twenty two thirty
three and this actually put goes
further and putting more
concrete requirements on what
the PRC should be doing to
request to ask Miss I'll use to
submit the modernization plans
in addition to that include
modernization that couple of key
components and storage is one of
them and this was recognized as
said by Nora Roberts just now in
the grid modernization advisory
group that does convene by the
in twenty twenty two.
so the this bill really ties
both of those components
together it brings the energy
storage component into the grid
modernization plans and lays out
very specific targets which are
very consistent with what the
groups had previously
recommended so data and and my
comments but if needed I can
explain what the modernization
is that that is the wish of the
committee later on thank you
madam chair thank you committee
members.
I
think we're ready for support
opposition thank you thank you
how many in the audience are in
support of this bill.
We've got to how many in the
audience are opposed to this
bill.
We've got one so let's go ahead
level three speak.
Okay you don't opposition I mean
support to the need to speak
okay a steady bills and support
wants to speak.
Okay go ahead so we'll have a.
We have one.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name Susan Martin
I'm here representing the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club to speak in support of the
energy storage development and
planning act this bill would
require inclusion of storage in
the integrated resource planning
processes and position New
Mexico is a leader in energy
storage behind the eight early
adopter states some things we
might think about in planning
our where will these projects go
and what communities will they
serve for these projects benefit
frontline environment
communities this is important
because these projects can
promote economic development in
the region and provide a cleaner
source of energy for those
communities that have
historically borne the brunt of
the Energy in production we hope
that I. R. P. planning can
answer these important questions
and.
Thank you Mr and.
We have one another.
In support is this in support or
in in opposition.
Well madam chair members to be
Mike in Tokyo with the Xcel
energy there's not a category
for neutral we're working with
the the bill sponsor in the in
the experts here there's some
concerns we have with the bill
but we understand that there may
be some amendments but
potentially put on next
committee and one of the
concerns we have is there's no
cost recovery language here for
utilities so we wanted to that
we've talked to the the expert
on that and and hopefully that
that can be put on the it's
important aspect it's in the
current grid modernization
statute I think it was just an
oversight that was left off here
the other thing is that although
utilities don't like mandates we
like to be able to plan our
systems accordingly this bill
seems to have reasonable targets
on it it's statewide targets one
cabbie out that I would say is
that on page three
and if if I have the current
The current draft here line my
It's the.
I get a point.
To yes okay the.
So on page three line number for
this section be the megawatt
hour target specified in
subsection a of this section may
increased based on analysis
conducted by the commission it
doesn't allow for any decrease
you know if you would think we
have with the mandate is nice to
have a mandate from from the
state for statewide but we don't
know what the cost is of of the
storage we don't know the
performance aspect of it there
may be and so I just want a
little bit of the way
consideration you may or may not
be added to the next committee
but just one point that out that
the commission finds out that if
you do not cost effective why in
the end of those targets do to
reduce addition the way given on
that so I guess you could use
the we're kind of an unusual
situation right now with Sanchez
I just want to clarify so the
PRC wouldn't have the authority
if this bill were passed to do
that anyway will stay at the way
it's written this is only one
way so they can only increase
the target they don't have the
ability to decrease I think we
would like to see either or I
think okay thank you thank you
thank.
The.
Is that a low so much wire here.
madam chair members of the
committee Laura Sanchez on the
executive director of government
public affairs for PNM and I I'm
with that Mr Dantonio there's
not really a place for sort of
neutral or working on it so I
want to just clarify that we
were we've worked in spoken with
that Mr Abbas Akhil as well as
the the sponsor of the grid mod
part of this bill in the house
with Representative Lujan at
worst we're in support of that
part of it as far as the energy
storage we recognize the energy
storage is an important part of
decarbonisation I think we've
come a long way from where we
had been in terms of the
technology or the industry has I
should say and so we we see some
opportunities within the energy
storage portion of it but we
also have some concerns that
we'd like to work through with
the sponsor as as well as the
expert and primarily that is
that of the targets as Mr
Dantonio said there statewide
which which is good but part of
the concern is that we already
have eight hundred megawatts of
storage on our system this
requires us to only or would
only count any energy storage
that's developed after July
first twenty twenty three so
there's still significant energy
storage on the system we would
like to have some recognition
that that's bring value in terms
of decarbonisation and and a
recognition also that you know
it's it's an all and sort of up
progression that we need to take
with regard to with regard to
decarbonisation so it's not you
know we don't want to sort of
put all our eggs into the energy
storage basket we want to make
sure that there's an opportunity
to count other integrating
technologies into that I know
mattress that will be able to
have conversations on that so I
just want to make sure the
committee was aware thank you.
Thank you so we have supporters
or neutral so far do we have any
opponents.
An online we have one a
supporter Andrew stone who
didn't need to speak but he
wanted to be recognized as a
supporter.
So with that I'll turn it over
to the committee for questions.
Senator Gallegos Madam chair
madam chair just a few questions
so earlier in the discussion of
the neutral side they're talking
about cost recovery of in your
build you guys address that I
didn't see anything in there
looking at just what's going to
have to take place for the
storage to to component to be
right who pays for those costs
and is it ultimately the rate
payers John Q. public to pay for
that.
The manager Madam chair Senator
this is not changing assisting
statute of cost recovering as an
existing statute it's still
there but I would not want to my
experts answer that if they wish
to.
Yes certainly intent that the
existing planning and resource
procurement process sees would
make the determination around
recovery through the the
standard planning process.
Madam chair chair and I
appreciate that so I think that
might my fear was so of two
years ago we did the grid
modification it's not had enough
time to be tested approved it's
still in growth mode motive if
we have on these extra
batteries basically is what
you're gonna have to do I'm
trying to figure out of the even
though we we had the grin
modification.
Already passed this would be an
add on item in a wondering if on
that and I guess you told me
that the that it's already in
place but I'm just wondering
what the costs associated cost
if we know they are of what that
would be to the
power company that ends up being
on my bill Madam chair madam
chair so madam chair senator I
think I'd like like of about
security incident.
Madam chair and senator act
that's a very good question
though the difference between
the bill that was passed in
twenty twenty three
modernization bill as opposed to
this is in that bill the only
acquired the committees to fight
a project for grid modernization
and that has actually been done
all this for you I use have a
planned act submitted to the PRC
that's being considered there
what this does is it requires a
specific plan could be I you
obviously by the I use to have a
more comprehensive approach
correct.
Madam chair Senate does that
unsafe questions it does Madam
chair madam chair representative
and I'm glad you're back up my
my thought on that then is have
we looked at I know that you NM
that may not be you think
through who was had a battery
testing a program going on right
now Senator ilab
and I'm wondering.
Sierra lead acid batteries but
with that it being completed are
we.
Way ahead of the process earlier
we talked about you know
And I think we do this often we
put things out there before
rules catch up for testing
catches up but madam chair madam
chair and representative how are
we on that yes and what does
that look like as forced to
qualify to be able to get these
numbers up
are we anywhere close to we have
any ideas are there other
options other planned because
they're being forced to have
these on a timely basis actually
moved it up
in I'm just wondering if there
is a capacity for the batteries
I know madam chair and and madam
chair there is a and and same
subject because it's a battery
of Carlota battery
a trainload of Korsakov fire
because the battery
of cop are one of the trains on
on total lecture Kerr I don't
know that the technology is
there to satisfy what we're
asking him come this morning for
we are on the testing if you
know the results of that on
chairman to.
Madam chair and senator it's
interesting you ask that
question because I worked in
that department for the last
production since nineteen eighty
eight I think we have a very
deep program at Sandia national
labs Sandia national labs also
the key eight of our tree for
the U. S. deal with the
department of energy's energy
program energy storage programs
and us as a result of that
you've district several
technologies and actually given
up some of these technologies so
hi slightly take madam chair and
senator slight issue with the
fact that these at the
implication that these are not
fully proven technologies these
are these are not the pilot
projects anymore we these are
actual commercial technologies
that are available that's not
the fire that you like to do to
referred to was basically yes
that can happen there are
different technologies that
cause less more or less
flammable lift them happens to
be one of the more energetic
technologies that you use today
that can cause that kind of an
incident but the other
technologies at the completely
safe have been used for the last
hundred years a so so technology
is ready.
I think that I can safely say
that that is not the nation
today thank you for that Madam
chairman chairman Representative
so
and I think the technology is
proven as lead that battery
basically we've used it forever
but I looked through in this
cost projection free to scale
battery storage up for twenty
twenty one update and it has a
huge decrease.
I so what I'm trying to get to
is the dollar amount that let's
say excel is going to have to
put into the storage facilities
and the recurring cost because
it's got a trajectory down like
that I'm trying to figure out
how that is going to really
relate back to our rates and
what the overall cost to rate
payers so the utility has to
recover their costs in I have to
pay for that so I'm trying to
see if madam chair chair and
Representative feel tell me what
that ultimate cost is going to
be for me a repair with your
planning your bill.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and senator.
The bottom line because that you
would see on your bill is
somewhat indeterminate because
it depends on the size of the
project and the technology that
that particular service provider
chooses to use but I don't think
that learning to be hard for me
to put a number on it because
ultimately what use number of
cents per kilowatt hour increase
you see on your bill.
Would be very hard to predict at
this time but it but that is the
the really the job of the
commission to decide with the
fact caustic you see on your
bill is a reasonable and
affordable and also is
consistent with the reliability
of the great that that service
provider manages so all those
considerations was going to
place when that final decision
is made.
Thank you madam chair and Madam
chair representative thank bring
me my problem in the bill we
talked about there's no way to
reduce from the PRC standpoint
it's locked into the increase I
want to look at the reduction
because if it isn't equitable
forming then we're locking them
into a high side not to low such
that may be something to
consider as you visit with them
on some amendments the other
thing that brought this to mind
madam chairman and chairman
representative is that the
recognition for the current
storage if they are going from
here forward and they've got
this suitable storage already in
place why are we not madam
chairman chair representative
give them credit for that.
The chair and senator just give
me just a second because this is
quite interesting to me that a
lot of other commenters are one
of the the public service of New
Mexico stated that they have
eight hundred megawatts of
storage of questioning whether
cultural.
Because I'm very familiar with
pretty much all the storage we
have in the state and I'm quite
surprised to find out if we have
eight hundred megawatts on madam
chair madam chair would you mind
me asking I work for PNM for
thirty years stay with me on
sale like them but it's one of
those things that I'd like to
have that answer if we could
Madam.
Yes it is this section.
Madam chair and and senator I'm
and you're gonna be disappointed
my answer but I have been
working with our folks from
generation and they they emailed
me and said that we had
currently it's that
PNM already has nearly eight
hundred megawatts of battery
storage and we need to go and
basically they're saying we
would like to move beyond that
so I know you're shaking your
head but I can only report what
whatever folks internally
engineer as a let me see if I
can find out exactly what that
looks like the and hopefully
that'll give us more information
so chair thank you just in if
you would get that to me before
it gets to the floor because I
can't pull for this in the way
it is now because of my fear
what it can do to you and all to
please to me so if you would
appreciate that because that
would give me a different view
on this bill so I'm sure with
that are you so madam chair I
think that would be important to
all of the Senator thank you
thank you madam chair if I may
thank you Mr guy goes and so
agency that just will you find
that to all members of the
committee chair members would be
happy to thank you okay
any.
Other thank yes senator Neville.
Senator Gallegos cover most what
I was concerned about the cost
recovery I think is a big deal
and
There was a statement made by
somebody members Mr the Antonio
of that.
The cost recovery was not
particularly covered in this
bill is that what I heard
somewhere a long way.
It's not madam chair Senator
it's not in this new language it
is an existing statute the
existing statute I believe
allows for PRC to review but
also authorized cost recovery
plus a profit level is that I
think cell numbers were standing
madam chair Senator and so this
didn't change that this should
be recoverable SO that's correct
what I found I'm playing around
a little solar personally the
big cost if I want to have in a
certain place I have off grid
capability if the power goes out
which it does frequently
the batteries of the big cost if
I and that's very small
understand compared to what
we're talking about but lithium
by batteries are very costly and
they're also don't last very
long so the cost could be a real
serious issue has that been
analyzed to consider managers
and.
So madam chair Senator I'd have
to defer to my experts on that.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
question and and I will
recognize that that there were
some cost estimates provided in
the the F. I. R. I think one
thing we would like to point out
is that no New York was invoked
in in that report is that
through robust analysis New York
also determined that three
thousand megawatts of energy
storage would produce over two
billion dollars in that budget
and so I think.
You know we would we would
convey that similar to transfer
transmission infrastructure
there is that capital up front
cost but once it's installed
it's an inherently deflationary
technology that will control
intended to get costs over the
long term thank you and madam
chair.
But those batteries don't last
very long.
Madam chair Senator I think of I
have an expert who'd like to
interact with the representative
Akhil least I heard him in my
year.
Madam chair and senator I would
like to add that yes life of the
batteries is it is an issue but
right now if you have experience
with lithium batteries that have
gone on more than fourteen years
so generally that notion that
they come back please have a
shorter life it depends on how
that Backes use
the kind of issues that we are
looking at the life should be
fairly long black in electric
vehicles to use it's it's very
of very demanding because you're
constantly drawing high cut into
the factory we would likely not
be doing that in the the
applications and and other
comment I'd like to make madam
chair and senator is the cost
that is given as FIR for the two
back piece is reasonable yes
it's about more than four for
five hundred dollars per
kilowatt hour but the other
technologies affect quite proven
and we have used them for longer
that are less than a fifth of
that cost to so you have all
these got an option of what
technology we can choose what
purpose are to serve and the
cost of clinker so the utilities
and the commission have just
lactic you to decide which kind
of technology to use we don't
necessarily have to use that to
all the time that the
technologies that can do the job
as well when the demands a
different.
Madam chair Senate.
Thank you venture I understand
there are different my wife's
car has a does not have lithium
battery in it has a different
kind of remember what it is
often but I understand and I I I
don't know the life expectancy
of some of those but.
The literature I read even would
you say thirteen years or
fifteen years life even that if
you start figuring out faster at
current cost levels that would
be fairly high so if the the
companies are comfortable with
doing this side I'm not a
certain object but
I live under a municipal system
so I'm not affected because this
is for public utilities
and my other properties are
under co op so again I'm not
affected so
I just am concerned after having
gone to the with our power plant
molecular thing we've been very
cognizant of what goes on with
the with utilities and what may
happen in the future with of the
PNM customers in particular but
there may be some serious.
Changes in cost the I don't know
we're just trying to we're
running outside looking in but I
just concerned about cost what
happens thank you Madam thank
you senator Neville any other
questions.
Comments.
Madam secretary we call the roll
is there a motion right.
Madam okay is there a motion
from term of the past is there a
second okay move by Senator pope
second place Senator home at
home I'm going madam secretary
able to call the roll.
Senator boxes.
Saturday of the month.
Etcetera have a yes.
Senate Bill.
no.
Senator pope yes.
Thanks committee excuse Senators
souls Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
explain my vote says the phonics
yes.
The reason I'm supporting this
at this time is because of the
intention to talk with the
utilities we're got some of it
some of these issues I think
it's a really really good idea
but we need to make sure that
it's effective and I trust you
to to have those conversations
twenty two you have a do pass on
forty two thank you so much for
your members of the committee.
So the next on the agenda is we
have just before sixty four
agritourism promotion act
Senator Maestas.
I want to folks come.
Thank you.
And madam chair would like to
address the the substitute in a
presentation.
So
Thank.
Please look at that in our the
manager I was just gonna ask do
we have the substitute in the
analysis on the substitute yes
okay.
So please go ahead and present.
The representative on the
substitute.
Yes the purpose everyone has the
substitute and the analysis on
the subject to so much present
thank you madam chair honorable
members this is the Senate bill
for sixty four and we ask that
you would take a look at the
substitute that the committee
has we we appreciate the staff
working yesterday I think.
Thank you no not for the
presentation.
Thank thank you know and out so
this deals with agro tourism I'm
joined by Kevin McCall the owner
of a calls pumpkin patch out in
more already and Chris goblet of
the executive director of the
New Mexico winegrowers
Association and I'll give the
Mike to them here in a second
but I go tourism madam chair
audible members is a fantastic
growing industry here in the
United States it gives a
opportunity to agricultural
producers to participate in agro
tourism what we want to do is up
to provide accurate for some of
the outdoor recreation act the
two two of the nine main target
industries are defied by the New
Mexico economic development
department was outdoor
recreation and value added
agriculture agro tourism
operates a bridge between these
industries I find that a niche
economy for outdoor recreation
and a growing popularity of
agriculture here in New Mexico's
diversity of rural and urban
areas it so anyway I'll turn it
over to Mr Kevin McCall.
Madam chair and members of the
committee good morning I'm Kevin
McCall like you said owner of
McCall's pumpkin patch and we
just celebrated our twenty fifth
season this past fall so it's
been it's been good for for the
foreman for Torrance County
there in in Moriarity
You know as as many challenges
are in rural New Mexico we have
we have a lack of tourism but we
do have back and so I think this
is a a perfect segue to put the
two together and
Like say it's been good for for
my family and and keep in the
form someone alive through
through these are time so.
That I will you.
Madam chair madam chair members
the committee thank you for your
kind attention today my name is
Christopher Goebel executive
director for the New Mexico one
growers representing fifty five
wineries located throughout the
state the term agritourism was
written the Italian law in
nineteen eighty five in Tuscany
the original philosophy of
agritourism is a simple concept
where tourists are hosted and
farm houses and allowing guests
to take part in a rural
activities the farm I personally
visited Italy in two thousand
travelling from Santa Fe New
state my first winery and olive
oil farm the local visitor
center had a brochure that
outlined all of the different
agritourism
properties in the area and I
ended up staying for these
different farm facilities
learning in broken Italian about
process sees of running a winery
and olive oil farm also state
and and agritourism properties
in New Zealand California New
York state.
Senator for sixty four eight New
Mexico tort established in this
viable tourism sector talking
about locations throughout the
state we can develop new tourism
products offer educational and
recreational opportunities that
would attract new tourists and
support farmers I believe thirty
two states are more have already
taken measures to determine and
define agritourism.
These hands on activities
already exist in New Mexico
wineries great picking and
stomping bottling events pumpkin
picking apples with great
example during the pandemic one
couple of our wineries gave
space to local farmers to set up
farmers markets on their
property.
A copy of New Mexico magazine
here from September of twenty
twenty two that features winery
get aways in New Mexico.
I'd love to see a feature cover
story the next few years
featuring farm stays and
aggravated tourism events that
promote a new segment of their
tourism economy I hope we can
take this first step forward
today to make agritourism part
of our new future thank you very
much thank you before we
continue on I'm gonna go to the
center Hamlin for moving us into
the committee so madam chair I
have motion to continue to move
on the committee substitute for
Senate bill four sixty four and
for discussion okay and then we
do a final motion will do a do
not pass on the original bill
okay so let's go to the audience
who is here to see we are only
talking about the committee
substitute.
So who is here to support the
committee sub for Senate bill
four sixty four.
I see the keep your hands up a
minute please one two three four
five six seven eight it's about
nine in the room supporting
online.
We have to online supporting is
there anybody in the audience
opposing the committee
substitute.
Is there anybody online sep
opposing tools to opposing
online cell from the audience
let's hear from three
individuals please.
Please come to the middle.
Speak into the microphone
introduce yourself.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of my name is Dave
the Cerro and I am from fort
Sumner New Mexico and two
thousand twenty one my wife and
I planted our orchard and our
goal is to have a U. pick
operation and invite children to
come to our farm and and and do
school tours and put on
workshops so healthy soils
workshops and and orchard
management workshops and things
like that and so really this
this bill is very important to
us because we think it'll put us
advertorial on the map I think
it will provide an opportunity
for
promotional and advertising for
for farm operations and and I
just hope you guys will support
this thank you very much.
Thanks.
Thank you next please thank you.
Good morning madam chair
committee members carry Romero
executive director registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
council about fighters and
guides we stand in strong
support for this legislation not
only is the hunting and fishing
industry a sister industry to
agriculture we actually feel
that fishing excursions and
hunting opportunities there
taking place on private ranches
across the state are in fact a
form of agritourism additionally
agritourism operations such as
dude ranches and also McCall's
pumpkin patch they provide
connectivity between seasonal
employment of other outdoor
recreation industry like hunting
and fishing and also the skiing
industry this connectivity
provides for year round
employment opportunities for
individuals who prefer to work
in the mall in the multiple
seasonal industry helping to
build New Mexico's outdoor
recreation tourism economy we
one hundred percent support the
inclusion of agritourism as an
outdoor recreation activity in
the state of New Mexico thank
you madam chair.
Thank you next please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
SB four sixty four and thank the
sponsor for bring it forward our
members believe agritourism is a
valuable piece of the
agricultural industry at large
and making these adjustments in
this bill will really unlock
this industry a further
expansion expansion and growth
we believe this step aligns with
the economic development
departments economic
diversification strategy by
targeting two of the nine
identified industry.
Outdoor recreation and
sustainable agriculture the goal
of this strategy is to build a
diverse and robust ecot economy
that engages local talent
cultivates innovation and
delivers prosperity for all New
Mexicans please support and
uplift New Mexican industries
that are going to contribute to
do it diversifying our economy
thank you.
Thank you is there anybody in
the audience to oppose this one
more time.
Okay online I have to supporters
and to up up up opponents and
I'm just going to read their
names I'm not going to ask for
their testimony in support I
have Beverly is singa and
Anthony Wagner.
Out opposing online I have
Sophia and Alyssa Trautman.
So we're going to go now to
questions and comments Senator
Gallegos.
Madam chair mines just comments
so I've been
out and about I'm not stuck to
your phone compact but I really
like it I like the idea this for
multiple reasons you get our
people outdoors in off computer
games and get some back out into
this country side so
as also as a one time to go to
the pumpkin chunking.
etcetera but LA had invited me
that and I I did not go because
I thought he would have me on
the field and they be targeting
on me but I just wanted to stand
in support of this because I
think right now we've taught our
kids stayed indoors on the
computer on your phone and for
them to get out even talking
about the orchards and and
learning about so the
opportunities are out there that
we've lost I was raised on a
ranch I enjoy being outdoors but
my grand child is never done
that because just changed times
change location where you live
so you guys providing this for
use I appreciate that so just
want to send support thank you
thank you on that point it's not
just for use my nephew had a
date at the pumpkin patch a
couple years ago.
So Center Hamlin's next thank
you madam chair and thank you
sponsor for bringing this up
one of the things that I really
appreciate this this is kind of
a combination of my two worlds
in focusing on outdoor
recreation but also just the
idea of up lifting all of our
farmers and our agriculture
industry in the state and so I
do have a couple of questions
about this because I I I love
the idea of the bill on page one
the on on on the side of the
substitute.
one twenty fourth recruit out of
state based outdoor recreation
businesses to look locate to New
Mexico
as you know I I really want us
to try and like nurture our own
and I know carries group she's
got a lot of folks who are are
really active in the community
and so when it when I see
recruit out of state based I'm
thinking that this is not a
analogy that we actually have an
opportunity to develop folks
from within the state I don't
like money going to the out of
state really is what it is I
want money to stay with you I
wanted to go to you because you
get back to the community you
employ local people.
You're committed to your
communities as a local business
and so I'm wondering it is that
necessary to have recruit out of
state based outdoor recreation
businesses or can we change it
to up lift local or statewide
outdoor recreation businesses
and provide them with the assets
and resources they need to
thrive.
Thank you madam chair center
Hamblen great catch it's it's up
it's part of the bill in front
of you so I would suggest we add
that we add a line dealing with.
With the New Mexico based
businesses and how do we promote
and enhance current small
businesses to grow this is part
of the tourism statute and this
was created a few years back by
the Representative I had like a
Rubio so this statute she put
into law and it's on the tourism
department and I think that's
why deals with recruiting out of
state based outdoor recreational
businesses but yeah we we we
should put in a line either here
or maybe on the floor to promote
New Mexico yeah that's what I
would suggest madam chair
Senators to prioritize resources
and support to locally owned
outdoor businesses and and yeah
because part of it is that I
think you know Kerry might be
able to to talk about this is
there is an education process
that is going that that is going
to be needed for these
outfitters who are going to be
or these organizations or groups
because I'm thinking of the
friends of the organ mountains
in my community who does a lot
in terms of getting people
outdoors west at the end of
which also brings folks into the
outdoors especially communities
of color but it Equatoria is in
this is something that's a
different creature is as you
know I mean it's it's you're
running it like a business but
you're also you're providing
food you're providing sustenance
and and so but and there's also
education like how do we
sustainably farm and how do we
best use water it I mean all the
different components to this and
so there does have to be an
education process I think for
those when we talk about outdoor
recreation businesses to have
them be aware of what they're
talking about what they're
selling
and and so there there might be
some like.
Training education component so
I think I can come up with a
line for you center Maestas that
might prioritize those local
businesses and I can work with
you on it I I'm not going to
like just spring that on you
because I'd I'd like to work
with because I see here the tent
but I think for me I'm going to
be pushing local businesses and
and not trying to recruit out of
state and like what's up with
our own.
No thank you madam chairs and
have a know what that's existing
law but any time there's a bill
in front of us we can make it
better so
Mr sponsor and senator Sliq goes
to Judiciary next if you want to
do an amendment we should do it
here absolutely where they re
write the bill.
Right
madam chair and senator if I
could suggest an amendment to
section one a number two instead
of recruit out of state based
outdoor recreation businesses to
locate to New Mexico it would be
more of a provide resources to
existing.
Outdoor recreation businesses.
To promote.
Grow tourism.
So.
Senator my S. this is separately
thank you madam chair I I it is
partially from a of I don't want
to mess with existing such
without talking to the director
of the secretary I would suggest
would be super friendly is on
page two.
Between line six and seven at a
subparagraphs six.
Promoting of.
Local local small at a business.
Businesses.
With that membership okay so
could you repeat your language
one more time Senator Hamblen
sure thing madam chair would be
on page.
To to between right after online
six after a program instead of
the period it would be between
chair if I may between like six
and seven it would be a new
paragraph six right but it would
have okay just a minute back to
the line for.
We would delete the word and.
I.
One line six we would take away
the period put in a semi colon
and and and.
And then the language for number
six would be.
Senator Hamblen.
Madam chair and senator
to promote existing outdoor
local existing outdoor
recreation businesses.
Madam chair center haven't of
friendly thank you.
Thank you for the consideration
I appreciate.
So one more time promote local
outdoor.
Promote and provide resources
for local.
For statewide okay we do a
providing resources is through a
grant program sure okay so what
about support madam chair.
We can put it in okay provide
support to local and state based
outdoor recreation businesses.
The Secretary catch that now
you're gonna have to repeat it
one more time
so this you need to write it out
I know I do next time I do is
just as kind through this
discussion provide provide
support to local and state
happened.
Promote after number six.
On.
I think I got a chair if I may
please.
promote and support local
recreational and agritourism
businesses.
Local and statewide message
just.
Local and statewide agritourism
business or you don't need to
say local anymore to statewide.
Okay so we need a motion and up
correct language for the
secretary I'm so sorry madam
chair and senator for being so
confusing
I think we got it done may if I
may promote and support
statewide
Edward local recreational and
agro tourism businesses.
Yes in my back there catch up
now can you get wait for we need
we need really clear.
We need Senator right it bring
it together I know we need it
now so as I go to it again okay
thank you madam.
This changed the second true.
Will promote.
And support.
In state recreational in state
agribusiness.
I go tourism businesses.
To promote and support in state
recreational and agro tourism
businesses.
It everybody on the committee
could set now.
Okay is that a motion for and
living things is that a motion
this Madam is active out there
is a motion and a second.
Is there any opposition to the
additional line.
Okay we've adopted that
amendment thank you very much
for back on the bill Center
Hamlin you have the floor thank
you madam chair and my apologies
and thank you senator for
working on this of that language
up you understand my intent and
I appreciate that
what are the other thing is have
we we have incredible resources
when it comes down to our R.
Agra Agra businesses in the
state we have businesses like
yours we have small farms that
are
Provided that are are run by
black brown and indigenous
communities women farms and so
were there any conversations
with there there is Pam Roy with
farm to table in New Mexico Food
and egg Policy Council candles
this works with the food hunger
she's the food hunger adviser
for the office of the governor
there's agriculture good others
Elga there's to the Yazzie in
the four corners area we have
the entity youth farm in
southern New Mexico where their
conversations with any of those
folks when we start talking
about agritourism also the
Lyle's family farm down in
southern New Mexico looking at
Tiffany we're the those
conversations madam chair
Senator thank you madam chair
Sir have an I'm sure there was
not necessarily around this bill
but just in general the the this
is significantly different than
the original bill up.
But up but I think if this bill
passes this committee passed the
Senate I think they'll be some
really good momentum going into
the house if this were to become
law I think that will give us an
opportunity to meet with the
director of the the secretary of
economic development is
cognizant of this bill and just
keep pushing the envelope on
going those economies creating
those opportunities.
But yes thank thank you madam
chair and then just as a final
comment because of the the work
that I do with the healthy food
financing act to help our small
farmers and Justice coalition of
these groups there are plenty of
opportunities here to help up
lift what they're doing because
many of them are doing a lot of
sustainable farming practices
indigenous farming practices
we've got the whole gamut in
this and I think this is a great
opportunity the the the last
question or concern I have is
we're not trying to add every
tourism into the outdoor equity
fund are we.
Not.
It's it's so it's just allowing
okay it's allowing that to be
part of this but it's not trying
to modify that because there's a
lot of work done into the agro
into the outdoor equity fund and
we want to make sure that that
stays intact thank you madam
chair Sir I'm not I don't
believe that that affects the
mission or the law that I.
Thank you madam chair that's all
I have thank you senator thank
you any further questions or
comments.
Senator pope.
Madam chair I move a do not pass
on Senate bill four sixty four
and a do pass on Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
sixty four as amended as amended
actually if I may um it would be
a sub two point two version
that's why Iraq with it would
still be a substitute bill it
wouldn't be an amended
substitute bill and it would be
a point to version two.
Okay could is there a second.
All second but I also had a
discussion please quickly just
just.
We're only on the steps to build
yes on the subject adding
agritourism yes
so we.
Yes it was in twenty four hours
in advance with the agenda and
the committee sept two yeah
posted okay thank you well I'll
go ahead and set that.
Okay there is a motion and a
second.
For a do not pass on Senate
bills for sixty four and this in
a do pass on Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill four sixty four point two
the secretary please call the
roll yes centers of this excuse
Center guy goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Centerville.
Senator pope yes Senator
Schmedes excuse centers goals
excuse Senator Lopez yes yes the
panic yes.
I voted six zero you have a do
pass thank you very much thank
you Mr go play Mr called madam
chair thank you thank you.
And will prepare that a point
two and then you'll be going on
to Judiciary thank you so who
with the analyst.
You want to get that changed to
the council status for point to.
Okay.
Next okay we're on Senate Bill.
Four seventy.
Senator Sanchez here.
He was taking.
However you want to go call him
from the various areas.
Sorry sorry.
You're gonna put on but.
Okay.
Senator thank you madam chair I
bring today to you bill Senate
bill for seventy this bill will
what it does is.
Students.
It will suspend the Endangered
Species Act just for the time of
the fire that is happening here
in New Mexico we've heard of all
the farmers seeing that all the.
All the devastation of the fires
of had this last year from right
so to Las Vegas to the ones
we've had of late to County so
in the in some situations that
we had we were unable to get
water close to where there were
some you know
people's houses structures
their livestock
Different things that were we're
going to be consumed by the fire
so and and the reason why they
can get the the water was in
like in Valencia County we have
the will fly catcher the silvery
minnow so they're having to go
further to pick I to pick up
water out of the revert to put
these fires out so that this
bill will.
For the the the duration of the
fire with its three days ten
days fifteen days will just
suspended the.
and dangerous.
Area where they're trying to get
water to put out the fire to
save human lives livestock Hey
bars whatever's in the way and
it you know so without madam
chair I stand for questions.
And senator do you have an
expert witness I do not madam
chair okay we'll go to the
audience who here in the
audience is in support of this
bill.
Is there any opposition to this
bill.
Is there anybody online in
support or opposition.
Okay so let's hear from the
opposition please.
And you want to get the Mike
please.
Good morning.
Good morning.
It's the second time was better
like this okay hi good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee I stand in rest
respectful opposition to just
before seventy.
The bill seeks to suspend
restrictions on water use
pursuant to the federal
Endangered Species Act within
fifteen miles of a fire first
the impact on fires can be
detrimental to endangered
species so removing water
restrictions at such a life
threatening time would be
contradictory to the goal of
recovering this species.
Most importantly this bill does
seem to be in direct conflict
with the supremacy clause of the
US constitution that gives
federal laws preemption over
state laws and as I'm sure this
committee understands the
federal Endangered Species Act
of nineteen seventy three would
take direct precedence over this
legislation and of course we
always want communities to be
protected but that needs to be
done through careful agency
coordination during emergencies
so we do understand the
motivation but have to stand in
a respectful disagreement.
If you yourself for the record.
I'm not even sure who I am at
this point I'm Camilla I woman
of us are.
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
thank you.
Okay seeing no other comment in
the audience we're going now to
the committee members.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I was just
looking at the at the FIR and it
it raises the issue that is
people of mystery woman raised
and that is a supremacy clause
it also raises an issue about
making sure that the department
of game and fish has
jurisdiction or is at least
conduct a consulted in your list
of people who are consulted
because they have jurisdiction
responsibility for for
protecting endangered species so
what are your thoughts about
this privacy Clausen
And and that concerned about
including game and fish Madam
chair Senator I I'm up for an
amendment and we can put that
there on page two you know where
it says who's responsible you
know either have your in your
rural areas you have your
volunteer fire chief human is
suppliers you have your city
fire chief and your and your
county fire marshal's so I I
would be.
It would be a friendly amendment
to add game and fish.
Okay well I believe that
on pay online on page two line
six.
Of.
After secretary of environment a
comma is placed and
The game and fish department.
The director or the director of
game efficient the director of
game and fish.
And madam chair Senator Woods
but you know I'm looking at that
now and maybe we should have
state forestry.
And state forestry.
The state Forster yes yet to be
consistent and the state
forester.
Did you get that.
You got okay
So I I move that those if those
entities be added to one six is
there a second.
Okay is there any opposition to
adding online six after
secretary of Environment comma
the director of game and fish
comma the state forester.
And the state engineer.
Is there any opposition.
Okay we have adopted that
amendment back on the bill.
Madam chair I I'd like a
response to this a primacy
Clause issue because that's
pretty significant and it's
interesting to think about the
interrelationship between.
The fed's finding.
And.
And this bill.
Madam chair Senator you know
with we have the federal laws
and and I and I I respect and
stuff we've seen what happened
with the fires of gone through
New Mexico and if we have
something here established in
New Mexico with this bill where
we could take action you know
for just certain days that the
fires there I know after you
know you're like two minutes a
polity or your order in a rural
area of the state or local fire
department after the four hours
the forestry does take.
Affected come in and assist the
fire the rest of time so this
bill would just give us another
tool to help us.
Move faster and and get these
fires put out I think it would
help the endangered species that
are in that area if we could put
out the fire faster there's less
smoke there's last of trees of
been burnt vegetation.
So.
That's.
Madam chair of and not you
probably too young to notice but
my father was the was the chief
of volunteer chief of the Los
Chavis volunteer fire department
and I remember when they're
fires they go to the they go to
the ditches they go to the river
and they just suck out water I
don't think they notified
anybody and and that was really
important because of what of of
the emergency so I let have a
lot of empathy and sympathy for
that for the issue of emergency
And I am concerned but I am
concerned that we're passing a
bill without consulting
Without health consulting the
the end date the.
Federal officials and it and
actually the the game and fish
I'm not sure if they supported
the bill I don't see them here
to figure out how this how this
can be done and maybe do some
trainings of the of the various
fire departments to make sure
that they do this in a way that
is the least damaging possible
like I said I just remember they
just went to the ditches sucked
out the water went to revert
sucked up water and.
Of course it was a loss Chavis
volunteer fire department so I
doubt it consulted with anybody
and so.
This so I would just feel more
comfortable of those
conversations happened and that
And that we're doing this in the
in the best way possible to
balance both and madam chair
Senator I I do remember your
father as I believe you the
detractors well to I was very
young at the time
but yes that's what they used to
do now you know the whoever's
running the fire at that time
whether it be you know in the
rural area you are in your miss
Holly whatever fire chief for
fire marshals running that they
do have to contact force of
state forestry out for the four
hours then there's a plan put
together before the helicopters
come for they're going to get
the water how many gallons I
believe there's talk with state
agent the into state engineer to
because the water that does run
down the river is allocated for
article seven other things that
the contacts that we have so
that is I I think it happens.
Sarah hopefully sooner than
later when the fire starts but
there is a process now they can
just go take the water out of
the.
Out of the ditches like they
used to in till the paper work
is been done and I am going to
follow up with the the state
forestry I I had a brief real
brief conversation in the
hallway before this
I I put some of the language in
the.
The
That you and then you amended
for me so if it does pass
through here I'm going to keep
having conversations to make
this a better bill.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you saw
the floor.
Thank you I I think those
conversations are are really
important because
I guess well I have one final
question so would passing the
bill affect that prop how no I
should ask how would passing
this bill affect the current
process.
That you described.
What this time you can not get
water from those areas passing
this bill the the the the
industry sector would just be
suspended for that time that
that and I'm sure there'll be
more than just the fire marshal
involved
for the three days a new water
five days ten days or whatever
it would so the bill right now
the you cannot pull water from
certain areas at certain times
whether there's a fire there or
not.
That with the paperwork still
have to be filed.
Yes yes so that so that
paperwork so far but it might be
twenty miles down the road or
thirty miles down the road they
go fly pick up the water and
bring it back when we can do it
from here let's say let's try to
save your family farm or I you
know to get the water there to
get out instead of having to go
tomorrow pick up the water or
further north you know because
of the will fly capturing the
silver medal at that time.
So that that's what this would
be implemented Madam chair
Senator.
But that the process.
For example so is there a
balancing of it like if if the
silvery millet mento was truly
truly endangered maybe somebody
would say we have to go to
Bernardo but if the silt if the
water was flowing in the silver
mineral minute of minnow wasn't
Was it really really at risk in
that at that time then the
decision might be made what go
ahead and pull the water can
with that happen under your bill
yes this this was the yes madam
chair center yes so so.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator Hammond thank you
madam chair and thank you
senator Sanchez for bringing
this forward I am reflecting
back on our first couple of
weeks of committee and the
session and we had you know our
colleague Senator Griggs has
prescribed burn bill that had a
lot of conversation and you know
we we put a hold on it and then
they were more conversations
that we're having and then it
became a came back as a better
bill
and it and and I'm wondering if
there were conversations at all
you'd said you kind of alluded
that you had one out in the
hallway but obviously there are
multiple groups that are
impacted by this we've got the
forestry service we've got EMNRD
we've got you know coalition
groups in terms of protecting
these endangered species
have there been other
conversations that you've had
regarding this bill.
I've reset to funerals reach
back yet madam chair Senator but
I'm willing to talk with anybody
I as soon as this you know
whether this what goes on today
forestry is gonna be my first
one and I will get will give the
fish
but.
I will keep continue to reach
out madam chair.
Okay agencies all right thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you senator Sanchez thank you
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair center up
I was gonna go down the same
road as far as the federal
dialogue yesterday we passed
bill the didn't care about the
of federal Kontakt Comstock act
in when you're going to have
discussions and I know you're
Judiciary next of will it be
with the feds I I know there's
different from federal for
forestry in state forestry would
you be visiting with federal
support forestry also.
Senator Madam chair Senator I I
believe I would pry need to
reach out to both of them and
get their opinion on this bill
in this language to make it a
better bill thank you for that
and and the other part I want to
talk about Madam center is the
endangered species so just
thinking through that they are
in danger they're in a facility
let's say a lake of the fires
coming and if the fire is not
stopped.
it hurts them does not mentor
center.
Senator yes it does so the
opportunity to shop fire early
on even with their waters are
habitat would still give them an
opportunity to force later but
stop far now so for those
reasons and I know that you're
going Judiciary also of stand
for your bill because I think in
Judiciary they'll tear it apart
even deeper so I appreciate the
opportunity visit.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you further questions
comments what's the pleasure of
the committee.
There's a motion for it to pass.
From Santo renewable and a
second by Senator Gallegos.
With the secretary please call
the roll yes Senators serve on
this excuse Senator goes.
Senator Hamblen this is one of
a place Senator Neville.
Senator pope no.
Center street is excuse Center
souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Stefanics no.
By a vote of five to to your of
the bill passes committee thank
you madam chair yes certainly
fits Senator Hamblen thank you
the reason why supported because
I I trust that you're going to
have those conversations I think
all of us
we need to do our due diligence
on those things and and have
those conversations even if they
don't support what we're doing
but at least I understand that
and so I wish you the best of
luck in Judiciary.
Madam chair senator thank you
very much.
Okay so
Members of the committee we
pulled out at last meeting we
pulled Senate bill three twenty
six off the table and by a vote
and we did put it on today's
calendar Senator Hamblen.
This.
The madam chair committee this
is one of those opportunities
where I wish I had one of this
film things that was like take
two
so that we could do this and and
start fresh
madam chair committee thank you
again for being willing to hear
Senate bill three twenty six I I
I want to address maybe elephant
or elephants in the room was
we've had conversations with
groups that have been in
opposition and understands their
concerns regarding this bill and
eight you know I I I feel that
it's it's a step it's we we need
to kind of open this door it's
it's not a perfect bill but I do
feel it it is something that we
need to do in order to make sure
that the renewable energy from
distributed generation gets gets
collected and so with this I
have the and I'll explain the
bill again this is about how the
state of New Mexico counts
renewable energy from
distributed generation for the
purposes of the renewable
portfolio standard it's purpose
is to clarify the law to assure
the renewable energy from
distributed generation is
counted as part of New Mexico's
transition from fossil fuel
generation of electricity to
clean renewable carbon free
generation of electricity its
sole purpose and effect is to
assure that renewable energy
from distributed generation is
counted towards achievement of
the renewable energy portfolio
standards that already exist in
law and with me I have nearly
souls who is a of expert from my
region as well and utility basis
and I look forward to the
discussion and I know that will
we'll probably have some folks
who also speak about the bill.
Agency so if you want to make a
statement madam chair members of
the committee good morning I am
very least tolls I currently I'm
working as an analyst for the
house I have participated in
proceedings utility proceedings
at the PRC and many of those
over the last ten years I hope I
can help you with your decision
today.
Are you are here on work time
I have permission from money
management to be here as part of
my work yes ma'am okay thank you
very much we're going to the
audience is are there any
persons here to support this
bill.
I see one is there anybody here
to oppose this bill.
I see a couple people.
Online we have no one in support
and we have one person opposing
so let's hear from the support
here in the audience Carlos come
on up.
And use the Mike please
introduce yourself for the
record.
Day good morning madam chair
members of the committee Carlos
to Sir with the.
Public service company New
Mexico and we see this bill as
an opportunity to we're with the
distributed distribute
generation R. P. on our PS
counted towards the overall our
PS schools because the in the
next twenty years we know we're
looking to be eighty percent
renewable and you know to a
hundred percent carbon free so
the this bill would only help
those efforts for a cleaner
sustainable energy future thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone else
here in support.
Okay we'll go to opponents now
in the audience.
Take two people and that's all.
Sure.
Madam chair yes Committee my
name is the gentleman
on the co coordinator of three
fifty New Mexico environmental
organization and we stay in in
opposition to this bill.
I'm in addition a thirty five
year
member of the electrical work in
the electrical industry and in
that capacity Representative
company is the.
As the government relations from
the PRC have been involved in
regulation with the PRC so just
briefly.
Of this bill.
Will overturn the PRC decision
if you look at your FIR.
The the current state of affairs
is that my solar system at my
house.
And I heard senator who will
talk about his solar system at
his house my solar system
produces electricity and rex
renewable energy certificates
this is a little complicated a
little hard to understand.
But my electricity comes in two
pieces.
Hi use my renewable energy
credits myself
for my electric car.
So what this bill would be a
allow would be for the I owe you
to take my racks that I am using
for myself take them and use
them for their self without
compensating me.
Presently.
I have the option of selling my
rex the I. O. U..
With the contract.
A a power purchase agreement.
But I decided to keep those
wrecks for myself.
So this bill.
Would interfere with my my
current ability to use my own
rex not just a little bit of
background.
most of the I will use in the
state that we have three major
I'll use.
Are up on getting to the renewal
renewable portfolio Barmouth of
our statute.
Not all of them.
So this bill.
Could help bill the the that I
owe you out.
Who's currently behind.
By taking the rex from there
customer base and putting them.
Into order to.
Satisfying.
Their portfolio center okay
could you summarize this so this
would happen without.
Compensating.
Their customers and that's the
problem we're the PRC says they
can do that but they have to
compensate.
Their customers for taking the
rex this bill would change that
thank you very much thank you
well here one more opponent.
And I while you're getting ready
online of we have Carol Lynch
and we're not gonna have her
speak but I wanted to note that
she's an opponent thank you so
go ahead thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
sponsor and expert witness we do
appreciate the conversation
would introduce yourself.
I'm Camilla I am and director of
the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club currently utilities
can count renewable energy
credits towards our PS
compliance and if they want the
full amount of those racks they
can pay for them it is a fact
that EP has been missed
counting.
There renewable energy
compliance
however EP has pending approvals
at the commission that will
address its current our PS
deficiency one is a hundred and
thirty megawatts of solar and
sixty five megawatts of battery
at the carne project another is
amendments to the previously
approved a hundred and twenty
megawatt solar and fifty
megawatt battery bit when a
Vista project and a hundred and
fifty solar heck Tate project
all these project approvals are
supported by commission staff
because the pricing is within
current industry standards SB
three twenty six may be in
conflict with the renewable
energy act income and interfere
with commission rules in cases
our members by solar at their
own expense they use it for
their own electric use anything
beyond that the utilities are
welcome to but they need to pay
for it thank you thank you very
much okay we're going to of
committee members.
Comments yes senator Neville.
Thank you venture unless I
missed something this isn't
about to.
taking money away from the
customer or two or it is just
about crediting the utility with
the amount of solar that's
rooftop isn't that what it's
about madam chair and members go
ahead let my as far as
determining our fifty right here
hundred percent whatever we're
trying to get to.
Madam chair Senator that is
correct the only thing this has
to do with is counting that
renewable energy as we go on
this journey the Energy
transatlantic questions from
last time madam chair where
whether the systems Senator
souls and you have systems with
those systems actually have the
capability with that experience
that's my only concern before I
talked with the utility folks
afterwards and I think that's
find for they've got the
systems.
Arrange for they do that so I I
don't have any heartburn over
that but to.
I don't see the concerns that
the opponents brought up of as
far as.
Dollars money and all that
because I think this is just a
crediting systems from the
standpoint of getting.
It it's for our.
renewable portfolio that we're
trying to get that's all chair
thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair how do you
respond to the concern that did
this takes REC from from the
generators of the solar energy
and transfers them without
compensation to the I use that
have what's.
Madam chair Senator it has
nothing to do with that.
That is the purview of the PRC
the arrangements that are
different amongst the various
utilities today are a result of
the PRC and the utilities
working through their process.
It will still be the purview of
the PRC as to whether or not the
utilities are paying rooftop
solar on owners for their racks
it does not address that it is
instructing the PRC that it is
to be counted.
The PRC is authorized to do
whatever they need to do
regarding the racks and how they
can't this is only about County
the renewable energy towards the
renewable portfolio standard
requirements.
Thank you madam chair but does
tie their hands because it's
renewable energy certificates.
will be owned by the generator.
The generator's qualified
facility in which case the
renewable energy certificates
owned by the public utility
purchaser of the renewable
energy provided and and I have
to share with you that I found
this language really confusing
last time see if I can find it
in the case of qualifying
facilities that are net metered
all of the energy generated by
the qualified facility will be
deemed to have been purchased by
the utility and last time I I
just have this.
And that typically toward deemed
because it's not real deemed to
have been purchased by the
utility so it's not really
purchased by the utility but
they're getting credit.
It and and just explain to me
how I'm wrong.
Madam chair Senator you are not
wrong.
The current language in the
statute sometimes refers to it
being purchased by the utility
sometimes refers to it being
delivered to the utility.
This has to do with whether or
not you want it counted because
the renewable energy from eight
distributed generator a net
metered facility has three
different dynamics going on some
of which is purchased some of
which is delivered some of which
is used the deemed to have been
language is intended to school
all of that up madam chair and
senator and say find a way to
count.
Madam chair so it's not counted
has being generally is being
generated by the people who own
the the solar rooftop and madam
chair if I can the reason why
she points to a phone is because
because I have I love watching
it monks that watches our solar
system yes electricity.
Madam chair Senator what's the
question again please so
I start laughing so.
As I understand it right now has
a generator
I own the credits the REC that's
what I understood.
Of the concern was now I don't
even know why dari cease to be
honest with you but I just like
the little Mike and telling me
how much it's it's being
generated so my question is if I
wanted to do something with
those are you seize this
precludes me if I understand
correctly from selling them
because they're already deemed
to have been purchased.
Madam chair Senator and I'm
sorry I'm so thick headed.
Alum.
It depends on which utilities
system you are currently on as
to how much discretion you
currently have about those
renewable energy certificates
this goes back to what the PRC
determines is the way for doing
this for how to move forward
this bill is trying to clarify
the legislature's intent which
frankly has not been clear which
is how it has gotten to be
different depending on the
utilities and madam chair and
senator the bill is trying to
give you the legislature the
opportunity to tell the PRC it
is renewable energy and we do
wanted count.
Madam chair so.
Does it reversed the PRC
decision that was made.
In the P. U. K..
The PRC has come madam chair
Senator the PRC has completed
rulemaking to try it without the
help of a change to statutory
language to try and sort that
out so yes they will have to go
back and now take whatever the
legislature determines and
revisit their rule making to
figure out how to do.
Hey.
I really appreciate that this
Madam chair because I was so
confused last time and and this
is very clear it's a policy
decision about whether we think
solar should be counted in the
overall renewable portfolio
If it is counted will this
provide an incentive to I used
to encourage.
Rooftops or solar on rooftops
because they're gonna get a
benefit from it.
Madam chair Senator.
I hope so.
I I see the energy transition
we're going to be needing more
and more like Tricity this is a
market that is going to have
higher and higher demand so that
so that total amount that we're
talking about is going to
increase.
It is my expectation madam chair
and senator that all of the
tools that we have available to
us are going to be required and
as a result we will have the
opportunity to minimize unduly
burdensome cost to rate payers
to make it possible for the
utilities to shut down old
fossil fuel generators sooner.
That it is a very important part
of the energy transition and
madam chair and senator without
counting it it becomes invisible
in it won't get the attention
and it won't get the push to let
it fill as big a part of our
energy transition this makes
sense for New Mexico.
Okay well because that I think
is important because when we did
this did the solar
We did get we use the the
immediate tax credits for the
down payment and then the
savings for the payment so I'm I
was very very happy with it but
they were of course so seven and
you get the question because
we're at our time in this okay
second time we're discussing
this bill okay what is the
question my my question is.
My question is.
It's better I guess my question
is so it's better to be counted.
Is that correct to give the the
I use the incentive to support
it and encourage it is that
correct.
Madam chair one yes or no that
is part of it that in all the
other things that let you be
able to see what is actually
going on as we manage our way
through this energy transition
okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you anyone else on the
bill yes Senator Gallegos this
route real quick then churned
Center since we don't have
amendment
could potentially madam chair
and senator bill is tabled so
they have the amendment should
all take you have the original
bill in front of you thank you
madam chair and so I do know
that there were conversations
about that I'm sorry and madam
chair center what I'm trying to
find out is it was tabled and
what changed between then and
now the product to the surface
again that would have another
dialogue on it usually there's
something that had brought it to
a better point sure absolutely
madam chair and committee thank
you very much and I do
appreciate the opportunity to
spend this time there were more
conversations not necessarily
agreements but more
conversations that were taking
place and also
the the my expert today
lives and breeds this
information and is much more to
do with that I am on on this
bill.
Thank you for that Madam
chairman center I'm still since
I don't have solar optional
confusion don't like us some
thoughts from the public that
all yield with that.
Thank you so we are on the bill
what would the committee like to
do with the bill.
There's a motion for do pass is
there a second.
There is a motion by Senator
renewable and a second by
Senator souls who the account
committee secretary please call
the roll yes Mr sense of this
excuse Senator echo so much.
Etcetera have a yes Senneville
yes.
Senator pope.
Yes thanks committee to set our
souls yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Stefanics nope.
By a vote of five to to your
bill has passed out of this
committee thank you very much
for the reconsideration.
Thank you we are in recess until
Tuesday and we have on Tuesday
we have
a large build that was in the
emergency bills Senator Stewart
it's five twenty I hope to have
everything out to committee
members tomorrow so you'll have
time to look at over the weekend
so we'll see.
