More and I I have to experts
that have joined me Monday
Ireland seventh grade whack and
mount schools and Regina ray S.
Lara sixth grade from Carlsbad
intermediate school I'm going to
let them present memorial but
let me just first say that the
while friends organization has
been around now for thirty years
a suit Torrez at current
director cheesy here hi Ashley
young and her husband Robert you
see these T. shirts there are
many people that have been
working with while friends it's
an amazing student led
organization every year they
decide what they're going to do
and a vote on it and then they
bring it to the legislature but
when a while friends group of
visits me three weeks ago the
teacher of the group said to me
I was in well friends in middle
and high school and you did a
memorial for us and I was the
presenters so thank okay I'm
old.
Well I have to give a shout out
Senator Tommy Rutherford
actually had wild friends as
well back in the nineties early
nineties so and I was following
his lead but I wanted to just
give that child out to him as
well thank you so I'm gonna turn
it over to Monty in Regina to
present the memorial please and
the way we do this is you
introduce yourself by name and
where you're from all of them
okay sorry it all down okay
you'll be impressed great.
Please.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Marquita I
mean and I am in the seventh
grade at wagon on public schools
in writing them.
Senate memorial twenty nine
thanks the state agencies who
help protect our forests such as
the forestry division encourages
more education about the
importance of our forests and
asked the governor for a forced
appreciation day.
Okay so the reason I'm asking
are gentleman in the back is.
full time you're speaking we
want to make sure the people
watching can here okay.
Push hold down full time you're
speaking but right around Mr do
you want to start over now okay.
This memorial is needed because
increasing wildfires disease and
drought are harming our forests
and we need to educate everyone
about how important they are.
I got home was scary with the
wildfires so we would really
appreciate it if you support
this memorial thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee hello my name is
Regina race Lara I am in the
sixth grade from pure living
caused by New Mexico we need to
protect our force because forced
are ecologically important this
is because they protect rivers
and streams create oxygen
control floods and provide
habitat for and.
Forster personally important to
me because they are essential to
the environment they're also
important to me because I like
the soothing sounds of nature
that are relaxing their most
important to me because they
provide food oxygen and habitat
for wildlife you're probably
wondering for why forced or
parts to us in because that if
we don't even have force and we
live in the desert but that is
like saying why does their
matter we can't see it.
People in because that still
profiting Care for forest
because they receive food oxygen
and the habitat for the wildlife
around the or in their area also
some people might camp out of
town enforced near so it doesn't
matter that we don't have a
forest.
Hi of course in our town but we
still profit from force in our
surrounding which means we still
need to care for them thank you
for considering this memorial
and thank you for Sanchez
Senator Stewart.
Right so we stand for questions
thank you so much so let's go to
the audience everyone in the
audience it's in support of this
memorial would you raise your
hands.
All my gosh we have almost the
entire room thank you and we
have a couple people online
supporting as well and I'd like
to especially thank Oscar
Simpson for joining so would one
let's have one person from each
side come to the middle to speak
on the memorial.
If somebody who raised their
hands over here did you want to
speak.
Somebody from over here okay we
have to.
Advocates coming up thank you so
much.
That's great good morning madam
chair committee members key
lever more with the New Mexico
State Land Office the land
office and supported this bill
thank you so much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Debbie Hughes
with the association of
conservation district we
definitely support this our
forces are so healthy for so
important for so many reasons
and one of the main reasons that
I think we need to understand
work harder on the called a
watershed for reason that's our
water supplies are supposed to
come from so it's very important
get these force they end up not
only keep from having
catastrophic fires but also to
help with our water supplies
thank you thank you so much Mr
Simpson do you want to say
anything.
Thank you very much madam chair
I'm also presents live in
Albuquerque a lifelong resident.
Conservationist an outdoorsman
Forster critical for wildlife
for watersheds and quality of
life please support this
memorial thank you thank you
very much is there anybody in
the room who is here to oppose
this memorial.
Online.
Okay so it seems like there's no
opposition let's go to the
committee for questions or
comments.
Yes Senator Gallegos and then
Senator Sedillo Lopez and I have
a common as well the intern
Center and well young ladies I
enjoyed they actually came to my
office this morning to explain
their memorial the reasons
behind it in a very impressed a
love the yield in this on your
own reasons but I think it's
benefit for state so to me and
living in in like your state in
the desert we go on to of the
Cloudcroft read also very a lot
in the Mescaleros have found a
way to go ahead and claim their
force land so to me that's a
discussion that we need to carry
forward because we don't want
what happened here in the more
area to happen in our area and
we do have a four speed up in
the mountains but it's a benefit
for the state as a whole and our
nation the we start looking at
these on how we preserve my how
we clean them how we care for
this is slated made a mention
earlier that is where our water
comes in it it's our vegetation
like you guys in your
presentation the animals it's
really important that we take
care of what we have in order to
keep it just thinking through
more of a now they don't have
the treason and grant please
when the melt of starch then
it's going to cause erosion
always down into the communities
and it caused devastation a
recently I've done a lot of
hunting in New Mexico and in
state maybe eight years back I
wanted the Pecos wilderness and
beautiful ride it's all of go
back to a horseback but there's
areas that you can't go in that
ten twelve years ago I could go
on horseback because of the
deadfall it's not you're not
able to go through so as a young
person I appreciate what you're
doing because you need to keep
this before us because we as
adults need.
Figure out how we go ahead and
keep our state in a great way so
that way when we handed over to
you and you can go ahead and
build upon that but I just want
to thank you all I love the idea
that you've got I think it's
valid force and
I just created you have the
strength to come before us and
and and talk to us about it so
with that are you thank you so
much Senator Sedillo Lopez thank
you madam chair I am I'm so
excited about this group I
remember when Ruth less grave
started at the law school and
I'm all excited that sue George
who was one of my students at
the law school is now continuing
the tradition
and I was very impressed with
the presentations I have a
couple of questions when I read
the memorial I was very excited
to read that one of the students
went to go hunting for you with
the his or her grandpa and what
I was wondering about is do you
know anything about how the
pinion crops are doing.
In New Mexico these days.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't know the
answer to that question right
now but I'll check my resources
and get back to you thank you I
would appreciate that.
and I also really like to the
governor is going to be
requested to declare of Force
appreciation day so that we can
all think about the beauty of
our forest I was actually
surprised to read any memorial
that they cover one third of the
state I hadn't you know when you
just kind of drive through had
realized how how much of our
beautiful state is covered by by
standing for us I'm very excited
to support your memorial.
Health centers nope that's it to
my question and then we'll go to
the committee for a motion my
question is is there a specific
day a Senator expert witnesses
that you want for the forced
appreciation day.
Madam chairs and members of the
committee.
We don't have a specific date
for the forest appreciation day
but we would think it would be
around fall around the fall okay
great other questions comments
Senators holes.
Thank you madam chair of do you
know of how many you know what
Rick Perry in areas are.
The water areas how are those
new force affect those.
Madam chair members of the
committee at also don't know the
answer to that check resources
and get back to you thank you by
the way I was a lot of the other
expert sometimes would say that
instead of making things up
with.
Of do you know are there any
plans to try and re planned to
reforest areas of New Mexico
that have have lost their for us
either through fires or through
other overgrazing rather things
are there plans for re forcing.
Madam chairs and members of the
committee the memorial focuses
more on education and awareness
rather than management when we
leave that to the experts.
Thank you very good answer.
Thank you madam chair a
committee member's motion yes
Senator pope.
First off madam chair that you
know I I want to bring them next
time on one of my bills to get
all the support from the.
but with that I I move a do pass
thank there's a motion and a
second.
From Senator Gallegos in the
committee secretary is going to
call the roll for of the.
Senator boxes this excuse
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
etcetera hablan excuse
Centerville excuse Center pope
yes Senator committee Senator
souls yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator phonics test.
By a vote of five zero you have
a due pass from Senate
conservation congratulations
impairments plea my vote yes
certainly of so I just want to
at the end of our meeting in my
office they actually asked me
for my vote and to me that's
really important because a lot
of lobbyist come up here and
they talk and talk and talk in
they don't ever get to the point
of what they're needing so I'm
really proud of you too young
ladies and for you to actually
asking for that of changed my
mind on decision so just wanted
to congratulate you thank you
madam chair thank you very much
and have a great day okay thank
you so much okay we're going
back to the agenda at we have
Representative McQueen and
Senator Diamond for house bill
one eighty four as amended.
And Sanchez thank you for the
indulgence we wanted to get the
Well children back to their
classes understandable yes thank
you.
Okay go ahead please
madam chair members of the
committee house bill one eighty
four makes the changes to the
the way the state came
commission is appointed so for a
long time I I think came
department has been struggling
and I think a lot of that is
because working commission has
been struggling we've had a lot
of turnover in of course when
you get a new governor you can
get a new commission because
they serve at the pleasure of
the governor we're currently at
for members that during the
session one point we're down to
three on the seven member
commission so for a while there
they can make important.
And even with four members
you know someone's out Tanner
someone sick they still can't
hold a meeting.
what this bill is designed to do
is bring continuity stability
and professionalism to the
commission he would stay at
seven members instead of all
being appointed by the governor
three would be appointed by the
governor at large no more than
one from anyone County no more
than two from any political
party and then there would be
four appointed by the
Legislative Council and the four
point by the Legislative Council
or sort of position appointments
they have a little a job
description for each one a
rancher or farmer the
conservation is a hunter or
angler in the scientist in again
no more than one from any county
in the more than two from any
party.
The commissioners would serve
for six year terms instead of
four and the terms should be
staggered and there's language
in the bill to keep the stagger
so if you happen to have a
Senator us resign with the same
time then the new appointees are
pointed for the remainder of the
term so you keep that second
place and they may only be
removed for cause and the for
cause language in the bill is
the same language that and Miss
Universe New Mexico regents
which is the idea of providing
some insulation from political
pressure.
I would like to briefly address
to the criticisms are for the
bill one is that it doesn't have
enough geographic diversity and
it actually has better
geographic diversity than the
current statutes
so it's I think I stepped step
up in that way in the others
that there's only one Lujan
position.
In the game commission
in the reality is again under
current statutes there are zero
hundred positions so we just
want to make sure that voices
represent and we certainly would
expect that more than one member
would be a hunter angler because
that's the kind that kind of
person who is interested in
serving on the commission is
someone who likely has that
background so I have the seven
members you could certainly have
a quite a few who are hunters
and anglers and with that
manager I'd like to turn over to
my co sponsor center time thank
you madam chair and members are
I won't take long because I
think Representative included a
great job this is an attempt to
bring stability to the game
commission and not just that but
to depoliticize this we also he
he makes a great point that just
until about ten days ago we
didn't even have enough board
members on this board to to meet
because they lacked a quorum so
we need a leadership we need
these appointments to stay in
place both the landowners and
hunters are teaming up with
wildlife activists advocating
for stability in the sport and
so we stand for questions if you
look through the draft the
current draft there are a lot of
changes made in rules it really
simplified the bill before you
again for Legislative Council
appointments those will include
input from our legislative
leadership and three governor
appointments and all of those
after leaving rules all of those
now requires Senate approval or
Senate confirmation and will
stand for questions.
Okay so policies committee
members we are getting a.
Yes I do have several pages of
them.
So we will go on.
So.
Are there other people who are
here in support of.
Anybody in the audience oppose
this bill.
And online meeting of two
supporters no a point so here in
the audience let's take our cue
from each side who support the
bill first you.
Of these.
madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak my
name is Jesse develop the
executive director of the New
Mexico wildlife federation
organization that was
instrumental in creating the
state came back in nineteen
twenty one for the past three
years approximately the
commission has been in complete
disarray very dysfunctional in
this bill is necessary to ensure
that we have stability at the
state game commission I will say
though throughout the last three
years while the commission has
struggled and while the agency
didn't have proper leadership
from the commission the agency
staff has done an exceptional
job or conservation officers or
wildlife biologist continue to
work and continue to ensure that
we have healthy robust wildlife
populations across the state in
addition to reforming the
commission I strongly urge folks
to get behind Senate bill two
fifty four which is a funding
bill that would properly fund
the agency so that the agency
could continue to carry out the
great work and continue to carry
out the great work once we have
a new commission or stable
commission in place madam chair
committee members thank you very
much for the opportunity to
comment thank you next.
Got it I thank you madam chair
and committee members for the
record and over which had
unlimited as an organization
efficient wildlife management is
central to the work we do we
understand that it is inherently
difficult and I think it's
important to remember that it's
it's made more difficult we
don't have a functional Game
Commission we hope to see a game
commission that's defined by
professionalism by real
expertise in the subject matter
that provides for diversity of
perspectives and perhaps most
importantly that has greater
stability from year to year I
think today will only provide
one commissioner on the
commission that was there four
years ago I think that's a real
problem we don't have stability
we don't of familiarity
familiarity with with these
issues in New Mexico I'd also
point out this bill supported by
organizations that are often in
front of the game commission on
different sides of an issue I
think that shows really the
status quo isn't working for
anyone this bill isn't gonna
solve all our wildlife
management challenges but it is
a significant improvement over
the status quo we think we think
it's time to to try a new model
in the state we ask for your
support thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Kerry Romero
executive director and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico council about fighters
and guides we also stand in
support of this legislation and
I definitely want to say that we
are in support of the changes
that were made during the rules
committee they were numerous but
they're mostly technical in
nature and they really do make
the bill a lot more concise I
think that you know if you
listen to the testimony from
previous committee meetings you
might be a little confused about
all of the various support from
organizations that are normally
adversarial I'm not sure that
that's ever happened before but
the one thing that we all have
in common is that we all attend
every commission meeting so we
have all had a front row seat to
the continued inefficiency on
the commission throughout the
years this bill really truly
would make things a lot better
it takes some power away from
the governor.
It also requires that seats be
filled with people who actually
know something about wildlife
Policy gamefish Law and hunting
and fishing and then it also
stabilizes the commission
because it prevents
commissioners from being removed
without cause so we would urge
your support thank you madam
chair thank you.
Go through online.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kevin Bixby I am the
executive director of wildlife
for all I'm speaking to you from
Los crucis we support this bill
we applaud the sponsors for
introducing this bill
that would address a serious
problem with wildlife
governments in New Mexico today.
In my capacity with the
nonprofit wildlife for all hi
have had the opportunity to
study the wildlife management
systems in place in other states
most states have some type of
wildlife commission usually
appointed by the governor but
none that I'm aware of peer to
be quite as dysfunctional as the
situation in New Mexico so this
bill would change that and
actually make New Mexico a
leader in professional Leising
democratized dean and
stabilizing wildlife management
in the state thank you.
Thank you can call one.
Yes good good morning
commissioners
Senate members of this
conservation commission can you
hear me yes we can okay great
thank you for this opportunity
to speak I am New Mexico
educator
wildlife is a publicly shared
resource held in trust for all
citizens the game commission is
a powerful group of appointees
who decided wildlife management
policy is very important bill
seeks to add balanced science
and to reduce political bias did
again commissioner by dividing
the appointment of game
commissioners between to
introduce the governor and the
Legislative Council I
distributing representation
across state districts in a
quest up party affiliation and
most important to me is an
educator seat is reserved for
scientists.
Also as a non Lujan one seed is
reserved for a non game species
conservationists ninety five
percent of our citizens do not
fund so this consideration is
better representative of all
citizens and is better for all
wildlife thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you very I'm gonna of go
to the opposition but we also
have great features in Los
crucis an online support thank
you very much for being here
this morning the the opposition
under the phone.
Madam chair members of the
committee Mike Sloan director
New Mexico department of game
and fish we stand in opposition
to the bill today for two
reasons.
unlike the current statutes the
bill the bill will reduce
representation across the state
the bill would allow for
representation from only four
counties and six of the seven
commissioners could be appointed
from just three counties the
potential exists that this will
shut out voices of those most
impacted by commission ruled
Policy rural communities.
The second reason we oppose the
the bill is the removal process
contained in the bill the bill
puts into statute language drawn
from the state constitution for
regents of higher education
institutions the clause allows
for removal for incompetence
neglect of duty or malfeasance
only by petition to the New
Mexico Supreme Court.
None of the reasons for removal
are defined in the bill nor is
there any direction as to who
can petition the court.
Given the controversial nature
of some of the issues the
commission addresses it's easy
to imagine a significant number
of frivolous petitions being
filed by those who believe a
commission decision was a result
of incompetence or neglect of
duty because the decision was
not in their favor these
frivolous petitions
Representative a waste of
limited judicial resources.
Finally as with the refusal to
hear state up to fifty four
percent of bill two fifty for
game and fish licensees this
bill does not advance wildlife
management in New Mexico and for
these reasons we stand opposed
to the bill thank you thank you
is there anyone else here to
oppose the bill.
Okay we're going to committee
members for questions and
comments I have Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
In center data to start.
Thank you madam chair and I I
glancing at this and so if if
this is already already been
addressed justice let me don't
know and stop the but I guess
I'll start with the first one
which is the supreme court
process for removing
I.
I have a limited practice now
that I'm retired but one of the
things I do is I consult with
boards and commissions and I
represent their quality control
board in in Albuquerque and the
biggest thing that I've seen
from all of this is of missing
meetings.
That is mostly the reason that
the that's the malfeasance and
of most of the commissions in
fact I'm I'm not aware of any
commissions and I
Boards that I've seen have to go
to the Supreme Court other than
the regions and that what they
do is they have the board itself
State you know they have a
provision in their bylaws or
whatever it is that that
constitutes them that if they
miss that for funding for an
excuse meetings or you know
whatever that they will be
removed by the board.
Could could you explain to me
why this board requires such a
high bar to remove somebody
because that's a that's a very
high bar.
Madam chair chair of this excuse
me center city Lopez the the
high bar is to insulate the the
commission from a political
pressure we did borrow the
language from the regions as you
know to the best of my knowledge
that language hasn't been tested
hasn't been used I have seen in
a couple other bills I think
it's and senator Wirth icy
Commission your state Stream
Commission bill and it's it's.
You know it's a high bar for
reason and that is we we want
stability on the commission it
you would have to show you know
this is it the language
malfeasance in compass look
neglect of duty or malfeasance
yes that language is undefined
you know it's sort of the
typical thing in a lot of flaws
as you know like the reasonable
person standard reasonable is
not the there is a fine so it's
it's a high bar to protect the
commission the language hasn't
really been tested.
Third I move did you add
something no I I also think that
it's important this was
discussed at length really in
the in the rules committee and I
think that if you if you recall
we were going over the exclusive
original jurisdiction was kind
of the the language that that
they looked at and and you know
I think that I think that he's
explained it well we're trying
to create a depolarize a
commission but also to really
professional isis and take the
politics out of this is that
there's no long term stability
and so it was but designed by
intent that we we mirrored
policies the regents.
Madam chair so what's your
position that the regents are
not political.
That that those appointments are
insulated from politics because
of because of the high bar.
Madam chair etcetera I believe
they're more insulated than they
were.
On the point that you brought up
it is not in the Interstate
Stream Commission bill I just
looked it up.
Thank I.
I think that you know what I
understand exactly what you're
trying to do manager excuse me
just to be clear it says may be
removed by the governor for
failure to attend but has
nothing about the court.
And its failure to attend
meetings yes three three
meetings yeah that the madam
chair that's what I've seen in
most of the commissions and you
know they're different
commissions or city commissions
are counting Commission state
commissions and what I've seen
is the greatest malfeasance they
have come very strong conflict
of interest rules and that's
very important and they also
have a you know you missed you
missed three or four meetings
whatever it is it's usually
three within a year for within
two years or something like that
some something that's the
greatest thing you see and you'd
want that process to be easy and
quick not having to do a up that
me filing original petition with
the Supreme Court for most
people it's kind of intimidating
thing to to do and then getting
a hearing with the Supreme Court
within original dentures diction
is also kind of an intimidating
thing to do certainly would be
very difficult for non lawyers.
And so I I'm just thinking that
if you want
Set the would want somebody is
continuing the continually
continuously missing meetings to
be referred moved rather quickly
because that person is really a
drag on the commission on the
other hand you do want to
insulate them and I understand
that purpose of your bill and
that seems like a good purpose
is there any did you talk about
any other kind of health way
approach or.
I don't know because I just
think that bar is extremely high
to remove somebody and and there
are there are times that.
That you may want the bar to be
a little bit lower like missing
meetings.
Mentors Senator Sedillo Lopez
we've discussed the mechanics of
the language in the bill we
haven't had any discussions
about the different less onerous
process.
madam chair is that so I know
that you probably don't want
concur well you're gonna have to
do concurrence anyway because of
rules.
Would it be and family to put
something in effective
commissioner Mrs for meetings
the commission can remove that.
The individual for missing for
meetings
Madam chair Senator dealer visit
I I when considering unfriendly
you know the for two Senator
Diamond I I think you know the
as always that the challenges is
timing and and we're committing
on the fly I know I I think
thank you madam chair Senator I
I I wouldn't consider that on
friendly at all if we can get
the the structure the bill in
correctly so that we could.
Still some this along to the
process.
I will I will think about it and
and be thoughtful has other
people have questions I'll try
to be thoughtful so my other
question about.
About the bill let me just check
make sure that it's something
you.
Going.
Fund.
I circled a partial term should
be counted as one full term.
The county of Bernalillo has a
provision that I thought was
really good and that is if
somebody gets appointed for a
term that's less than a year it
doesn't count as a full term
because if they're just filling
out the remainder of a.
Of the term is less than a year
they really don't have it they
they're not able to have an
impact and I really like that
that rule I don't know if you
dress it has.
Each.
I circled it on the green one.
On the on the old one so I'm not
sure if you just that it's still
it is still here yeah.
On a partial term should be and
that that would be easy a
partial term shall be counted as
one full to our unless the term
is the initial term is less than
a year.
Would you consider that family.
Madam chair center yes.
Okay
you want to repeat the.
So on page twelve no okay on
page five line twenty of the
original of the original bill.
one twenty.
Like twenty one.
it eliminate the period the
period and say unless the
initial term.
Is less than one year.
Okay so which drafters following
this I mean it analysts okay
listen if I do the initial term
is.
This last someone we don't okay
on the it's on page six of the
New Mexico and contexts.
And it's on on.
After.
Here is there let's get to one
okay.
It's now F. on on the in
context.
Chair if I may it it's a on page
five one twenty one of the bill.
Yes and I would suggest she
doesn't have the original bill
to getting it now.
Please everybody here listen
here's the bill she's getting a
plan.
Go ahead Representative who's
just instead of using the word
initial term I would suggest
using the word partial term okay
list the personal term is less
than one year that's a that's a
very good suggestions unless the
partial term.
Page no page five of the
original bill line twenty one.
Unless the partial term is less
than one for you.
One four year.
Now going back you indicated
that was friendly yes ma'am so
going back to your first one did
you get the language for the
first.
I haven't made the for for I
didn't make the first one
because I so we'll take each
agency separately so.
Committee members is the
opposition to this amendment.
Anyone in opposition to this
amendment so the secretary is
going to show that all.
Six of us have agreed to this
particular amendment on a vote
count.
So go ahead center east of the
floor
Senator if if you don't mind of.
To somebody else so that I think
about
And I think between I I know
Senator I mean Representative
McQueen has a lot of experience
with drafting more more than I
do so I think maybe between the
two of us we can come up with
something.
But all this is this last stop
before the floor so either if
that doesn't happen here.
We call it into a wide open
discussion on the floor so I'll
come back to you okay Senator
Gallegos.
Madam chair and senator
Representative I've got a couple
of questions if you wouldn't
mind from director Sloan I
understand the I looked up the
members they have now Mister
Lopez
of of you should be Center for
for who I a replace and then
miss Hickey I had a couple of
questions for him if you
wouldn't mind.
So directly funded when it come
up here so just take a seat so
we can get you on the Mike.
Use the so my could all these
make sure on so.
If you speak loudly enough it
picks you up if you're soft
spoken you have to have the hand
held.
See what I can do.
well and chair and senator
representing directional so I
did look on the economic side
you only have three in place do
you know if historically if
we've had any removals for the
non attendance to the meetings.
Madam chair senator I do not
believe we've had remove the for
non attendance.
And and I guess that's troubling
to me Mr chair and center
representative if if we use that
and I know you only have three
right now if we're not able to
make important I think there
should be some kind of
punishment there but my next
question for you then is would
it be a pay issue madam chair
chair representative on the
reason you're not able to fill
the vacancies our our something
else that's causing us not to be
able make court.
Madam chair center I I guess
first we do we do currently have
four commissioners and I
anticipate additional ones being
appointed so we do have the
ability to get a quorum
commissioners receive only per
diem it's a voluntary position
so it's not a pay issue and I
guess the second the last thing
I would say is that I think one
of the reasons that there hasn't
been the need to remove people
for lack of attendance is
because commissioners rarely
miss meetings I think during my
tenure as director we've had.
Maybe at two commissioners meet
miss one or two meetings they're
usually pretty dedicated and we
have five or six meetings a year
and so they make Madam January
and they make sure they make the
time to attend.
Thank you for that then chairman
and senator representing
directional the those are my
interests from my questions for
you I do have more questions but
I just wanted to see if there
was a void in if there was with
his monetary or something else
structurally that's causing it
to make hard but it you're
saying you're making Corman that
answers that question for me
insurance center representative
my next question has to do with
the in context on.
Page seven
it goes into provided person who
changed party affiliation and I
noticed in the house they're
they're my colleagues were all
opposed to the bill and I'm
wondering if this is the park
for I understand
Representative rules did a lot
of free right but I'm wondering
if there's an opportunity to
visit on possibly what this does
and also the opposition that we
had in the house.
Insurance center Representative.
Madam chair Center
it was interesting we we did
have a lot with the part have a
pretty lengthy discussion of
this on the house floor
I had a number I I will tell you
I had a number of my Republican
colleagues come up to me
afterwards and say yes not about
the bill you know I I just think
you should tweak this retreat
that I I I think the.
Some of the opposition was
For the sake of opposition I
move it was it was the bill we
discussed that day and it's kind
went on at some length.
The incident rules we did have a
discussion over that the length
of time that someone could not
have changed and there was a
motion which failed to change
the four years to two years and
my feeling is especially with
with six year staggered terms
you could see in advance you
know what positions gonna come
up four years is the length of a
the governor's term.
and I think changing not having
change your party affiliation in
that time is a good safe card
because that has happened on
boards and commissions in the
past you know you need to
appoint a Republican or Democrat
in you just have you know one of
your friends change affiliation
so they can fill that role
I I will say if you see in the
the equipment and contacts there
was an amendment added on the
house floor addressing the
changing parties to.
Carve out these disorder open
primary provision that we have
where decline to state voter can
change parties at the time of
the primary in vote in the
primary.
And so we didn't want to exclude
the the DTS people from serving
and so the language there says
that that that doesn't count as
changing your party affiliation
as long as you change it back
within ninety days.
Thank you for that Madam chair
representative and I guess my
next my only other concern is
of.
I guess the dialogue in in rules
of.
What seem to be the problem.
What with reserves I see some
some percent.
Working out in rules but.
For those the issues that are
other issues were in the house
or were there strictly something
the Senate looked at
in difference to your bill
etcetera etcetera over
Representative mentor center you
know I I think some of the
changes that remain rules that
were made in rules.
Thurgood changes like on the
changes you know we had the
provision that the governor's
appointees that no more than one
from it three appointees one
from each congressional district
and they thought with the county
requirement that you can have
more pain more than one from the
one County that that cover that
because of the way the
congressional districts are
drawn are drawn that you could
have you could have three people
fairly concentrated where the
districts come together in
ironically the that when I
started working on this bill we
added the county language
because of that concern and they
just sort took it a step a step
further and said well now that
you have the county language you
know those those congressional
districts that added protection
probably isn't necessary and we
accepted that as a friendly
amendment there was certainly a
lot of other word smithing and
Sir testing of the language of
the bill
I I think the amendments that
were adopted not all the more
but the amendments that were
adopted I'm fine with them and I
just think the bill still serves
to provide that stability that
we're looking for on this point
this that.
During the session I sit on
rules and for the first time in
many of the bills
many of the appointments that we
have have some standardized
language going through the
appointments and I think Senator
Pirtle and some others were
trying to standardize this two
other appointments that we have
and so there was a lengthy
discussion but as I said just
the Representative said most
were adopted unanimously they
were madam chair and senator
Gallegos if I may the amendments
removed were mostly made by our
Republican caucus in fact page
one two and three and even
really page I have to do with
mostly of the the initials in
the initials are three governor
appointees we had for
congressional districts and was
pointed out that if we did it
that way you could potentially
have all three of those from
just Bernalillo county and so a
lot of that language taken out
to simplify the bill they just
have to be from three different
counties I also want to point
out that on page four this
ammendment was also brought
forward by Republicans
additionally other than the
scientist appointments are no
more than two commissioners
could be of the same party that
was struck and so now of the
four Legislative Council
positions to no more than two
could be of the same party and
so you're you're most likely
going to get a it's close to a
balanced board with those
changes now.
You madam chair and senator
which once once we took out the
congressional districts it has
the process of all we change it
on this line will that language
also appears over here and it's
also in the title there is a
story Caskey the fact that once
we decide to take up the
congressional districts that
triggered a lot of the the the
reading in the the amendment to
contest.
Thank you for that madam chair
Senator Representative and and
it brings me to my next level I
look at Center Perlas ranching
farming hunting of that type of
person so the game commission
would be really important to and
and as to me as well but with
his I show him as novo and and I
know that you soar like
Representative Ezzell keep her
little sign ready for her no
vote but it just brought concern
to me especially that if we are
once changing the language in
the bill we should be an
acceptable to the bill and vote
in the permanent but I
appreciate and and you've
answered all my questions I have
less concern now than when I
first read it but I did not have
the in context so with that are
you thank you thank you Senator
souls.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
trying to look back and forth
between the original and the the
amendments in context of on the
governor appointees.
Decline the state are they not
counted as either political
party is that correct.
Mentors etcetera I believe
that's correct.
So they wouldn't be limited only
to decline to state thank all
for B. declined to states.
You madam chair Center and under
the bill the governor has three
the Legislative Council has for
all seven could be declined the
state okay thank you for that
clarification up madam chair and
a gunman three of the original
one
The members that are appointed
by the Legislative Council.
Would they apply.
For this knowing that there's an
opening would they make an
application to Legislative
Council what would be the
process for them to know who's
interested who's able to do this
who verifies that they meet the
proper requirements
Madam chair Senators schools
this is actually a question
that's been asked for and it's a
good question I think their
number ways that you could
Promote the position in a
identify clients not clients and
candidates you know I I'm sure
you could put something on the
the game fish website I'm you
know we have a legislative
website we have legislators to
go back to their communities and
no people that might be
interested because the for the
for positions or sort of you
have these job descriptions ago
go along with them you know that
the interest groups might know
people that the hundred hunting
groups you know might put the
word out to to their members
the the scientists maybe the
other universities they talk to
each other I mean I think
there's different ways to get
the word out.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator souls I will tell you
that a similar question came up
in rules and it was make clear
both.
President our pro tem Mimi
Stewart and gridlock at that
leadership often has a lot of
influence with those Legislative
Council from the continuously
meeting and so those names could
also be brought forth by
legislative leadership to
Legislative Council okay thank
you and on that same page three
of the regional one the position
for which is the rancher farmer.
And it talks about where the
game hunting is a licensed where
the species are frequently
present what this frequently
present mean W. Y. over it daily
the.
For what happened to come
through as they're migrating
once a year what's frequently
mean Madam chair Center that's
that's one those words it's not
defined like malfeasance and
reasonable you know present is
It's a it's open to
interpretation I will say that
the existing statute has similar
language language and it says
former reinstate contains at
least two species of wildlife
on that part of the deeded land
requiring license prior legal
pursuit
so a similar idea that not
Not to provide to the last
detail and madam chair yeah
would that be docks that are
seasonal is that frequently
addition the stream.
The.
Madam chair center I would think
so but again I think it's open
to interpretation and one of the
reasons I will say that we put
these position appointments at
the Legislative Council.
Is that I feel it would be
useful to have this kind of
discussion in that bipartisan
bicameral body and as opposed to
simply having one person making
the appointment the governor the
governor in making that judgment
on their own without discussion
without a little back and forth
we have you know some position
language in the existing statute
it hasn't really been followed
so I think by by having it in a
more deliberative body like the
Legislative Council we'll be
able to flush out whether
candidates actually meet the
qualifications.
Okay and madam chair and down
from that the next one position
I a conservationist and the
primary focus of which is not a
game species clearly Audubon
society might fit into that what
other kinds of organizations
where their primary focus is
not.
Game species
species occur.
Yes madam chair center there are
all sorts of conservation
organizations
us here quote comes to mind one
of the members of the public who
spoke representative
organization called wildlife for
all I think that's focused on
non game species
there are.
A wide range of NGOs out there
that I think you could find
qualified candidate from.
Thank and yes I was looking
through and then shifted over
madam chair and shifted over to
the.
The amendments in context I
originally had a question about
advice and consent of the
appointments for from the.
Legislative Council but it looks
like that's been one of the
amendments it's been changed
that all of these would have
advice and consent of the Senate
not just the governor employees
is that accurate Madam chair
etcetera that's correct okay.
Madam chair I think those are
the questions I had as I was
going through the the bill thank
you thank you.
Thank thank you madam chair I
don't know if this would work
for you I guess I do have one
commission maybe there or when
question of.
Does the game commission have
bylaws or rules I know it has
rules that govern its internal
processes and including
removing somebody for failure to
attend meetings.
Do you know about this center I
don't know the answer to that
perhaps it's directors on here
yes could you answer that.
Madam they do not okay.
Madam chair another thing that a
lot of a lot of commissions and
boards do is X. distaff's rules
for their own conduct and
behavior conflict of interest
rules
admitted programs rules
requiring attendance at meetings
so what I came up with is this
would put the onus on them to
come up with rules is except for
the boards of forty to remove.
to remove a member for failure
to attend meetings that way that
leaves the board the ability to
establish its own rules about
intent meeting attendance
because they only meet five
times I didn't realize they
limit five times a year I
thought it was monthly so they
could have their of their own
rules and and
you repeat that so everybody
contract with you what okay so
so I I'm just saying that in the
New Testament let's talk about
page are we in context or
regional okay I'm I'm looking at
in context which is on page six.
we would like all members to be
H..
H. thank you.
So the proposal and I would
definitely like
Representative queens opinion on
it is to leave what I'm trying
to do that accomplish what I'm
trying to accomplish is to allow
the board to establish its own
requirements about attendance at
meetings and the reason is they
don't meet very much so maybe be
missing two meetings in a year
is pretty devastating to the
board and its ability me quorum.
Where they might decide they
don't want to do anything about
this but leaving their authority
to establish their own rules
about meetings make sense I
think to me I don't know if that
makes sense to you
and so the idea is except for
the boards.
The authority to remove a member
for failure to attend meetings
comma a commissioner shall not
be removed except for in other
words the I'm trying to give the
board authority to remove its
own other boards have that
apparently this war doesn't and
that's up to the board to to
establish its rules and it might
not choose to and just leave it
alone for the they may choose to
have attendance rules usually
they establish them what I've
seen is established and when
they start having problems with
attendance at meetings.
Madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez
I think there's some potential
drafting issues which I'd like
to talk about I would say is
initial matter I would be
uncomfortable with the board
that could remove other members
of the board
I think if we're going to talk
about the middle path on removal
I think we should probably look
at removal by the appointing
authority rather than the board
itself I just it.
I'd have to think that through
it makes me feel uncomfortable
years ago I was the do executive
director of the health policy
commission.
The members were appointed but
we had rules and the rules
specifically stated that when
you missed X. number of meetings
you were off the board and it
David was up to whether or not
the.
Governor who with the pointer or
the executive director would
notify.
The individual but that is a
common practice if we look at
some other boards and
commissions.
It is it and then madam chair
and senator
I I I looked at diocese Language
Senator Wirth bill in the it's
it's interesting and might have
to look at this further but it
does say may be removed by the
governor who with in that bill
the governor makes all the
appointments for failure to ten
three consecutive meetings it
also says in the same manner as
provided for removal of members
of boards of regents percent
article twelve section thirteen
of the constitution and I don't
know if that is a reference to
this language of of having the
Supreme Court to it and you have
to check on that Senator Neville
had something on this point of
sometimes you see the wording
shell have been deemed to reside
to have resigned.
And if you missed three in a row
you have been deemed to have
resigned and if you put that and
I think that might circumvent
the the because we we use that
if you remember in when I was in
a constitutional amendment in
rules a little earlier this
session of we looked we research
costs because that's is the
board of regents standards has
we border border regions and I
don't know about that whether
they miss if they miss meetings
out or not but to.
The whole idea is to minimize
the political thing if you have
a governor in particular that
within that wants to hire
certain president of university
they just switch the regions
around to get what they want you
don't want to have that you want
to have some independence and I
like the because.
Revision but you could put
something into the affected if
they missed two in a row over
three in a row whatever they
will have been deemed to resign
unless.
The board choose otherwise or
something like that to.
It's like it's a I doesn't seem
to be a problem for the work but
most boards have some provision
for either the board to remove
the board chair to remove for
the appointing agents Agency
agency to remove
I mean I understand you're not
willing this year and
willingness to do it on the fly
but I just think.
It could be a potential problem
if you've got some dysfunction
on the board and somebody
decides just to start skipping
meetings or group start skipping
meetings it really it really is
hard on the board and if you
have to go to the Supreme Court
to remove them for missing
meetings just seems like such a
high bar.
She madam chair Senator we we
like the Senators suggestion I
think perhaps it could be
inserted it might have to figure
out how it fits but on the rich
I'm looking at the regional bill
page I.
Starting at line twenty two when
the commissioner dies resigns or
no longer meets the
qualifications required and for
the commissioners selection.
Or misses three consecutive
meetings.
That position on the commission
becomes vacant.
That's a great solution.
Do you want them to be excused.
You know I I was thinking about
that Madam center of the idea of
excuse your unexcused.
And it to the extent it's
excused or unexcused you sort of
put back in that you know sort
of political decision and and
truthfully Effects excuse of
someone's
not able to attend.
You know for three consecutive
meetings you know I mean I'm
sympathetic but maybe it's time
to for them to step down anyway.
To support me
Remotely at all we need to
ensure we look at
the faster pace of these do we
know if four madam chair does do
we know if the board right meets
remotely at all I see a not I
see no that they do okay I I the
move or if senator bill wants to
make that motion I would support
it.
I don't have it drafted up where
we at on page five of the
original bill one twenty four.
On the.
For.
Or where ever for after regional
selection.
After the comma for.
I think this through I get to
remove the comment remove the
callup for Mrs three are Mrs
action how many three meetings.
Three meeting three consecutive
meetings will be allotted report
that only meets five times a
year so do a lot but somebody
could have health issues or
something and might be
reasonable to keep on it they're
going to come back and.
But okay or misses three
consecutive committee meeting
that because the that position
on the commission becomes vacant
so then it's just an automatic
thing and then the either the
director or the chair pointed
out in informs the member you've
missed three meetings you're no
longer on the commission and
then informs the chair I guess
for somebody would inform them
demand less content okay so we
have that AS a motion so senator
bill makes a motion and a
second.
Or misses three consecutive.
Okay so on page five line twenty
four.
Read the original section strike
come out for misses three
consecutive meetings comma that
that position that's the motion
and the there was a second is
there agreement on that motion
madam chair would not strike the
comma which from the first come
first come.
Resigns forced me to
qualifications required okay
yeah I agree.
Okay.
Think that catch that okay.
Is that fine with you Senator so
we're all in agreement one two
three four five six so there's
six of us in agreement on this
second amendment.
Committee secretary madam
secretary.
now what are we gonna do about
the Supreme Court.
Chair of leave it in.
That's the cause provision
right.
Yes since.
Conflicts of interest.
Okay anything else center you
have the floor Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Are you concerned about
conflicts of interest.
Madam chair Center yes in the we
put in I had language in there
that they were subject to the
government conduct act and sent
rules took that out on the
position that they are they are
so we have to say it no I made
the argument that that saying
that they're subject to the
Carroll conduct act and the gift
that might in the commissioners
that they should get versed on
those that language specific
and.
I know that's the position of of
okay that's fine of that's all I
have chair okay is there any
further discussion or questions
with the pleasure of the
committee.
There is a motion for do passed
from Santo gate goes is there a
second madam chair this is
second from Senator pope.
And as twice amended in this
committee.
So could the committee secretary
please call the roll yes Senator
Vontaze excuse Senator Gallegos
yes ma'am Senator Hamblen
Senator Neville yes.
Senator pope yes.
Thanks committee you Center
souls yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes session a phonics test.
You have it has thank you very
much moving on to the next bill
we have Representative Roybal
Caballero and this
Representative Ferrary that I
understand Representative Roybal
Caballero is bring the weight
today.
We're on house bill three sixty
five as amended.
Right after.
Good morning madam chair vice
chair of members of the
committee Representative House
Bill three sixty five and I'd
like to just inform House Bill
three sixty five related to
geothermal resources is the
mirror Bill SB eight presented a
and as of sponsor Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino he presented the bill on
January twenty sixth and this
committee heard it in full and
passed it unanimously so we're
here to present the house
version of the same bill with
one exception to the the bill
actually Senate bill eight after
it left committee was amended
and the expert witness madam
chair Mister Tom Solomon was
there and he can speak to the
amendments that were made here
and how they're incorporated
into three sixty five if I may
Mister Tom Solomon Solomon who
was the facilitator of the
working group for geothermal
resource with.
Thank you Representative madam
chair members of the committee
of yes the the amendments were
actually worked out jointly with
a representative from Energy
minerals natural resources in
response to some comments they
made in the F. I. R. and they
were basically two amendments
one has to do with changing the
target temperature for what
counted as a geothermal resource
and lowering the temperature
from two hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit to one hundred light
which
expanded the scope of geothermal
projects could count under this
bill to include
such resources as spas
and hot springs and also to
areas where we were extracting
geothermal heat to achieve a
greenhouse for example and so it
just expanded the scope of what
counted the bill there was also
another amendment from energy
minerals that they wanted to
I wanted to change the
The the definition of the heads
that were added in the interview
minerals and natural resources
from being specific to ECM do
the energy conservation
management division more broadly
to chest
heads with in EMNRD
unfortunately that was in
section seven which is been The
appropriation section which is
been subsequently struck for the
bill so no longer counts but
those with the basically the two
amendments that happened to the
Senate version of the bill that
you previously heard thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
on the amendment to the bill was
also house bill three sixty five
was amended.
And with the removal of the
appropriation and so it passed
the house floor and here we are
today and we stand for questions
madam chair.
Thank you is it is there anyone
in the audience in favor this
bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
not opposed to this bill.
Okay and on on the internet on
the zoom we have gene Logsdon
and Oscar Simpson who stand in
support of the bill can we just
have one person to is we have no
opposition just one of public
comment in support of the bill.
Mr get it.
All right Good Morning madam
chair members of the committee
is going to with the service of
your gonna chapter representing
a thirty five thousand members
and supporters throughout New
Mexico we strongly support this
legislation do thermal is a
renewable energy source that can
service effective twenty four
seven back up to solar and wind
power geothermal also also does
not boom and bust it does not
destroy the our our climate and
air quality so it is a wonderful
economic opportunity Mexico
development of geothermal energy
representative and equitable
transition opportunity not only
for workers in the oil industry
but also for those that through
the state.
We disadvantaged community we
urge that you will pass this.
And fully fund this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Mr get it so let's go
ahead and turn it to the
committee.
With the will of the committee
Senator souls thank you madam
chair.
I wasn't part of the things why
was the appropriation stripped
off how are we gonna start a
center without an appropriation.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Senator souls it
was stripped down because during
the process of the hearing
the negotiations were already
begun by Senator Ortiz and you
know with Senate finance and so
he he in that process presented
to to Senate finance and
received
And okay to incorporate
appropriations I think in the
mouth right now we have Mr
someone four hundred thousand
and then there was an additional
amount that
When I just let Mr Solomon
continue with the additional
women.
Yes thank you madam chair
Senator souls of so it's
complicated but I I believe
currently ongoing within Senate
finance is a negotiation to
reinstate some small amount of
the funding just sufficient to
Fund The New Mexico tech center
of excellence that that's the
four hundred thousand the
representative just spoke about
in in addition to hundred fifty
thousand dollars that would go
to energy minerals natural
resources to give them I guess
it would be one and a half to
two heads which would be
sufficient for the beginning of
the expanded to a role that they
would take and administering
geothermal duties per this bill
those negotiations are in
progress I believe that the
EMNRD received a substantial
increase in funding we are
trying to figure out if.
It was about six and a half
million dollars in additional
funding for EMNRD if the school
but that includes this two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and Senator Ortiz Pena was
checking with the Senate finance
administrator this time.
That's what I know.
Madam chair and thank you and
the reason I ask is the small
amount of money compared to what
the total budget is for what the
potential this has even just the
the research potential in the
amount of additional requests
will come into New Mexico tech
as a result of putting something
like this in.
Seems like you know this ought
to be a place finance be looking
at putting additional money
rather than trying to do it on
the cheap or through and and so
it's I guess I'm I'm more
railing against the frustration
of the finance committee that
tries to under fund everything
instead of look at things that
really can make a huge
difference in New Mexico could
be a world leader in by putting
a little extra funding into it
so just thank you for the
explanation it doesn't surprise
me I would hope that our finance
committee and others see that
investments in research and I am
particularly our world class
research universities that we
have here is an economic driver
not a cost or expense to the
budget so thank you madam chair.
madam chair Senator Stefanics is
there anybody else on the let
nobody else is on the left over
to pass.
Do I hear second by second
thank.
Madam secretary will call the
roll I guess centers have office
excuse Senator Gallegos.
B. Google shows no ma'am and I'd
like to explain the.
Senator Hamblen.
Senneville yes.
Senator pope yes.
Thanks committee centers also
yes.
That's a deal this yes Senator
finance yes.
Senator guy goes to explain his
vote on madam chair and
representative it just goes back
to the target of the unfunded
mandates I think that we had a
bill on the floor yesterday for
gentleman yield of shorter right
me over the coals on no idea I
have and that may be something
to visit with him on because if
he's consistent
we don't have the money going
forward so with that are you
thank you.
Okay with that so madam chair on
that point it's real common and
finance when there's any amount
of money whether it's sufficient
or not if that's what the
money's gonna be they take the
strip the appropriation that's
just what it is and that's that
they may have twice as much
money as a need or half as much
but that's what they do.
thank you with that of House
Bill three sixty five receive
the do passed six to one thank
you very much madam chair faced
chair and committee thank you.
Okay great.
Please.
You need to.
Okay.
Your bill's.
I'm finishing thank you of.
Assistance or so clean cut metal
shed.
Thank you Senator would
appreciate that.
I'm here at presenting the study
brought canyon ranch state park
brought to you is an area to the
north west of Los crucis and has
quite a number of recreation
areas that was acquired in two
thousand eight I believe as an
example of that you all would
desert in a place where many
people go and hunt there's four
wheeling out there there's
hiking
one of New Mexicos amazing slot
canyons is right in that area
this is looking at expanding
that to make it into a state
park there is lots of recreation
is part of the organ mountains
desert peaks national monument
area is right near that and and
some of those same areas and so
this is just to to begin to
study is to look at whether that
is appropriate to make it
another of the New Mexico state
parks.
Thank you do we have anybody in
the audience in support of this
ammendment of or this memorial.
Anybody in the audience in
opposition to this it in
opposition to this memorial.
Okay we have one person online
in support of the moral that's
Mr Patrick Nolan Mr Nolan.
Everybody thank thank.
Go ahead Mr no one.
Yes madam chair no one executive
director with friends of organ
mountains desert peaks
this is a really critical
informed property
wildlife diversity access to the
river and it's a place where
we've been trying to manage
access to the monument for a
long time in this really
presents a really elegant
solution and provides access to
a one of a time landscape for
southern New Mexico and I think
it's really important for us to
look into this and make sure
that we are managing this place
as much as we can.
Okay with that what is the will
of the committee question after
Senate Bill just it to orient me
because I'm at lived in Los
crucis for a long time isn't
that out toward the court latest
rant what used to be the
correlated transient those
bluffs that are on the west side
of the river.
You madam chair and and senator.
That would be the south west
corner of where we're talking
about the the high peaks of the
the don't be on us and the up.
That aren't done yet as are on
the side right.
The.
I'm trying to get around it
worry and of it from the river
this is to the west of the river
and north of Picacho peak area
the kind of form of of press
there and then just to the north
of that is what's called brought
to you the very western part is
the high peaks with that have
the.
The absorb observatory up on top
and so it sort of starts there
and then flows down into the
river near the
Town of radium springs area just
north of radium springs is where
slot canyon is and brought
canyon that empties into the
river and madam chair Senator
did they have some flood control
structures constructed out there
hundred years ago under years
ago with fifty years ago thirty
years ago when they were made
probably more than that it was
back in the thirties where the
corps of engineers came in and
put some small dams most of
those closer up towards hatch
instead of in this particular
area just just educating myself
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senate bill anyone
else I commit to come in I don't
know if we're look look at the
time.
We have one more level.
Madam
thank you madam chair thank you
center for bringing this forward
and just full disclosure in my
job that I've worked a lot on
the organ mountains desert peaks
national monument Mr Nolan who
called it is somebody that I
work with a great deal and this
is a very popular site in
southern New Mexico it is an
area I think it's a lot of foot
traffic that gets you see it on
social media all the time it is
something that is a a jam to our
area and to be able to instances
already located within the
national monument
correctly right within our team
here at the I think it's
probably just need north the
band shared just north of the
national monument the money then
I think is a little bit is the
southern mountains are peaks in
this area thank you madam chair
thank you sponsor for for
clarifying that I'm not somebody
who personally likes to hike
because I'm very clumsy but I
like to do everything they can
to support that so that people
can get outdoors and so it is it
is a very popular area for
people in southern New Mexico
and to have that study to make
sure that it continues to get
protected because it is so
popular is something that I've
support act reshape this
legislation for that thank you
madam chair by might it's that
relate oh mountains of the ones
I was trying to think of not the
done on us.
Okay do I
Senator Stefanics and we would
do pass to your second a second
all right madam secretary will
call the roll.
Bosses you Senator Bancos yes
ma'am Senator Hamblen yes
Centerville fears.
Senator pope yes.
S. meetings etcetera so yes.
Senate bill okay yes since the
pandemic yes.
Thursday I'm going thank you.
Yes sense of with a vote of
seven to zero.
Senator Steinborn got to do
that.
Senator how to me Senate
memorial forty four madam chair
before a certain numbers the
committee we might be in trouble
by be doing a brisk walk here is
out of breath so I don't know
how to do it that basketball
game today.
No excuses I'm just used to
static there Jerry god that take
a brisk walk without.
So I think that all of you think
that this just pertains to
camping which is the Senate
memorial but what this is about
it's about Hispanics enjoying
camping hunting and the outdoors
this is that show which means we
elevate Hispanic voices to
ensure that we don't only talk
about conservation our
connection to land and water and
people but we also talk about
how do we elevate Latino voices
and public policy to ensure that
they're heard and can give their
perspective on what they know
about the land and water when it
comes to shaping bills and
lawmaking so what ensure does
that encourages elected and
appointed leaders to safeguard
our precious public lands so
that our children can continue
to enjoy fishing hiking hunting
camping and other outdoor
activities for generations to
come not empowering Hispanic
leaders to engage their
communities in the conversation
a public lands is one of the
major focus of now SO strives to
just be to be just and equitable
balanced and nonpartisan
connected to communities and
events yet he can MCSO that's a
familiar connection to the land
and with that I have to expert
witnesses with me today who care
so much about and show and about
our land and water and I'm gonna
yield to them to say a few brief
comments and introduce
themselves.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Floyd
or to that from twenty year
member of the S. bill a city
council
best number I should say and
I've been with it so for a
couple years now we felt it was
necessary that the chapter
reform here in New Mexico and we
have a joining chapters in or
major states and so my
responsibility has been
primarily to a identify a
members of the community leaders
we get involved with farming
ranching the cicadas and all of
the things we grew up with that
the new one on thirteen the the
wood Holly and and and it's
important to us that we promote
to for pre serve that the
culture
In the future so that has been
my my involvement we're up to
about thirty members right now
so thank you Mr chairman.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Max
Trujillo I am the senior field
coordinator for agile in New
Mexico I'm also a county
commissioner in San Miguel
County
and thank you for having us so
insurance can has formed the
Hispanic conservation leadership
council made up mostly of
elected officials past elected
officials a second question is
water board members utilities
people and the reason for that
convening was that we can
elevate Hispanic voices any time
that there's policy or or
changes in policy that affect
our communities and caring so
deeply about the land and water
that that we all live in and so
you know.
These changes affect us all so
we formed the Hispanic
conservation leadership council
the HLC and we are thirty member
strong in New Mexico thirty
member strong in Arizona we have
ten members in Colorado and
that's growing out we have
members in Nevada and Utah so in
the whole concept behind that is
cross cross state support and
always keeping our voices
at the forefront of of
legislation and policy as it
pertains to Hispanic communities
and also encouraging our land
management agencies to hire
Hispanic
Executives and other people that
are on needed in some of these
agencies to represent these
these voices there's a there's a
huge lack in cut in the
conservation community of
Hispanic voices and that's what
we are that's what our mission
is so we we ask you humbly to
support this memorial thank you
commissioner Trujillo and I see
that you have a close your co
sponsor with senator Michael
Sanchez my good friend Senator
Campos from so we can thank you
very thank you very much of
course that madam chair members
of the committee and of course
the people that are here the
stingers guests is so great to
go ahead and be here with you
and I would just say as we
continue to go ahead and
advocate for a the use of our
public lands in the conservation
this memorial is very important
to each and everyone of us so
with that Madam course I will
also be available for questions.
Thank you.
So do we have the who in the
audience supports this bill.
Is there anybody in the audience
that does not support this bill.
And we have of us Christensen in
support and he's been on the
internet so maybe we should let
him speak in support so I'll
start Mr Simpson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee cost percent some
lifelong resident
conservationist and lifelong
support we need representation
broader representation Senator
more forty four provides that
representation and a good voice
for New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr Simpson do we have
anyone in the audience wants to
speak in support.
Okay could of okay go ahead and
I think we have time.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much to the bill
Sanchez and my very good friends
here from echo my name is Jesse
do bell and the executive
director of the New Mexico
wildlife federation a very
fortunate and privileged to be
able to work with actual every
single day and then to witness
their accomplishments in the
things that they do most
recently.
Our most notably in recent
history I guess is a year and a
half ago The New Mexico wildlife
federation and Max and the team
at that to work together for the
very first time in history to
get the New Mexico department of
game Fischer to support the New
Mexico department of game and
fish in publishing all of the
rules and information booklets
and Spanish as well as an
English that's just one small
example of the incredible work
being done by this organization
so thank you very much for your
support the memorial thank you
thank you.
Director so.
Madam chair committee members I
also support the the memorial as
was just pointed out we work
closely with H. on a number of
projects including translation
of the ribs and information
booklets to Spanish and more
Spanish resources on our website
and so we were very much
appreciate the Sanchez bring for
this morning thank you thank you
director slow.
Thank you madam chair committee
members Camilleri with the New
Mexico State Land Office the
Land Office stands in strong
support of Senate memorial forty
four because you recognize the
commonality of the actual
mandate and our mission to
preserve our land for the future
generations while earning.
New for beneficiaries thank you.
Thank you.
Okay what is the will of the
committee.
Or.
Yes Senator guidance I'm
chairman and Senators I
appreciate actually had looked
at the moral love get our people
back out into the land to be
able to enjoy it just have a
couple questions on and it's on
ensure it's not even on the
memorial and I apologize so to
give you just a little bit of
background I was born in Holmen
I wrenched in economy to
Colorado so I look at myself as
part of this pandemic community.
How do you get on it Joe how do
you learn about agile how do you
know about it Joel and and is it
balance opportunity Republican
that may be the reason I'm not
been invited to the table but
I'm just wondering how that gets
up pushed out there if you've
got thirty member statewide and
as elected official also on
school board I think I matter
and I'm not been invited to
discussions and that's just my
question then turned center
madam chair senator this is
completely bipartisan and I'll
tell you how I found out about
it Joe is thankfully Floyd are
to let the the family friend
believe it or not he is his
father and my grandfather used
to carpool to Los Alamos
National Laboratory it was
literally a phone call from
Floyd who asked me do you know
about action so welcome to the
edge of families will make sure
that you're in contact because
we would love to have you
Senator and what I'm going to
commit to the two gentlemen my
to experts is all help them with
outreach to fellow senators and
anyone who wants to support
doesn't need to be Hispanic but
who believes in the mission of
actor and so your new member
welcome center madam chair and
senator I'd love to look some
detail I'd like to see what the
actual purposes and also send in
support of the bill of the
memorial but I just just want to
make sure that
those at least considered
Hispanic enough to matter so
with that are you.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this memorial
and thank you for for doing what
you do in southern New Mexico we
have less that the ETA also
really focusing on bringing the
Hispanic community out into the
outdoors and and grateful for
the people who originated the
outdoor equity fund in southern
New Mexico Representative Rubio
and a couple of my my brothers
and conservation as well and so
I'm I'm grateful I'm in very
much support of this and and
grateful for the work that you
do in the and the look that I
shot you was like.
If it's taken us this long to
have our materials in Spanish
when that's part of our
constitution I think that's
that's long overdue so thank you
for spearheading those efforts
and doing that because
there years ago when we were
celebrating the designation of
the organ mountains desert peaks
national monument I was there
because we had a I'm not
actually concert with the organ
mountains as the backdrop it was
an absolutely gorgeous setting
and it was our one year
anniversary of the designation
of the monument and so you know
we hear the money etching music
we've got the organ mountains
behind us and there was a a
husband and wife who were there
with this beautiful yellow
Canary yellow Ford F. one fifty
truck that he had restored it
was just a gorgeous truck and so
we're talking about that and he
was like you know I've I've been
been here since the seventies
I've been hanging out here since
the seventies and what groups
like it showing like listed at
the end I show is that
Latinos Hispanics have been
utilizing and protecting our
public lands for generations and
so an understanding about
sustainability and protecting
and and nurturing what we have
that provides us with so much
peace and comfort and an
opportunity and so I'm I'm
really grateful for what you're
doing and for what many of our
conservation groups and Jesse I
get to to talk about those
things as well
and so I'm grateful for what
you're doing and thank you and
and the thank you for the
memorial.
The committee thank you senator
Stefanics madam chair thank you
when I served on the Santa Fe
county commission the national
association of counties was
really a where I learned about
H. O. and the there was a county
commissioner a Republican women
over in Arizona who was the
national leader at that time and
we did outreach to every county
here in our state did
of resolutions had the county
association behind it so you
might start reaching out to
center again said the school
boards the
municipalities the counties and
quickly you might have a lot of
members that's all thank you if
I can just address that for one
second Senator Gallegos we the
H. C. L. C. is is young it's
it's only two years two years
young and just as we're growing
it out we plan to make of the
cast a broader net and bring in
not only Democrats but
Republicans as well into our A.
T. L. C. because your voice is
just as important as anybody
else's thank you madam chair on
that point and I appreciate that
and I would like to be
discussion because I know you're
have a lot of hardship portal
and gas I lived there so I'd
like to educate you on some
possibilities to be balanced as
you go forward so I look forward
to those conversations chair
thank.
Thank you senator pope.
Thank you madam chair in a want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this memorial I think
this is important.
It is that you're talking about
ensuring that that voice is
heard from the community I also
think about you know the
district I represent in
Albuquerque and kind of that
urban area and making sure folks
are getting out and.
they understand camping hunting
and you know preserving our our
lands so I think this is just
really important
I also would love to be part of
this as well you know we talk
about this and and my Hispanic
roots in my family from northern
New Mexico but more importantly
just sharing the values of what
the heck is talking about so
thank you for doing this and I
hope to get involved as well
thank you madam madam chair
looks like we just got our two
new members on one point I want
three I think that thank.
Thank you that's my comment is I
would like an invitation as
well.
And madam chair if I could just
say something quickly utilizing
and protecting our lands for
generations as what Senator
Hamblen just that what it
speaking to an older women from
my community about actual
because she had Representative
the memorial she said remind
them that I'm an
environmentalist to because of
my grandkids come over they
don't know if they're getting
but or red chili when they open
the container of countries
because we re use and we recycle
and I.
Thank you Sir thank you to hear
motion to pass chair.
Yeah okay so you you have a
motion we have a motion and a
second madam secretary will call
the roll yes.
Senator guy goes.
Senator happen yes Senate Bill
yes.
Senator pope yes thanks
committee excuse etcetera so yes
yeah this yes Senator font yes.
With an on a vote of seven to
zero you have a do pass.
Madam chair which is the most
classes but the pyro thank you
for your support thank all right
with that we're going to have we
will be in recess in a minute we
will plan on meeting Tuesday
morning at nine AM in the event
