variety of, of actions,
including leasing a primary oil
and gas.
Over 10 billion in 2019.
This money alter relieves the
tax burdens on working families
in New Mexico. It's the money
that the legislatures and
taxpayers don't need to come up
with to fund government
services.
Unlike other types of offices,
state land office leases
agreements specify terms of oil
gas leases and are set by state
statute.
Commissioner of Public lands
currently lacks the authority to
set royalty rates for the best,
the best oil and gas tracks at a
level that reflects the true
value.
Of the resource being leased and
market rates.
The last time royally royalty
rates were updated in the
legislature was in 1970.
Well before the full economic
potential of New Mexico's oil
and gas regions were fully
understood. We know that New
Mexico has one of the best oil
and gas plays in the world.
Um
And a testimony in Hobbs, New
Mexico, one of the uh Fed
secretary said.
This is the best gas play, it
will not stop.
The US is going to be number one
in the world in demand and drive
that economy. And so,
This piece of legislation allows
the Office of the State land
Office to charge market rates
for premium oil and gas leases
within the within the most
productive part of the, the
broader Permian Basin.
To royalty rates within this
area would be between 20 and 25%
based on evaluation of the
specific parcels of production
and their potential.
Unlike last year's bill.
It's at a higher rate across the
state.
This one limits it
geographically to the best areas
and is tailored to line with
geological formations, and they
correspond with state trust
lands.
The bill would only apply to.
On the most predictive oil and
gas.
Parcels in the state of New
Mexico. With that, Madame
Charlan introduce my expert
witness today, Greg Bloomho,
talked for like one minute.
Oh, I'm sorry, could you uh
repeat uh the expert's name or
you could introduce yourself
please. You betcha
Oh, I'm sorry, could you uh
repeat uh the expert's name or
you could introduce yourself
please. You bet,
good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name's Greg Bloom. I am the
assistant commissioner for
Mineral Resources at the New
Mexico State Land Office. And uh
I, I cannot add too much more by
way of introduction to what uh
Senator Munoz already said, um,
I'll just pick it up.
This
Is a um.
OK. I feel like I'm clipping or
cutting out. OK, thank you.
Senator Hamlin and I used to
work together at NMSU many years
ago.
Um,
The, uh, this is about a royalty
rate. It's about what the land
office, what our school kids,
what the taxpayers get.
Off the lands that belong to
them, um, this is about the
state getting 25% in oil and gas
companies are receiving the
remaining 75%. This is not a tax
increase. It's about getting
something closer to a market
rate for what the state already
owns. Thank you.
Thank you. How many people are
here in the audience to support
this bill.
How many people in the audience
are here to oppose this bill.
OK, the same question for
online, how many to support?
and
OK. Online there's one
supporting and one opposed.
So we do have a 10 minute rule
for proponents in a 10-minute
rule for um opponents. So if the
proponents would please stand
up, uh, and just line up we have
the um.
Microphone and
We'll time the 10 minutes, so
the longer you talk, the less
the next person gets to talk or
the least number of people.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Bill Lee, president and CEO of
the Gallup McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce. Thank you
for the time this morning, um,
the McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce supports SB 23. You
have to go back as the senator
said to the 70s to see the last
adjustment in royalty rates on
state land trust or state trust
land um when compared to Texas
our primary competitor in the
Permian Basin, we are not
capitalizing as fully as we
should on the revenues that
could be generated for our
state. We agree with the state
land office that
Even with an increased New
Mexico leases would be more
industry friendly than those on
the trust land in Texas because
New Mexico offers longer lease
terms and charges the royalty on
a calculation of proceeds that
allows for some deductions
rather than gross proceeds. We
stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Camila
Feibelman, director of the
Sierra Club's Rio Grande
chapter. I think the fact that
the royalty rates haven't been
increased since the 1960s as a
clue that it's time to.
get up with the times. These are
publicly held resources
extracted off public lands for
private profit, and New Mexico,
New Mexicans and land office
beneficiaries should be fairly
compensated for this resource.
Some will claim that industry
will leave New Mexico if they
have to pay a fair royalty rate,
but the only factors that
indicate where extraction will
occur is the quality of the oil,
the ease of accessing it and the
price on the global market.
Thank you.
I'm
After this speaker will go to
the person online, uh, after
this speaker, we're gonna go to
Lucas Herndon for a comment. Go
ahead. And Madam Chair,
committee, I'm Karen Carl and I
represent New Mexico Native
vote. Many native people around
the states regularly use the
institutions funded by state
lands office activities are
natural resources do not belong
to oil and gas, and extractors
and belong to our families and
our kids.
We are a savvy state and should
be charging market rate for the
extraction.
Good morning. We're gonna go to
the um online and then we'll
come back to you. OK, Lucas.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes.
Thank you. Good morning, Chair,
uh, and good morning, uh, to the
committee. My name is Lucas
Hernan and I'm the energy policy
director at Progress Now New
Mexico. I stand in strong
support of raising the royalty
rates, um, has, as has been
mentioned, the rates have not
been raised, um, since before I
was born and uh as I raised my
daughter, uh, who is a
beneficiary of uh funds that
come in from our state lands.
Um, I would love to see us
maximize uh the
Uh, returns on this, these
resources, um, and the arguments
from industry that uh this would
make it too competitive or too
expensive, um, are just simply
unfounded. Uh, we see across the
legislature, industry fighting
um on a daily basis against
bills that would otherwise, um,
you know, add re other
regulations to their to their
industry, uh, they seem very
interested in maintaining a
presence.
here in the states and um if
they're gonna be here, they
should be good neighbors and
fair their pay their fair share.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Yes, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Atta Chavez. I'm the executive
director for NM Native Vote.
We really need to allow the
state land office to increase
the royal rate to 25%.
It's a minimum for our state.
These resources often come from
tribal lands, and we deserve a
fair price. These resources that
are owned by New Mexicans will
benefit all our hospitals and
schools, and the industry should
really consider paying these
market rate for these resources.
They've been given a discount
since before I was born. New
Mexico native vote deeply
supports this efforts, and we
please ask you to vote in favor
for SB 23. Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is John Martinez. I
am here with Conservation
Voterss New Mexico and for all
of the previously stated reasons
and in the name of fiscal
responsibility, common sense,
and investing in our children,
we stand firmly behind this
bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Cali. I'm a
board member and registered
lobbyist for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico, the league
is in strong support of this
bill. The league believes that
it is a state's obligation to
collect revenues to fund
services that are generally
state responsibilities and are
adequate to finance the
essentials of government.
The legislature should ensure
that the state land commissioner
has the support needed to
maximize profits and minimize
administrative costs while
protecting the environment and
preserving the long-term value
of the land I want to thank
Senator Munoz for bringing this
bill forward and urged the
committee to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Soa Porter from
Prosperity Works, and we stand
in strong support of the changes
proposed in this bill.
Our children benefit from the
extraction.
Taxes
And our children are in major
need of that.
Please pass this bill.
And
Let's get on par with our
partners across the border.
In terms of what is being paid
for this important resource.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name's
Ward McCartney.
I think there's two facts.
Uh
New Mexico's the 2nd.
Oil producer in the nation
currently.
And we are also competing with
Mississippi for the lowest.
Per capita income. It just seems
like our mineral wealth flows
right down the Rio Grande to the
Texas billionaires. We need to
pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, we, we're within the 10
minutes, correct? That's right.
OK. So we're now going to the
opponents, uh, who have 10
minutes, so if the any opponents
would come forward and we'll go
to the first person online.
Who is the opponent Carlos
Santag.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carla
Sontag, president and CEO of the
Mexico Business Coalition. You
know, I totally get why people
think that we should be on par
with our neighboring states. We
oppose this bill because we're
not just looking for parity in
the royalties because we don't
have parity in all the other
costs that are incurred by this
industry. Their production.
costs are the highest in the
nation, and those costs, they
never stop, and the attacks on
this industry for more money
never stops. So if we want
parity with the royalty rates,
that's fair, but let's have
parody for all the other costs
that are incurred.
Because when we do that, we're
driving these good partners out
of the state. They don't have to
drill here. They can go
someplace else. So we urge you
to please consider the entire
picture when you look at this
bill, and we urge you to vote
no. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Paul Guessing. I'm head of the
Rio Grande Foundation at free
market think tank that studies
taxation and other issues based
here in New Mexico.
The idea that because this rate
hasn't been changed since the
70s or whatever date you can
pick, uh, that that's a
justification for increasing it
is quite frankly, silly. It's a
rate, it's a percentage, uh, the
state of New Mexico gets more
when the prices rise and
I'd say that you haven't raised
it in a long time. We're not
talking about gas taxes where
it's 16 cents a gallon or
something like that. We're
talking about a percentage. So,
uh, I don't see that as a
legitimate argument, but
To compare the other states uh
with New Mexico, uh, it's apples
and oranges, to say the least.
New Mexico, taxes, oil and gas
activity, according to the
Mexico Tax Research Institute,
uh, at a higher rate than any
other state in the country, uh,
because we take an overall
higher percentage of the
revenue. Uh, those royalties do
have a direct impact, especially
on
Smaller producers of oil and
gas, the independence, this.
Policy increasing royalties will
push smaller producers out of
New Mexico, make it harder for
them to do business, leaving
only the large producers, the
big corporations that uh many
who testified on the other side
purport to dislike. So for those
and many other reasons, I urge
you to oppose this legislation.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Preston
Miles. I'm a small business
owner and I represent industry
uh on the leasing side, and the
economics of this deal just do
not make sense.
Um, if a beneficiary is
expecting $10 million from a
lease bonus and a royalty rate
increase of just 5% to 25%.
That's about $2.5 million so the
beneficiaries would be taking
75% less immediately from lease
bonuses.
The other thing that needs to be
thought about is
The state land is.
No, um, and for the past 6
years, they have been leasing at
a 20% royalty rate, unbeknownst
to most people, and they've
leased everything and whether it
is a good area or.
A bad area. Everything has been
20%, so they've already kind of
enacted their own royalty rate
increase.
Thank you.
I urge you to vote no against
this, please.
A madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Winchester. um, I represent the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, and
we have about 350 members, um,
many of which, if not all, are
very concerned about this bill,
um.
First, just to, to, to set the
table here. Our members are
certainly very proud of the
billions of dollars, uh, for the
beneficiaries that are raised to
royalties, and they take a great
pride in that, um.
So, as it was previously
explained, and I won't get into
this in detail, but for major
out of state operators, um, a
bump from 20 to 25% probably
doesn't hurt, um, but for
smaller companies who I
predominantly represent.
Uh, they operate on thinner
margins. They have less wells,
so this kind of raises uh does
disproportionately hurt them.
When it comes to evaluating.
A royalty rate.
You have to consider
The other big factor which has
been talked about, the true
cost.
Of overall production.
Per barrel.
And then you tack on a 5%
royalty increase. Now it's been
mentioned here, the tax Research
Institute New Mexico does show
definitively.
That New Mexico operators pay
the highest percentage of
overall taxes.
produced compared to other
producing states.
Just consider the list,
severance taxes, processing
taxes, production taxes.
Uh, and then of course the big
one grocery receipts taxes that
already put New Mexico at a
disadvantage and certainly so
for the small independence.
So, while those Texas operators.
can certainly afford to pay the
state royalty rate there of 25%.
As mentioned, it's not an apples
to apples comparison when the
operator is considering the
overall cost to invest in that
well, because of the tax burden.
The bottom line here,
For my membership,
And really for the state.
Is that we're losing
independence to the
consolidation of the industry.
The bigs are certainly getting
bigger and small operators are
getting squeezed out.
And if Madame Chair will let me
indulge here for just another
minute.
I want to support this claim
about independence going out of
business.
Last night I, I checked OCD
online, oil conservation
division records.
And I pulled up records from the
past 7 years on production.
There were 518 producing
operators here in New Mexico
back in 2018.
Every single year since then.
That number has declined.
Right now, we're down to 414.
So this consolidation is already
happening.
The small guys are getting
squeezed out. They're either
consolidating or going out of
business.
So, I asked the members today,
please consider.
That by raising another 5%
royalty rate.
Your further adding to this
problem that's being faced by
our members.
We do want small state.
Based multi-generational
operators who employ many people
here in New Mexico to stay here.
So I do stands respectfully
opposed. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We still
have time. Is there any, are
there any other opponents that
would like to speak?
OK.
seeing none, um.
Each side had approximately 8 to
9 minutes that they use and uh
we thank everybody for their
comments. So committee members
were now to questions and
comments.
OK, and we have.
We'll just go back and forth and
we'll start with Senator
Townsend, and we'll go to
Senator Charlie.
OK, Senator, you've been
designated.
And then Senator Charlie.
Madam, excuse me, madam Chair,
thank you very much.
Senator Munoz.
Uh, your expert witness there is
Mr. Blame and he is with the,
hold on here just a minute. Uh,
Assistant commissioner for the
state land Office. Is that
correct?
Uh
Madam Cheer and Senator Munoz
and Mr. Bloom, this is the
questions I have for you and I
do have some big, could you
explain to the audience in.
That shell kind of
Tell me about surface damage
bonds.
Mr. Bloom
Ah
That's uh Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, thank you. um.
Again, glad to be here and to
talk about our royalty bill
today. Um, we've had, uh,
Extensive discussions over the
years here on, on bonding, but
again, we offer a number of
bonds, uh, there's a single well
surface damage bond. It's uh
$10,000 and then there's also a
blanket bond that is $20,000 for
surface damages, but uh bonding
is not affected by this. This is
uh solely limited to uh.
rates, this legislation.
Madam Chair and.
Senator Munoz and Mr. Bloom, uh.
Said State land Office does
assign portion of the lease.
By production.
That they have to hold in place
the surface damage bond if there
is production. Now my
understanding that correctly.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, yes,
if
Alessi, uh or someone acquires a
lease and they are not intending
to.
Uh, develop the lease they can
uh.
file a waiver with the land
office, uh, they don't have to
put up a bond because there's
not going to be any surface
disturbance out there, and to my
knowledge, we have always
granted those.
Madam Chair and Senator Munoz
and Mr. Bloom, I disagree with
you because you have in the
past, Mister.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Munoz, Mr. Blame, um.
We have had
out there that have held held
leases since the 40s and 50s.
They bid.
Paying those religiously they
have.
Held on to them, but in the past
and I know this.
Very well.
That some of those leases have
been canceled even though the
lease payment has been made.
And
Even though there was no surface
disturbing activity on it.
Those y'all tried to cancel
those leases, and there has been
much discussion through the
leaseholder in the state land
office and other people that
have been involved with this,
and in my opinion, Madam Chair,
I think that the reason this was
done.
Was so that this 25% increase
could take effect on those
particular parcels of land.
Uh, talk to me about a record
title versus operating rights,
Mr. Bloom and Senator Munoza
Madam Chair.
Um
Yes, uh.
Um, madam, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, um, you know, just on
the, on the bonding and I know
we've discussed this and, and I
know your husband's uh you know
unesteemed oil and gas attorney
here in the state and, and we
have worked on, um, talked
through some of these issues,
he's come into the land office
and and met with our legal
counsel on them, uh, you know,
generally, one of the things
that Commissioner Garcia Richard
did was asked that her staff
review.
Uh, the bonds for all
approximately 6000 oil and gas
leases, and we found that
Unfortunately, about 15% of
those leases weren't bonded. We
found 800 leases that had no
bond.
Um
I think we could have canceled,
frankly, a lot of those leases
in short order, but we didn't
want to be disruptive of the
production and in the end,
Only a handful, probably a
couple dozen leases were
actually terminated and we gave
people time to go out and find a
title uh to these uh leases and
to get their bonds in place.
And the accusation that we're
trying to bring back leases so
we can lease them at a later
date. It just isn't true and I,
I, I've talked previously that
It, the request of some of our
independents IPAM and the MOGA
we actually uh put.
on our website, lease
cancellation notices so that if
there's an operator, we have a
lot of operators there could be
4 or 5 operators on a lease or
the or the operators don't are
not the lessees, um, those
operators can go to our website
and see if there's a
cancellation notice and
If it's there, um, then they can
contact the lessee and get the
rent paid, uh, or cure any other
uh faults that are out there.
So, you know, if we were simply
trying to bring back those
leases, um, we would never do
that. So we're, you know, we're
trying to work pretty
collaboratively, um, with, with
folks.
Madam Chair and Senator Munoz
and Mr. Blame, so Alessi should
go randomly to check your web
page to see if their lease has
been canceled. That's what I
just heard from you.
But my, my problem with what
y'all have been doing it
violates state statute.
And I think that was pointed
out.
In various conversations that
were healed.
If Alessi has no surface dis
disturbing activity.
They are not required by
statute.
To have that bond in place, yet
they are being canceled for not
having that bond in place.
So I would like an explanation
on that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, again,
we, we, we can't cancel a bond,
we can't cancel a lease, uh, if
there's no bond, particularly
when we have, have that waiver
in place. So if there's been, if
there's no activity on the lease
and the less he files a waiver
with us, we approve the waiver,
um, we would not cancel, we
would not cancel the lease and
to my knowledge we have not
incorrectly.
Council leases. I don't, I can't
think of any contests that have
been filed.
And I'm not aware of any
lawsuits related to to this at
this time. Senator, is this
related to the bill? Yes, ma'am,
it is.
You will see that you'll tie it
back in? OK, thank you.
And Madam Chair, whenever we are
talking about these particular
leases.
that
Are not required by statute to
have this bonding in place.
If those lands are leased out
again.
I am assuming that the state
land office is wanting to impose
this 25% increase. Am I
understanding that correctly,
Mr. Boom.
Madam chair, Senator, uh,
If if we recover a lease, if it
comes back it's been canceled
and, and Senator, I want to go
back to something you said
previously that, that um lessees
would have to go to our website
to see um that their that their
lease is in jeopardy being
canceled for, for lack of
bonding or nonpayment of rent,
for example, that's untrue. Um,
we actually have to send them a
uh a letter and uh but then
again, to make sure that the
people are aware of what's
happening out there. We do
publish all our cancellation
notices online.
of it
Non-less the operators would
also have the opportunity to see
what's happening. We don't know
who all the operators are on
State Trust land that operators
are controlled by the OCD. We
just work with our lessees, so
there's often people out there
that we don't know about because
of agreements that might go back
to the 40s. So we put everything
online so that operators can see
if there's a problem with the
people that they're leasing
from. It's actually a way to,
you know, keep the, the, the
leases going, um, regarding, um,
leasing for higher royalty rate,
um.
It would depend where uh the
lease is located, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, uh, for example,
if it's, you know, outside of a
restricted area, that is an area
of known oil and gas resources,
uh, we can only lease as an
exploratory lease, that would be
12.5%. Um, if it's in a a better
area, then we can lease it uh
for a higher rate, um, but
regardless, the lease has to be
um looked at by our staff, uh,
geologists and engineer to uh.
make a recommendation on how
much the uh royalty rate uh
would be set at.
Madam Chair and.
Senator Munoz.
And Mr. Bloom
Whenever you are saying that you
do send out a letter, I'm
assuming this letter is either
certified mail with registered
receipt at I correct madam, and
Madam Chair and Mr. Bloom
whenever we are, whenever you're
saying that we, I understand
that if these leases were first
executed in the 40s and over the
course of years, some of these
owners may have died and passed
that onto their heirs and stuff
like that. I understand that it
might be a problem there.
But the thought of
Going back in and say, you are
required now to hold this even
though there's not been any
production on that land. No
surface disturbance at all.
Therein lies a problem because
like I said earlier, by statute
that is not required.
Madam chair
Are we whenever we're talking
about these particular parcels
that the state land office wants
to hold for the increase in
fees, the 25% fees.
Is that the best deal for the
state or the beneficiaries of
these funds getting the best
deal out there from the state
land office, and that includes
the school for the deaf, the
school for the blind, and the
Mexico Military Institute in
particular, is this really the
best deal.
For these
Beneficiaries.
Uh
Madam Char, Senator, yes, um,
you know, we, we certainly
believe it is, uh, our, our
belief is that, uh, once these
leases are out there um at 25%.
Of course, the lessee has 5
years to develop the lease, but
once it's up, it's producing
oil, it's held by production. Uh
once these come into effect,
they're producing, we believe
will make an extra 50 to 84
million a year, the LFC, uh,
numbers were a little bit lower
in the range of 50 to 75 million
a year.
But um over time, we suspect
that the the LFC says that uh
the future distributions will uh
increase between 750 and $1.3
billion.
For our school kids, um, so this
is a, a tremendous amount of
money.
Madam chair and Senator Mao and
Mr. Blam.
That's a
Oil maintains the rate that it's
selling at right now. Would you
agree with that?
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
Yes, I, I think that's, that's
appropriate, probably in a 60 to
$80 range.
Madam Cheer
Centerman yes Mister Blame.
Why is the state land office
selecting to certain
jurisdictions.
But these rates do.
Madam Chan
you're in business, we're all in
business. People left people to
my right.
If you're in the real estate
business and you're in any other
business, you're going to get
the highest rate for the market
you can.
Whether it's a
sale of property, a lease, or
any other form.
The reason I did this was
because these are the most
valuable valuable assets to the
state of New Mexico. And when
you have something of value and
somebody wants something about
you.
We're gonna get the best that we
can.
And last year it was across the
state. There's a different
ranges of wells, different
ranges of exploration Northless
New Mexico is completely.
different in line with what
happens and so
I determined that if there's a
premium.
We're gonna get the best for
what we have in New Mexico.
Mr. Bloom, would you like to
expound on that?
Uh
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, um, I
don't have too much to add to
that.
Maybe just that we don't think
that by limiting this area that
it that it changes the amount we
believe we'll earn, uh, in fact,
the 25% royalty rate is, has
always been, uh,
A rate that we see being applied
to the best of the best tracks.
So that area would have always
been
the, the Permian Basin, uh, and,
and some areas a little bit to
the north of there, uh, but
other parts of the state, uh, we
certainly never would have
raised the rates on new leases
to 25%. Those would typically be
a 20% of exploratory area, uh,
you know, 12.5% and maybe for
some other areas, 18 and 3/4,
so, um, this, this works for us.
I think it gives people uh from,
you know, in the Northwest and
other parts of the state,
confidence.
that they will not see a 25%
royalty rate in their area and
would encourage growth in oil
and gas and those other areas as
well.
Madam Cha and Senator Munoz and
Mister blame the problem I have
with what is taking place here
with the state land office.
It is with this 25% increase on
the selective premium, uh,
tracts of land.
It is eventually going to.
Decrease the number of
independent operators, it is
going to harm those.
The small operators and I do see
this happening. We are
restricting these lands to be
sold at a 25% premium.
And it's gonna go to the majors
that's where this where this
bill is in particularly Eddie.
I have a problem with that. I
can see that the production is
going to fall mainly because of
the restrictions that are placed
on the drilling industry in the
state of New Mexico, even though
we are just.
Up here above every other state
in the union.
The restrictions that have been
imposed by the OCD OCD the
environment department are so
restrictive, the cost for these
independent producers.
They can't compete anymore. It
will be left up to the majors
whenever you can go into Texas
and do the drilling even
horizontally.
They still are able.
To make more production over
there than what we are intending
to do with the amount of
restrictions we do have here in
the in the state of New Mexico
plus this premium that's going
to be input imposed if this bill
passes, and I certainly hope it
doesn't cause I don't want to
see anymore.
jobs and businesses leaving the
state of New Mexico.
Madam cheerful right now that's
all the questions I have. I, I
would like to reserve the right
to further ask another question
if another issue comes up.
Thank you very much for your
responses.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Senator.
Um, can you repeat how much
money New Mexico stands.
Ma'am, Chain and FIR if we
listen to the FR and only to the
FR somewhere between 50 and 70
million additional money. Um,
and do you have any information
on how much currently oil and
gas are making off of the
distraction in the Permian
Basin.
Madam Chanson, there's no way to
look at the net proceeds. If we
look at the deductions in Texas
doesn't have these deductions
and we want to talk about a real
difference. I mean, we're on
that proceeds, not gross. That's
a different bottom line.
Transportation deductions are
allowed in New Mexico. The cost
of place productions in the
market are allowed processing
deductions are allowed.
Extraction uh is allowed. Fuel
deduction is allowed 100% plant
fuel deductions is 100%.
The highest price in the field
cause, uh, which is for
noncompliance is another
deduction of deductions for the
midstream's arm to transport the
oil, the length of service and
the cost must be reasonable.
And the non-arms length royalty
due from the first
non-affiliated arm length sail
are non-taxable, taxes.
All tax those. So if you want to
get into a raw hard comparison
comparison. There's no way I can
tell you what a net is on an oil
well.
Because you have to get the
deductions to do that and it is
an oil well is drilled in the
first production, it's way high
and then it slowly starts to
drop off in those legs. So
that's a hard number to come by.
I don't think we'd ever be able
to attain it because they will
not give us proprietary
information.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Senator, is it safe to bill.
Um, Chevron just came out with
their earnings. I'll, I'll might
say the wrong number, but you
know, it's not all New Mexico
produced oil that's across the
world for Chevron, but you'd
have to go into their earnings
and see what the region of their
earnings were and they're
probably on their financial
statement.
Um, Adam Chair, Senator, thank
you. Um.
And that's, it's 2.3 in the last
4, 2.3 billion in the last
quarter, quarter earnings.
Um
And while we're zooming out and
thinking about what the
potential.
I wanna put some things into
perspective for us.
So Chevron in the last quarter
earnings, 2.3 Exxon.
33.7 billion.
Uh, Occidental, 16.7 billion.
APA
7.86 billion.
Conico Philly.
2.4 billion.
And so when we are thinking
about what is the impact to the
industry.
In the context of what is the
benefit for the residents.
Of New Mexico to zoom in a
little.
Um, do we know what the average
income is for
The county average annual income
is for um, workers in counties
that would be affected.
Madam Chan, we wouldn't have
that information, but it's some
of the highest paid uh.
Workers in those regions, I mean
truck drivers may be at 100,000.
I don't know what the other oil
field workers here, but there's
some of the highest paid
employees in the state of New
Mexico. If you take uh and we're
doing work in Carl's bed on the
housing subdivision. We're not
taking employees from that we
don't trust that will jump and
leave because the oil and gas
companies are sitting on every
job site saying you want to
drive a truck for us at 100,000.
We don't pay 100,000. Uh, we're
not that big, but you bring
something to the point that I
think really needs to be driven
is.
As, as we talk about New
Mexicans, right?
You talk about large major oil
companies where 5% cost on 100.
1000 barrels of oil is not a big
difference. It's a rounding
there, it's taking a cup of
water out of the ocean, but
we're going to have to look
hardly in how we protect our New
Mexico drillers. They're small.
They started, they helped
discover this field.
There here they're not only
paying income taxes, they're
paying real estate taxes.
They've invested in us and, and
there are neighbors and there
are friends. We're gonna have to
look a little bit into how we
protect New Mexico companies. I
don't know how we're going to do
that, but you talk to a lot of
the majors or the, the, they're
the ones looking at the prime.
They're.
The uh
I think I'll put some money in
the budget to get rid of the mic
bugs.
Please, please come to the
Senate minds I don't think we
have that issue.
Um, but if you look at at what
they're doing, take a cup of
water out of the ocean.
It doesn't matter to the large.
You take a cup of water out of,
out of the kitchen sink for a
small producer. It makes a
difference and, and I'm all
about New Mexicans um and I'm
all about protecting how we keep
our oil and gas, guys, because
it is a problem, it's a problem
for a long time in this
legislature where the largest
come in and, and are pushing out
the smalls and you try to help
them and, and sometimes we just
get run over.
And, and so
Think about a little bit about
that, cause those are the guys,
uh, you can, I won't name them,
but those are the guys that have
foundations that
Kids graduate from certain
schools in artesia that their
schools called tuition is paid
for, uh, those are the guys that
from the football teams. I mean,
I'm a business owner, you know,
we, we're the local guys that
the cheerleaders, the football
teams, the basketball.
I'll come to you. They don't
come to Exxon to get their
uniforms, buy tennis shoes or,
or buy their, their dinners at
the end of the season, right?
They're not the ones producing,
so we got to think about that a
little bit and how we, how we
protect some of our New Mexico
guys and probably we'll start
looking at that pretty hard as
this bill moves along. We hope
we don't know what's gonna
happen here today. But just
think about that, the deductions
are different.
Texas doesn't allow them.
Maybe if we just just allow the
deductions, what that would,
what would be the offset that
may be even a larger number. We
don't know, but just think about
the cup of water, how that.
Changes things.
Adam Chair, absolutely, um,
senator.
Drilling down a little part in
the pun, um.
More on your point there. I want
to talk about um.
Residents of a few counties.
Yeah
Right now in Chavez County, the
annual income.
In Eddy County, it's 37,000.
In Lee County, it's a little bit
more than 32,000 and Otero
County, um, the average
resident.
Annual
27.
And we contrast that the average
income that CEOs of these
companies are making Chevron CEO
last year made 1.8 million.
ExxonMobil, Occidental made 1.4
million. Apple made 13.7
million.
And ConocoPhillips need to know.
And so when I'm thinking about
the impact to industry, I'm
thinking about how much money
oil and gas is making off of
their extraction.
The car and I just wanna
Um, reemphasize that point and,
um, chair, I wanna end with this
question. Senator Munoz, what is
possible for the state of New
Mexico with this funding?
Well
Madam Chan center, so the way
this funding is diverted a
certain portion is going to the
permanent funds. The other fund
is going to the to the to the
schools we mentioned, all the
schools, including Mimi and the
special schools, uh, Carrie
Tingley was not mentioned. They
have a specials in there for
children's hospitals at
Carringtonley. They have a
direct benefit on the lands that
they've been given to trust and
so.
40 some um little confused
today, 40%.
Of our budget is education.
Yesterday
We heard, not everybody heard.
We don't have enough money for
education, right?
We don't have enough money to
fund CTEs. We're trying to get
SEG fixed, um, we're trying to
Fix the problem with education
in Mexico and sometimes it's not
all money.
But money helps.
A lot of things get fixed.
Pays our teachers better.
It pays our janitors better, or
everybody's better and, and we
all benefit from oil and gas
revenues in Mexico from capital
outlay when we sold severance
tax bond, but I will tell you
the benefit that oil and gas has
given us in New Mexico and a 5%
increase is not, not in this
conversation.
We have set New Mexico up.
In every sector to be
successful.
In 2 years since I've been the
LSC chaired. We have triggered
some bills and legislation that
will allow us to have more
investment income by 2040, then
we'll have oil and gas revenue.
We wouldn't have that ability
without oil and gas.
We've set up the ability to do
capital out. You haven't been
hearing that this long, but in
2009 and those of us who were
here, we didn't have Ca Boley
and, and, and because of the
downturns.
In capital outlay were on track
to set capital outlay up to all
be a cash economy in New Mexico
and not bonding. For the first
time that I know in the history
of the state of New Mexico, and
thanks to the DFA secretary
working with Moody's. We're
gonna get an increase in our
bond rating.
So we financially built our
wealth on oil and gas.
But they've built their wealth
on us too.
So don't think it's a one-way
street.
They made money, we're, we're
making money. Um, we need to fix
some issues in New Mexico.
And you know, when you have
money, is it the right time?
Well, it's never the right time
because when you don't have
money, is at the right time.
And so while there's a balance
right now. I, I, I think this
bill kind of starts to address
that.
It's only the best, uh, if you
own a corner street in Maine and
Main, it's usually a McDonald's
or some franchise.
They're going to pay the best
for the best. They know what
those numbers are when the
retail sales come through. We
know what Walmart targets, you
know how.
It's driven in in New Mexico
deserves that and the people and
the children in Mexico deserve
income.
And income when income is high
and we may we'll ride the low
waves when income is low, right
along with them because we set
this up.
Me being a call me a
conservative Democrat,
You kind of, kind of be that as
you become a chair and and come
around the legislature, but
what's fair is fair and what's
right is right.
And I guarantee you those CEOs
of oil companies would not turn
down the 5% pay increase.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
And then Senators Dia Lopez and
Senator Townsend.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
It occurred to me when Senator
Charlie was
Throwing out all of her
statistics she left out.
Blank's petroleum consultants
incorporated.
Or coyote oil and gas LLC.
I don't know who they are, so
you might want to explain this
to me.
Those are two of the very small
oil and gas companies.
Mostly retired now.
very small oil and gas companies
that made a living.
40 years in southeast New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Bloom.
Ma you have represented at this
royalty rate increase.
Is a maximizing the revenue.
Available to the state land
office for the benefit of the
school kids is.
Is that pretty much where we
are?
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, yes,
I agree with that largely.
OK
In statute
There is a process.
Or
Valuing.
The royalty rates.
On
Various categories of leases.
And could you please step us
through.
That process.
You bet. She'll be glad to, um,
and I.
Made a flow chart this morning
so we can get through this. It's
uh
It's a little bit complicated
and Madam Chair and senator and,
and you know, let me say I if at
some point we could wrap back to
to the question because we
touched on that with Senator
Charlie's questions and Senator
Eels as well. And of course,
you, you've long been in that
role, um, I agree with, with,
uh, Senator Munoz as well that
we, we ought to think about
doing some things for, for
independence in New Mexico-based
oil and gas companies because
there's a very small piece of
the pie now.
But um back to your, uh,
Question, Senator, Madam Chair,
um, the first step in the uh.
Getting at the royalty rate of a
new lease is we have the
nomination come in and
nominations come in from from
two places. They can come in
from, uh, individuals or or or
companies that want to uh buy uh
an oil and gas tract generally
based on their, on their own
research.
or the land office can can
self-nominate, so we see that we
have a track open and we put it
up for sale.
Um
Once the nomination has come in,
we'll look at where in the state
that nomination is. Uh, look at
the section township and range.
Uh, and the whole state is
divided into two.
Two categories, uh, restricted
areas and then by default
non-restricted areas.
I don't know who started calling
these things restricted areas in
the 1920s, I think it was. It,
it's, it's kind of horrible
nomenclature. It's really just
an area of known oil and gas.
And it started off just one.
Uh, restricted area in the state
and that was a kind of a small
corner of uh the per.
Down in the southeast corner uh
with Texas and kind of going up
from there. The uh restricted
area can then be expanded, uh,
by commissioners. They can be
added, so we've added two over
time, the Bravo Dome and uh.
at the uh the San Juan Basin.
Now if
A nomination is in a
non-restricted area. So, on
land,
Outside of outside of the
Permian, outside of the San Juan
Basin area, and outside of the
uh restricted area for the Bravo
dome, which is, if you don't
know, that's where there's CO2
wells in New Mexico. Um, if
it's, if it's in these
non-restricted areas, and the
only royalty rate we can charge
for the only lease form we can
use is the exploratory lease,
and that's a 1/8.
And that's a 10-year lease
comprised of 2 5-year terms.
Now, if the track that's
nominated is in a restricted
area, um, then we
We score the tracks.
Yeah, based on state statute,
um.
And
The scoring is based on 5
categories, uh, 3 of them are
The geologic, uh more geologic
in nature. Two of them are a
little bit more market focused
whereas the activity band, um,
where are we seeing good
production.
Uh, each category, uh, scored
for 20, um, each category
receives 20 points. I can
receive up to 20 points, so
you're basically scoring out of
100.
Sorry if this is getting arcane,
and, and maybe a little tedious,
but I think we're getting near
the end here. Um.
If the total score is under 75
points. This is all in our, our
rules and regs as well, um.
It's considered
A a regular track, if it's over,
or if it's equal to or over 75
points, and we're talking about
a premium track.
Um
It's a regular track, there are
two lease forms that the land
office can offer. One is the
exploratory, 12.5% royalty rate
that I just mentioned, 10-year
term.
The other is the uh discovery uh
lease, uh, which is 16.67% or
16% royalty.
And uh that's for 5 years. I
mentioned the years because
Texas only gives you
3 years.
established production.
In Mexico, we give you 5.
Senator Munoz mentioned in
Texas.
You don't get to take deductions
for natural gas transportation
and processing. In New Mexico
you can. That's, that's
something I mean y'all, y'all
created these leases, right? The
legislature.
And we're giving away $50
million a year in deductions in
New Mexico that they don't give
away in Texas. Texas is less oil
and gas friendly.
Currently the New Mexico, right?
Um, and the.
Last thing I'll say on this is
in New Mexico lease, it's
incredible. It is all depth.
You're buying from Bedrock.
On up, Texas can lease
individual strata formations,
OK?
Um
Now, if it's a premium lease,
uh, meaning that it's, um,
Greater equal to or greater than
75%. Land office can offer, um,
the exploratory lease, the
discovery lease what I just
mentioned or the development
lease.
And the development lease
currently has a range that goes
from 3/16, that's 18.
075 %
20% and we're asking that that
be increased.
Ah
To 25%.
Um
I think
That's pretty much it. The only
other thing I'd add is
If it scores less than 90%, the
maximum royalty rate we can
charge.
Is uh 316 or 18.75%.
Madam Chairman, Mr. Bloom.
These
Calculations have been.
Diligently applied.
In recent lease sales.
I'm sorry, would you please
repeat the question, uh, Madam
Chair Senator, Madam Chair, Mr.
Bloom, I'm inquiring.
As to whether
These processes.
Have been diligently applied.
During the tenure of the current
land commission.
I'm sure, uh, senator, uh, yes,
they have, we have a uh
geologist and a petroleum
engineer that uh
Look at the various scoring
factors and
Score these leases and
That determines our, our So,
Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom, could
you explain why all of the
leases
that have been offered in the
last 6 years.
Have been offered
It's a premium
Designation
Mountain Sheriff senator, I
believe there have been a number
of leases at the 18.75%, but
yes, the majority is at 20%.
Um, and I think
We saw that, I think the land
office saw back in the Dunn
administration, uh, that the
Strata that we have, the rock,
the geological assessment, the
engineering assessment show what
we all know that we have some of
the best oil and gas in the
world. And
We're charging accordingly. We
know it's the geology is good.
We know that the market's good
and we know that the sales are
good, thus we end up the tracks
get, get scored highly and we
end up uh pricing them out at
20% uh using the development
form.
And Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom.
It seems like
The maximizing the revenue to
the
People of New Mexico would
involve lease bonuses.
would involve royalty rights.
would involve
The time value of money.
If leases are not.
Being offered for sale.
Could you explain, Madam Chair,
Mr. Bloom.
Why
A number of premium tracks.
Has not been offered for lease.
Given
The lack current lack.
Of the 25% royalty rate.
Madam chair, Senator, yes, um.
You know, you're, you're, we all
know we're here. Your, your job
is is to make laws in the, in
the commissioner's obligation is
to the beneficiaries of the
trust. It's to this school kids
in New Mexico, our other
beneficiaries as well and
We don't believe we're doing our
fiduciary duty or
responsibilities if we're
leasing land out at 20% when you
step across the border into
Texas, you can literally step
across the border and it's 25%.
That's
That's what's driving this. So
we've held back our best tracks
until we can get
What the school kids and other
beneficiaries deserve.
So, Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom.
Would you agree with me?
That $100.05 years from now.
Verses $100 per day.
Today
are significantly different
numbers.
I don't think it's a trick
question. Generally, yes,
$100.05 years from now is worth
less than $100 today.
So
Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom.
Do you have uh one of your.
Experts in the room that could
describe the process.
That goes through calculating.
The impacts of royalty rate.
On lease bonus.
And $1 today.
Versus
$1 several years from now are
one of those.
People
In the room
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
uh.
That is something I can speak to
and when we did.
Look at this. We believe that we
are
By not leasing some of our best
tracks over the past few months.
We believe we have a delayed uh
sales which will earn us, you
know, millions of dollars,
hopefully in July when this bill
passes. I'm being optimistic.
Um
We lease those there was a small
delay.
And then we earn, and I think
this is back to Senator
Charlie's question, Madam Chair,
uh,
We believe that this will end up
with extra distributions over
time by 2050 of 1.5, you know,
750 million to 1.5 billion uh
from the uh land grant permanent
fund. So the, the, the numbers
certainly pencil out uh over
this period.
Madam Chair and Mr Bloom, would
you be prepared to show this
committee your calculations as
to how you arrived at those
numbers.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
I don't know that I have
something, I don't have anything
to share today. I didn't bring
the, the workbook with me, OK.
Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom, my note.
that you have outlined in yellow
here the proposed rate increase
area and I guess the question
would be, does that
Absolve you from making the
appropriate calculations that
are contained in statute.
With respect to these royalty
rates.
OK
Oh
Of this acreage.
Within the proposed yellow
outline.
Going to go out at the premium
rates per a recent history.
At the new royalty rate of 25%.
Madam Chair, Senator, quick
answers, no and no.
Uh, no, the, the having a
limited
Area of the state where we could
charge 25%, uh, does not mean
that we can stop.
Uh
Doing what statute and rules set
out that we have to score every
track before we can set a
royalty rate or even know what
lease we're gonna use.
So that, that will always come
first. And there are areas, um,
particularly to the north.
Uh, in, in the, uh, newly
defined area that Senator Munoz
has put forward, uh, that, that
I don't believe would be a 25%
uh track. They'd likely be 20%
tracks, uh, particularly as you
leave the Permian Bas and get
the Taum basin.
So, Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom,
basically everything south of
the Capitan reef, roughly.
You would anticipate.
Being able to charge 25% royalty
rate.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
That sounds about right.
Although, you know, we'd still
score every track and uh
You know, we, we, we still have
to do it, we still have to do
the work. I just don't want to
see where the numbers come out.
I still want to see what my team
says on those, um, yeah, as you
go, as you go further south,
And generally further east, uh,
you get into some pretty good
territory and I think, I think
you're well aware of this.
And Madam Chair, Mister Bloom,
do you take into account at all.
In these more outlying areas,
the lack of infrastructure and
the requirements is the state
would have.
For the additional investment
required to bring those products
to market, is that part of
Your magic formula at all. Madam
Chair, Senator, uh, no, no magic
formula. It it's one that's set
out in statute, I, I'd read it
to you, but it's about as
exciting as the uh the
nomination process I outlined,
um.
I mean we, we, we have to go
through that and, you know,
Senator, I, I think that those
do those do come into account
because, uh, areas with, with
better production draw more
production, uh, we see more uh
intensity on our heat maps of
production.
And
So areas that don't have that
would, would scoreless in areas
that
You know, do have takeaway
capacity where oil is being
produced, they're going to score
higher and, and, and get a
higher royalty rate. And with,
with
With less
Gass transportation and other
infrastructure, uh, I think
would, would.
B scored
Madam Chair, Mister Bloom thus
the need for a magic formula.
Uh, Madam Chair, that's all the
questions I have for now, but I
would reserve, uh.
Another shot, another bite at
the apple, if you will.
Uh, depending on
What are the questions come up?
Oh
Thank you, Mr. Bloom for your
answers, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Senator Lopez, do you
still have questions? Um, well,
thank you. I, I actually was
gonna ask the same question
about the difference between the
net.
Uh, which is what we base the
royalty on versus the all of the
deductions you mentioned, which
I would say is um.
You know, includes the net and
then the gross, which is what
they uh assess the royalty on in
Texas, um, but I think that that
point was already well made, um,
and I was gonna ask you a little
bit about um
I, I found and you may laugh,
but I found this discussion
about, you know, the, the
different, uh, the way that you
have thought through the
I guess the sweetness of the oil
and and and the quality of the
oil. What kind of process did
you go through in in determining
this, or is it just decades of
effort?
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez.
Um
Are you talking about how did
we, uh, identify which royalty
and, you know, the, the, based
on the quality of the the best
of the best, yes, um.
I mean, again, state law and
regulations require us to, to
identify this, you know, on a,
on a continual basis. So we're,
we're, anytime a nomination
comes up, we're looking at
decades' worth of uh geologic uh
discovery in science, uh.
Whatever we can get our hands
on, uh, looking at the, the
different strata where, you
know, thinking about um
Not companies nominate tracks,
they'll often present us with
data as to why they think it's a
good nomination, why we should
lease it, you know, we'll see
some of their data, um, so, so
we learned a lot along the ways
and um we have a, you know,
geologist that came from
Chevron, or oil and gas engineer
was out in the field for, for
many years. So it's just these,
these decades of, of, of, of
experience, uh, and getting
familiar with, with where the
the resource is and then of
course updating that and
learning because
We're, we're still learning
every, every day there's,
there's new exciting discoveries
on State Trust land.
Madam Chair, I, uh, was also
intrigued by the comment you
made that Texas, we're actually
more oil friendly than than
Texas and um in one area that
I'm very well aware of is, um,
by regulation Texas passed what
is known as the best available
control technology rule.
Which requires that um
That any any applicant for a
lease in Texas, um, do an
analysis of the best available
control technology to control
emissions.
And um, and one of the things
that I heard is that a lot of
the oil companies in Texas are,
you know, putting this really
wonderful technology and
protecting the environment there
and selling the old technology,
um, to some of the smaller um
oil and gas firms in New Mexico.
Now I've heard that. I've just
wondered if that's if that's
true.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I have,
I have not heard that that that
that Texas companies or
companies based in Texas are
offloading lesser equipment on
New Mexico. Um, I have spent
time in the field with, you
know, many New Mexico companies
and, and.
Some of the, some of the
environmental controls that
people are using are, are, are
fantastic. I mean, people using
uh fuel cells to create
electricity so they're not
burning natural gas on site. I
mean, it's, it's, it's, it's
pretty cool stuff and, and, you
know, vapor recovery units that
are, that are first class. So,
you know, you have some really
great, really great producers. I
mean, people that we passed this
methane rule a few years ago to
say, OK, you can only waste 2%
of your methane and there's
companies like they are 10% of
that now. They're they're
working to get under 0.2% in New
Mexico, so you know there's a
lot of, I think most people are
doing a really good job.
out there and you have some
others, you know, you got to
keep an eye on them.
Yeah, that's fantastic,
especially the good neighbors.
So, so that's just really
fantastic and good to hear. Um.
I also just want to finish, um,
Madam Chair, I really thanking
the senator and this the um the
land office for for doing this
because the oil and the gas is a
resource that belongs to the
people of the state of New
Mexico.
And our job is to be good
stewards, and I really think
that all of the work that went
into this and um just the the
incredible job, um, you know,
for several years looking into
how this would affect us. Um, I
don't think these companies are
going to going to go to Texas,
the oil is here.
Um, so I'm, I'm very, um,
Complimentary of this.
Of this, uh,
statute, and I look forward to
voting for it and I, I wanna, I
thought your, your presentation
about fair is fair, Madam Chair,
um, senator was just excellent.
So thank you very much.
Thank you. I have Senator
Townsend, then Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I almost say thank you for
bringing this bill forward, but
I'm not gonna say that.
We get amended at a higher rate
if you'd like to discuss it a
lot further. Well, let's talk
about a few things.
Um
Madam Chair
Um, how many years have you
been, not you, the state land
office.
I've been trying to bring this
bill forward.
Or this action forward.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
I believe uh.
Commissioner Garcia Richard
presented this bill in her first
60-day session, uh, back in
2019. Uh, so I think we're on
year 6 and I believe we've uh
had the bill run, uh, maybe this
will be the 4th time, if not the
5th.
Ma'amer and Mr. Bloom, why
hasn't it? Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, you all have been here,
you, you'd probably know better
than I do. I try to stay out of
politics. Well.
brought up politics.
Is it fair to say that the
majority party has prevented it
from going forward.
No, no, I just wanted to know if
you want to answer that.
Senator, I, I, I might not know
my politics, but I can count and
I know the Democrats should have
the vote to pass this bill, so
with or without your support,
yeah.
But pack and that's got to be
frustrating for you because I
believe that's your party, so I
mean, that's
Problematic. I get it.
Um
And
I think that's why and.
Um, March of 2024, just as soon
as we
Go through the last session you
sent.
The Moga and IPA andM and
notified them that
You didn't get your way, and so
I, George, we're not gonna lease
anymore at that rate anymore,
right?
Madam Chair, Senator.
Yeah, I think we've all heard
that the definition of insanity
being
Uh doing the same thing over and
over again expecting different
results, um, we had to, we had
to change something and I
realized if, if we kept.
Selling our best tracks at
Uh 20%, we're never gonna get to
I mean it's, it's this is about
making revenue for our school
kids and, and the state in
general supporting our
education, other beneficiaries,
uh, so, so, yeah, unfortunately,
that's, that's where we landed.
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh, Mr.
Bloom, um.
And
my previous life.
And like living.
I often sat down and did what?
Senator Scott
I
They too volgo in that present
calculation of whether the
decisions I made were, have you
sat down or has your department
sat down.
And done that type of
post-economic analysis of this
decision and said,
Boy, this was a great decision,
or maybe we missed the boat
here. Have you done that? And
what was the analysis?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think we, you know, I discussed
a little bit with Senator Scott.
Uh
Say an FY 23 we released about
27,000 acres of land.
24, 22,000 acres of land.
Made more money in FY 24.
Um
At least a lot of good tracks.
A lot of good money
Um
You know, not leasing an extra,
say, 5000 acres of, of top, top
land.
Uh
we lose out on a $1000 an acre,
or $5 million.
Uh, for a short period, yeah, as
Commissioner Garcia Richards
said many times.
I'll leave a few million dollars
on the table to make an extra
billion for the permanent fund
over time. Well,
Um, Madam Chair, and
Mr. Bloom.
New Mexico tax policy, Richard
Anklin's group.
has looked at this process.
And I think you're aware of that
analysis, you know, I'll be
happy to share it with you.
He, he basically said, um,
You just can't make it up from
here.
that for going.
Years of revenue.
Or
A 5% increase.
You never make it up.
And that's with the risk of
price.
And everything else that's going
on.
We have administration in
Washington now that's going to
promote.
Um, drilling activity.
That typically drives prices
down.
So we have missed the high
prices.
And we're gonna get an extra
little bit of a lot less.
Very probably.
Do you agree with that?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
I, I don't think I I would I
would.
hesitate to speculate on, on
prices in the administration in
Washington and what it'll do uh
in the Middle East and how it'll
affect oil prices, uh.
I'll I'll just leave that one
there.
And Madam Chair
One of the things that I hear
from people.
Um, in my district all the time
is
The state land office's failure
to lease this tract is this.
Deprived
Private citizens of considerable
income.
Um, and I'm sure Senator, I'm
sorry, could you repeat that? I
didn't, I didn't follow you. I
didn't understand you there.
Well, are there, are there
people that own minerals on any
of these tracks, uh, other than
the state.
Madam Chair, Senator, we, we can
only lease uh state minerals,
so, so no, I don't believe we
would be.
one of their.
private or feed minerals? No.
But
When you unitize or when you
develop these larger tracts of
land, companies that come in and
develop a track will do, they
will have a bigger area that is
more than just state land,
correct?
Uh, Madam Sheriff Senator, that,
that's correct, uh.
If, if people want to put
together a unit, um, it can be
helpful to, to have uh the state
trust lands that are involved as
well.
I'm gonna regress just a minute,
um, on something I heard a while
ago that I think the public um
Madam Chair.
Senator, can you tell me on
state land, but
Income is derived from
Oil and gas on a per acre basis.
Wind energy that
basis.
ranching. How, how does that
break down?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator.
I do not have those figures with
me today. I believe they are
annual reports which are on our
website, and I think there's a
some some internal uh it may be
reported metrics that we share,
uh, with the LFC that uh talk
about uh
Money made
By, uh, oil and gas over an acre
and wind and renewable energy,
of course, those
are just now getting going,
unfortunately. Um, but, uh, I
think it's encouraging that we
have uh.
And uh
The biggest, uh, wind project in
the uh Western Hemisphere and
all the Americans on State Trust
land in New Mexico. It's uh it's
a great achievement and we'll
create a lot of uh value for our
beneficiaries over time.
And um, Madam Chair.
Just this
He had, um, do you have premium
lands on wind, uh, lands, I
mean, do you charge different
rates for wind projects.
Madam Chair, Senator, we're
getting outside of my area of
expertise here. We do have an
Office of renewable Energy, of
course, they're, they're not
here today. They're, they're
back, uh, cooking up more, more
deals for us, but um.
The
The funding for renewables is,
is done in a little bit
different way and those uh uh.
Leases our auctioned off and
there's a uh a percent rent that
we get on those as well. Um, and
I'm not sure, I, I, I would
imagine that the fact that some
areas have better winds than
others, uh, would, would factor
into uh what we get at at uh
lease sale and what the um
Uh, companies offer us a sale as
well.
Madam chair and
Mr. Bloom, I, I looked.
And I couldn't find that you.
And I don't mean you, you know
that. I'm the state land office.
As
Has developed leases for win
guys.
In the same way that you're
proposing to develop leases for
oil and gas.
Is that correct?
Madam Sheriff Senator, uh,
clearly, uh, this lease here is
the only gas leases that are set
at the legislature, our
renewable energy leases, I
believe,
to my knowledge are done at
home, but I, I really can't
speculate. It's not, it's not an
area I work in.
Well
Um
For the interest of the
Public in the members.
There, Madam Chair.
The difference is 0.
you don't charge any royalty
interest.
At all.
Madam Chair, Senator, we have a,
uh, I think it's called a
percent rent and it functions uh
similar to a royalty where we
get a percentage of the proceeds
from renewables and I think uh
for Sunzia will make $240
million of the life of that is
it compared to oil and gas? No.
Does it have the same intensity
as oil gas, you know, no,
clearly not at the commissioner
herself.
Uh, has stated that in in front
of both bodies here before as
well. Yeah.
So
Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom, when I
read this bill.
Knowing what you just told me.
This is just an anti-oil and gas
bill. This is a bill that
attacks one industry, and your
fiduciary responsibility that
you have described so eloquently
as being trying to derive
benefit, you're not doing it
over there. This is, this is the
place you went to get it.
I mean
You haven't done
And
Chair, when I say you, I don't
mean you and I don't want to
personalize this.
The state land office has
targeted one industry and
completely turned her back and
their fiduciary responsibility.
On trying to extract.
More out of another industry, I
would go as far as to say,
Senator Charlie's comments on
wages.
Look at dextera's CEO.
Don't look at the Sunzia's um
investors.
They're making millions of
dollars as well, so it's not
fair.
The target one industry and say,
oh, those guys make a lot of
money and turn your back on the
other one and say, oh, I kind of
like that. That's part of the
ETA, so we're gonna let them get
through.
We want to build them up.
That's not fair.
With that said,
Um
Madam Chair, um, one of our
Esteemed colleagues that uh is
out right now representative
Henry.
Um
And quite a bit of time.
Talking about this.
Do you remember those.
When this bill was
In the house last year.
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator, um,
I do remember spending some time
on the issue of bonds with uh
Representative Henbury.
But um if it's something other
than that, I'm sorry, I don't
recall.
Madam chair, um,
His comments were
Mr Blo was that he thought the
commissioner was trying to hold
the beneficiaries.
As hostages.
To get her, and I think there's
some truth to that, and there's
been a lot of feedback said
about it.
Um
I
I hope that we're
And you guys in the state land
office are continually looking
Yeah
All avenues of trying to
develop.
Not picking and choosing,
because I see this as a picking
and choosinghe.
Um
You mentioned while ago this.
He referred to as this magic
calculation.
Would you be willing to make
that calculation over the last
4 or 5 years.
On each lease available to the
committee so we can look at and
and.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
Mhm
We were
Welcome to
We can take a look at that for
you.
Is that a yes or a no?
I'm not sure what um
Data we can provide, there's
some, um, we might have to
anonymize uh some of the names
companies generally, uh, keep
their, uh,
want to keep their nominations.
It's a, I don't know if it's a
trade secret, but um,
confidential, you know, they
spent a lot of time, I think Mr.
Senator Scott and Madam Chair
would understand this very well,
but, um, people put a lot of
resources and time into their
exploration and their, and
they're looking at the, at the
regions and um
Don't want to tip tip other
people to where they're looking
to to buy.
I want other people to know
where their company's looking,
uh, because you get some
gamemanship out there, people
trying to pick up.
Uh, tracks around it to, you
know, block somebody from
creating unit or or becoming
part of a unit or, you know,
some of those sorts of things.
Uh, so there's some things we,
we'd, we'd have to look into.
So let's remember to go through
the chair, please.
I'm sure, um.
I
I really believe.
That
The state land commissioner.
Statutorily is obligated.
To develop and sell these leases
we have done for many years.
Withholding that from
From companies
As
has deprived.
schools of a lot of money and
what we have done.
It really hurt many
beneficiaries in the state of
New.
I don't believe that there is a
statutorily obligation.
from
land commissioner or any other
secretary.
Try to push a political agenda
and
And do it in a way that
One
Industry
gets off.
I won't say scot-free, but
Pretty
Pretty easy.
Those numbers, by the way, off
top of my head, and I may be off
a little bit.
Oil and gas to stay in New
Mexico for acres, about $280 to
$300 an acre.
Wind is about 17 or $18 an acre.
huge disparity.
And most of that power that
we're generating, well, I won't
say most, a lot of that power
that we're generating, that
subsidized by IRBs with New
Mexico taxpayers doesn't even
not 1 kilowatt of it stays in
New Mexico.
We're standing, we are giving
them a sweetheart deal.
Using taxpayer money to
subsidize them and send them the
power to Arizona and California.
Absolutely drives me crazy.
That people in New Mexico have
allowed that kind of stuff to
occur.
It doesn't make any sense.
And
You know, I think, um,
Any business man, woman, when
they look at the cost of doing
business.
They look at not only royalty
rates.
Taxes, regulatory environment,
the whole gamut, and it
certainly is beneficial and
we're darn lucky that we have
such a natural resource in New
Mexico.
That even with all of the
shenanigans that we pull as a
state.
People can still come in and
want to invest money in New
Mexico and they can derive a
profit from it because they
employ
Thousands of New Mexicans with
high-paying jobs and they do a
darn good job of it.
I'm uh
I, I know I'll get another shot
at this bill. I look forward to
it on the floor. It ought to be
fun.
I, I,
I can't support it because I
don't believe it's right, and I
don't believe it's right for the
state.
Thank you. I have Senator Pope.
Did you have questions or
comments? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Bloom.
Thank you, Senator.
Go forward
Um
Just a few comments and
Question or start off.
apologize.
Could you please explain again
really what the goal.
Madame Chanen, I mean, the
purpose of this, the goal is we
have the best of the best,
right?
We do.
The Federal Reserve testified in
in Hobbs, you know, we have the
best of the best, it's not going
to slow down. This is where
everybody's wanting to come.
This is the corner of Maine and
Maine are our value, our assets
are here and our our values are
not as high as other states.
And so how do you get the best
of the best and not hurt.
Other places where they do
exploratory and their costs are
high and they don't know what
they're gonna hit oil and what
the oil's gonna look like and
how they're going to get it out.
Uh, if you look at the
definition of the map and that
was done by the state land
office where the best of the
best is, and even the president
at some point are gonna is gonna
admit this. The New Mexico and
the permanent basin in that
southeast quadrant of.
Southwest quadrant of Texas and
Southeast quadrant in New Mexico
is where we're gonna generate
oil or produce oil from and
where revenues are going to
produce.
You have to capture that.
At some point
How is it there in in northeast
New Mexico, where, where it's
really natural gas and and it's
stranded asset and it's hard to
get out and the costs are a lot
higher.
How do we balance that and this
is what we're going to do to
make sure that
We gather that um previous bills
in the session were across the
state. The only reason I'm
supporting and carrying this is
because it's limited to the best
of the best and let that
exploration happen in other
places, and so.
You and I love Kale outlays just
as much as everyone in our, our.
This is one of my oil and gas
and so.
We're going to take home capital
Alley and, and that's not the
issue, but, but the way we look
at oil and gas and our resources
is.
It's time that we get the
premium and we don't let it sit
there and.
Um, we're allowed to make money
along with oil and gas companies
hand in hand. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Mr.
Bloom, I will let her know as
well, but
Um
Let the
Um, I enjoyed the conversation,
Madam Chair, on.
Present value and made me remind
me back to.
NBA I would argue that.
You know, the oil that we're
getting now, we need to be
getting that as well. So we have
to take that in consideration.
I don't believe this is an
attack on oil and gas.
Um, this is really about getting
the fair share. Once again, it's
not my resource, it's not the
Senator Sadi Lopez said.
We got to do the right thing,
lot people stepping up to try to
do that.
For me, the reason why this
hasn't passed sometimes good
legislate and people need to
remember that.
The comments made about local
producers. I think we need to
look at that. Can we do to
incentivize them.
Senator Charlie mentioned, we
look at those huge salaries.
And so I don't believe this is.
Anything radical. No one's going
anywhere.
You're right, this is where
The oil is
Um, as far as the administration
now that they're gonna.
A production and the price is
gonna drop.
That might be the case of
production.
I lived inside OPEC's gonna slow
it down. I mean, these guys want
to make money.
So
This oil is not being sold in
New Mexico, global market.
I will be supporting this.
Sure it'll be a lively debate on
the floor.
Yeah
But what this is really about is
setting up New Mexico for the.
This is our resource.
Get it done. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So,
I am now going around for the
2nd time, but looking at the
time, uh, I hope to finish this
discussion.
So we can move to whatever
motions we have. Senator Eel,
Senator Scott, and Senator
Townsend.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
and listen to the dialogue that
we've heard today, I still have
questions regarding this, and
Madam Chair of some of the
comments I've come up with, I've
written them down and scribbled
all over my paper.
So it's gonna be kind of random,
OK, I do have a question for.
Mr. Bloom, can you tell me the
number of uh petroleum engineers
that are in the state land.
Madam Chair, Senator, top of my
head.
I'm going to say
44.
Petroleum engineers in the state
land office and they came up
with this designation then on
these premium praxilants. Is
that where this information is
coming from, or is it based
solely off of what you were
seeing by the.
Different work that the land men
have done.
In possible production of those
tracts of land.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
Just to clarify, um,
The scoring is done by uh a
geologist and one of our um
Oil engineers are 3 other oil
engineers, uh,
are pretty much full time, uh,
working on units and uh
communization agreements, uh,
and we're, we're lucky to have
4. I, I wish we had more, um, of
course we could move.
Uh, a lot of our instruments
along more quickly if uh
If we had, we had more of those
positions, uh, I think, you
know, as you know, it's tough to
compete for salaries with uh
with industry, uh.
Versus state wages.
Well, Madam Chair and.
Mr. Bloom
If, if you, you didn't, I didn't
ask this question, how many
geologists do you have working
in the state land office.
I believe we have
At least 2 geologists working at
the 3 geologists working in the
state land just
and uh
and so I'm assuming that.
They have determined that New
Mexico has the best rotten
reserves there in the premium
basin. Is that what I'm hearing
from you?
Madam Chair, uh,
They have and I think I have
some, some quotes here from the
head of the American Petroleum
Institute, API, uh, saying the
same thing as well.
Madam chair.
I do think we have better oil
than Texas does. I really do,
uh.
And as long as oil stays at $70
a barrel or higher, it's good
times for the state.
And the beneficiaries of this
and for the producers.
But the restrictions that New
Mexico has placed on those that
are doing any sort of
exploratory work.
They're moving out of out of our
state they're going across the
state line.
They're coming in horizontally,
so we are losing that
production.
And you, you're shaking your
head now and that is not the
case, Madam Chair and Mister.
Mm
Bloom, uh.
Uh, I'll, let me phrase it this
potential.
25% increase on premium land.
With what Texas is doing with
their royalty rights.
At 25% does this put us on equal
footing?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh.
No, I don't, I, I don't believe
it does.
In what way? I'd like an
explanation of that.
Madam Chair in the equal footing
portion of the bill and then
we'll get you a copy of this.
You look at the red and the
differences between tax credits,
gross and net.
And what they do in Texas
compared to New Mexico.
War completely different and
it's not an equal footing. If
just looking at the sheet in the
rates of the deductions, the
taxes, right? The terms of the
lease, uh, the pain quantities,
um.
There is a stark difference. I
mean,
If we really want to turn this
into let's take the tax credits
away and operate just exactly
the same as Texas.
You might see royalties go even
higher in income go even higher
without the deductions.
Madam chair and senator, can you
tell me where that information
we'll get you that, um.
We'll get you that, but uh uh it
doesn't say on my sheet, but
it's a comparison of the 5400
wells in Texas compared to the
6000 in New Mexico, uh Texas
negotiates their lease were set
at a base cost. I will get you
the, uh, it doesn't say here.
Um, but we'll get you that, uh,
this, this may say the state
land office. I don't have my.
And, but we'll get you a copy of
the sheet so you know the
differences.
Madam, and Mr. Bloom while I'm
hearing this is the information
that the state land office put
together to further their cause
on the 20%, 25% up to 25%
leasing increase.
Miss Madam Chair.
Mr. Blue what I am.
Most upset about, I guess it is.
Has the commissioner considered
any lost interest that uh.
The beneficiaries and private
citizens.
Could have been earning if they
were able to see.
bonus.
Chicks from this premium tracts
of
premium tracks last year.
And Mr. Bloom I addressed that
to you.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I think
we may have covered this, uh, at
least twice, maybe 3 times now,
but I mean, I'm glad to cover it
again, um.
The uh
At some point we're not going to
keep repeating and uh I do think
you've gone into things, uh, in
detail, so please be brief with
your answer. I'm sorry, can you
repeat the question, Senator?
Yes, I, my concern here is I
feel like the state land office
is gambling.
With what possibly could have
been paid out to the
beneficiaries and the private
citizens in our state. And
that's, that's my opinion. I
think those beneficiaries and
those private citizens would
feel the same, do feel the same
way just because the state land
office is holding out for that
25% increase on those premium
lands.
Madam cheer.
And Mister Bloom.
We are not on equal footing with
Texas mainly because of the
regulations that New Mexico has
imposed on all sorts of drilling
in the state of New Mexico.
Madam chair.
We need to look at the overall
picture on what we are doing. We
know that this is a volatile
industry while I've been up here
in in Santa Fe for 21 years that
I have been up here. We have
seen oil drop to $19 a barrel
when it was whenever our budget
was set at over $80 a barrel,
and you know what that did we
had to do a bunch of scrubbing
and sweeping and doing
everything else that we could.
It stands to happen again, yet
we are going to hold off.
On these leasing these tracts of
land because we might.
be able to get that extra 5%
whenever we're taking out the
small.
Producer in our state.
And those are jobs that will be
lost.
Beneficiaries are losing.
The private citizens are losing.
And Madame Cheer.
I am not up for gambling on what
we're.
The fiduciary responsibility of
the state land office is put to
question.
And I don't like gambling with
what is due them, Madam Chair,
thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr.
Bloom, I'll be.
just a couple of questions here.
Over the last 6 years.
How many leases have been
Let at.
Less than 20%.
Acres
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
have that data with me.
And
Would it be safe to say?
That all of them
Have been let
Yeah.
The 20% rate.
Madam Chair, Senator, as I said
earlier, I believe there are a
handful that were leased at 18.
But Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom, you
don't know the answer to that
question.
You don't, you can't tell me how
many acres is on.
1875 and how many senator, uh, I
do not have that information
with me. OK, thank you.
Can you tell me we will get you
that information that way you
understand and we understand and
I understand what the difference
is.
Uh, Madam Chair.
And Mr. Bloom, can you tell me
how many acres worth of tracks.
Were nominated.
And did not
Garner a bitter.
Because of the
Royalty rights that were
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I did
not have that information with
me, but we can get that
information for you as well.
And then last question.
Madam Chair, Mr. Bloom, can you
Moratorium.
Madam Center, are you asking how
many
Acres we have withheld from
lease sale, uh.
Because we would like to lease
them at 25%. I thought what
you're speaking to.
Yes, um, we can get you that
information as well, Senator,
OK.
With regard to all of these
deductions.
I have sold oil and gas in this
state for a long time.
And what I got paid on.
was what I produced, sold, and
saved. That's what I paid
royalty on.
So my royalty was based.
On the gross revenue that hit my
hip pocket.
After the costs associated with
developing the resource.
Is that
Consistent with.
The deductions that are being
described.
Madam Sharon Senator, I can't
tell you how the deductions were
derived on the sheet, but, but
we'll make sure that we
understand how the deductions
are derived, I think.
The Deputy Secretary is trying
to get you some information and
so.
OK, I will represent to the
committee.
You, Senator, and to you, Mr.
Bloom, that the cost of
operations in New Mexico.
Or as high as they are anywhere
in the United States, and I
would like to ask one last
question.
Given that everything recently
has been leased at 20%.
That the taxes at another dime
to that.
And gross receipts, taxes on.
On equipment and operations at
significantly another 6-7% of
that.
What
Does this body consider to be
The fair share.
You know, um, I don't think in
base a fair share on that.
On, on a person's net income. I,
I think you can base a fair
share on what the quality of
something is and what the value
of something is.
The commodity market is driven
by the world economy, not by us,
and New Mexico alone does
determine what the cost of the
barrel of oil is, but what's,
what's a fair shares is what do
you have and what's it worth to
someone to lease it to buy it.
To make money off it.
That's a derivative that we got
to understand.
I mean, if oil's at 150, the
value of that land is a lot
higher when oil is at $19 that
that land is better off for uh
cattle and so you have to
determine that as any
businessman, what's the risk and
what's the reward and what's the
value of the asset that I'm
gonna lease and what I'm like,
what am I gonna bid it at?
What's a pair of heifers worth
today and what's a pregnant pair
have worth pregnant have work
today is, is all commodity
driven and market driven and so
That's, that's a tough question
to answer. I mean, depends where
the market is.
And Madam Chair.
And Senator
There are billions of dollars
being invested in the state, not
millions, billions of dollars
and already today under the
current system.
Approximately 65%.
Of the gross is what.
Those operators have to recoup
those investments.
So the question would be.
The skeep squeezing the orange.
And squeeze in the orange until
it becomes uneconomic.
Or celebrate the billions.
The, the 5.5 $6 billion that are
coming into the state.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir.
Thank you, um, I think we are at
the point of a vote or a motion
of some kind, Madam Chair, I
voted to pass on Senate Bill 23.
I.
There is a motion for a due
pass.
With the secretary of please
call the roll.
Senator Cervantes.
He's excused. He's in court.
Senator Charlie
Charlie, yes, Senator.
Oh.
Saintel, no, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. And our Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
No, Scott? No. Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, no. Senator
Dia Lopez,
yes, Senator Lopez, yes, Senator
Stephonics, yes, Senator
Stephonics, yes.
Uh, I would like to thank the
committee for a uh good
discussion and uh the vote is 5
to 3, you have a due pass, uh,
senator, thank you very much for
being here today. Thank you,
Madam Chair. You know, if you
really want to go into the risky
market, uh, Senator Scott.
Tri plan and lettuce.
OK, so we're calling Senator
Padilla up.
For his bill
We're gonna try to finish this
entire agenda because our agenda
for Saturday has grown.
We're on Senate Bill 60.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
Senator Michael Padilla.
Appreciate you allowing me to
present this morning,
we quietly leave the room if
you're leaving.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
member and Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee ranking
member, um, yeah, so I'm Senator
Michael Padilla. I'm here, uh,
you know, to establish a
six-year pilot project aimed at
integrating practical
environmental education into a
high school curricula across New
Mexico through a pilot, the
initiative focuses primarily on
water management and
conservation, reflecting our
commitment as a state to water
management and conservation and
environmental stewardship,
essentially what this project
does, it creates a six-year
pilot project to
create curricula for um schools
that may be selected through
grant to offer a water
management and conservation
courses to the students there,
um, uh, the, the public
education department is where
the money that we're suggesting
here would rise to about $1.2
million over the six-year
period. Um, the curriculum will
emphasize practical and
experiential learning by
multidisciplinary um areas and
offered as a sequence of courses
meeting the requirements of two
or more required credits for
graduation.
Um, the selection to
participating districts would be
uh to to have regional
representation, both rural
areas, small cities, large
cities, etc. various regions,
uh, the financial assistance
would be grants that would be
issued to the districts that
would be selected. It'd be about
5 or 6 districts selected for
the pilot period, uh, and then
they would be collecting data
reporting that back to the
legislative education Study
Committee to help make decisions
there. There are collaboration
opportunities here as well with
higher education, the Department
of.
environment, etc. So,
I, I guess that's the
introduction. There are some
significant pros to doing this
one is enhanced environmental
education, skill development,
ensuring that there's regional
representation, resource
allocation again data and
collaborative opportunities,
Madam Chair, the last time I was
in um Senate Conservation. It
was actually attempting to get
this done. I've only been here 3
times, uh, but of course, I
proposed it in a year where we
had absolutely no money, and we
were taking money from districts
so we couldn't add anything else
to them. I think we're in good
shape to do that now.
Great. Thank you very much. Is
there anyone in the audience
supporting this bill, please
raise your hand. Is there anyone
in the audience opposing this
bill?
Is there anyone online
supporting or opposing? No one.
OK, a few supporters could come
over here to stand and talk.
Um
It's great that
soil and water conservation and
some others. Thanks. Go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Debbie Hughes with
the Association of Conservation
Districts, the soil and water
conservation districts are in
full support of this. In fact,
we would love to work with the
sponsor, um, a lot of our
conservation districts are
co-housed with USDA Natural
Resource Conservation Service,
so we also have those assets but
uh we stand in full support of
this and um hopefully.
done. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Next.
Thank you, Camilla Feibelman
Sierra Cla Rio Grande chapter in
full support of preparing young
professionals in water
management. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Is, are
there any other comments?
Before we move on.
OK, uh,
Committee members, questions,
comments.
Senator Hamlin, thank you, Madam
Chair, and I really appreciate
the sponsor bringing this
forward because I think one of
the the big challenges that we
have in the state is, is, uh,
growing our own and we have a
bunch of young people who just
walked into this room, I think
experiencing the Senate
experience or enjoying the
Senate experience and I think
when we have these opportunities
to create jobs and training in
things that our state is in
desperate need of.
Uh, I, I think it is critical.
So I'm wondering, uh, Madam
Chair and sponsor, what was the
inspiration for this when you
tried to bring this back when we
didn't have any money and now
that we do.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Hamlin. Yes, so it just
was commonsensical to me. I
just, it didn't make me make any
sense to me that we weren't
graduating students in New
Mexico with an understanding of
where the water comes from, how
does it get there? And is it
always gonna be there um and I
watched my own children, they're
29 now have twins, you've met
many of you've met them along
the way and you know I just
think I got the impression that
they had the feeling that, you
know, they, when they were
young, that when I got here.
13 years ago, they were a lot
younger than they are now and,
and you know, when you turn that
faucet on the water, it's always
going to be there or the water
in the Aseki is always going to
be floating there. Well, it
could, if we take the time to
learn about where it comes from,
how does it get there and, and
how do we, we
maintained it and conserve it.
Thank you very much, Senator
Padil and Madam Chair, um, one
other quick question is, is, is
this is something
Uh, with the conversations that
you're having with the, the, the
partners and the people that are
supporting this, um, are there,
would there be an intent to try
and continue this and make this
into a full-fledged statewide
program. And thank you, Madam
Chair. Excellent question,
Senator. I appreciate it. So
that's why I'm coming at this
and coming before you as a pilot
because the six-year period will
help us again with regional
representation, rural cities,
towns and villages, large
cities, medium size, uh, higher
education, etc. I'm assuming
this is going to take that data
and it'll turn.
into something a lot larger for
us.
Thank you, uh, Senator Padilla
and Madam Chair, are there
Strategic areas. I mean, we're,
we're talking about like really
making sure that
In this pilot program that
they're representing different
parts of the state. Also are
these areas that are being
considered also areas where
there are.
Issues with water supply and
conservation, um, do you know if
there are a specifically
targeted areas just because of
their need.
I'm Adam Chair and Senator
Hamblin, good point. I wouldn't
say that I think there's any one
particular area that would be
More needy or rather I want to,
I want this to just go across
the state. Um, let's go to 6
districts that we that the disc
that the department.
And they have guard or guard or
guidance on, on, on, you know,
large versus small versus this
versus that, and I think we'll
learn a lot in that six-year
period and on how to approach it
on a larger scale. Great, thank
you. That's all, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you.
Then Senator Zill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I guess the question would be.
Water management is
substantially
A technical endeavor.
How many acre feet of water can
I hold behind a 200 ft long dam
that's 30 ft high.
Water conservation is a
completely different subject.
And
Can be.
Uh, an indoctrination if you
will.
So
With respect to conservation
issues.
With the agricultural community
somehow.
Have a primary role in this as
85% of the waters.
Utilized in the state is
utilized in agriculture.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Scott, absolutely, uh, there
would be partnering with higher
education, uh, as a matter of
fact, some of the commentary
that came back when the bill was
introduced was from higher
education, and I would want them
to be a, an active part of
developing the, the programming
and the curricula, so
absolutely, yes.
And I agree with you, 85% of our
water usage is ag in the state
and they absolutely have to be
at the table when all of this is
coming together.
OK, so I guess my question would
be,
Is the is the high school
environment, the most
appropriate place to develop
this pilot project.
I mean, it's gonna have to.
They primarily
Uh
STEM students would that be
accurate? Um, uh, Madam Chair
and Senator Scott, you know,
you're you're right, you're
right on the mark there. I'm,
I'm envisioning that this early,
very early.
Um
Involvement in where water comes
from, how it gets there, what
I've said previously is, is a
very important
part of a high schooler's life
because I'm hoping that several
of them, they would go through
the pilot or if it becomes a
statewide program, um, that
they're gonna pick that up as a
career, and they will take that
into the rest of their life and
make a career out of it. We need
more people to understand water
and again where it comes from,
how it gets there and and and
the uses of it. So yeah, I think
that's a great place to start on
this type of an option. OK.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Scott. Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Pa.
I understand what you're wanting
to do here is get our young
people involved in what is
critical to the success of our
state. I do get that.
One of my first questions
though, you're asking for an
appropriation of $1,250,000 that
is recurring through.
2031, is that correct?
Madam Chair, and Senator Ezel,
yes.
OK, so 6 years from now.
We are going to have
30 schools that have been
through this program and how is
that information over the course
of years? How is that going to
be disseminated. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair and Senator Ezel,
yeah, so it is an annual report
to the legislative Education
Study Committee, which is
exactly where it should go and
on that committee, our folks
that are obviously education
minded, but also I serve on that
committee. I'm not an educator.
I don't know, but so I think
you're gonna have a lot of uh
education minded folk, but also
business people like myself and
yourself.
and others that serve on that
committee, so that is where the
information will be disseminated
and turned into something
larger.
And I do want to remind the
senator she's already voted for
this one so I know that but I
need to come out for the rest of
the body to hear and I do have
additional questions
and yes, I did question you
quite at length whenever you
were in the education and happy
to see you again, uh,
some of them weren't answered.
OK, OK, to my satisfaction.
When is, when is the office of
the state engineer or the
interstate stream commission
going to be involved in these
issues.
Madam Chair and Senator all
along.
Well, my concern though, and it
goes back to the question I
asked you before in your bill,
you were stating.
The uh
Where is it? I wrote it, uh, the
Department of Environment on
page 3 line 13 of your bill. The
department may collaborate with
the Department of Environment,
state post-secondary educational
institution, counties,
municipalities.
To identify these local issues,
but in that I'm not seeing.
The part the two departments.
That are most important.
To our water.
And the ownership of this water
and how as was stated before,
85% of it is for agricultural
use.
And as far as I can tell, every
person in this room is involved
in agriculture.
sponsor the day on the Senate
floor.
If you eat, you're involved in
agriculture.
That makes a huge, huge
statement. We also have our
obligations.
To our downstream users such as
Texas that water in the Rio
Grande as well as the Pecos
needs to be monitored. It needs
to be made where people can
still use the water.
And I think it's time that these
young people do step up and
learn about why we are in those
compacts that seems can
sometimes be so detrimental.
To the citizens of our state.
Madam Cheer
I can go on and on about water,
um.
My concern though was another
question I have here, and I
don't think you answered it. I'm
gonna look back on my response.
No, I did not ask that.
Are we going to?
Whenever you're awarding this
money, this, uh, $1,250,000 per
year that is going to be split
split up between.
05 school, at least 5 school
districts in our state.
We've got the cost of personnel,
we've got the cost of supplies,
we've got the cost of equipment
and other.
Just other expenses that are.
Related to what, what your
intent is in this bill, where is
that money going to come from?
I'm Adam chair and Senator Ezel,
that's all.
the request. That is part of it.
It's for the, the staffing that
will be required.
etc.
OK, and madam, cheer whenever
we're talking to at least 5
school districts.
With the oversight of the
environment department, are they
going to be able to go into
these schools to help.
Whoever is teaching these
students.
Are they gonna be working in
cooperation with say the
conservation districts.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
would, I would envision that.
Madam Chair and Senator Padilla.
Who makes the determination on
which particular 5 school
districts might be involved in
this.
I'm, I'm guessing there will be
a committee put together within
the public education department
with
Various stakeholders that will
make that decision, but I did
call it out. I want to make sure
that uh and I I thought about
our rural partners here and I
want to make sure that it that
it was called out that it is
required.
this be across the state, rural
communities, large communities,
etc. It was very important to me
that the word rural wound up in
the legislation.
Oh, madam chair and Senator
Padilla, I agree with that
because there's.
Important issues.
Up and down the Rio Grande
Middle Rio Grande Valley, the.
Picass Riverside of the psyche
association's involvement in it
are municipalities that are
going to be involved with it are
small communities that are
trying to attract business that
they might not be able to
because of the lack of water in
those areas.
The protection of what water we
do have in preventing out of
basin transfers of our water. To
me, that's very, very important.
Madam Chair, I did vote for this
in our education committee. My
concern now is.
I don't see anybody from the
education department here, is
anybody from the education
department here, Madam Chair,
I'd like to.
Uh, is there anybody from
education here?
He
No,
it seems not though they were
there.
I would like for them, I would
have liked for them if they had
been here.
To express what their role in
this, this particular bill was
going to be.
Sometimes I can't help but feel.
Madame Terenceinatorpiti is
sometimes we're overloading our
education, PED K through 12.
I it, I think maybe we might be
overloading them with too many
different facets of it.
But this is a very important
part for our young people to be
able to learn and know why.
Our state, even though it is a
desert.
Why it's important that we do
put our water to beneficial use
that we have equal stakeholders
throughout.
Why
are irrigated acres with our
water rights are our personal
property and why we must be good
stewards of the land.
Madam chair
Senator Padilla.
Um, let's see, I'm gonna look
real fast again.
Why do you feel this legislation
might be necessary right now.
I think Madam Chair and Senator,
I think we're really at the cusp
of ensuring that the future
generations.
You have a good understanding
again, as I've said multiple
times, you know, where does the
water come from? How does it get
to you? And, and what can it be
used for? I think this is a
crucial, crucial time. We see
our rivers and streams and and
our lakes so they're just, they,
they seem to be diminishing, and
I know that we don't have to
make that our future. I think we
can, we can make it better for
ourselves, and this is uh we
have a whole crop of young
people who need to understand
this and ideally some will take
this on as a career and help us
to avoid these, these travesties
that could potentially.
happened to us.
I agree, Madam Chair, Senator
Padilla.
I know that in the education
committee, the question was
brought up about.
Desalinization of water.
would
If there was, let's say a school
in.
State of New Mexico.
Lee County, Oil and gas.
Would there be a possibility of.
That industry being able to work
with this particular school if
it was Tatum, if that was one of
the.
Schools that did submit an
application, they were accepted
to do that. Would they be able
to work with that student to
let, to show them.
These steps that have already
been taken by this particular
industry.
To clean up the water, the
produced water especially. Madam
Chair and Senator, I would say
absolutely yes, resoundingly
yes. That's why we don't put as
much um specificity or detail
and, and, and you know, in
legislation. I think this is
broad enough to where anybody
that comes to the table needs to
be a part of the solution.
And Madame Cheer, one last
question. I did not ask this and
it just popped into my head
whenever you're talking about
the request.
For the funding of $1,250,000
per year for the next 6 years.
Will this money be split up
equitably between these.
5 different school districts.
Um, Madam Chair, and Senator,
yes.
I don't have any reason to think
it wouldn't be. OK, well, madam,
the reason I'm bringing that up,
we have one school district that
far outnumbers every other
district throughout the state
and so they could come back and
say, well, we do need more money
because we've got 10 number of
1,000s of students versus let
say like Arthur, who might have
200.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
would envision there be an equal
distribution because you're
still gonna need an educator,
you're still gonna need a
curricula, you're still gonna
need the supplies, you know,
and, and it's not like it's
widespread at this point. So I,
I would envision the dollars to
be split right down for each one
of the grants and that way you
can stand up a program
individual in each one of the
schools. Doesn't matter if
you're in Tatum or in
Albuquerque. You still need to
have an educator there. You
still need to have the supplies.
I would envision it being
equally divided and that's why
they.
came together the way it did.
Madame Chair and Senator
Badilla, I appreciate that, but
I, it's not spelled out here and
so I've got a little bit of
concern about that. I would like
to see an equitable split in
these funds, no matter the size
of the school district. Also,
whenever you're talking about
the environment department being
involved in this, but they have.
But they
See me would they have to?
Possibly hire another full-time
employee, another part-time
employee to help with this
endeavor that we're trying to
get.
Instituted in our classrooms.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
guess that's possible, um, at
the funding level came together
the way that it did in the
proposal the way it did to
ensure that that can all be
accomplished.
Well, Madam Chair, I think it is
important that our young people
do know about our water or lack
thereof.
Madam chair
I do have to point out to the
committee.
The industry that we are trying
to kill up here while we're in
session, the oil and gas
industry is one that is paying
for this endeavor to protect our
water, and I just want people to
remember that.
Because you know what?
If we, whenever oil and gas is
paying for 48% uh is it 48%,
47%.
Of the budget.
Especially with the majority of
it going to education, we need
to respect what they are trying
to do to provide that necessary
means for our young people,
which has now filled the room,
and I'm glad to see all their
faces out here.
The opportunity to learn more
about our state. So Madam Chair,
that's all the questions I have.
Thank you thank you, madam and
Senator. I want to underscore
the fact that I'm not trying to
kill any industry whatsoever.
And this bill has absolutely
nothing to do with what you just
said. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator and um.
We need to watch how our
comments are taken by the
sponsors, everybody. Senator
Cilia Lopez, Senator Townsend,
and Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
just think this is a a wonderful
model, um, and the only thing,
and I, I believe that Senator
Azel already made that is on the
first.
Uh, OK.
Uh, I made the, the good point
about um about involving the
industry interstate stream
commission and the State
Engineer's Office, and, but
there's nothing in the bill that
would prevent them from being
involved and I would assume that
they would, um, I think it's a
great bill and I, I support it.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Townsend then
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, very
quickly.
And how do you see the
curriculum.
Uh, I would envision the PED
establishing a working group as
they normally do, Madam Chair
and Senator Townsend, and pulled
stakeholders together that many
of us have mentioned here today
and that I did hear about in the
previous committee to develop
that curriculum.
A
Uh
Madam Chair, I think that was
being applied to it is.
Uh you're, you're starting the
development of the learning
process broadly.
Bring literal.
Decisions comprehend the facts
and not try but.
I believe you got that covered.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Senator Padilla, I am curious
about the conversations.
with
People
often not be ascribe what ought
happened.
We have the power to do that as
people who are in power. What
are the what are the
conversations?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, thank you, Senator
Charlie, um, Senator, yeah, I've
had multiple conversations over
about an eight-year period um on
the subject and, and I, I wish I
could say that this was an
original idea of my own, but
this was sort of a conversation
I had about 8 or 9 years ago
with a group of students that
said, well, why don't we do this
in our schools and, and, and the
idea just sort of percolating
and about 6 or 7 years ago I
introduced a bill on it and
again, we didn't have a penny to
our name at the time, so we
weren't able to move it.
forward, but I think now is just
the right time.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you.
Uh
More of a comment, I would love
to see in the development of the
curriculum.
Attention paid to indigenous
knowledge system.
Of water.
And ecological system.
Um, more often than not
indigenous knowledge is an
afterthought.
Else
And, um, it's, it's just
something that I'd like to see
and advocate for, um, and then
the point was made earlier, but
really appreciate your special
attention to equitable
distribution.
Um, I, I do appreciate that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you
Are we ready for a motion?
There is a motion for a due
pass.
In a second, but the secretary
please call the roll.
Oh, I think we have a senator
who stepped out. Is he coming
back? Yes.
We'll, we'll start the boat, but
we'll hold it for him.
Senator Cervantes excuse.
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes.
Senator
And herself, yes, Senator
Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes.
Sinner Pope. Yes, Senator Pope,
yes.
Senator Scott
Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes.
Senator Lopez, yes, said Uadia
Lopez.
I, yeah, uh, Senator Stefaniks,
Senator Stephonics, yes.
You have, thank you very much.
You have a uh unanimous due pass
and we appreciate you being here
this morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
So now we're gonna have Senator
Campos for Senate Bill 86, and
then we'll do my two bills last.
Yes.
you
OK, so let's have an
introduction. Yes, ma'am.
Please.
Why didn't you come forward and
just uh
Explain who the crowds are.
Yeah, you just write
Yeah, you just like talk, my
name is Dianna Oberhe, um,
Senator Stefaniks, we've nice to
see you again, I, I've met a few
of you were from Renoso High
School, and we're here with the
wild Friends group um from UNM
Low and uh we're very
interested. This is my dual
credit college wildlife science
class, and so we're very um
interested in the conservation.
Thank you very.
Thank you all very much for
coming and being here today.
That takes a few hours on a bus.
It's not easy.
Having uh and Capitans even
further, but.
Anyway, Senator Campos.
You're up
Senate Bill 86.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the Senate
Conservation Committee. It's
great to be here today to go
ahead and present this
particular issue and as we
continue to deal with the fires
and floods and the other issues,
it's great to see our young
people, particularly from the
Lincoln County area.
Uh, come to not only listen but
to uh participate in this
process.
Uh, if I may, I also, uh, uh,
also ask your indulgence as we
move forward because I do have
an expert witness who is going
to be here with me and that's uh
Debbie Hughes with the New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts and to
begin in essence, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, what this bill does is it
provides funding through DFA for
funding for soil and water
conservation districts, uh,
board members.
Or locally elected officials on
the general ballot.
The uh SWCDs are managing
millions of federal dollars and
currently have no required
training.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
conservation Committee, in
essence what this would do, it
would provide us the resources
so that we can provide that
training.
There are many areas that this
group continues to deal with
statewide, particularly as we
deal with procurement, securing
federal resources and most
importantly, the implementation
of the projects that enhance our
environment as we move forward
and so with that, Madam Chair,
if I may defer to uh Debbie
Hughes at this time to make a
brief statement as well.
Thank you, and if you do
introduce yourself for the
record.
Yes, ma'am, um, Madam Chairman,
uh, members of the committee,
Debbie Hughes, uh, I'm the
executive driver, something like
30 years now, so.
Kind of crazy, but um as a
senator Campos mentioned, um,
the soil and Water District
board members are now on the
general budget. There's a lot
more visibility who they are,
what they're doing, um, they are
starting to handle millions of
dollars. The spreadsheet that I
passed out was thrown together
really quickly, so it only has
information for about 20 of the
47 districts, but I wanted to
give you an idea of all the
different federal agencies.
There weren't enough copies, so
they're being made for the
entire
committee, the spreadsheets, um,
sorry about that.
So, uh, you can keep talking,
but just know that they're just
being.
OK, distributed.
Um, so basically, um, I, I
realized last year that the.
Association and the land grant
association had funding in House
Bill 2 that went through DFA and
then DFA let out an RFP and then
those nonprofits like ourselves
were able to bid on it so that
they could actually do the
training for their membership.
So that's kind of our goal, um,
I noticed in the FIR that uh DFA
thought that they were gonna
have to do the training and they
were going to have to get
another employee, but I met with
him yesterday and I said no,
that's not the intent, we really
want it to go through our
associate.
or our um employees association
and work very closely with the
MDA, but I will just point out
really quickly, so just um the
districts that I got information
for really, uh, in a short
period of time, uh, it was over
27, almost $28 million just this
last couple of years.
Um
The state association ourselves,
uh, our current budget, uh,
we're gonna be handling over 19
million for the next few years,
and the reason it's such a giant
amount is um in the last 6
months I was working with USDA
and they said, we want to send
money to New Mexico for Seas and
so in December we signed an
agreement with US to um get $15
million.
And so in the past, we have uh
been applying for and receiving
what's called RCPP or Regional
Conservation Partnership
Program. Um, we've brought in
34,600,000, uh, just in that um
of that money, 7.2 million was
for Asacus. So in the last 5-6
years, we've already been
putting money on the ground with
the. That's why USDA kind of
said we want it to go through
your association, you have, you
have the folks and and our
staff.
Basically, um, is mostly made up
of retired beds.
So I have a lot of USDA, I have
uh some state foresters, even a,
a former BLM director.
But we have a lot of trained
educated people that don't cost
much and we're able to get a lot
of work done.
But
Anyways, I just wanted to point
that out to you because um we
feel like we're at a point now
where uh we're not required, the
district boards are not required
to get training.
But we want to put together a
program for them because it
could be ethics violations, all
the financial management,
there's just a huge need for us
to to set up this Thank you very
much, Madam Chair and with that,
uh, we're available for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you both of you. Um, is
there anyone in the audience
here to support this bill.
Could I see your hands?
Thank you. Anybody here opposing
this bill.
Is there anybody online
supporting one, anybody
opposing.
OK. With the support.
With the supporters like to come
to the middle, so you could uh
speak for a few minutes.
Let's please go
Good morning, Madam Chairman
Eddie B. Hill. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Association for the Conservation
Districts. We do have 47
districts and
They are all elected officers
elected on the general ballot,
so this training is definitely
needed.
Like she says, to prevent ethics
violations or
You know, financial management,
so.
We'd appreciate
na s ti ness
procedure. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name's
Josh Smith. I'm the president of
the New Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts and the
chair of the Donana Soil and
Water Conservation District, um,
I'm just here in support of this
bill as a chair and uh
The state president, I see the
amount of money that we're
leveraging and the amount of
money that's passing through
these districts, uh, as the
chair of the district, I have
board members, there's 7 of us,
6 of which have received no
training, uh, which is of a
concern to me, so, you know, the
opportunity this bill provides
is is a necessity in the state.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair. I am Andy
Yates. I'm a board member from
the NMACD, but more importantly,
I think for this bill.
I'm a board member for Colfax
Shore and Water Conservation
District.
So boots on the ground if you
will.
Our board consists of mainly
farmers and ranchers.
We were all volunteers.
And we do
the opportunity now with some of
the funding that we've been
granted in the past to hire
folks that can do some grants
for us maybe we we're out of our
league initially.
Which brings in more money.
Fire prevention
And in larger landscape scale
projects as a result.
What I could maybe do before
with, you know, a couple $2000.
It is kind of getting out of my
league.
Without a little bit of extra
help and training on the issues.
So, um
Could you repeat your name for
the record, please?
Andy soil and Water Conservation
District.
Thank you very much for being
here.
Online, let's have Howard
Hutchinson.
Thank you, madam Chair, members
of the committee.
I am in support of
SB 86.
Uh, we currently on the San
Francisco soil and water
conservation District.
Have 5 supervisors.
And we have one administrator.
We would like to increase our
capacity for acquiring and
utilizing additional state and
federal funds for conservation
projects.
So I encourage you to
Vote a do pass on Senate Bill
86.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. We're now
to questions and comments, and
we have Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
accomplice.
OK.
Are you?
Um
do
Board members
Of these organizations, are they
covered?
They have liability for their
decision, personal liability for
their decisions and do most of
them have
Director and officer insurance
coverage to protect them.
Um, yes, sir, we would have that
in most cases, I hope they all
have it, um, but they are also
covered under the state tort
claims because they're uh. Um.
This
Training who, um, Madam Chair
and uh Senator Campos, who does
the training.
Who develops the training, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator, we've
actually got some folks already
working on that, we've been
working with the Department of
Ag and their staff, but we also
have um retired teacher slash
principal, and several of our
USDA folks that are putting this
all together right now and so
hopefully we can take it around
the state. We realize we're
gonna have to go to some areas
of the state.
Because they don't all come and
Madam Chair and um
The composts are
Will the training
All the
The same training as it
attributed across the regions,
so they're all running from the
same playbook.
Yes, madam chair, Senator, uh,
Townsend, uh, yes, sir, because
we are basically trying to make
sure they know they have to
comply with open Meetings Act,
though I'll have to do budgets
for DFA, they have to do audits,
they have to do, I mean, so
there's a a lot of that kind of
stuff, um, that will be in the
training, but there's also um.
information that would because
grant writing uh funding
available, all that kind of
stuff, we all need to grow
there.
The programs.
The other aspect of this with
the 47 districts, the intent is
to help.
And support, if you will, people
working with each other to uh
better provide not only the
resources, uh, the procurement
process, but lastly, uh, to
ensure that throughout this,
thank you for that, Senator.
Thank you. I'm sure.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Senator Compass and uh misuse, I
do have a question regarding the
handout that was.
Given to us
And you sit there are 47
districts, yes.
I just wanted to make sure that
I, I heard that correctly.
I do need some clarification on.
Some of these
Listings right here, OK? First
one, and these pages aren't
numbers, so I apologize for
that, but it starts off with
Carl Carl's bed. Can you explain
to me what the NFWF is.
Yes, ma'am, I, um, Madam Chair
of Senator Riesel, I should not
have done that with acronyms.
Um, that is the National Fish
and Wildlife Foundation. It's a
foundation out of Washington DC
and so a lot of the federal
money comes to that and then you
apply for grants through them.
OK.
OK, thank you very much for
clarification there. The next
item down.
I see your dad?
Tell me what that is and where
it's located.
Yes ma'am, Madam Chair, Senator
Yel, that is uh actually the,
uh, soil and Water District in
Albuquerque.
And they just recently on the
general ballot um.
By 80%, now they're gonna have
funding to actually do a lot of
work.
In Albuquerque and also they go
they they go clear up into the
East Mountains, so they've been
involved in a lot of forest
thinning too.
OK, and Madam Turing, uh,
Senator Campos and Ms. Hughes
whenever we're talking about
this, is it just your dot and
it's located in Albuquerque. Can
you tell me the makeup of that
conservation district, you said
it goes up into the east, East
Mountains, but I'm sure there's
a board. How is that?
Selected
Um, Madam Chair, all of the
chair and senators, all of the
soil and water districts have a
boundaries, um, they tried, I
guess when they were setting up
to make them on watershed
boundaries, um, so that's why it
does that, but the board is
elected on on the general
ballot, so it's made up of
people that live there are
statute right now, um.
Says that at least 4 of the
members on the board have to be
landowners.
So, and then there can be a 5th
1. Uh, the reason some of the
boards have 6 or 7 is because
there is an option to, uh.
turn in names and resumes to the
commission, soil and water
conservation mission, and they
can have additional people um.
And I think see that has 7.
OK. Thank you for that. Also
under that see Dodd.
Uh heading right there the next
two of the last two items that
they have through the US Fish
and Wildlife Service, one of
them is for an ambassador?
What are we doing here, Madam
Chair, um, Senator Diesel, I
should have done some research
because I'm not really sure I
went and looked at their at
their whole annual report, and
that's where I was able to get
that information, but I'm sure
it is tied to some kind of
conservation.
Some kind of education because
that this district being in
Albuquerque, they do a lot of
outreach.
OK, and then the second one
under US Fish and Wildlife.
Is artist in residence, how is
that pertaining to conservation.
Is that money really being spent
on conservation uses, Madam
Chair of Senatoriesel, um, yeah,
once again, I'm not exactly
sure, but I know that it has to
be tied to conservation because
uh that's, that's all they do,
that's all they have the
authority to do.
So I can get back to you, um,
with both of those with a better
explanation I can call down
there.
OK, Madam Chair and I still have
some more questions regarding
this paper on the back page of
They, uh, one that we just
discussed it's talking about the
San Juan Basin and the gold mine
rehab. There's two different
entries in there, one of them's
for 279.
$1000. The other one is for
$642,000.
Is that money coming out of that
conservation district in
addition to what the feds put in
to help on the.
Uh, clean up.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Griesel, this is, is federal
money going through the
Constitution this is the dollar.
I'm sorry, you're exactly right.
But
Has that been remediated?
Madam Chair,
it is they are still working on
it. It is a huge job and they're
they're, you know, working with
the farmers and ranchers there,
but you'll also see the ORNT,
the Office of Natural Resource
Trustee. So there was funding
that that they put wanted this
district to also put on the
ground. OK, thank you very much
for that explanation.
I am concerned about, Madam
Chair, on the next page over, it
starts out at Santa Fe, but it
goes all the way down to.
Uh
Tierra Montes?
And it's talking about virtual
fencing.
Um, enlightened the enlightened
the panel please, yes, um, Madam
Chair, Senator Ezel, um, this is
a, is an exciting option, um,
this conservation Tierra Montes
is there in Las Vegas. They've
had over 1000 landowners because
of the fires and floods, come in
asking for help and, um, so the
For service, um, wanted to try
this because all the fences are
burned.
In fact, one of my sons is, has
a subcontractor and he's working
up there doing the fences, but,
um, the salt water districts and
our state association is very
involved in Calf Canyon Hermit's
Peak, um, we actually are.
Totally in charge of doing all
the USDA NRCS um gave money to
DFA and then DFA did an
emergency contract with our
association because we had the
trained personnel that they
needed. And so, um, they've also
amended that contract and we've
been able to hire um two more
engineers, um, engineering firm
out of.
Out of Arizona and then uh John
D'Antono is helping us work up
there and we're trying to put
back in. OK, but that Madam
Chair, that did not explain the
virtual fen,
sorry, uh, Senators out, um, it
is some kind of tags that they
put on the cattle that they can
that they can read where they're
at, um, and supposedly there's
gonna be some kind of boundaries
so they won't be going past it.
I haven't seen it myself. I just
know that this is kind of a
pilot project. And Madam Chair,
I do.
know about this particular
project. First off, they have to
get the cattle gathered if
there's no fences they have
gathered the freaking cattle
yet.
And I have a problem with Forest
Service saying we're gonna do
this whenever it should be left
up to the livestock board to be
able to get that done and the
vote of the Cattlemen's
organizations throughout our
state and throughout our nation.
So Madam Chair, I do have a
problem there because just like
the flood we had down in the
Roswell Dexter Haermani. There
were no fences left.
And we have problems now getting
our soil, not our soil
conservation service, but our,
uh, I can't remember the acronym
for, I hate acronyms. I really
do, uh.
Whenever we have a.
not a contractor, but a
coordinator for.
Three county area that those
devastating floods hit.
That won't even come over and
take a look and yes I am
pointing at you and you know who
I'm talking about here.
And we are not supposed to
rebuild fences.
Until they come out and do a
visual inspection of that. I
don't know if y'all are aware of
that.
We cannot rebuild until they do
a visual inspection if we do
build a fence back.
They may pay for it or they may
not, depending on if we use our
old fence post or if we go out
and buy new.
Cost of a fence post right now,
normal size fence post is over
$10 each, OK?
But if you do build a fence, you
have to have an archaeological
survey done.
And that that landowner is
responsible for paying for that.
So there's some problems there.
We have agencies that are saying
we're here to help and in fact
they're not, but I like to see
that the soil conservation is
because Carl's bed so well and
soil conservation and stepped up
to help.
Those particular people out and
that does my heart good. Not all
agencies are doing that.
I get off my soapbox now about
that. The next one I have, OK,
that was a virtual fencing.
I'm going to, oh, here we go.
Uh, upper is the next page is
the upper trauma and drops on
down to the upper Hondo.
The second acronym under the 2nd
entry for Upper Hondo.
Or service WI I don't know what
that is.
Madam Chair of senator Isel.
Next time I won't put these
acronyms, I'm sorry, but that
stands for wild land or it's a
higher priority if it needs to
the near a community where
people are living, so those
grants are well, boy, I'll tell
you what, madam chair and.
Senator Campos and misuse.
The Forest Service did some
thinning, didn't they? They did
some thinning all over the
state. They tried to burn our
state up.
And Madam Cheer
The Forest Service did invest
over $2 million in thinning, can
you tell me where this was done?
A Madam Chair, senator.
OK,
I'm
Oh, that one, OK.
Um, Mad, Madam Chair, Senator
Eel, um, this would have been
done in the Capitan, um.
Redos area.
Before it burned.
Madam chair, I'm kind of at a
loss as a former senator from
down there in that area I know
the senator is very aware of
what the Forest Service has and
has not done and what we are
seeing is lack of response by
the Forest Service of sparse
protecting our lands, our
wildlife and our.
Homes and businesses.
Madam, cheer my last one.
Is NICD on that same page going
on down in my CD and it said.
HPCC fire rehab.
And if I'm putting you on the
spot, all you have to say is
you're putting me on the spot
and I'll stop.
Oh, no, ma'am, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, I welcome the questions
to educate people. Thank you
very much, um.
That, um,
That funding, uh, we have a,
that's the one I was talking
about with DFA where this was
funding from the Natural
Resource Conservation Service
from the emergency watershed
protection, um, and so it was a
$2 million contract. Actually,
the time ran out, and we'd spent
about half a million, so we just
renewed the contract we now have
another 2 million. And so what
we, we did is we have actually
went up and evaluated all the
ass, and then now they have us
hiring engineers and actually.
Building getting the a psyche to
uh put back into place that was
like it was before, OK, so Madam
Chair and Senator Campos misuse
this has to do with the Hermit's
peak calf Canyon fire
and, and my heart goes out to
those people because shit they
have got no resolution.
And Madame Chair, I
Think that might answer my
question about all the acronyms
that are on here. I appreciate
the good work that our soil
conservations do.
Um
They are the agencies, I do
believe.
Do you have enough common sense
to see where the need needs to
happen.
So I appreciate this. Thank you
very much for answering my
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Hamlin, you have some
introductions and then a motion.
Yes, Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I do want to recognize our
folks from Southern New Mexico,
so thank you very much, Mr.
Smith, for being here. Also our
friends from EBID and like my
colleague Senator Azel, acronyms
always, uh, uh, mess me up. So
that is Elephant Butte
Irrigation District. We have
Rafael Rovioso and Greg Davie,
uh, they're in the back. And so
thank you very much for being
here in this city, um, and so on
that note, I would like to uh,
did you have a comment?
And
OK, go ahead, thank you very
much Madam. Thank you, Senator
Pope. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
move a do pass on Senate Bill
86.
I
OK, let me just ask, is there
any opposition to this, uh,
bill?
So would you please show the
people present, the senators
present, uh, voting in the
affirmative.
So you don't have to call their
names and the others are
excused.
OK. So you do have a do pass
senator, congratulations and
thank you for being here. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We are rolling
Senate Bill 37 and Senate Bill
98 into our Saturday agenda, but
they will not be first because
we have uh other items, several
other items, and we will meet
from at least 9 to 12 if not
12:30 on Saturday, uh, so that
we can try to move some of these
out of the way.
Thank you. We are in recess.
