Automatically receive the link
for the meeting at the next
morning.
That doesn't mean that that the
chair will recognize in any of
the committees will recognize
every single solitary person
that signs up.
But so far for example on this
bill that we are continuing on
Senate bill one thirty two we
were able to hear all the
opponents and all the
proponents.
Now on some bills we have twenty
five or more people sign up.
And what we will do is the
ranking member will final two
Trevor Reilly.
Specific people cover Riley is
our gym operator and senator a
guy it goes has his email and
his cell number in which to
text.
they will email or text Trevor
for that opponents or proponents
that they want.
And the sponsor of the bill.
Can identify the people that
they would like to speak to
Trevor as well.
So that we understand there's
been a work in preparation done
on bills and that we want to be
as fair as possible.
I have received emails
indicating that people of signed
up over and over again and it
truly has been random picking
names because I'm not picking
them our system operator is he
has no idea who these people who
anybody is he's new to the
legislative process so hopefully
we are going to do that.
Now I think we have one request
Senator von cases out of range
so we're going to put him third
instead of second.
So today we're still starting
with Senate bill one thirty two
and we are just continuing or
finishing up that bill.
To explain to the public what
happened.
We were awfully ended our
meeting this past Tuesday there
was a food fire in the capital.
Which created smoke and all the
hallways and the entire capital
had to be evacuated so that is
why we abruptly shut down on
Tuesday.
But we're back and Senator
Gaydos I just explained to
everyone how you would be as the
ranking member would be
providing any names to Trevor
Reilly that you want to have
speak I sent you his email and
his text number and we are
continuing today with Senator
souls one thirty two Senator
previous
We were on questions and the
question from committee members
Committee members.
All right are there trending in
the proper English is are there
any is there any further
discussion about Senate bill one
thirty two.
Photo voltaic systems in new
homes.
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair thank you and I
think I was in actually asking
questions when it happened but I
want to go back for just a
second on the people that are
asking us so I'm not going to
get a list from you of those
that are wanting to be on I just
have to wait for them to email
me and I don't know how they do
that I we can contact.
Thank you for the question we
can have our however Riley
provide you with the list of who
Did
Sign up so if you have a
preference in order I was saying
earlier that if twenty five
people have signed up we're not
gonna take knowledge twenty five
people but that certainly as the
ranking member you could of
identify opponents and
proponents you want but that the
sponsor of the bill could also
identify people that have been
working with them to speak.
And then be very my thought
managers if I just step back for
of the in the list you want to
ten and then that you would fit
those in as appropriate
depending on the sponsor so at
least chance to look at it great
I was explaining to the public
into the committee that I am
identifying the people of Trevor
Reilly is in a different room
than I am we are based out I'm
in my office so my communication
with our system operator is only
by tax and.
And that's you know what's
happening so he is the person
who is trying to be fair with
everybody.
Thank you Mr chairman when
you're ready I'll go back to my
questioning of the struggle
creation before you proceed I
did get this I just got another
note Senator of this wants to be
kept second.
So right constantly changes so
Senator Gallegos you have the
floor to finish on Senate bill
one thirty two.
Please proceed.
Thank you thank you Sir sold.
Right click for my notes from
the other day but I think Sir
soldier I was that was asking
what the cost difference would
be from a new home currently per
square foot to a new home with
your added expenses on it and I
think we're trying to find
someone in the audience it would
have good detail on that did not
know if we pending.
Madam chair and senator and we
did talk about that at the
original thing is it adds up but
somewhere between four dollars
and fifty cents and five dollars
persecuted square foot.
Mr.
Madam chairman and chairman of
do you know what the current
cost building costs are is it
hundred twenty square average.
Madam chair I don't know.
Madam I'm wondering if we have
anyone in the audience the
builders trades would be able to
give an estimate.
The home builders is Jack Millar
John.
No Randy do you have Randy
trainer do you have any of that
information that's being asked.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes thank you you know
I'm sorry I don't Jack avoidable
builders would have that
information I just don't have
that sorry okay thank you and I
don't see any my builders on the
list.
Well are not one of the analyses
Senator did have a cost an
estimate in the in the analyses
of what it would add
column it was a square foot it
was about the overall price that
would add to the building.
Center this use of the floor.
Thank you madam chair and
chairman souls
Currently I understand that
anyone is allowed to do this
they wanted why wouldn't we need
the bill to mandate it.
What is the rationale behind
that madam chair in all building
we are required to put
insulation in the walls
regardless of if you are super
wealthy and don't think could
pay thousands of dollars of
energy bills you have to put
insulation in the walls it's for
the public good of energy
conservation this is the same
thing this is a public good type
of thing that we are reducing
our carbon footprint we don't
have to burn fossil fuels in
order to heat homes if we put
photovoltaics on.
Madam chair and chairman sold.
I have recently completed a
subdivision in Lee County and
now we're trying to keep the
cost.
To the lower end of the spectrum
so that way teachers of police
department fire department
personnel could afford a new
home and I look at this is you
want to increase that it's
mandated I understand having
insulation.
Down south from out we don't I
don't know that we do in the
walls I may be wrong I know we
have in the Russian addicts but
the just one those things and I
look at this as an add on that's
unnecessary minimally impact the
lower level of people can afford
a new home and in less I hear
something different very rest
conversation that'll be why
don't know but I thank you for
that madam chair I will you.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair Senator so
this is just a question in terms
of how does this affect the
manufactured home industry
There seems to be some concerns
about that if you could address
that that would be great yes
this indicates and it reads in
the bill that homes that are
constructed in New Mexico
sometimes of.
Covenants and things might use
even the term site built but
manufactured homes are not built
in New Mexico it would affect
modular homes but not
manufactured homes which are
built term used to be trailers
or whatever but it would not
affect those.
I would encourage them to do it
too because it reduces their
energy costs in the the overall
cost of ownership once they're
installed but it is not affected
by the change.
You madam chair.
Thank you senators also.
Thank you further discussion or
questions from the committee
about this bill.
Yes.
But if I might be for we get to
a vote just a couple of things
that come up in the last one
where I do have some information
with.
If any other states are are
doing this and California is
California already has a mandate
of this sort of one of the other
areas that that people would
have asked about was whether the
construction industry can keep
up if we suddenly mandate this
and in the global scheme of
things on solar panels New
Mexico is but a little bitty box
it would hardly affect the
supply chain of solar panels
certainly initially builders
would need to know where to
order those from and get them
but there is not a a bottleneck
of getting enough panels at this
time and New Mexico adding this
would hardly change the global
market on panels to where it
would cause a.
A up.
The difficulty for builders
could to get panels to put on
the roof and actually would
increase jobs in New Mexico.
Souls.
No ma'am thank you thank you so
much Committee members was
supposed to the committee.
I moved to pass.
Is there a second to the past I
second.
There is a motion and a second
on Senate bill one thirty two.
Monica could you please call the
vote.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville.
They'll you're on mute.
I'm sorry madam chair I had
someone talking to me.
We're we're voting on the bill
yes of the I voted I voted no.
Thank you.
Senator Paypen.
Just.
I'm sorry yes thank you.
Senator is also yes Senator.
Now.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes and.
Annex.
I'm.
But.
Medius is here yes I hear you
voted no.
Okay I'm voting
I'm voting no.
Okay it's five yes and for no.
Okay so Senator you have a do
pass and you're on.
And you're on to your next
committee and I would like to
explain my vote it is really
about the affordable housing I
think it's a great concept but
it's about affordable housing
thank you.
Okay second late next we are
back to Senate bill one thirty
seven of the New Mexico finance
authority water projects with
Senator of Sir Montes Senator
Montes can you hear us yes I can
madam chair thank you for
recognizing me are you prepared
to proceed we are thank you
thank you madam chair madam
chair every year the interim
committee.
A place to work and proposing
projects to be funded from the
water project fund what is the
committee I'm getting an echo
madam chair over I'm the only
ones the.
Excuse.
We hear a sees this piece of
legislation which reflects
certain projects that have been
applied for by our local
governments and that are
eligible for funding from the
water project fund we have a
fixed a resource every year from
which to fund these projects and
the committee will recall and
for the newer members when we
should have some pride in the
fact that there's been a great
deal of progress in the way that
projects are vetted scored
evaluated.
Before the session so the
project you have before you in
this bill should be meeting the
criteria that we've established
for them which means that their
shovel ready legislative meet
the criteria for a proper
funding I have Marquita Russel
with me I believe she should be
and I'd like to defer to her to
give you the specific numbers of
the projects that have been
applied for funding and and
which the water project board
and on and their process
recommends to us for approval in
this bill so madam chair it
market it can be allowed in and
recognize I would appreciate
doing so.
Thank you senator I keep on and
Marquita wanted to proceed great
thank you very much madam chair
thank you senator so as the
sponsor mentioned The New Mexico
finance authority carries on
behalf of the water trust board
this piece of legislation we are
the staff to the water trust
board at the New Mexico finance
authority we oversee of the
water project fund which is the
funds that makes the grants and
loans to various water projects
throughout the state the process
for our annual application cycle
starts in the summer it begins
in August where we do outreach
and training and we ultimately
solicit letters of intent so we
want to make sure we know who
intends to apply so that they
can be kept up to speed on any
potential changes in the
schedule or anything like that
and to make sure that they get
all the communication that's
necessary we had fifty six
notices of intent filed
alternately fifty applications
totaling about sixty million
dollars were submitted we have
an agency review team that seven
different agencies including the
legislative finance committee
that looks at these projects and
makes a recommendation to the
water trust board they
alternately then review that
list and make a recommendation
to first New Mexico finance
Authority oversight and then
ultimately the legislature to
authorize these authorize these
projects for funding the process
over the last several years has
changed since the beginning of
the water transport we ask up
front for their planning
information we ask for their
actual planning document we
review the applications against
criteria for others five
different sets of criteria to
deal with the five different
kinds of water projects that can
be funded and so we provide to
you the best of those
applications and recommend for
funding this year's part.
In our list has on it
The chair said it it's thirty
eight applications and they are
I flood prevention projects
there are two water conservation
or treatment recycling or reuse
projects that's a whole category
then there's twenty seven water
storage conveyancer delivery
projects those are the pipe
projects that sort of thing and
then ultimately there are four
watershed restoration and
management projects so those are
the projects that appear before
you authorization by the
legislature is necessary for the
water trust board for the the
finance authority board to make
the the loans or grants but your
authorization isn't it doesn't
mean for sure that they will get
the funding it means that they
can proceed to the next step in
at that point we are looking for
all permits are necessary to
fund the project we're looking
to ensure that they have water
rights that they're in
compliance with the drinking
water bureaus
Eight regulations regarding
safety and that sort of thing so
this is a very necessary step
but it's not ultimate the
ultimate determinant as to
whether or not they'll get
funding so can't proceed without
you but this authorization isn't
a guarantee that they'll receive
the funding that they requested
and that without madam chair I
would ask for a simple questions
you mentioned I think thirty
eight projects and there's only
thirty seven on the bill.
There are thirty seven entities
listed there is one entity the
clutch Peter soil and water
conservation district that has
two different water star
restoration projects so thirty
eight introduce one entity
country to operates two major
watershed restoration projects
and so that particular don't
remember the number but I can
provide it if need be it'll be
towards the end of the list
country into has two different
projects so that happens from
time to time when it's one
entity that is two different
kinds of projects that they
appear separately but if they
have the same kind of project
the pair jointly thank you.
Anything else Senator before we
go to Coniston proponents madam
chair I think both market and I
have neglected so far market
could you give us the number I
think you said the total number
of project submittals total
sixty million dollars would you
reminded committee of the
funding source please for these
projects and what is available
this year for these for these
funding applications thank you
in those numbers yes thank you
senator I apologize for not and
hitting on that earlier so the
water project fund which is the
fund from which we make these
grants and loans receives two
different sources of funding
there's an annual year mark of
the severance tax bonds the
finance the.
Water transport
gets nine percent but then
immediately ten percent of those
monies go over to the office of
the state engineer so we're
dealing with and that eight
point one percent of the senior
severance tax bond capacity and
then we're similarly dealing
with a four million dollar
distribution from the water
Trust Fund again ten percent of
that goes over to the office of
the state engineer so three
point six million dollars is
made available annually for as
long as the trust fund continues
to be solvent and that will add
in the eight point one percent
of the senior severance tax
bonds and so that amount of
money is going to be I believe
in the.
Forty two million dollar
category I think we have thirty
nine here but the
the estimates were increased in
January so we are dealing with
slightly more money but we
should have sufficient funds to
meet the majority of these
projects.
Thank you thank you madam chair
was number questions thank you
are there any opponents are on
the soon were on the phone that
want to speak on this bill.
Are there any proponents who
would like to speak.
I'm upon and I have several
projects not in my backyard.
Okay back to committee uh
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair it is
water cleanup allowed under this
this source of funding and and
the statutory scheme.
madam chair I might take that so
water clean up
yes could be enter the treatment
and re use but like up a plume
of contaminated area would
probably not be in there but
it's intended to be for clean
drinking water and other sources
so it just depends on
specifically what they're
looking to do but it should be
able to be covered under of.
Water transport should they have
applied.
But no one no one applied for
water clean up.
re use reconditioning reuse of
these that madam chair
There are two projects that are
on this list for water of
conservation
we get those two up for you
college eyes
There is in that project there
is Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water utility authority which is
asking for meter said that's a
conservation project and the
other is a filtration project
for Los Alamos County the other
projects there are there and
they would all been like
effluent reuse but not cleanup
right contaminant cleanup and
filtration filled the filtration
project what what is that how is
that the list we have agents I
can tell you very quickly here.
Representative that pledges.
The computer does not want to
play with me
So in that particular project
they are.
It's an effluent water of
project so they're trying to
take
Conserve potable water using
effluents this is a multi phase
project in Los Alamos but it's a
filtration treatment project
okay thank thank you madam chair
I I think these are great
projects in on I'm really
excited to vote for them when
you need a motion just I'm
available to give the motion
made.
Other questions or discussion
from committee members.
Okay Senator Sedillo Lopez for
your motion I moved to pass.
Okay.
Madam chair.
Thank you and senator pope did
second.
Could grant please call the
vote.
Yes.
Senator Gallegos yes.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
In about yes.
Okay yes Senator salt yes.
Senator Schmedes.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Unanimous.
Chair chair then just take a
moment to think Marquita and the
NMFA staff and and because we
have some new members I would
want them to know that that
you'll always hear about our
need for capital outlay reform
in New Mexico in our broken
capital outlay process and and I
would want you to know that this
committee and the interim
committee and that then this up
agency of the state did exactly
what needs to be done what we as
I said the last five years have
completely changed the process
by which these projects are
funded and we've done a great
deal more vetting study analysis
early consideration of projects
to make sure that that one the
capital outlay funding comes
down as well you're proving here
today as a legislative body that
these projects are ready to go
in the money doesn't just sit
around for years and years and
it's it's been done by Marquita
and all the people at NMFA and
and realized this is their job
they've been doing it for years
and I've been working with them
closely for years to do this and
then on top of that we've made
them essentially the state
lending institution to small
businesses were passing
legislation having them make
loans and grants we put a lock
on them and they've done a great
job so I just wanted to take a
moment for the committee to
recognize that we've got some
great people working for us.
Yes I think most of us would
agree and thank you so much
mistrust all for your work we
really appreciate thank you very
much I appreciate your support.
Thank you.
Now we're going on to Senate
bill eighty two but I would like
to let the committee members to
know that Senator souls will be
leaving us for short period in
the coming back.
So Senator Steinborn and I also
sent you Senator Steinborn
secretary Kenny statement okay.
I by tax free to read.
He would like me to repeat madam
chair he can't yes you can okay
okay Senator I want to present
your bill Senate bill eighty two
thank you madam chair and am
excited to finally be able to
put this bill on before you.
Senate bill eighty two men's an
existing task force we have a
law that was was developed.
During without prior to wet to
get our state government
involved in what is largely a
federal issue to review the
impacts this is existing law to
review the impacts of federal
storage facilities being wet and
report the impacts to the state
of New Mexico as a losses now
regularly and and also in the
case of the task force for
federal facilities to also
negotiate on behalf of the
state.
What this bill does but it does
not include private facilities
and as we know we have been in
matched in a proposal to store
the nation's high level spent
nuclear fuel into New Mexico and
I was the past chairman of the
radioactive and hazardous
materials interim committee for
the state I sent off letters to
the Martinez administration
asking have you done any due
diligence on this proposal us
probably fifty some odd
questions from six different
departments and they came back
and said.
We have no requirement to do so
they just literally rubbed it
rubber stamped and so we have no
required to do so so what this
bill before you does is take the
very common sense
approach of requiring our
executive branch to do an impact
analysis of a few of the
existing and future at all.
High level nuclear waste
proposals in the state of New
Mexico and that's all it does it
does not give on regarding
private facilities it does not
give this task force the ability
to negotiate on our behalf
that's the only is exclusively
Evans.
Our Mr Donahue had mute on your
computer is background noise and
requiring executive branch away
Madam chair thank you number one
I'm sorry I didn't go through
the rules you can I have your
webcast on and be on the zoom.
When you do that it creates an
echo for us and the delayed
response.
If you have your webcast on
please turn it off if you are on
the zoom.
And everybody should be on mute
and tell your recognize thank
you so much Senator Steinborn
you have the floor thank you
thank you madam chair so so what
what this bill simply does is is
fill that hole that exists in
our law to require the state
executive branch of which we
have added some very important
agencies to review the potential
impacts of proposed high level
nuclear waste storage in the
state of New Mexico and report
to the legislature at least
annually which is another
important change in law that I'm
proposing right now the current
law says regularly and literally
that that never under the
previous administration they
didn't even other task force
existed what this would do it
this bill passed madam chair is
regardless of if there was a
whole tech or not it would get
the executive branch actively
engaged in these issues
reporting to the legislature
regularly and making Legislature
aware of these things and engage
I think that's a very good thing
it's kind of like the national
environmental policy act what's
known as nepa yeah I think most
people who deal with it with
with federal issues are really
happy that we have any but
because it's the one thing that
separates us from you know
hidden quick federal action on
land without first outing
impacts it's a very small thing
to do we don't have any fund
state lands and people have
fought for that and it's been
fought back so so this bill
takes that staff and with that
out madam chair I will tell you
that you have an amendment that
stemmed from the committee
because the state land
commissioner has requested to be
added to this task force.
And I'm happy to act on that.
Well now if you'd like me to go
further.
You just Senator as a member is
not a member of the committee
you cannot be the one to act on
it so
as Senator Steinborn the sponsor
indicated it's a one sentence of
page five line eight.
After designees insert.
And the commissioner of public
lands or the commissioners
designate.
From the committee is there a
motion to accept.
I moved to accept the amendment
is there a second.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you is there any
discussion about this amendment.
Word isn't with anybody on the
committee like a vote roll call.
On the amendment madam chair I
would okay running could you
please call the vote roll for
the amendment on Senate bill
eighty two.
Senator Cervantes yes they're
going goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville.
Senator poked yes Senator so
also yes Senator smitteez no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
In chairman Stefanics yes.
Six yes three no I thank you
Senator Steinborn your amendment
has been adopted.
Thank now back on the bill the
amended bill.
Yeah I'll just finish up madam
chair I will say it's important
to note that I want to say about
forty percent of the state of
New Mexico municipalities have
passed resolutions either
opposing this waste from all
tech coming through their
community or their opposed to it
all together including Los
crucis McKinley County City of
Albuquerque I think all of I
don't I believe the all Indian
public council governors but
So so great great concern and
there's great interest in us
stepping up oversight so with
that perhaps read the statement
from the secretary and then
stand for questions yeah.
Yes so
Senator experts are the
statement from the secretary of
the environment and we have
expert Lisa Trujillo from energy
and minerals so Senator go ahead
and read the secretary statement
sure so this.
From secretary James Kennedy
secretary the environment
department just sent ability to
provide some more inclusive and
comprehensive approach in
protecting public health the
environment and our existing
economy well the federal
government retains primacy for
much radioactive decision making
radioactive waste decision
making Senate bill eighty two
establishes a robust process for
executive agency collaboration
on such proposals SB eighty to
ensure state agencies consider
all stakeholders including
tribal nations the HSD is listed
in the bill thank the sponsor
for his efforts to mitigate the
current blind spots related
radiological waste
transportation and storage in
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Is not Trujillo on.
From the energy minerals and
natural resources department.
At least I see you on the would.
Madam chair.
Good morning madam chair
commission members of the
committee I am meeting that
Trujillo and I am with energy
minerals and natural resources
and might provide administrative
support to the radioactive waste
task force.
All.
Minerals does support this bill
essentially.
All our analysis shows that we
would need staff to conduct the
The impact analysis
currently because our program is
funded primarily through with
transfer through department of
energy for with transportation.
They don't pay us to work on
projects outside of with
transportation so at some point
we would need to provide funding
for this project and that's I
think an initiative that we
would take on with department of
homeland security and emergency
management as well as possibly
D. O. T. so yes we absolutely so
one support bringing on the
additional departments and then
working through this project.
Thank you so now we're going to
the opponents and
I think the list.
I have here Ponant is mixed up I
think it's both sides so.
Maybe the opponents could raise
your hands.
And Trevor could recognize you.
Go ahead thank you raise your
hand for everybody who's
opposing this you need to go
down to the bottom of your
screen.
It has to be full screen you go
to the bottom our right hand
side it says re actions.
You click on that and then
there's a place to raise your
hand.
Okay that's all you have to do
is is tax that yellow button and
then we'll get you.
September go ahead.
Madam chair help hello there we
go in I'm sorry sense there's I
have more than ten people so I
think ten people at a minute
each.
Okay.
And that's for both.
When applying favorites here in.
Okay however is Janet needs.
There you go you need to make
yourself on mute Janet.
Very.
Okay.
First.
First we have and use.
Okay and please proceed madam
chair members of the committee
can you hear me yes my name is
ed use in my life Patty and I
are members of north eastern New
Mexicans United against nuclear
waste which is the correlation
ranchers farmers and ag
businesses that was formed to
oppose that utilities proposed
plan to very high level nuclear
waste in boreholes in quite
County.
Our resounding group message the
DOE was that we do not consent
to high level nuclear waste we
were years are you opposing this
bill opposing I'll get to that
so very short.
I'm sorry go ahead no problem we
were successful in stopping the
DOT's plans we have we have the
threat of high level nuclear
waste you know the egregious and
completely unacceptable risk it
brings to our economy and our
culture as of now hold next
possible rail route lies with
southern border of our small
ranch we greatly respect Senator
steinbruner grateful for the
good work is done in the past to
oppose Holtec however for the
reasons of the of the term
negotiated this bill we must
oppose this bill we think that
since our our message that New
Mexico does not oppose the
governor land commissioner gone
on record opposing postsecondary
except acceptable risk and you
realize that New Mexico would be
the fact permanent homes over
ninety five percent of the total
radio activity in the US making
it the most radioactive spot
between the earth and the sun I
greatly go along with what
Senator Steinborn has said about
his concerns about hold active
support and all that way that we
think that this bill sends wrong
message we need the New Mexico
legislature to join with the
many of the United voices in the
state and make a clear and
forced for policy statement that
we do not consent the storage of
high level waste in New Mexico.
Thank you very much next cover.
We are.
You're on mute.
ready percent.
Okay I'm Cindy Wheeler madam
chair I grew up in Roswell I
belong to Southwest Alliance for
a future we propose Senate bill
eighty two because it assumes
that high level waste is coming
to New Mexico and that we're
willing to increase the alarming
amount of radioactive waste we
have we support bill that bans
bringing more nuclear waste to
New Mexico our legislature must
pass a bill saying we do not
consent Wyoming Utah North
Dakota did it so can we we need
every legislator on both sides
of the aisle on this issue.
If we bring this ways within our
borders it's strips New Mexico
of its right to self govern and
risks traditional industries
lives and properties New Mexico
has done its part we're becoming
the sole state that accepts
building the nuclear waste dump
of the nation other states that
have produced this waste need to
build their own repositories
thank you thank you next
current.
Janet.
And.
Madam chair and committee
members and thank you for this
opportunity.
I am Janet Greenwald I live in a
small on a small farm in kicks
in New Mexico I oppose this bill
because it would regulate high
level nuclear waste rather than
opposed bringing it here I
understand federal preemption
that both Utah and Nevada of
becoming a high level nuclear
waste dump State and one.
No that'd get your study the
state is perceived as a high
level nuclear waste dumps State
last year as well come there and
the state agricultural products
will be less widely accepted.
Our community like many others
depend on tourism and acceptance
of our agricultural products.
We can't afford to accept high
level nuclear waste.
Thank you.
Thank you next.
John.
Mr Representative good to see
you.
HSD and madam chair.
My name again is John Heaton and
I'm a member of the any easily
alliance board of directors we
have been working hard to in
southeast New Mexico to deliver
diverse are.
Diversify our and we discovered
and niche with safe carbon free
nuclear projects can tell a
consolidated energy storage is
another one of those safe
projects we have been working
for on this for about six years
the project brings three hundred
fifty jobs one hundred
operational one hundred
construction and a hundred bill
hundred fifty building the silos
capital expenditure will be
approximately three billion
dollars we expect seventeen to
twenty five million in revenue
sharing annually to New Mexico
based on one shipment per month
the facility is subsurface a
solid concrete fortress it is
resistant to plane crashes
rocket hits earthquakes and
possible terrorist attacks
considered by homeland security
and the NRC the transportation
system is heavily regulated by
the NRC federal rail
administration and the
department of transportation the
NRC said said even though they
cannot say the risk of a breach
is zero they do say it is a
billion to one and no
radioactive material would be
leaked from the from the cask
madam chair the NRC is given.
Trevor I love that more finish
please.
Okay.
More.
Okay I'm Mr you want on mute so
we were trying to let you go
over time but we can't hear you.
You still muted looks like Mr
chair yes my needed now okay so
I'm sorry you were cut off where
I was what could you kind of
summarized yeah I I we heard the
first part yes.
Okay the again the facility of
sub Services solid concrete
fortress it is resistant to
plane crashes rocket it's
earthquakes and possible
terrorist attacks the
transportation system is heavily
regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission the
federal rail administration and
DOT the NRC cannot say the risk
of a breach is zero but they say
it's a billion to one for the
transportation cask and yet no
radioactive material would be
released madam chair the NRC is
given total authority for the
health and safety of our
citizens for commercial nuclear
projects and have some three
hundred engineers and scientists
dedicated to protecting the
public the NRC totally preempts
the state and I ask you why
would the state spent four
hundred ninety thousand
reviewing what the NRC does I'm
sure education could better
justify the use of those spots
thank you I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you so are you might want
to stay on the zoom in case
there are questions later so the
next person please.
John Brandt Karen Burnes.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and also
Senator Steinborn for all of
your good work and work with
this whole take issue in the
past but I'm with New Mexico
interfaith power lines to John
Brown but we out of respect
oppose SB eighty two working
with our people of faith and
conscience around the state I'm
we believe that this would send
a message of consent for the
whole text storage facility for
nuclear waste people a face
native American communities many
local people and people across
the state have spent countless
hours and expense to show up and
speak at hearings in our State
saying that whole tech is a bad
idea and it creates even more of
a sacrifice zone in southeast
New Mexico we are not giving
consent for New York it clear
waste also our state and federal
leaders have opposed this
project so we just believe that
this bill would send a confusing
message and would be interpreted
as legislative consent thank you
thank you very much nextra were.
Jerry.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jerry planning the public and
government affairs director for
Eddy County Eddy County have a
long and successful history with
the handling and disposal of
nuclear waste two thousand
thirteen Eddy County commission
passed resolution are eighteen
seventy three in support of the
building of an interim storage
facility by OPEC international
in southeast New Mexico the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
are requires a very thorough
public process for the issuing
of permits for the handling of
the spokeswoman your whites once
the NRC has approved issuance of
the permit all concern for the
handling and storage of waste
will have already been addressed
in there has been ample
opportunity for all issues to be
explored.
Senate bill eighty two following
add to that already with the
process of getting these types
of permits issued and it what
about adding any additional
assurances for the handling and
storage of the waste for these
reasons Eddy County stands in
opposition of Senate bill eighty
two thank you.
Thank you very much next.
John Busher.
So.
Madam chair and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
John boxer I am the radioactive
waste issues chair for the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club we are concerned that this
bill creates a monitoring
framework.
Comparable to what is in place
for with even though the state
would not have regulatory
authority under the hazardous
waste act as it does for work
this can be interpreted as
saying we expect waste storage
by a commercial company to occur
federal law requires a private
company or the nuclear utility
to have title to high level
radioactive waste before
transport to a distant.
Storage facility if a private
company owns the waste and if
anything goes wrong during
transport or storage the damages
can easily exceed a private
companies financial capacity
this may put the burden on the
state for cleanup and to pay for
damages.
People and livelihoods the
federal government has failed in
its obligation to provide a
permanent radioactive waste
facility we should be clearly
stating and law we do not want a
high level waste storage
facility in New Mexico the time
for this bill is after finding
permanent storage locations for
high level radioactive waste and
after a planned minimizing
transport read.
Thank you very much next driver.
Meryl.
Madam chair committee members my
name is economy so merry cover
I'm here speaking as
Representative yup could you
through notificar crisis action
is gravely concerned with the
generation and handling of
radioactive waste all kinds
whether from nuclear fracking or
any other kind of dangerous
industry we are strongly opposed
to the idea that New Mexico
should be at the office most we
believe it is critical that the
impacts of any new proposed
federal or private disposal
facilities within the state
thoroughly scrutinised
documented a document however
respectfully you want a bill
that bans high level nuclear
waste from being stored in New
Mexico not one the facilities
negotiations for its disposal
here in New Mexico without
public input thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next.
And lastly more January.
In the sense can you hear me yes
welcome.
Thank you madam chair members of
the Senate conservation
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
My name is Dale general and I'm
speaking as the mayor city of
Carlsbad I am speaking in
opposition to SB eighty two.
There been recent discussions
at the state national level
about the importance of
diversifying our economy.
We are aware of this need for
diversity which is one of the
reasons well we have been
supportive of this part of it.
In a rural storage.
This project has strong support
in Carlsbad it's really
education.
Our city council is pastor will
resolution James ward.
George and community members
have turned out in large numbers
to speak in favor it would be
the safety reviews for both a
consolidated roll forward simply
with the process of transporting
to this still with the girl this
will be a world class facility.
Create jobs for New Mexicans and
generate revenue for New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you so much are there any
other opponents we have room for
one more.
Okay so let's go to the
proponents Trevor one minute
each.
I am not a proponent I'm in a
public.
Have you shut up on both sides
so we'll take you offices of the
a proponent.
Next however.
L. Evans.
I'm sorry I'm not here to speak
on this bill I'm here to speak
on another bill.
Okay the proponents of please
raise your hands.
I'm with the yellow at the
reaction button at the bottom of
your screen.
So I think Karen Douglas.
Karen you're still on mute.
There you are you can talk now.
Yes yes I apologize good morning
madam chair and and honorable
senators of the committee I just
as the up copious were voters.
Senator Mexico I am a nuclear
engineer and I share our state
the women voters the New
Hampshire Act since twenty
seventeen the legal women voters
support Senate bill eighty two
and have this are you all
started safety advocacy
statement that was approved by
our national organization
December twenty nineteen.
Voters and please with the New
Mexico state agencies
represented on the task force
and recommends that they're
affected must be assured by
stepping with person whose
experience education knowledge
and who have authority are to be
sufficient for evaluation of the
state for storage facility
operations and to impose
restrictions when warranted the
voters of New Mexico recommends
that Task Force breeding
briefings to the interim
committee both periodically and
went on planned events arising
Committee instances for safety
provisions are violated or.
When it I can't I anticipated
radiation exposures to workers
that is occupational exposure
occurs task force members should
have authority to ensure that
aging management programs are
imposed comparable to the course
required of the existing seventy
for spent fuel storage locations
across the United States.
The drive care system that will
be used for that are similar to
those that have been in use for
thirty five years in this
country what are would like to
ensure that the testing that's
been completed will be
sufficient to insure these will
remain intact and perform their
safety function throughout the
storage period for the in our
storage facility and we would
also like to hear the nancial
assurances by the spent fuel
storage facility order and how
operator including both
liability provisions for
accident.
That.
In in case of a bit.
Okay thank you Mr.
Is there another component.
Are there any other proponents
from the public on Senate bill
eighty two.
Okay Mr can you take your hand
down now so we are now to
committee members.
Senator Steinborn did you want
to respond to anything yes I get
madam chair and I just
I respect that the concerns of
my fellow advocates and I have
been the lead.
Member of the legislature
opposing the whole tech facility
I think they need to read the
bill carefully and I it's I'm
pretty pretty obvious that many
of them have not of the task
force amendment that we're
making to this legislation
specifically does not give the
task force the ability to
negotiate on behalf of the state
of New Mexico that eggs exact
exist exclusively for federal
facilities.
And I would also say
studying impacts hardly makes
this a welcome mat which is why
the industry is hired a team of
this to kill this bill
we're the welcome mats already
here that the industry trying to
create a facility we're trying
to do our due diligence and make
sure New Mexicans are protected
with that I stand for questions
chair.
Thank you we're gonna go to
Senators soul since he has to
leave and then Senators
committees.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator and thank you I've just
a couple of questions as I read
through the built up respond
page four line eight and that
page for like twenty three years
two different units for
measuring the amount of
radiation what is in my throat
and one is in Mando Kerry's why
is it not a consistent or could
we make that a consistent one
does yeah I don't but I'm not
familiar with exactly how many
zeros are are on them and how
many zeros there are on.
Sorry Senator sells I see what
you're saying on page four
what's the other reference you
get other both on page four one
is line eight and what is line
twenty three line eight talk
about micro cherries and line
twenty three talks about then
curies.
Well madam chair one of them is
talking about transuranic
contaminated waste which is a
different type of waste
this what's considered lower
level waste and that's the waste
that's going into web.
But here is the madam chair and
senator Kerry's is the the unit
this is just how many zeros are
there as to how many of.
Radiation particles are coming
off of things yeah and it would
be helpful if that were
consistent and what scale were
on with each piece sure and
madam chair center present a
question this is existing law
but perhaps you know we can can
gain a team of physicists to
look at this language and figure
out what's if we need to
harmonize it if the bill moves
forward and thank you madam
chair and senator it is is I'm
trying to understand this is I
don't know whether one is a
hundred times a thousand times
ten times yeah we know what is
the unit ratio for nano sim
micro juries and at and again
that ought to be something that
maybe the with a simple and then
that in the next committee the
ex existing law so that that at
least makes more sense that
those are on the the same out
that full scale.
Madam chair and and Senate my
next one page five wind sixteen
the part about the consultation
task force and to go sheet with.
What does it actually required
to consult and negotiate does
negotiate meaning that it has
the ability to stop it or is it
just need to have to say Hey
we're here yeah on that's
negotiation what are how are
those defined what is it to
consult and to negotiate yes and
and and Madam chair
representative so I think you
need to look at I the language
very carefully and I eight and
then turn the page six.
eighty six and look at number
B..
Because what you're asking about
is you're asking about the
authority in existing law
pertaining to federal disposal
facilities if you look at line
eighteen on page five.
When this bill was passed in
this is existing statute we
empower this task force to be
our point entity with regards to
wet and it was literally to
negotiate the terms and and the
and the valuation impacts and
report to the legislature
we are creating separate the
forty on record with regards to
private facilities like whole
tech and and and so that's on
page six line seven which is a
task force identify impacts of
new federal and private
facilities so the so really
that's the only operative part
of this bill new authority at
the the negotiating authority is
only limited to federal
facility.
Okay and and senator my and my
next what was page six line
seven to twenty is and that's
all new material where the
legislature the governor
our review licenses it doesn't
indicate any time like if they
choose not to do anything does
that stop everything I went to
the after report back how soon
do they have to have something
new comes in
Your what if it isn't that.
No I.
Those don't seem to be defined
in here as to the task force
just uses not to do anything
what happens that.
Well
madam chair it's a good point it
doesn't have a timeline in here
but what it does to which is it
a big improvement over existing
laws if you go to page seven.
Line three that we're upgrading
when the task force has report
to the legislature from
regularly to at least annually.
And again in the past they never
reported to us at all they
didn't even know it existed and
then again then said we
Furthermore don't have the
authority to do any due
diligence on all tech when I ask
them to so this at least
requires them to report to
annually these proposals frankly
don't come around very often I
mean they're very very rare but
but but you're right I mean when
a license application is made
with the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission it doesn't create a
it doesn't create a time frame
to do that
and that might be something
worth thinking about.
If the bill moves on I mean if
we wanted to keep it off of.
A license application or draft
environmental impact statement
or or some benchmark along the
way.
Madam chair and senator I think
he gets the kind of the
fundamental thing is what does
this actually do require of all
tech or any other company coming
in and the task force as a beach
doesn't really have any control
or power or they just go eight
federal government says it's
coming in here's the information
I don't see anything that it
required of them to to make sure
that we agree or anything of
that sort it just sets up
somebody to look at what their
application is am I missing
something that read that's my
last question now chair that
another madam chair you're
exactly right it doesn't it
requires them to study the
impacts of a long list of things
including public safety homeland
security public health economic
development
things that are concerned
industry greatly which is why
they're here opposing that bill
they don't want us to do that
evaluation but as some have
CENIC knowledge we are actually
preempted from even regulating
the industry someone said the
state of Utah stopped it they
didn't they didn't stop at the
federal government had given
interim license actually passed
a lot trying to regulate it and
the federal court struck it down
because we do not have any
preemption authority we are
preempted by the federal
government so so some of
suggested we Pat should pass a
bill banning it it would be feel
good legislation that actually
at this point would be meeting
less because federal law is very
clear we are preempted from this
but this that this would do what
authority we do have which is to
take our head out of the sand
and require our state government
to actually look after all of
all abilities and impacts to the
citizens of the state and
educate each other educate the
legislature about those impacts
so that we can be frankly better
fighters and better advocates
but it doesn't it doesn't.
Take a position be on that or
have any power beyond that.
Thank you senator souls I next
have Senator Schmedes in center
city Lopez and Senator gave us
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair and first
of all want to commend the bill
sponsor for his openness to me
discussing this issue with him
since he's my neighbor on the.
On the Senate floor and and this
is a really fascinating topic in
and he has been really open to
answer a lot of my questions
I do have a few more that came
up just in listening to the
discussion
but but clearly the Senators
given a lot of thought.
Into this issue what one thing
that I wanted to bring up is
when I when I promised my
constituency
when I was campaigning was I'm
gonna fight for local control
local government
And have a good relationship
with my mayors in my district in
those sorts of of folks and
local folks and so what I heard
from the discussion is I heard a
lot of mayors and people
counties is in this area in
southeastern New Mexico which is
not my district but on the
principle of local government it
just kind of see what I'm
hearing is that we've got a
bunch of people locally saying
we we want this and then it
seems to me that we have people
that.
Yes maybe in the state but
they're not really they don't
live down there they're saying
we don't want it so madam chair
and senator could could you
address my concern there about
the the local issue if you just
you know I I kind of want to
side with with the locals here
but.
Madam chair representative I
really appreciate you asked that
question because that's a that's
an area where I think
Some people in southeastern New
Mexico and I should point out
that there's communities in
southeastern New Mexico who have
passed resolutions opposed to
this project one of the
community college out okay and
their they're not on the phone
the bill's been schedule several
times and we're all busy doing
lots of things as far as my
ability to corral these but
what's important to note Senator
on this project is that we are
all affected it is it's not just
the end point where the wasteful
and up this way so actually
shipped through communities
nationwide to get to this
facility and and it'll all come
via rail it'll come by armed
guard.
According to the company Holtec
because it's private ways to not
federal if there were to be an
accident along the rail it would
be the responsibility of local
governments and the state of New
Mexico to do emergency
preparedness so in fact and the
rail routes if you look at a map
rel go through all parts in New
Mexico so we are all local
stakeholders we're all vested
interests and not just us in New
Mexico there are people in New
Mexico triggering this proposal
it's not based upon national
energy policy but the fact is
I've been on calls one the only
members of legislature on these
calls advocating against pose
with an act national Regulatory
Commission and you have
communities all over the country
saying don't support this
proposal because waste is going
to come by my house on I ninety
five in New York and they fall
down the bridge so when we talk
about local control and
respecting that what I would
urge it also respecting consider
is the fact that communities
representing forty percent of
the state of New Mexico
including the cities of
Albuquerque Los crucis McKinley
County Santa Fe County have all
passed resolutions opposed to
this because they don't want
that ways coming by and so my
bill is fundamentally about
respecting that local control by
saying we're gonna look after
everybody by studying impacts
it's if we were to just say yeah
we're gonna listen to just two
more that the endpoint we would
potentially be I think
disrespecting all the local
governments that waited across
the state of New Mexico on this.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I think that's a great
answer and I I certainly can see
how how this would not only
affect in and and I I'm in no
way suggesting that everybody
down in southeast New Mexico is
is supporting this I'm just I'm
just trying to sort through some
of the the things we're we're
here.
Yeah but I I think that's a
great point I think it's well
taken and and one of my other
questions has to do with with
transport because I want to make
sure I understand what this bill
does and what it doesn't do
I'd like to try to.
Talk some facts and figures
briefly
with you because one of the
things just from from my view
point and you know I I like to
Legisla- I think we all do but
it seems to me that sometimes
Either we hear testimony or or
or things like that that that is
more based on on a a fear
perhaps Madam facts and figures
and and things you know and I've
I've done I used to be a
software engineer I've I've done
work at a nuclear power plant in
doing some software design for
these folks and and so I I
understand these are these are
big projects there's there's
concrete there's guards there's
all kinds of things and yeah and
and and the wording radioactive
can be scary to people in a we
use radio activity in medicine
quite a bit to fight cancer and
so these things are are a bit
scary but I I'm I want to try to
move past the scare factor and
and go to some facts and figures
so we're talking about transport
you know I I looked at I was
looking up some information on
on it a governmental website
here nothing is not a partisan
thing is the government website
it says we've had thousands and
thousands of shipments sent in
the past fifty years with no
leaks or or no no no no spills
and things
it is is there do you have any
for for the communities that are
concerned about you know the the
waste going by them on transport
do do we have any facts and
figures to to try to sort
through here on the actual risk
thank you madam chair Senator
the personal this read this
waste is going to be shipped via
rail and I think a lot of ways
to ship frankly another by other
weight by other means and its
other types of waste I think by
and large I would stipulate that
most of the time most of the
time this waste will ship
without incident.
Most of the time the facility
will operate without incident
but it's when an accident
happens and not if an accident
happens but when an accident
happens rail shipping is not
infallible fact I had a
conversation with the vendor
they said New Jersey who would
be considered for shipping this
waste he does very little waste
rail shipments he himself his
company has had an accident in
the last twenty years and he's I
think he studies his ownership
like less than twenty thirty
shipments but he had a situation
where rel car fell off the
tracks we're talking about
thousands and thousands of
shipments were talking about up
to ten thousand cast it'll be
shipped in New Mexico and not
just once but twice because this
is an interim facility in theory
it will then be shipped back out
we're talking about a rail
transportation operation of
historic proportions regarding
spent nuclear fuel that doesn't
exist in our country's history
so I think what I worry about is
what happens when that one
incident happens what does that
look like and what we know from
with for example which is low
level waste when an accident
happened that facility and it
was a billion dollar incident
lives were put at rest local
community there was a radiation
exposure thank god no one was
was hurt and and I want to just
point out Senator what's up
what's really interesting about
Trying to contemplate what that
what could happen it's often not
things that you plan for or
things that you can even
anticipate what happened in Los
Alamos what happened and what
was the they incorrectly packed
a drum of waste with the wrong
kind of Kitty litter I kid you
not they were supposed to put in
organic and they put in in
organic and the damn thing come
busted and they ended up with
the billion dollar in is that
where you had an explosion or
kind of what they call a broker
they had different words for it
but anyway so you know the the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
itself says that storage of
waste is not infallible you have
to accept accent to the cost of
doing business and so my answer
to use yes there's lots of cases
of rail accidents the company
involved is had a rail accident
and we're talking about putting
New Mexico communities with
exposure of thousands and
thousands of the shipments of
which we will have direct
liability if there's an accident
so.
Good question
Thank you.
And madam chair and senator
thank you for that I do
I I appreciate that but I also
just you know he if you can
account for if it's a financial
issue.
And and we seem to have other
you know I mean how home
builders and I mean all industry
have to prepare for accidents
and they have to cover insurance
and things so it seems that
those could be overcome I I'm
more concerned I think as you
are to on the on the human human
health.
Issue and just as an example of
and I'll move on because I
think.
You know we can't speculate too
much on what's gonna happen in
the future but the the nuclear
power plant that I worked out
they had designed where you
could fly a seven forty seven
directly into the building and
it was physically impossible for
that sort of impact to to have
have had a spill and so I don't
want to get into the details of
how those shipments are done and
I don't think that really
addresses your bill and that's
not what your bill does but you
know if it's physically
impossible for there to be a
league if you know at a huge
bomb were to go off on the on
the rail car or something I I
you know and I guess that's what
I'm I'm getting at is I know
people the these are very
sensitive issues and people do a
lot of planning and around those
issues but my my next question
committee that backs madam chair
and center on so your your
comment about Los Alamos does
this legislation affect
it or could affect our we we
talk a lot a whole tech but does
this affect our national labs.
Madam chair Senator
no because number one it it
regards to spent fuel which this
bill really deals with the
private facilities we are
totally preempted I mean we
don't we don't have the
authority to stop anything in
reality believe me I've looked
for those letters I got an
Attorney General opinion on ways
from Los Alamos he's going to
whip anyway it's mostly low
level waste and it's in this
bill doesn't I mean the the
existing law forty deals with
Los Alamos so it doesn't I would
say this is the other than in
this one respect which I think
is really positive the people
Los Alamos very concerned about
the waste and obviously we had
an incident where we had a drum
agency package that because the
billion dollar incident this
bill would require the task
force is designated to deal with
that issue to report to the
interim radioactive Committee
annually so what it does is it's
a public safety bill it gets the
legislature more involved and
being aware of these issues I
think it's executive branch
point and you having to report
on it be transparent about so
that beyond out that we don't
have any doesn't have any
regulatory teeth.
Okay madam chair answer maybe I
should rephrase my question I
understand there's no regulatory
teeth but with this commission
also would they be looking at
say transport of waste from from
Los Alamos is is that even on
the radar or is this very very
specific to to hold tech.
no I mean it is on the radar and
in fact
Alicia spoke earlier leave the
with the with our energy
minerals department that's how
she gets paid she actually is
very different from what's being
proposed here by health tech who
are hiring lobbyists to even
keep us from looking at impacts
with yeah we actually give our
state money where they do
homeland security they do
emergency preparedness they look
at all these issues and so and
the task force under this
existing law.
Although that that
responsibility is kind of been
delegated down to staff in fact
the existing statute requires
them to look at transport and to
look at all issues related
impact to report was quite
regularly which meant number
until we brought it and
literally until we brought it up
with them and then they reported
but but under this law they
would have to report to us
annually.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator I think that's that's
about it for my remarks I I do
find this issue to be very
once again very interesting I I
like the idea of the state of
New Mexico having a little more
I don't know how you say just a
little more having our finger on
this a little bit more having
our eye on then just outsourcing
its to the fence although at the
same time I understand that
this.
The the nuclear stuff it in it
is mainly a a federal issue to
and so I look forward to hearing
the rest of the discussion and I
I just want to for for those
that are part of this discussion
listening hi once again just
trying to look at the facts and
figures and trying to understand
this better I mean.
from some of our national
energy.
data on websites I mean it seems
to me that the amount of solid
waste radioactive waste produced
by the industry is actually very
very small physically
and it's you know about to think
guess two thousand metric tons a
year is what I'm reading I mean
that that would to to to explain
to people how much solid waste
that is me over over a hundred
years that would be about one
your your average skyscraper
worth of waste.
and so the the the total volume
what what I like about nuclear
is that we're not using up tons
and tons of of our land.
As we are at with Energy sparse
technologies so I I just wanted
you know and and and it's
nothing for against the bills
but I just think that we're
dealing with the technology that
is extremely energy efficient as
far as a fuel standpoint and it
is producing a very very small
volume of fuel and so I think it
you know that that's another
thing that I I just like about
the the technology so anyway
thank you Senator for your
openness for my my prior
questions that I've already been
answered I really appreciate it
and I I appreciate.
Our look forward to the rest of
the debate.
Thank you very much Senators
meetings and next we have
Senator Sedillo Lopez then
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator have you ever heard the
term sacrifice zone.
I believe I have madam chair
Senator.
Do you well.
Would you consider amending this
bill online eleven page six to
make sure that one of the things
they look at is the racial and
ethnicity impact maybe a racial
and ethnic and ethnicity impact
statement because sacrifice zone
is is is known in which it is
determined that they're just
going to sacrifice the area for
the good of a larger a larger
issue and that's what I think a
lot of this nuclear waste
disposal is is it's it's
choosing sacrifice zones.
And I'm very interested in who
is going to be impacted I love
your bill because it promotes
transparency.
And at least our agents are our
elected officials will
understand what's happening and
will have we have a
responsibility I think to
protect their health the welfare
Our Environment and we can't do
that if we have no idea what is
happening in our state and we
can't do that if we have
sacrifice loans being offered up
and so I strongly support your
bill and I'm gonna vote for
whether you amended or not but I
would ask you to consider
adding racial and ethnic impact
to this bill just because we
need to have some clarity within
the state doctor who is impacted
most by these horrific
environmental decisions and I
proceed the disaster in this
area to be a horrific
environmental decision.
I remember miss madam chair at a
in and of interim hearing and I
I think it might have been rude
also
where Holtec made a presentation
and I remember Senator Steinborn
that of this chair that Senator
Steinborn you
got to argue with them about who
was responsible for cleanup
because they made two different
representations and I understand
from your discussion with
senators meetings that you
cleared up is that correct and
out how was that cleared up.
Well madam chair it's it's some.
Frankly the company has his gate
has given different statements
but at the very first
presentation to the New Mexico
legislature when I was chair the
radioactive Committee they give
us a presentation that I could
text all of you afterwards I've
got on my laptop that says that
Emergency response would be and
it literally says state and
local government because in the
distinction is because it's
privately owned waste it was
owned by the department of
energy it would be a different
deal but because it's privately
owned
that it would be our
responsibility then they said
well well you know later in the
committee said of course we
would do right by local
communities and we have
insurance but the reality is if
if there was an accident it
would be the frontline response
handling it and and having to
pay for that and then maybe the
federal maybe a would come in
and help reimburse
a local communities cost
possibly but up so they've given
different statements about it it
hasn't been cleared up that's my
satisfaction.
Okay thank you and so madam
chair of would you consider
amending it to include racial
and ethnic impact statements.
Absolutely what madam chair
senator I think we need to
figure out how we word it and
whether or not we do that right
now just because.
Okay excuse me in this committee
we don't usually do amendments
on the fly if we want to propose
an amendment it will roll it
over to the next
the committee date in order to
have the analysts look at it for
the committee.
Okay I'm not going to propose it
now I'm just going to encourage
you to because I'd like to see
this bill move forward I'm gonna
vote for it anyway but I'm glad
that you're open to that because
that's another thing that I
think we need transparency on
thank you madam chair that's all
I have thank you and before I go
to Senator Gallegos understand
one discussed to where Judiciary
yes ma'am chair thank you very
much Senator Gallegos.
Center.
Conversation I really appreciate
you bring this bill of unity I I
this the first time that I can
say that the the whole tech and
your ad Catron same side.
I'm grateful for for the
discussion and I know you stated
earlier they didn't understand
the bill but directed to have a
lot of time a lot of expertise
on the subject matter so I
appreciate wanted to clarify
just couple things madam chair
and senator
Senator
So do are Lopez had brought up
the emergency response I just
want to give you a little bit of
updates you can have some
understanding the reason Holtec
said that it could go to a local
state local responses because
you're Ranko of our
first responders in the lead and
Eddy County have had training to
be able to deal with instances
like this that be totally
different than for Albuquerque
are given Los crucis but because
they live there and they live in
the realm of what the
possibilities are to be like Los
Alamos Los Alamos knows how to
respond if there's anything
happening in the facility there
but I just wanted to update you
because I think what
hope takes real response was my
thought thought or understanding
to and you can correct me on
this Senator Palmer on I
understand that they would be
responsible if anything happened
they have to have insurance say
that they have
plans in place is that not
correct.
I'm.
Madam chair.
That is not correct I'm pulling
up the thing on my laptop right
now.
And literally it says project
axe aspect U. N. F. transport
emergency response call in state
and local authorities.
So.
That's what we were told and
there is a there's tape of it
because we are cover committee
meetings for five for five years
so it's very there will be a
tape of that interim committee
but that's.
Those are their words and that's
their presentation.
Madam chair and senator a you
talked earlier did you step on
your laptop I may send you
something else to hold because
I've got a got an email from
Mr Scoggin says holder will have
to take insurance on the
transportation and the facility
so that gives me a little bit of
comfort although to my next
question madam chair and senator
I'm just wondering and I
understand you know already that
They are C. does this you know
the the detail that you're does
trying taken from federal level
to the state level and I'm just
wondering if you have any kind
of I have been through all your
meetings of saying you know the
fight over whole tech are you
fighting against WCS also.
So madam chair Senator
Not really actively I mean I'm
I'm I'm engaged in this facility
in our state I know that the
governor of Texas abit is also
opposed to the proposed high
level waste facility on the
other side of the border in
Texas there's advocate working
on both sides and I realize that
if that were to be approved and
we're going to have exposure
from that to kind of back to
Senator Schmedes question that
the impacted communities is a
really broad question we would
be impacted by that but no my
efforts are primarily focused on
on what we can impact here in
the state of New Mexico.
Madam chair and senator that's
why I asked that question to
prove that you're wrong on the
discussion about the jail that
of the proposition is for the
WCS project because the material
going to hold tech will not
travel to jail the rail those
through jail in Eunice would go
to the WCS addicted is in Texas
I live four miles from the WCS
project in our opposition is it
goes back to the second question
is on that the Senator Sedillo
Lopez was talking about they
show a twenty mile radius for
the whole tech does not an
inflict on any the area
communities where the WCS
encompasses parts of Hobbs all
of you in a small jail and those
are the reasons that jails in
opposition to the rail being the
maternal being railed through
but it's going to the W. C. S.
project not the whole day and I
want to distinguish because
madam chair center you're very
very knowledgeable on this but
there are two different projects
your combining two different
fights and one project yeah I
just I just want to bring that
up I'd love to hear your down so
madam chair Senator I'm not sure
that you're correct on that with
all due respect I when I chaired
a hearing in Hobbs we had a
Jarrell city councilor come to
the hearing in talk about jails
opposition and in fact she said
one of the most precious things
I never heard any buddy say and
I wrote it down and she said if
there are sharks in the water
now if they're sharks in the
water don't get out of the boat.
He was talking about their
concerns about this spent fuel
the everybody else wants to get
rid of and dump on New Mexico
and I just thought that was a
really amazing thing to say in
other words you're messing with
extremely.
Stuff with a lot of exposure and
the last thing we would want to
do is take a with that so to
answer your question I believe
job.
is opposed to Holtec as well but
it sounds like we both agree
there opposed to high level
nuclear waste storage.
We're straying from the bill
of Senators of we need to
maintain of the discussion on
the Senate bill that we're
discussing Senate bill eighty
two please.
The madam chair and senator I
just was wanting to make the
point that there's two different
fights out there one both of
affected Mexico of the senator's
of fighting Holtec which I think
the overall arching level is
that it does not affect if there
is an incident our communities
in the region that I live so
with that I yield and thank you
madam chair.
Yes we are Senator von case
next.
Senator Cervantes did you get
kicked off for you still here.
Senator Cervantes.
I had about that that's fine we
are
So this does go to Judiciary
well look forward to it passes
this committee working on it
there I kind of want to echo
maybe a comment made by one of
my colleagues earlier it's
interesting bill because it
seems to me that the opponents
of all tech are opposed to the
bill and the proponents of hold
back proposed the bill and and I
the best explanation perhaps is
that a Centers time aware that
maybe there's misunderstanding
or confusion about what the bill
reads are says or does so I'm
hoping that drugs explains that.
I'm a little confused by the
bill only because
I I heard the statement read for
the secretary which seems to be
supportive in favor in the bill.
But then I heard Senator
Steinborn to say that the he's
made exhaustive efforts to try
and get the agency to to
participate in the process and
do some of the things that are
here and they've been reluctant
or unable to do so
Representative so that that
seems like a disconnected me.
But I don't think it's for the
bill today for frankly very
simple reasons.
Maybe more than trying to figure
out what we're doing here simply
because the committee here is
probably heard me say this many
times before but but the my day
to day life is practicing as a
lawyer which means my job is to
read laws and interpret those
laws work with judges and other
lawyers to apply those laws so
it is my effort always you're
the legislature and I hope
consistently to eliminate bills
that.
Do not have meaningful standards
work working not be readily
enforced or the or the intent or
purposes are unclear so will
address some of these in in
Judiciary I presume it was gonna
be amended but I'll just give
you some examples so there's a
definition here for high level
waste but as I understand the
definition of high level waste
but that the look at the
definition of high level waste
your it means highly radioactive
material that's a that's a
circular definition that does
have has really no meaning to me
if you're defining high level
waste but I thought that it's
highly radioactive I don't know
what that means I don't know how
I could apply that.
And I compare that to maybe low
level waste which is defined by
an objective standard here and
in the existing laws so hundred
was it then curies per gram
under hundred managers program
that's an objective standard but
when we use definitions don't
have understanding or meaning to
me they're they're difficult for
me as a lawyer to to agree with.
And likewise we look in section
three of the builders languages
says the task force shall
negotiate for the state with the
government in section three
within the task force on the go
shape for the state but at the
same time that it says that the
nothing that secretary shall
limit any agency from
negotiating so that to me is an
ambiguity there's an
inconsistency there
and again I don't all well
certainly hear from centers I
worked maybe address each of
these here but the hope will
we'll get a chance maybe tighten
things up if we progress the
progress of the bill.
In section three of the bill
subsection B. says.
The task force a show of
disseminate information shows
knows it says the task force out
identify impacts and disseminate
information those are the kind
of language that terms and words
that that I usually very
resistant to shall identify
impacts in this that disseminate
information is too unclear to be
too uncertain to know what that
would mean what I question
subsection C. it says the
password show review of
information in shallow valuate
information and transmit the
findings to the governor and the
others once again I'm not really
sure what it means to evaluate
an out an application and then
transmit findings but again in
those those those types of
things in my mind do not belong
in law they block rapid Morial
we're asking a group you're
asking an agency to do things
but but we use us to task force
to evaluate application I don't
know what that evaluation with
me I don't know how and that
the rule or for what purpose
then it just says it shall
transmit its findings.
so the subsection do
says that the task force shall
recommend legislation I don't
think that belongs in log of the
we need a bill into law on the
books that says anybody shall
recommend legislation anybody
recommend legislation we don't
need a law to authorize somebody
recommend legislation and then
the subsection that says that
they shall meet as a it says
they show me as with the
committee at least once a year
this is a direct question for
Senators time were to somebody
answer it's as a show me with
the committee I can't figure out
which committee they're talking
about there because I don't see
a reference to a committee
elsewhere unless I'm missing
something so what it says the
task force on meet with the
committee what committee are we
talking about please and with
that question chair that's all
my comments for now thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Mondays.
Yeah it.
Of the other the really brief it
is the committee the referring
to is the radioactive hazardous
and and hazardous materials
interim committee this
particular law was created at a
time where we created the inner
provided radioactive hazardous
materials committee one of the
few interim committees created
in statute.
specifically to have.
Oversight that's probably too
strong a word but to keep an eye
on radioactive issues so they're
referring to reporting to the
Legislative radioactive
Committee finally madam chair
center hope you sports billion
supported it before but you can
certainly change your mind I
think up.
You left out some key language
when you're referencing your
read of the bill
it that I'd like to just clean
up which is the task force isn't
just evaluating some affects the
law the new language is very
clear on page six it is
considering public safety
environmental health
infrastructure transportation
projects it's got a very
specific criteria set of impact
yep not they.
Trujillo is this a good time for
you want to call I'm.
Video Lopez you are not muted.
Sh.
Okay so and the other thing is
is that
When it said.
Are you madam chair.
it's it's existing language of
the bill tracker just put it in
a different place it doesn't say
that they shall recommend
legislation to us that that they
may.
So that's existing language in
the law that they just re
ordered where they put that
but I think certainly open to
any cleanup of old statute but I
let's just a I don't see anyone
else unless manager would just
this bill is about looking at
the impacts of private
facilities that's all this bill
does and to report to us on a
more regular basis in the happen
which is never and this is just
about looking after New Mexico's
public well being it's I I can't
imagine that would.
Ever be a bad thing and that's
what this bill does and this is
Terry Sir stop this license
applications being considered is
for forty years.
And to ship and it will most
people think you could end up
here forever we're talking about
ten thousand cast being shipped
in our state not just once but
twice and again.
Keep in mind more is communities
county commissions tribal
governments comprising at least
forty percent of population
state in Mexico have passed
resolutions concern with this so
what this bill does it looks
after all they're interested in
so with that I'm I appreciate
the time thank you very much
Senator we're now back to the
committee what is the pleasure
of the committee on Senate bill
eighty two as amended.
I'm moving to pass.
Senator Lopez moves a new passes
there a second.
I second.
Center seconds.
When the of.
Secretary please call the vote.
No.
Senator night.
No ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes I'd like to
explain my vote.
Bill no.
Senator program.
Yes.
Senator.
Vote.
Senator committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
And the panic.
Yes.
For yes or no and one excused.
Okay Senator we do not have a
due pass on your bill it is of
late on the table I I move that
we move forward with the No REC.
The motion now for second motion
for I do and no recommendation
to move it on to the next
committee is there a second.
Second.
Senator Hamblen what oh I'm
sorry and before we go to your
motion Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Hamblen seconding and we
had people who wanted to explain
their vote on the do pass.
And who was that first madam
chair that was myself okay thank
you senator.
Madam chair thank you committee
you know I've I've known about
the issues with Holtec for quite
some time and and Senator
Steinborn and I've talked about
this extensively I do think I
and I appreciate the
conversations that have been
happening I do think that this
is an important additional
action as part of a multi
pronged approach to ensure that
our residents and our state are
safe and protected and that is
why I voted in support of this
bill I do feel that there are
other things that are happening
that will be able to come
together to make sure that our
residents are safe and that the
legislation that has been
promoted in this that gets put
forward so that we can protect
people so that is why I
supported this this bill madam
chair thank you.
Thank you.
So we have a motion or no REC to
move on from Senator Sedillo
Lopez and what's the second from
Senator Hamblen.
Yes okay thank you very much so
with the secretary please call
the vote on a No recommendation.
Senator surrounded no.
One yes Senator Neville no.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator so.
Excuse
Senate committee.
The vote.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Your.
Thank you.
And the panic.
Yes.
Four four again.
Okay senator
that we have like your bill on
the table thank you thank you
very much committee thank you.
We are moving on now do we have
Senator works with us I'm here
madam chair thank you very much
senator Wirth we have Senate
bill for the public we are going
on to Senate bill two twelve I
Interstate Stream Commission
members with Senator workers to.
Thank you madam chair Senate
bill two twelve
is very similar but different in
one sense from a bill that
passed the Senate in twenty
fifteen twenty to thirteen
passed the Senate in twenty
seventeen thirty two line both
times died in the house and then
finally in twenty nineteen
passed both chambers passed the
Senate thirty to ten house forty
six to sixteen but was pocket
vetoed and I think the issue
that caused concern
with the administration was we
were reporting to do two things
one change the make up of the
Interstate Stream Commission and
to change the appointments
attempting to balance out the
appointments so for would be
from the governor for from the
legislature and the state
engineer is appointed by statute
up this version of the bill
removes the change and the
appointments so all we're doing
is proposing to change the make
up of the state of the
Interstate Stream Commission
which is important for a couple
reasons are the existing
statute that created this the
Interstate Stream Commission
seventy two fourteen dash one
basically states that it's nine
members eight appointed by the
governor.
chairman six years in the north
member to be the state engineer
that will now stay the same.
Problem is that the appointments
are from the following under the
current law the members
appointed by the governor shall
be representative of major
irrigation districts or sections
and no to membership be
appointed from the same
irrigation district or section
so we've got an agency here that
whose whose mission has changed
since the statute was first
created where the eight members
are all from irrigation
districts or sections and
there's no.
Kind of.
Diversity of membership in.
In the legislation now why is
that important
we made a major change
to the rules of the power of the
state of the Interstate Stream
Commission in two thousand and
three and it's section twenty
two fourteen dash three point
one where we basically said that
in addition to the compact
compliance and issues that we've
always think of for the state
engineer we also stated and I'll
just read section at a it's the
intent of the legislature that
the Interstate Stream Commission
in collaboration with the office
of the state engineer and a
water trust board prepare and
implement a comprehensive state
water plan and then we list in
the statute a whole bunch of
things that the state water plan
needs to look at
and so this bill is basically to
provide some diversity in the
appointments
and under the bill as drafted
now which is a carry over from
twenty nineteen with one
exception that all highlight for
the the chair an amendment that
did not get put into this bill
which we need to discuss and
we'll figure out how to do that
but basically this bill will
have the state engineer for
representatives of irrigation or
Conservancy districts one
representative of the New Mexico
acequia Authority community
ditch one representative of a
New Mexico drinking water
utility one member of the New
Mexico water resources research
institute or civil or
environmental engineering
faculty member of U. M. or MSU
and one hydrologist with
expertise in New Mexico
groundwater resources or a
professional engineer with a New
Mexico consulting engineering
practice in water resources or
water utility engineering and
then there's some additional
requirements there about the
members requiring Senate
confirmation which is was added
at one point in this bills.
So long six year journey and
then no more than two from the
same irrigation or Conservancy
district or saying New Mexico
Indian nation tribe or pueblo no
more than three are from the
same congressional district and
no more than five from the same
political party and at least one
the appointments needs to be a
member of the New Mexico Indian
nation tribe or pueblo up so
that's what we're doing here
madam chair and I do want to
highlight and we do have an
amendment that was suggested by
Interstate Stream Commission I
think that you have but I also
want to highlight one additional
issue that was an oversight in
the drafting and of what we do
what we do this amendment first
and then I'll highlight that
issue something that got left
out that we could talk about how
best to get back in so that.
Senator Wirth I just sat on the
prior bill that we weren't going
to take any amendments on the
fly this amendment we had in
advance it is was sent out to
all of our committee members on
February tenth along with the
analysis that included this
amendment so
if you want to do a second
amendment we're gonna have to
roll you over or you can wait
till your next committee yeah
Madam I'm happy to wait to the
next committee it's just it's
truly an oversight it was a
Senate conservation amendment
from twenty nineteen.
The the the one that got left
out it was on page two line
seventeen after resources it
just added.
Insert quote who is a faculty
member of the New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology so that was in the
law from two years ago and for
some reason interestingly in
the.
Operation the amendments in
context on the website from
twenty nineteen it didn't catch
that amendment which is why I
think the drafter missed it but
I'm happy to put it on at the
next committee again I don't
think it's substantive and it
did come out of this committee I
just want to highlight that
issue being there thank you bye
you know if we can move beyond
it would be good so let's look
at this amendment could you
explain the amendment and then
I'll ask for a motion to doctor
I can.
madam chair this amendment again
was suggested by the Interstate
Stream Commission and it deals
with the replacements and
basically on page four line
nine.
It strikes the word replacements
and inserts include our
terms have expired and their
successors and then after
pointed it adds and qualified so
what does this do it just means
that the current appointees the
Interstate Stream Commission are
not going to automatically be
removed and so that makes sense
again
you know this will mean that
when their terms of expired and
then that there are their
successors have been appointed
by the governor and then
qualified which means cot
confirmation by the Senate
that's when the new provisions
will go when so that was a
suggested amendment I think it's
a friendly amendment I'd
certainly I have some of the
committee make a motion okay I
won't the amendment is their
second to the amendment.
Second.
Okay discussion from committee
members
may first go to the audience is
there any we're only talking
about the amendment to the bill
is there anyone in the public.
That wishes to speak for or
against the amendment.
If you would raise your hand
your yield little yellow hand.
Okay now let's go to the
committee for discussion or
questions on the amendment.
None of Ranko would you call the
vote on the amendment to Senate
bill two twelve.
In a disadvantage yes Senator
Gallegos.
Yes.
One as senator Neville yes
Senator pope.
Senator poke.
Yes thank you Senator souls.
Senator Schmedes.
Senator Smitty.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
And chairman Stefanics yes.
Okay so you have an adopted
amendments.
Now back on the amended bill
let's go to the public I have a
few opponents in a few
proponents.
So however why don't you go
ahead with the opponents.
Yes madam chair and then the
time limit.
well we have like.
Two people create so we can do
two minutes each okay.
First up to fifty Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning we
respectfully stand in opposition
to Senate bill two twelve
we feel that the bill and the
eligibility requirements stated
in the bill are extremely
restrictive we feel that these
requirements will make it
extremely challenging to find
qualified candidates for example
in section one seat it states
that appointed members have to
be qualified by no less than ten
years experience with New Mexico
water resources this requirement
alone will severely decrease
those that are eligible to serve
further this requirement may
limit the ability of our
beginning farmers and ranchers
who are the future of New
Mexico's vibrant agricultural
industry to have a voice in the
water issues that will affect
them.
Secondly Senate bill two one two
only allows for for members of
the I just need to be
representatives of irrigation or
Conservancy districts irrigated
agriculture plays a dominant
role in water use in the state
and the representation provided
for in Senate bill two one to
you is not reflective of our
irrigators and agriculturalist
needs we do support and I. SCO
or majority of the members
represent senior water right
users and these numbers are
geographically distributed
throughout the state thank you
for the opportunity to come in
this morning and thank you
senator Wirth for your work on
this bill.
Thank you next.
Lastly we have Rolf Peterson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee senator Wirth
well one of the thank you for
the opportunity to speak to you
about this bill
and I also want to thank the
Majority Leader for that
amendment that definitely helps
with regards to one of our
concerns right well to bill I in
looking at the bill and as you
heard if any say her moment ago
the the years of requirements of
gave me a lot of deposit my
staff in trying to look at
qualifications and and and and
what we really want there and I
really do
value the effort to find and
kind of make sure we have highly
qualified people and I would
tell you right now the
Interstate Stream Commission as
is good exist today is probably
some of the most highly
qualified individuals and water
in the southwestern United
States I mean we have one of our
members who was just nominated
to be Deputy Assistant Secretary
for water and science for the
department of interior that's
the leader political leader over
USGS in the bureau of
reclamation just a recognition
of the people of the the
governor appointed.
And what we wanted to do with
this group of the state engineer
for professional women women
four percent professional then
was to say if we have to follow
this bill would we be able to
still have those people on the
I. S. C. and and so we went
through that analysis by I sent
this around early this morning
because I was working on a late
last night and and even with all
the pieces that are they're just
assuming we continued four of
those members would have to be
eliminated and we have to find
somebody else
and I can go through the details
and important happy you don't
know the Majority Leader is very
busy but to talk through some of
those pieces because this gives
us a lot of concern you know
when we have a group of I just
see
commissioners that really is
unparalleled you know with in
New Mexico but it even other
states and their expertise and
they would not be able to be on
the Odyssey to meet the the
actual purposes that the
Majority Leader described that
gives us concern and we we
definitely like to talk about
that more for that reason we we
just stand opposed to the bill I
I would also bring up the term
of four years from my experience
gives me concern even even if
you have people who are very
very knowledgeable on these
subjects it takes two years or
so basically get them informed
about other parts of the state
it's not three and so you've
educated them and then maybe
they can be there you know maybe
not
and then finally just a Senate
consent piece I'm not sure
exactly where that came in and I
my concern and that is none of
the commissioners individually
have a decision making role is
solely of the commission that
does and by having that
additional requirement which I
think is a check that that's the
way I understood it and which is
fine.
But having that.
Okay Mister Peterson you went up
past two minutes but thank you
very much thank you.
I are there well first are there
any other opponents.
Any other opponents.
Let's go to the proponents and
there were two that were
registered.
There were two that were
registered in one withdrawal
withdrew from the speaking today
so we have Francis Gonzales.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you first to Peter Wirth for
sponsoring this I'm from the
Grant County area from district
twenty eight and district thirty
nine with the house and I just
wanted to thank you guys for
putting this bill together
because industry Stream
Commission here that presently
here's our water issues and
stuff is only made up of
ranchers and farmers there's no
diversity on the board and it's
only one way or another the
majority of them are Republicans
it's not spread out and even
there are any tribal people that
sit at the table and so it's
very one sided they've actually
have not allowed anyone or
change the board they have
continued to
To keep their positions for a
very long time so I really found
it refreshing that they
experience the professionalism
with a hydrologist and all the
different folks that are on it
and I think it's a good thing
thank you and I support it route
you text me or email me the
girls addresses right now I
don't know about his role as
this is
you're not muted.
Thank you.
Thank you Francis.
so
Is there any other.
Speaker our opponents
are you representing the
environmental law center I am.
Thank you my name is Gail Evans
I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
the environmental law center
supports this bill this bill
would ensure that the I. S. C.
has broad representation from
stakeholders within interest and
expertise in mortar and mortar
management across the state and
as senator Wirth said this is
particularly important now
because the Interstate Stream
Commission is charged with
developing a state worker plans
two I manage our war sure use
and the equitable distribution
of for sure across the state and
part of that plan by statute of
that plan is a must protect the
diverse cultures and customs of
of New Mexico and the people of
New Mexico so it's really
important that we ensure that we
have a safety is represented on
the Interstate Stream Commission
that we have a pueblos and and
native Americans represented on
the Interstate Stream Commission
and that we have irrigation and
Conservancy districts
Representative and I just want
to point out that in response to
one of the other comments made
this bill does say that there
would be for people from
irrigation and Conservancy
districts on this Interstate
Stream Commission yet they're
still only one person from an
acequia and only one guaranteed
place for a representative of
the Pueblo or native American
tribe I'm so I think that the
irrigation and Conservancy
districts are actually very well
Representative so in some we
need this broad representation
on the Interstate Stream
Commission to be sure that we
can develop a plan that's
appropriate for our state so
thank you.
Thank you representative we're
you wanna say anything before I
go to questions or comments from
committee yeah I would just like
to briefly respond
You know with all due respect to
Mister Schmidt Petersen the
amendment addresses your
concerns and this is part of the
problem I certainly appreciate
this administration and I have
confidence that you have
terrific commissioners in this
administration in twenty fifteen
I assure you that was not the
case and all this committee
needs to do is remember that he
law and again this became very
political and it was one sided
and it was driven by a policy
that I just do not think is miss
seven says reflects the statute
and I just with us I'll have
this conversation with the
governor that we pause for a
minute and understand
administrations change I
understand you didn't want to
take away her appointments fine
but this agency needs to realize
that it represents a whole
broad spectrum of water users
and the statute doesn't do that
just because this governors make
good appointments which I
certainly respect does not mean
that we shouldn't be looking at
this and so we're gonna continue
to have the discussion and I
just with with all due respect I
think the amendment addresses
your concerns and moving forward
we need to have balance because
that's what the statute requires
we've expanded the mission of
this of this organization in a
way that we have to have the
membership reflect that
diversity so that's just my
response manager.
Thank you we are now going to
committee members.
And I first have Senator
renewable.
Thank you madam chair of the
Senator Wirth could you just
refresh my memory are there any
defined qualifications on
interstate streams now could you
give got to go through those and
or is it just strictly a
governor's second shot at it in
terms of people out there yes so
solve all reduce chair senator
Neville the current statutes
seventy two fourteen dash one
which has been in place before
the two thousand three changes
to the mission and I'll just
read it to you because I think
that's that'll tell you there is
created the Interstate Stream
Commission consisting of nine
members eight appointed by the
governor for a term of six years
and the ninth member to be the
state engineer the members
appointed by the governor shall
be representative of major
irrigation districts or sections
and no to membership be
appointed from the same your
education district or section
the governorship point at least
one member of the New Mexico
Indian tribe or pueblo to the
commission the commission cells
elect a chairman and the state
engineer shall be the secretary.
So it's eight appointees who
come from irrigation districts
or sections with the with the
qualification at no two members
are from the same irrigation
district or section but no no
statewide diversity which we put
into the bill so they can all be
from southern New Mexico
and again it just gives the
governor huge discretion to pick
you know those folks from your
geisha districts
around the state and so that's
that's the existing law.
You're limiting it to four from
conservation to our for more
Conservancy districts.
Is that what I heard and I don't
have the bill in front of me I'm
sorry but to yeah we're.
Madam say kia.
For community initiatives yeah
most of our community ditches
but I think by definition their
safety is to.
Or whatever although we have one
small Conservancy district in
our county but to.
If I was on the heels of those
those would be community teaches
us and probably not a sake use
their program column that down
there that whatever they define
as and then the.
Again so we got.
I your Gators.
With state engineer what what
else we got just and then we got
three others under the bill one
representative of a New Mexico
drinking water utility that
provides at least five hundred
acre feet of water annually for
domestic use of one member of
the New Mexico water resources
research institute or civil or
environmental engineering
faculty of New Mexico State
University or the university of
New Mexico and one professional
hydrologist with expertise in
New Mexico groundwater resources
or a professional engineer with
the New Mexico consulting
engineering practice in water
resources or water utility
engineering so you're correct
Senator it's five of the members
are going to be directly
involved in Ag and then you're
putting three to professionals
and one from a drinking water
utility to again address some of
the diverse goals of the statute
with respect to the water plant
and what this Interstate Stream
Commission does I guess my only
a generally I like the concept
I guess my only concern is is.
My areas mostly community
ditches are sake use whichever
you want to define it
I suspect Silvercity is the same
way along the lower.
I suspect some of the all of the
everything north of a Santa Fe
is probably a safety is
So the Conservancy districts are
from somewhere south of Santa Fe
the lego.
You know Rio Rancho the down to
Los crucis that's the
Conservancy districts and I
suppose the Pegasus well.
That is the majority of no doubt
of your gated areas
but I'm a little concerned
there's a lot of outlying areas
maybe a little more
representation from a and the
safety although Indian tribes
they pick that up and just kind
of trying to balance it out make
sure kind of got a good balance
it's it's not bad a branch that
I think it's a certainly an
improvement so what are we doing
it yeah no I appreciate that Mr
chairman I think again it this
has been a there's been a ton of
work over the years by
committees and kind of shaping
this and that I would just
highlight you can you hit the
nail on the head it doesn't just
say a member of an acequia it
was specifically added or
community debt because we didn't
want to have that limitation and
you know I I would note Senate
bill I think I I looked and you
supported this bill in twenty
nineteen.
So again I I just think it's
it's it's an important step in
it and for a lot of reasons it
just make sure that there's a
diverse representation and
that's what I'm trying to do and
diverse not only in make up but
also around the state which
doesn't exist now in statute
that's all I have madam chair
thank you thank you senator
Neville next I have Senator
Sedillo Lopez followed by
senators committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I came
into this hearing
feeling positive about the the
bill
but then what what
Director Schmidt Petersen said
kind of troubled me a little bit
but the if I correct that you
said existing members would
continue.
So so he is the the the group
that he's gotten together that
so excellent right now would
continue.
Madam chair and center city
Lopez director Schmidt Petersen
asked me to put that amendment
in and that's the amendment we
passed and I think that
addresses exactly that issue and
and this is the challenge this
this governor has made
appointments that I personally
agree with the last governor did
not and so I just think though
that if we if we make this
change and make it proactive
after these terms with your six
year terms expire will be
dealing with this you know again
enough once the governor gets
reelected in the end of the end
of her term moving forward.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I think that I'm that's how I
understood the amendment and so
I think that amendment was
really important because when
you have a group of good people
you don't want to artificially
break them up what about the
four year term
I know because I've been on
somebody's commissions and
sometimes it takes a whole year
to understand what the
appropriate role is.
and and what are the limits of
the power you know.
I don't know sometimes it just
takes awhile.
So again it's a it's a it's a
valid discussion point I think
the concern and we saw this
before is that you have some
members have been on this
commission for very long periods
of time and you could have a
governor we frankly governor's
got a four year term so you
could have a governor at the end
of a four year term appointing
members to six year terms and in
effect taking away that turnover
so I just think these are the
checks and and and the
confirmation by the Senate was
added at one point in the
journey of this bill over the
years again as a check and it's
just an effort to make make sure
we're not we're not having wild
Policy in pendulum swings and
that's what's happened here
we've had a dramatic pendulum
swing from Interstate Stream
Commission that was driven very
politically pushing for
diversion on the law to a
totally different direction
because we had a change in the
governor I just think it's much
better policy to have some
stability and the four year term
gets us that the confirmation
gets us that diversity of
membership regional appointments
not just all from one place and
so I I again I think it's I
think this is something that
does make sense for those
reasons thank you for that and
then agency Rivera's point about
agriculture.
Because one of the things I
don't think the state does very
well or I I wish we did better
is prioritize the uses of water
for what's the most important to
our state and to our long term
future in sustainability and in
my opinion that's agriculture.
you know I I just think that as
global as
Climate change occurs we're just
gonna have to adapt you know has
wait I think two things we need
to try to stop it but also try
to adapt and the adoption as to
be with our water and our
adaptation has we with our water
and with agriculture interests
and so her point about
agriculture the other powerful
point.
and and I don't know do you do
you feel that that it.
That this might be to neutral
and debt and not prior tape
prior to prioritize agriculture
so madam chair I could center
city Lopez is Senate bill
pointed out five of the eight
members are going to be in from
agriculture four are gonna be
Conservancy districts and one
from acequia or community Dench
and I would just I would again
remind the committee that one of
the things the state water plan
which this body is tasked with
creating it's it the purpose of
that management tools to protect
the diverse customs culture
environment and economic
stability of the state you got
have diversity of the of the
folks on the board or you're
gonna end up with just a one
sided interpretation of what I
think for the reasons you say
with climate change is perhaps
the most important thing that
this commission does now I
realize they've got all the
legal compact and that's
important to but as we move
forward I think our state water
plan and how we do our planning
is going to be absolutely
critical and five of the eight
of the eight and the state
engineer will all be five of the
eight will be from the
agricultural community so I
think they'll have they'll have
a major quite frankly they'll be
able to control it just as it is
self argument can be made we're
not going far enough but again
this is the compromise we've
done okay thank thank you that's
very helpful thank you I
appreciate that.
Senator Schmedes please.
You said you want to speak on
this bill.
You're on mute.
Edie's madam chair I don't know
he might have stepped out.
For about I want to offer him
that opportunity.
Okay not hearing from Senator
Schmedes
is what is the pleasure of the
committee on Senate bill two
twelve as amended.
Senator bonded moves with you
passed.
There is a motion for it to pass
is there a second.
Thank you madam chair there is a
second from Senator Hamblen
could the secretary please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes yes.
I agree with yes.
Senator Hamblen yes.
And I'm sorry senator Neville
yes.
Senator pope yes Senator souls.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
In Germiston CENIC's yes
Thank you senator work you have
a unanimous vote on Senate bill
two twelve as amended thank you
madam chair members the
committee thank you
Senator souls.
Is letting me know if he's
coming back.
For this next final bill.
He staff okay okay Senator souls
cannot come back to the meeting
at the moment so committee
members we have completed our
agenda as far as we can go today
Saturday morning.
We have a rather
Robust agenda starting at nine
AM we have amendments to the
energy transition act that we
have the
Tracking new for us and then we
go on to ratepayer relief act
and some other things solar
energy credits etcetera so we
are expected on the floor and
eleven thirty please have a
great day and great weekend if I
don't see you and tell them
thank you so much
morning nine AM thank you.
J. yes Senator.
Was one of the committee members
trying to speak.
I guess not thank you bye.
