Good morning.
We're getting started a few
minutes late college eyes for
that.
Because.
I don't even have that strong
arm.
For those of you don't know what
we're talking about a brought
the gavel on Tuesday morning.
Our last week whatever.
So good morning our speaker this
morning is secretary Kenny from
New Mexico Environment
Department he's been asked to
come and give a little update
talk about initiatives concerns
for ten to fifteen minutes and
then to
a lot of time for the committee
to have questions and answers
the committee will start built
around nine thirty and we'll
start with senator Thoman as the
first bill senator Wirth and
come in around ten for his bill.
A reminder if you are one of our
have the kids who would like to
be consulted on bills we ask you
to sign up with my secretary and
at the front desk keeping a
little spreadsheet we lost
everybody's contact information
from.
Computers from one year to
another when the analysts do
analyses of bills they referred
to order some of the people's
names on here and contact you
for your comments are
information you'd like to
include so if you want to be on
our list please see my secretary
and.
I'd like to thank The New Mexico
AG community for sponsoring the
dinner that we had last week the
staff in the committee members
thank you very much we had
several groups about twelve
different groups who sponsored
that.
Okay without further ado my
forgetting anything Marian.
Okay.
Senator I just have a small
thing I'd like to introduce
Tiffany who donors from highland
University who's my insurance
for the day.
Thank you so much I also have
And in turn with me today is
shadow Alex Alexander see that
one which is which Martinez
Alexander Martinez who is a
student at New Mexico highlands
university so we welcome all of
our shadows and interns today.
So thank you and secretary Kenny
let's proceed.
Good morning madam chair good
morning on a real man members of
the committee it's going to be
in front of you this morning for
your interns that are here we
are hiring at the New Mexico
environment department.
at.
Let's hope not as of now no
madam chair and and Senators
again happy to be here and I
hope madam chair that that you
do not have to break the gavel
at least me this morning
for those who might be following
at home or in the audience and
have their phone with them we
have a a fact sheet on our
website that's the fact sheet
that was distributed to you this
morning it's a little budget
heavy because we prepared it for
House Appropriations and Senate
finance but I'm gonna be going
to use it because in our
department you really can't
segregate and many probably you
can't segregate out policy from
graduated and graduated from
policy so I will go through all
the numbers but I will use it to
kind of orient our discussion
and then highlighted number of
things that we're working on so.
With that madam chair
members of the committee you
know the New Mexico environment
department is one that many of
you are familiar with but I
still find that even though
we're before you often there are
aspects of our department that
just aren't always on the top of
people's minds
but ubiquitous our department is
our mission to protect public
health and the environment so
any of our programs go into that
direction
and if you look at page one of
the fact sheet we we our core
values are science innovation
collaboration and compliance and
that's what we strive to
implement our mission with every
day
And the mission is as many of
you know for things about we
focus on Climent we focus on air
quality water all kinds of water
surface water wetlands drinking
water ground water we focus on
solid and hazardous waste we
also focus on radiation control
making sure that people are not
exposed to radiation we
administer some programs for the
department of energy where we
fund where we hand out payments
for those who have been
affected by radiation at our
national labs we also work on
the waste isolation pilot plant
and deal with radiation issues
in that in that direction
but many of you also probably
realize at this point we focus
on food we focus on food
manufacturing Hentze
manufacturing cannabis edibles
all the septic tanks in the in
the state of New Mexico when you
have a real estate transaction
our our work through our
department
the list goes on and on madam
chair of the programs that we
have that kind of fall into the
mission and values of our
department.
I will go again too far into our
budget other than to say that
the funding for our department
is about twenty percent or less
general fund and about eighty
percent federal funds or state
permitting in in an either
direction whether it's general
fund or our ability to raise
fees through permits are yeah
permit fees we always need the
legislature support in those
areas because if we don't have
general fund and we're really
relying more on permit fees than
some of our permit fees are
capped by legislative statute so
we're always in this balancing
act in trying to
raise enough revenue for us to
implement our programs not only
effectively but equally and
equitably across the state in
New Mexico.
If you look at page two of the
fact she what I was going to
just really highlighted on this
page is the blue box and saying
what's at stake and again our
our department is really one
which I don't take lightly that
we have a big influence over the
economy of the state and in that
way we're focused on a lot of
initiatives that bring jobs and
a more of a robust clean economy
to the state of New Mexico so
things that we're really
focusing on their have to do
with our climate and air quality
initiatives and we work hand in
hand with our sister agency
energy minerals and natural
resources as well as economic
development to attract and
retain some of the the companies
that really will help us race to
the top on the setting and
meeting our climate goals
Madam chair members of the
committee we also are one of the
agencies that's going to be
administering significant
amounts of the bipartisan
infrastructure and inflation
reduction act funding that's
coming to the state those are
both formula grants meaning all
states get them.
We have to have the capacity
internally not only staffing but
our business operations to
support the quick pass through
of that money to communities
a lot of that gets hung up with
the fact that stem type jobs are
hard to for the state to to
recruit and therefore we always
are in need of engineers and to
the extent that we can't find
engineers were contracting out
those jobs
and again it's we're paying more
to contract out those jobs then
we would had we if we had the
ability to to
Administer that funding those
projects internally but I'm I'm
very concerned that with the
flood of money coming to the
state of New Mexico in terms of
formula grants under B. I. L.
and I are a that we're going to
have
You know we're not going to be
able to rise to the occasion of
getting that money those shovel
where the projects need to be
shovel ready and and then
funded.
We're also the agency which on
on behalf of many federal
agencies be it air hazardous
waste solid waste OSHA which I
forgot to mention early earlier
we received large amounts of
federal dollars from our federal
partners to administer programs
in our department and again
those we have the the contours
of state statute and we have the
contours of receiving federal
money from the federal
government which also kind of
restricts how we can spend money
and and it minister those
programs madam chair members the
committee at sticking in the
blue box here I'd be remiss if I
didn't point out that we are
have a backlog of enforcement
cases so we had we can get out
into the field in many of our
programs we find where there are
we provide a lot of complaints
so it's not all bad news but we
find it many instances where
there's non compliance and then
we are faced with the decision
of what to community which media
do we want to work on first
because we don't have all the
technical and legal resources we
need to educate those matters.
so.
Madam chair members of the
committee what I was going to
also point out to you and I'm
I'm going to end my presentation
rather quickly so that you can
ask questions because again we
have this many programs from and
this many legislators from
around the state there may be
areas you want to talk about
more specifically than what I'm
covering
But in terms of our workload
snapshot and I'm now on page
four of of our hand out in terms
of our workload snapshot what
we're doing in our department is
really trying to right size an
understanding of what our
employees are facing on a day to
day basis meeting how many
regulated community members are
there as a ratio of how many
staff people do we have to
implement those programs so when
you look at our ocean program
you know and you look at all the
businesses that are covered by
OSHA
it would take us about twenty
four years to visit each of
those facilities it's not
necessary that we visit every
facility for sure we don't I
don't think that's the case but
when you look at our high
incident of it industry these
are the this is where I like to
phrase it as these are the these
are the industry where people go
to work in the morning and they
may not come home or people go
to work in the morning and they
lose a limb and a digit or they
get an occupational illness or
something to that effect those
would be oil and gas cannabis
film and and a few other
industries but we're working
trying to focus on those to make
sure that New Mexicans go to
work and come home for work
With petroleum storage tanks
madam chair those of the leaking
underground and above ground
storage tanks that we try to
prevent from leaking by visiting
those and then when they are
leaking we try to administer
funds when there's no owner
operator to make sure they're
being cleaned up.
Just an interesting aside here
and I feel like this is of may
be of interest to Senate
conservation certainly to our
budgeting friends.
What we're using thirty percent
of our petroleum storage tank
money for other programs and you
might save yourself are you
disclosing something to us right
now I'm not the legislature
approved that we did do that or
do they prove that in like the
twenty fifteen twenty seventeen
time frame when revenues were
really low in the state so we
started diverting about thirty
percent of our funds that clean
up the trillium storage tanks to
other programs I find it ironic
to say the least that we've
never reinstated that money and
what that means is we're not
looking at those petroleum
storage tanks the way we need to
and yet we're putting that money
towards a baiting spills from
patrol patrol into a storage
tanks so you follow that logic
we've moved we've given this
department the ability to move
money from petroleum storage
tanks to cleaning up groundwater
I think we should be preventing
the leaking of petroleum storage
tanks not using it to clean up
money to clean up groundwater.
Those are the decisions the
department had to make being
that the funding was cut never
restored.
Again I'll just highlight one
other program for you before ice
sunset my remarks here which is
I I really want to highlight our
construction programs bureau
this is the bureau that puts
money into your communities
they're managing our engineers
are managing about a hundred and
twenty six projects per person
so when you look at that we they
take all the the clean water
state revolving fund money that
is zero point zero interest rate
loan that we can also do with
come at a grant component to
that
we lend that money out to
municipalities for their it
water infrastructure projects
and we administer all your
capital outlay so whenever you
make a capital outlay assignment
or you have capital outlay for a
community that is water related
it often comes to the New Mexico
environment department so we're
administering clean water SRF
we're administering capital
outlay and here comes the flood
of the bipartisan infrastructure
money coming into the state I'm
already managing a hundred and
twenty six projects per person
we're already have a contract on
board where we're gonna quickly
outpaced the the revenues I have
to put in that contract of
engineers work on those programs
so again this is what the
reality of what I'm trying to
plan for which is
a lot of water needs a lot of
money and the staff is going to
be the pinch point for us to
administer those funds.
It's not all bad news at all
we're very optimistic at the
environment department are
vacancy rate is down to nineteen
percent we've instituted and not
a lot of re retention and
recruitment and incentives I
think we're probably the most
progressive state agency when it
comes to recruitment and
retention and if if my colleague
here and I forgot to introduce
my colleague I apologize pers
Basil's are deputy cabinet
secretary and he's acting deputy
cabinet secretary and also
permanent general counsel.
If Bruce were to identify
somebody wanted to work at the
environment department and we
hired that person Bruce would
get a day off and that person
who got hired get five days off
right out of the back starting
to join our department so we
have a lot of recruitment and
retention programs in place we
are one of the only agencies
that has a delegation from the
state personnel office to
administer all of our HR
transactions internally what
does that mean that means we've
instead of implementing about
our processing about six hundred
and some odd HR transactions a
year going through CPO we're now
at two thousand six hundred and
six to two thousand two hundred
sixty two transactions meaning
because we're doing this
internally we're way more
efficient and in processing our
H. R. actions and again I think
that is reflective again of
getting our vacancy rate down to
nineteen percent from twenty
three twenty four percent just a
few months ago.
so madam chair there's probably
a lot of other things that I'm
not talking about but whether
it's whether it's our oil and
gas rules whether it is the
waste isolation permit pop
pilot.
Waste isolation pilot plant
permit.
renewal whether that is P. I see
issues that are happening
throughout the state whether
that is suing Los Alamos to
Hey.
What you're perceive has the
issues with we get with getting
that spill cleaned up.
Madam chair Senator want your
support of our department and to
thank you for the question
with respect to cleaning up the
P. by issue one from filed a
lawsuit so fast forward madam
chair Senator here we are now in
twenty twenty three the defense
department has started cleaning
up offsite.
Sorry correction they started
cleaning up on site not offsite
And and at the same time
the technology to remove P.
foster groundwater and and then
collected and dispose of it is a
challenge admittedly that is a
challenge and how clean is clean
madam chair Senator that what we
can say suffice it to say is
that if you remove it extracted
contain it.
We using the best technology you
can that's all we can ask for at
the moment
that is unfortunately not what's
happening offsite which is why
folks like highland dairy had to
had to euthanize sixty five
hundred cattle and madam chair
Senator you know that that
created its own problem for the
state of New Mexico because we
have P. five slate in cal
carcasses I've never seen that
in twenty five years of
implementing hazardous waste
laws.
So where do we put those
carcasses and right now they're
being managed on site and and
will be then excavated out but
just to and the answer to your
question the challenges are.
Related to.
A recalcitrant polluter.
And.
Technology that would be
solvable.
If we could get to the table
with the department of defense
in a meaningful and earnest way
thank you just a little quick
follow up does it look like the
EPA is going to pass the PPS
regulations.
In a reasonable amount of time
work because that's been
dragging on for quite awhile
yeah madam chair and then
Senator it has been dragging on
for a while so EPA has a rich
people just roadmap and there's
a number of regulations little
be promulgated from that one is
drinking water two because of
our because of the our governor
and because of the leadership of
our agency we've convinced EPA
to regulate P. Fosse's a
hazardous substance they weren't
planning to do that but for our
petition they are now planning
to do that rulemaking this year
and they've committed to us that
it will get done this year so
between the drinking water
standard the
hazardous substance standard
that they're coming we we are
getting tools finally that will
give not only us a destination
to tell people how to clean up
we give them some certainty
about how clean is clean.
Thank you madam chair you spoke
of will make it and I don't want
I don't know if other people
have questions but I did want to
commend the department also in
the rulemaking and the
involvement of all of the
stakeholders and and
And just hope that we can ensure
that those rules stay in place
that helps businesses have some
assurity and also have what they
need to comply with and also
work to clean up the air so that
that's really important thank
you madam chair thank you other
questions comments from
committee members.
So a secretary I'd like to know
in terms of your top positions
in your department are you
missing some deputies are bureau
division directors of your case.
madam chair yes we have
a deputy cabinet secretary
position vacant but fully
occupied by a qualified
individual right here in an
acting capacity we are also
Working to fulfill our HSD
director
because our other deputy cabinet
secretary Daniel Gilliam was
promoted from that position As
T. director to.
the other deputy cabinet
secretary position so we have
that to fill.
And and our resource protection
division director which is a
really important role that that
is the role that oversees all of
our federal facilities
especially the P. five us DO we
DO do installations etcetera
we've got conducted interviews
and we're looking to fill that
position any minute.
Okay thank you very much any
further comments or questions.
Well thank you very much we
appreciate your coming this
morning and sharing this with us
I hope we can advocate for you
with the appropriators to fully
fund your department we
appreciate that thank you madam
chair thank you for being here.
Is Senator Thoman in the room.
Barbara could go see if he's
coming.
Give Senator Tallman this income
we are waiting for senator Wirth
until ten and then we would jump
to Senator him on.
Which billing here for Senator
Tomlinson realty Bill.
Have you spoken to him this
morning to know if he's here
madam chair yes we spoke with
him and he knows who's supposed
to be here by.
Okay.
We were told he's on his way so
we'll wait a moment.
So for those on the web and on
soon we are moving to Senate
bill one sixty four.
Yeah.
But confirm that he's coming
otherwise we're going to.
So if you're reading your
cruise.
Public notice from the general.
No money occupant.
Excuse.
Wait another minute or two and
then one.
Let's do this
we are have moved ahead to our
third bill which is Senate bill
one sixty five local choice
Energy act center of Senator hit
senator Tom and you just be it
come on we are moving to the
next bill.
Okay we are on Senate bill one
sixty four.
Senator Tallman.
To explain the bill.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
And
welcome to conservation.
I lost my phone so I'm a little.
A different sorts looking for my
phone.
Good morning everyone sorry I'm
late I'm looking for my phone.
I thank you for
Schedule this in a timely manner
fairly early in the session.
And
I have with me
A
Expert witness who is the deputy
commissioner of operations is
the Land Office.
And his name is Santa Fe Stuart.
And he has a.
The good law degree.
So
Madam chair and members of the
committee with again thank you
for this opportunity
This bill this is pretty
straightforward in one sentence
or less increases the oil and
gas royalty rate from twenty
percent to twenty five percent.
Like other types of lease
agreements the specific terms of
the oil and gas leases are set
by statute.
Unlike Texas under current law
the royalty rate for State Land
Office oil and gas as I said
before is capped at twenty
percent this bill would increase
that cap the twenty five percent
for most productive oil and gas
parcels.
So.
Sure the scent of.
This would have to budget.
One would not only been
incentive to
To a cap is the
And it can capture the.
The gas that's the the methane
gas also have the added benefit
of increasing of revenues for
the state.
This change this change would
only apply to new leases that
would be put us in line with
what Texas charges twenty five
percent.
In New Mexico last updated this
right fifty years ago.
Hard to it's hard to imagine.
We're just a Texas is that the
twenty five percent since the
nineteen nineties.
So you know what what's so
ironic about that Texas is very
County is so big so huge is so
successful that they could
probably lose all the revenue
from the oil and gas and I would
highly skip a beat for as of we
lost our revenues overnight
would probably have to go out of
business.
So you'll notice that the
analysis doesn't include an
estimate of revenues.
And there's some reasons for
that number one the number of
releases it would go.
it's difficult to predict the
number leases that would go to
auction number two the V.
difficult to determine when they
will begin production number
three obviously the price of oil
and gas is
Is that goes up and down number
four
It is hard to predict what to
new technologies would have on
the on the production levels so
as you know this madam chair the
Thank you Mr has a fiduciary
duty to earn money for our
public schools and other
institutions.
And it just doesn't make sense
to prohibit the state from
charging the market rate for is
essentially a sale of of public
resource.
So with that madam chair.
maybe happy answer any
questions and and and thank you
again for a.
Scheduling this in a timely
manner thank you thank you Mr
Stewart would you like to say
thank you madam chairman my name
is certainly Stewart deputy
commissioner of operations I'll
be very brief I just wanted to
hit on a couple of quick points
I this bill would keep us
competitive you know were in
competition with in the Permian
basin with Texas they've already
got a a twenty five percent
royalty rate as the senator
mentioned you know this is a
public resource this is in a tax
bill this is a royalty bills so
basically what we're saying is
if an oil company leases from
the Land Office the oil company
get seventy five percent of that
public resource we just want to
school kids to get twenty five
percent rather than twenty
percent and I think that's a
really important point because I
think royalties and taxes
sometimes get a little bit
confused lastly I would just
reiterate the commissioner has a
fiduciary responsibility our job
at the land offices and to make
money for public institutions
and this is a very unique area
hi we don't have it anywhere
else in the law where the
legislature is put in statute
you can't charge more than this
for oil and gas it's it's
treated differently and we think
that we should be able to put
out tracks on the market have
companies if we put it at twenty
five they will bid and they will
get the lease and they will
produce so we're not sure why it
would make sense to cap us at a
lower rate than the market will
bear with act madam chairman
happy to answer any questions
the committee may have thank you
very much we're going to go
first to the audience could I
see a show of hands of those who
oppose this bill.
Okay and there are is there are
three people online who oppose
could I see a show of hands of
those people who in the audience
who support this bill.
Thank you and I also have seven
people online to support this
bill so we'll go to three people
on this side three people on
this site to speak for in
support then we'll go to the
opposition but in order to be
you must come to the middle of
the room so that the microphones
can pick you up and this is for
courtesy to the people who are
watching on the webcast because
they cannot hear when you speak
from your seats so whoever would
like to speak please come to the
middle.
First come first serve six
people.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and you have to
push the button Good Morning
madam chair members of the
committee and my senator thank
you so much for taking the time
and thank you to the sponsor and
the the land commissioner I want
to flag once again that oil and
gas extracted off public lands
belongs to the public and is
being extracted for the benefit
of private industry having a
failed fair royalty rate is fair
to the environment and fair to
our kids the only measure of
where oil and gas operators
extract is the price of oil and
gas not differentiation between
jurisdictions in their royalty
rates or anything else so having
fair royalty rates for a
publicly held goods is only fair
thank you thank you next please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Charles good markers speaking on
behalf of natural resources
defense council action fund this
morning you've heard from that
previous testimony that about
the competition that Texas
charges a higher rate this would
just put us on par with them
and also twenty on the FIR
that's widely believed private
landowners actually get more
than twenty five cents or twenty
five percent
most importantly I think in the
F. I. R. is that a notes that
have a lack at least doesn't
attract bidders at the twenty
five percent right the state
land office can then put that
lease back up to bid the next
month that the lower twenty
percent right so there's
actually really you know if
there's a case where the
at the rate seems too high to
make it profitable it goes back
to the current right so there's
no impact at all should be an
impact on development thank you
thank you.
Thank you madam chair you have
to pushing the button and
anybody who's going to speak and
we three more people can speak
on this if they wish before we
go to the gym thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Paul Gibson I'm the co
founder kretek Our Democracy a
five oh one C. for.
Profit statewide organization I
think I speak in support of this
bill it just makes no sense
whatsoever to say that the gas
and oil industry needs that five
percent more than we do and
yet that we will hear from them
that the sky will come following
if we had this five percent to
their lease rates and they're
certainly not going to flee to
Texas where they get the same
lease right so I I'd encourage
the committee to use their
discretion to vote for this and
get it to the governor's desk so
we can enjoy more rock benefit
from this Dr thank you very much
thank you very much is there
anybody else here who wishes to
speak in support.
Okay online I have six people.
You needed to come to the middle
please and you need to line up
if you would wish to speak.
This meeting if you can't tell
go.
The.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
semi callin be Clemente energy
advocate with conservation
voters Mexico and I want to
support I called in the room and
the sponsor and the expert and I
hope you also support this bill
thank you thank you very much
one last call supporters.
Okay on to the list of people
online we're gonna hear from
three people let's start with
Jessica Brooks.
If you'd like to make a comment
miss Brooks.
Well I done I didn't realize I
had my hand up or anything
But I would make a comment yes I
agree with what
what previous speaker said that
A request in support of this
bill
The gas and oil industry can
surely
You know take up the extra
money is needed for this.
Thank you thank you very much
Barbara Calif.
You hear me yes.
Okay thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico the
league has a position on land
use and part of that is that the
state legislature should ensure
that the state land commissioner
has the support needed to
maximize profits and minimize
administrative costs while
protecting the environment and
preserving the long term value
of the land there for we support
SB one six four thank you very
much thank you and the last
supporter we're gonna hear from
is ray Allen Smith.
Hello and thank you for a moment
to to chat about this as
previous speakers have noted
there is going to be opposition
to this bill saying that our
producers don't want to pay the
extra five percent and that they
will pull their business and
take it elsewhere well there
really is no elsewhere and there
the other than taxes and for us
to not be charging the same
amount
in lease rates for than Texas is
is surely
disrespectful to our citizens in
New Mexico thank you thank you
very much we're going to go
online for opposition and we
have Sarah fitzgerald and then
we will come to the room for
opposition.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee on serica
sterile senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce our state's revenues
are at an all time high enabling
us to pursue all manner of
investments for state and local
communities including projects
and programs that will serve New
Mexicans for decades to come and
as we all know a large portion
of these revenues come from oil
and gas projections show these
revenues should continue at this
level for around another ten
years but that's at the
conditions remain right if we
want to keep this oil and gas
money flowing in it has to be
profitable for oil and gas
producer's to meaning we must
take great care and the kinds of
costs imposed on the industry.
Jumping from a royalty rate of
twenty percent to twenty five
percent and a right would also
be applied to wasted oil and gas
at that absolutely increases
costs for producers this bill
would take us in the wrong
direction increasing costs for
the industry that sustains our
state and we urge the committee
to table it thank you.
Thank you very much okay coming
to the audience of.
There were a few hands of people
who oppose this bill if you'd
like to speak speaker to please
come to the middle.
And you need to hold the Mike
and push the button down.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Winchester I'm the
executive director of the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico I want
to make it clear we don't
represent big oil Representative
little oil a smaller producers
that independently work in live
here in New Mexico just a couple
of points I want to make today
first of all.
Want to thank the the state land
office further communication
over the course the past year in
specifically in recent weeks on
this particular bill we
appreciate them reaching out and
talking to us about that that
being said we do respectfully
oppose for several reasons The
New Mexico already carries one
of the highest overall tax
burdens on oil and gas
production when compared to
other states specifically Texas
and this is especially true when
you add up all the additional
various taxes that we pay
the end this is in addition to
the already existing royalty
rates that are are in place here
in New Mexico a royalty increase
does disproportionately affect
smaller producers and
independence of which there are
hundreds in the state in these
are not the producers that drill
in least dozens of wells over
the course of the year in fact
these are producers that maybe
have one or two well projects
every couple of years and as
such they do operate on thin
budgets in this increase will
make it more difficult for them
to maintain solvency and finally
I just want to point out that
this bill proposes to collect
royalties on vented and flared
gas in I just wanna make it
clear for folks who aren't where
it's an operationally impossible
to not experience these
activities during the drilling
and completion of a well and
even the state's new methane
waste prevention rule
acknowledges this by not
counting that methane that is
produced in that immediate sixty
day period now this bill does
acknowledge this fact that
excuse me at the bill itself but
the State Land Office has public
knowledge this back to us that
there will be exemptions in
application waivers potentially
in place but it is a process
that does differ from the waste
prevention rule in in short in
writing this bill does not offer
those guard rails so for this
reason we do stand in respectful
opposition thank you thank you
very much anyone else here in
the audience who would like to
oppose this bill.
Okay committee members questions
comments.
Senator Cervantes will go up for
New Jersey.
This bill this bill presents a
challenge for me because it I
know it doesn't go to Judiciary
should and I'll talk to
leadership about trying to have
it do that the the focus of all
of the presentation and debate
discussions of ours should there
be a higher royalty rate or not
and hi I understand and agree
with the higher royalty rate the
problem is all of the legal
language that's being added to
this bill as you language that
frankly.
Is nonsensical so when when on
page seven it says the lease the
lessee shall use all reasonable
means as defined by rule to
prevent the underground or
surface waste when you say
something like all reasonable
means that's that it has no
meaning what all reasonable
means means to one person is
what means to a different person
so we create a law that says
Alessi shall use all reasonable
means you're just gonna have
litigation right the lessees
gonna say that is I use all
reasonable means of the state's
gonna say no you didn't and so
we all have a lawsuit experts
will disagree about that so we
don't use ambiguous terms like
that in statute we can so to say
you shall use all reasonable
means that's frankly meaningless
then when it goes on to say that
you use all reasonable means to
prevent underground service
waste of oil and gas it goes on
to say avoid the physical waste
venting or flaring we say to
avoid something again once again
what does that mean was me to
avoid something doesn't mean you
can't have any of this for sure
you try to keep that to a
minimum or was it means so
that's another and an ambiguity
that really has no definition
again when you're writing laws
we try to be very specific very
very clear and here of there's
just an abundance of of a lack
of of clarity and I know that's
not been the subject madam chair
members the committee that
focuses been all the rage in the
right and again I'm conflicted
because I I may very well
support raising the right but
adding things into law that
really don't have definition and
meaning ambiguity are the things
that that is lawyer we try to
avoid the that language on that
page seven goes on to say the
the lessee shall pay a royalty
as provided on all on all on all
fifty all oil or gas wasted
including gas vendor flared
spills of uncontrolled releases
staffed rather losses you know
how's the state going to assess
or royalty on and control
releases that in other lawsuits
and we say other losses.
And what that means right so how
you gonna charge royalty on
something as ambiguous as other
losses I don't know of any and
that'll food of Italy to
litigation I'm sure as well to
so again just lack of of really
very poor drafting and they want
to go on state Lassen Services
upon written request the lessee
by the lessee the lessor in its
sole discretion may waive the
royalty.
I can imagine government
whatever do that you know you
never say here's our law but if
you ask us not to have to comply
with the law or the role to we
may decide on a case by case or
on any given day to waive that
that's not a law that's that the
law is you know you will drive
fifty five miles an hour you
will get a ticket to pay a fine
so when you say you have to pay
these royalties but we may
decide you don't have to in our
sole discretion as we shape and
fit that's not a law that's
that's of and frankly it's a
aspiration or it's a nice
thought of but it's not
something that really can be
understood enforced plan for for
contemplates so you know I I
hope that the maybe I can work
with the Sanchez and maybe we
can get this through you should
not though I building would
imagine a number of amendments
on the floor of the Senate and I
I would hope they would get this
to a place where it complex is
what you're trying to accomplish
senator I think which is
addressing the royalty but but
with the ambiguities and I'm
clarity in this language and the
fact this is not going to
Judiciary receipt as you
probably gathered quite a few
problems with the way this is
written thank you madam to Madam
chair and thank Senator please
go ahead.
Thank you for your time and
Senator the my expert witness
wants to make a comment.
Madam chair Senator you know I
appreciate those comments I
think a couple of you know quick
points one as you can see in
that provision there's
rulemaking authority and that's
generally where we would you
know find some of the degree of
specificity which would be a
public vote comment process
where we would I I try to lay
out some of that definition
which is you know a common
process all right number two
some of the terminology is
actually common in the oil and
gas context you mentioned loss
for example Texas all right they
charge for loans hi number three
and this was you know
highlighted and and on the
independent side where you made
a comment about well it's
necessary often we absolutely
agree and they're going to be
instances where you're you're at
an initially put in the well
where you you have to flare hi
and that would be prescribed in
rural and and and would indicate
when it's not appropriate now
the objective of what this is
trying to get at is simply the
past practice of companies just
wasting the resource and as long
as they if they were venting and
flaring you never have to pay
royalty because it wasn't
actually making it to market the
way our lease was actually
drafted or is drafted so what
we're trying to do is say listen
if there's a reason hi I to vent
and flare you know as prescribed
in rule I I that's okay that's
okay we're not going to you know
see cruelty and that's why you
have some discussion there in
terms of waving if there is no
reason
We don't need to deal with it
and the last thing I'd say on
this is we don't think this is
going to be a major issue with
the methane rule in place
venting and flaring is not a big
issue anymore the reason why we
have it is because this is
what's going to be in place for
many years to come we haven't
changed this lease since the
seventies so a future OCC a
future governor could change it
and we wanted to have a
provision in here that could
capture that but in the short
term I think the methane rule
really frankly deals with the
issue sorry to be long winded
but I appreciate that manager
and so of all start with your
first point you said that the
language here provides for
rulemaking the way we usually do
that statute Weasley's empowers
the agency to make rules here
what what what this says really
though it's different than what
you explain says the lessee
shall use all reasonable means
as defined by ridge Commission
rule to prevent the underground
or surface way so we given
rulemaking authority to prevent
the underground or surface waste
I agree with that is in here but
that's not giving the commission
authority rulemaking authority
over all the other provisions
here it says very specifically
the the the commission may slide
rural adopt rules to prevent the
waste of which is and then and
then the Senate sense that's
that's the extent that
rulemaking authority and it
changes the topic and goes on to
say then the lessee shall pay
royalties on wasted and so forth
so the rule making authority
this language would not give
that rule making authority
beyond what that is which is to
prevent the way so I would
disagree with you about the
rulemaking authority and I would
expect that the industry would
probably litigate that issue.
I would about this the Terry
Representative Powdell litigate
the commission's Authority that
becomes a big issue whether the
legislature empower the
commission to adopt by rule and
and whatnot so you know that
that'll bags if this was to
passed in its present form I
would expect there to be quite a
bit a litigation over that issue
I would certainly do so the the
you made a reference to the
Texas charging for loss I'd be
really really shouldn't center
you want to see what have taxes
to find what that is right
because all we're saying here is
you charge royalty this is the
words in the statute that would
be adopted by this any other
loss of that that may have a
meeting that's what I hear you
to be saying is that has a
meeting in the industry what any
other loss means to me an and
not an industry person when you
say any other loss that's pretty
ambiguous pretty pretty broad
but if you tell me that that's
understood in the industry what
that means then you won't have a
problem if that's if that's
ambiguous then you'll have a
lawsuit against you have a
construction by court to what
what that language meant when we
adopted it as a as a legislature
so again I met a gentleman of
August down in animal Act trying
to reserve these kind of things
where Judiciary Committee the
bills through this committee go
to Judiciary where we get a
chance to are these things out
but that's one of the first
things I look for centers this
bill would sure it's not so I
thought would be important to
bring them up here in maybe at
least alert these issues to my
colleagues into the all the
people
There are probably differences
differences on the lease terms.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator and it is Mr chair
I just know historically we've
been a lot more burdensome on
tax such on trying to get this
apples to apples I was actually
looking at also on page seven
but my question for rate was
You'd stated earlier Mr chair
Senator and Mr the
if there's a least the did not
go out at the twenty five
percent you can bring it in at
twenty percent is that premium
versus regular tracks is that
how you anticipate that madam
chair Senator this is a very
confusing area so first what we
do is we categorize areas in the
state as restricted or non
restricted that's the first
level.
Has kind of the inverse meaning
of what you would think
restricted as where oil and gas
activity usually occurs and non
restricted it is somewhere like
Santa Fe right restricted
Permian San Juan then within the
restricted areas you connect or
you're gonna further categorize
them as regular and premium and
it depending on whether they're
in regular or premium you're
gonna have different leases from
exploratory discovery to
development the only lease we're
talking about here today is the
development lease which
corresponds with premium
tracks so basically the best of
the best so the range for this
in the development lease is
between eighteen seventy five
percent and twenty percent now
we're extending back to twenty
five for the cap but you would
still have the least from
eighteen point seven five to
twenty five percent but it's a
very complicated kind of
division but that's the
distinction.
Thank you for that and and I.
I understand some of it and and
I do understand as can be called
up complicated
Madam chair and senator
My colleague was asking about
the venting flaring
can you tell me what the
difference in your bill is
compared to the OCD rags and
twenty twenty one Madam chair
Senator I great question so
we're really looking at it from
completely different angles
they're looking at it from an
environmental standpoint and a
waste standpoint in terms of the
resource where you know they're
trying to ensure that operators
are regulated in a particular
way to reduce venting and
flaring
the angle that we're looking at
it is is from a revenue
standpoint so you know when
we're it would not be
reinventing the wheel telling
operators the circumstances that
they can or cannot that or flare
up we would just be saying under
these circumstances we're gonna
charge royalty so if it is
necessary for operations to put
in the wild we're not gonna
charge what royalty but if they
were venting and flaring and it
was not operationally necessary
and then we would want the
school to to get paid for.
Madam chair and senator I
appreciate that and and that
sort of bring president next
question so.
You're talking about basically
you're looking at this not being
a punitive bill more remedial on
on getting receipts back up and
I appreciate that matter fact we
had the
Commissioner there the other day
seated there and I brought up
the whole tech issue so I
explained to her thurs somewhere
in the range of fifty billion
dollars with the B. rules she's
off of Holtec so I appreciate
and I'll leave and with this if
you're looking bring revenues
and for the oil and gas got to
be trying to consider the kids
in the whole tech decision to so
are you thank you thank you very
much Senator we have center city
Lopez and Senator renewable.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair I really
want to emphasize the point that
you just that bit of madam chair
that was just made and that is
that Texas charges is twenty
five percent on the gross and we
charge our twenty percent on the
net and I think that's really
important of when you're trying
to compare apples to apples and
oranges oranges because that's
huge that is a huge difference
and if you look at the amount of
revenue they that Texas gets off
the Permian basin it's really to
our ours so much that they don't
have to charge other taxes like
we do to run their government so
I think that this is a really
good idea with regard to the the
editing issues.
the state land office does have
rule making authority doesn't
madam chairman Senator that's
correct we have standalone
rulemaking authority in general
as well okay so I'm assuming
that the state so that I think
clarifies of the first the
clause the lessee shall route
read use all reasonable means
and reasonable means would
probably better be defined by
the State Land Office who has
experience with what are
appropriate things to do and
what are what are just way too
expensive to do
madam chair correct that that's
correct and I I think it would
also enable us to go through a
rulemaking process and and get
comments from industry from
others to be able to better
define what that would look like
operationally and room if that's
exactly the point I was going to
make me of madam chair remainder
and senator thank you madam
chair and senator because
rulemaking
It brings all the parties
together as opposed to
legislation where we because we
don't you know we're still part
time it really depends on who we
can catch and who who we can see
so I I think it's really
important that the State Land
Office control of what
reasonable means and then wasted
is wasted to find elsewhere
in in rural or regulations
including environmental
department will roll.
Senator do you want your expert
Mr chair to Mr chair without
madam chair and senator sorry.
Madam yes I would like the
expert witness to answer that
question thank you.
Madam chair Senator I I on the
OCD's side it is I I'm not a
hundred percent sure on the
department of environment side.
Thank you madam chair I I meant
I confuse those sometimes
because they do they have
support a similar duties so it's
so it is so Mister of.
Madam chair Mr senators so
wasted is defined elsewhere in
law isn't that correct.
The like to have my manage
insurance etcetera like The New
Mexico in the sense that
question madam chairman Senator
that's correct Hey and then
the language upon written
request by the lessee the lesser
more bait in its sole discretion
I understand the the issue of
guard rails of just.
leaving the it the.
Agency to just have unfettered
discretion we may have
confidence in one agency when we
pass it but then you don't know
what the agency will look like
in the future so I was wondering
if if you might Mr Mr the
Senator if you may
kind of entertain something like
upon written request by the
lessee the lessor may.
And then take out in its coal
sole discretion waive the
royalty do for gas.
That is necessarily vented or
flared on the lease and that way
it's clear that the the emphasis
is on the discretion of the
agency but that that that it's
gas it's necessarily vented or
flared because we know it has to
be vented or flared as part of
the process with that would
taking out in its sole
discretion be it a new.
A little commitment that you
would entertain at this time
thank you madam chair and thank
you for the question and
If my expert witness increase
with that that's okay with me.
Madam chair Senator I I I
appreciate that and I I think we
would be open to an amendment to
remove that the date
terminologies and sole
discretion is actually something
that were
that we put in there to try to
reduce the likelihood that we're
gonna have litigation and the
ambiguity of
you know whether it should be
you know accepted or not I think
may it would put appropriately
handle that but that was kind of
the purpose there and we have
other areas I mean I think that
the land commissioner has
thought discretion generally in
exercising her authority
so I I don't know that would be
a deal breaker for us thank you
madam chair Senator I just think
that sole discretion is is
superfluous and potentially
changes the
changes the focus from whether
it's necessarily vented or
flared and so I propose to amend
To offer this amendment which
appears to be friendly to remove
on page twenty three.
The economy three I mean on page
seven line twenty three sorry
paid seven line twenty three.
the comma after may.
And then in its sole discretion
comma.
City and
so
Senator is that a friendly
amendment.
Units and the special session
and then the I am sure you are
you yes it's a friendly
amendment okay committee members
is there any opposition to the
amendment.
On page seven line twenty three
we're deleting in its sole
discretion.
The
saying no opposition that
amendment has been adopted.
Anything else senator before we
go on thank you madam chair
Senator I'm just very happy you
brought this is disturbing for
quite awhile that Texas charges
twenty five gets twenty five
percent of the gross and we only
get twenty twenty percent of the
net so I really appreciate your
bringing this bill and I'm happy
for thank you we have center
renewable on the Senator souls.
Thank you Sir Senator thanks
for.
This would.
Involve some.
Estimate the.
Royalty payments on vented
flared and certain six
circumstances that what I'm
understanding.
Madam chair in the center of the
expert witness answer your
question Madam chair Senator hi
yes hi and and as I was trying
to say earlier our forecast
right now is that this is going
to have very little fiscal
impact because companies under
the current methane rule are
venting and flaring less so this
is really a preservation for the
future if something were to
change on the OCD's side.
To have this but we do not
forecast a lot of revenue coming
from right now because the rules
frankly has been successful in
that regard.
I guess my.
I guess my concern is that.
there is no income.
On vented and flared gas so
you're going to be charging a
royalty on something that
doesn't exist is that a fair
assessment.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Senator thank you
for the question of who expert
witness answer that question
Madam chair Senator
If if there was venting and
flaring that was not occurring
or venting and flaring
that was occurring because it
was necessary we would not be
charging royalty on on that if
there was venting and flaring
that was occurring because it
was wasteful unnecessary at we
would be seeking.
To charge the royalty on that
side community based madam chair
that you'd based royalty on what
the market value of the gas as
of that date madam chair I I
think that's probably right
and you know that that is a
provision that has been
indicated that we would do some
rulemaking on but that's that
would be the objective.
And madam chairs Senator who
would determine whether this is
necessary venting or flaring you
drill a hole you're gonna have
gas and you can don't have a
pipeline to hook it up to see
you go to get rid of the gas so
window across the line and say
it's unnecessary.
And madam chair Senator that I
think we would be looking partly
today you know OCD has has laid
some of this out
the circumstances when it's
appropriate operationally and
you know there would be
discretion that we were just
discussion discussing on the
commissioner side where you know
maybe a pipeline get shut down
and the company is doing
everything right and there is an
operational issue and they say
what you know it's a safety
issue unless we flare you know
what we do here.
They can ask for permission and
you know one would expect and
hope that third be discretion
exercised there and that's why
we try to break it to build it
in this is for cases like that.
Madam chairs Senator.
I can see some report
problematic issues with that
just to.
Set the settings right
One thing that's brought out as
the taxes and royalties when
you're a small company in or
company
It doesn't matter if you pay in
taxes or royalties takes away
from the bottom line so I don't
know how to use it you work of
expert on taxes tax situation
versus our tax situation but I
think that's pretty crucial what
the bottom line is to especially
some of the small independents
and that's pretty much what
we've got left over it to in San
Juan County there's no majors
much up there anyone.
So I just point that out it's
not a question but taxes and
royalties.
Kind of just more or less the
same thing if you're if you're a
small company and trying to pay
the bills one final question or
comment
New Mexico and Texas evolved
totally differently is states
and Texas really doesn't have
much away state lands as I
understand is that a fair
assessment.
Madam chair and senator have the
expert witnesses your question
madam chairman Senator yeah we
we have a lot more in New Mexico
I mean.
Substantially more than Texas
Texas has very little state
lands other than a few parks in
those kind of things they don't
have the the grid of four
sections per I mean for
sections per transhipped all of
the New Mexico as they have very
little percentage wise very
little state lands in the state
is that so in other words we're
not necessarily even though than
the other twenty five percent
were eighteen and a half it's
not.
You know it's not apples apples
in this case.
Madam chair Senator I I think
that correct in a certain extent
but also if you look at the
broader market
On the private land which Texas
has a lot of in the Permian for
charging twenty five and you
know what we hear from company
no no company is going to come.
And support legislation that
increases their bottom line what
we we get that I mean that's.
The reality.
But also the market in the
premium on the private on the
state across the board and they
don't really have federal down
there
is twenty five percent and so I
think it is different but
overall I think that's what
folks are charging okay that's
all manager thank you thank you
very much Sanders Sauls.
Thank you madam chair I move the
past.
As amended.
Is there is that.
There is a motion for a do pass
as amended and a second by
Senator pope with the committee
secretary please call the roll.
Senator so far.
By a customer Senator Hamblen
yes third of the LFC no Senator
pope yes meeting.
Full yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Fan yes.
I vote of sixty two you have a
do pass on Senate bill one sixty
four as amended thank you very
much thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee for
your support of Senate bill one
sixty four thank you we are
going back to the first item
Senate bill fifty eight as
amended Senator Wirth of just
that we hold off on that until
after ten so he's here and we're
going to put that on.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I do have a
substitute which I think was
delivered up a couple days ago
sell sell is substitute just
being handed out now yes it is
okay and just one minute
Senator.
So committee members the
analysis by our staff is on the
committee so.
I
didn't see the committee sub or
R. and analysis this was sent
out yesterday by our committee
secretary.
It.
And madam chair I can this
really is it's not a major
changes just pulling up the
changes that were made in the
prior committee and I can walk
through a couple of additional
it's not like we're re writing
the whole thing here just a few
it's cleaning up the bill
basically to come out so Center
again this is here with senator
Wirth has to say and then we'll
see if this to substantive.
Okay Senator Wirth thank you
madam chair so Senate bill fifty
eight is a bill that's been
around for a while
it actually passed both chambers
in twenty nineteen and was
pocket vetoed it deals with the
membership of the Interstate
Stream Commission and what it
purports to do is change the
makeup of the board to more
accurately reflect the policy.
Provisions that we have given to
the Interstate Stream Commission
when it comes to water planning
and our water future
what I'd what I think probably
make sense Madam shares if you
like is to walk through the
specifics in this up because I
don't want to put the whole bill
on and then I in fairness to to
you know you members here make
sure that they understand this
is something that I think we can
move forward on really what the
the what the Senate substitute
done as is the following on page
one line thirteen it added a
section in the title this was a
just a stylistic oversight on
line thirteen repealing and
acting a section of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight that's
because you'll see in section
one that we're basically
repealing the existing section
and replacing it with the new
section that's change number one
change number two in this is on
page two line for.
At the request of Rolf Schmidt
Petersen Interstate Stream
Commission we have added not
only a single member of an
Indian tribe or pueblo but we've
now added to tribal members so
one should be a member of the
New Mexico Indian nation or
tribe and at least one of whom
shall be a member of the New
Mexico Indian pueblo that
request came from the Indian
Affairs Department but also from
the Walt Water policy folks
given the differences in the the
tribal settlements that they
implement and so that added that
diversity on page two line seven
this just the word disk
sections.
The sections of the state of New
Mexico online eight page two is
added and this was a change made
in the rules committee it just
takes it back to the existing
law the existing law allows for
irrigation or Conservancy
districts or sections we
originally taken out sections
rules committee put that back in
all this does is track with the
rules committee did a like wise
on page two
I'm sorry in page three line
three the same thing just adding
the word sections taking it back
to the original intent of the
law and then the only other
change in this is on page two a
line seventeen
There were the word professional
is is stricken originally it
referred to one professional
hydrologist there's no such
thing as a non professional
hydrologists that was flags we
don't do that we've heard
professional and that's the
extent of the sub so really the
the the substantive change
that's in here's the one that
added an additional tribal
member and the other ones were
stylistic to clean it up on
that's what this does and and
madam chair if you'd like to
proceed I can just give a little
more outline of of the bill but
I want to make sure you're
you're you're okay moving
forward with this up.
I I appreciate that.
Yeah.
Senator is here thank you thank
you for.
Do you have for.
Cynical.
We discussed.
For discussion purposes thank
you so Senator Wirth please
great moment let me just give
the committee a sense and and
again I think the committee many
members of heard this before
we're not changing the size of
the Interstate Stream Commission
it remains nine members
membership would consist of the
state engineer and eight members
appointed by the governor and
confirmed by the Senate so we're
not changing the appointment of
the governor still has the
appointment it does have a
requirement for cop confirmation
by the Senate
no more than five members
including a state engineer
should be from the same
political party and then as I
noted two members now will be
from our tribal communities one
from a nation or tribe and the
other from the pueblo.
what we're doing here the
specificity of the new
appointments currently the the
statue that's been in place for
many years has the eight members
all coming from irrigation or
Conservancy districts or
sections so what we're doing is
leaving for representatives from
irrigation or Conservancy
districts for sections one
member to represent an acequia
or community ditch one member to
represent a utility that
provides over five hundred acre
feet per annum one member from
the New Mexico water research
resources research institute or
civil or environmental
engineering this faculty from
NMSC or UNM one member as a
hydrologist with expertise in
New Mexico groundwater resources
were a professional engineer
with a New Mexico consulting
engineering practice in water
resources or water utility
engineering and.
You'll see there's there is a
diversity amongst our
universities that handle water
issues I will tell you many of
these changes are things that
have occurred over the years on
this bill as we moved it through
the process so it's not exactly
the way it started for sure but
this is the result of the
compromises that have come in
for example having tech in
having New Mexico state and how
that was done again is really
come through the committee
process and this is this is kind
of where the bill is all all and
with this madam chair I very
much appreciate Mr Schmidt
Petersen understand you could
use on airplanes but he can in
the past there's been opposition
to this bill from the Interstate
Stream Commission.
He.
Didn't stand up in opposition at
the Senate rules committee
actually worked with us on these
changes of which have been made
and self hoping we can get
something here that again is not
changing the appointment process
but is making this this
commission which is so critical
on water policy more reflective
of what the statutes of
authorize it to do and that's
the purpose of the bill.
Thank you very much is there
anyone in the audience here to
oppose this bill.
Is there anyone here in the
audience to support this bill.
Is there anybody online.
How many just.
For support propose so this one
opposition.
On the
on soon so the supporters if any
but does anybody want to make a
comment if so please come here
to the middle and use the Mike.
We have somebody coming up.
Okay it is working very well
because for the whole.
And I think that yeah okay okay
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is so we Parker and I'm the
water associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
we encourage you to support SB
fifty eight this morning but we
feel like these changes will
make for a more equitable
process and create a bipartisan
commission focused on science
both of which will help the
state of water resources in New
Mexico thank you for the
opportunity to speak this
morning and have a good day.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else who would like to
speak in support.
Is there anybody in the audience
who would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay so we have one person
online to speak in opposition.
They changed it to support.
If you were persuasive said.
So there's two people online and
I'd like to thank Oscar Simpson
and Tricia Snyder so we won't be
hearing from them but they are
here online supporting so
we are now to the committee for
comments questions.
I move it to pass.
Could you do the formal I move a
do not pass for Senate bill
fifty eight has amended and a do
pass for Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty eight okay before we
take a second we do have a
question Senator Gallegos.
In terms of floor leader just a
just few questions and and
looking at how the bill
structure and all the different
requirements as far as the
basically you professionalizing
but there's in the way it's set
out morning if you had anyone
say is you're limiting the
That can pull if you had a
discussion on that correct seed
be really hard for me to qualify
to be part of that and I just
wondered if you that in comments
madam chair and senator up
that's a good question and I
think that's been one of the
issues that the Interstate
Stream Commission and Mr Schmidt
Petersen testified in the rules
committee you know the concern
about getting it to narrow that
you can't get folks to qualify I
think that's he suggested
putting back in the sections
language also that was in the in
the substitute that adds in a
sector that again has a
diversity there to get more
folks but again it does it does
make it more narrow I don't
think there's going to be any
challenge getting getting
acequia or ditch folks to serve
I think probably the tribal
folks is going to be relatively
straightforward and then you get
down to the professionals of the
different water institutes and
again I think that that's going
to be it's going to be more
challenging but I do think we
now because of the work we have
done in this legislature we've
actually created a pool of folks
at those institutions and I'll
use the the the one in New
Mexico state actually former
president pro tem paper and and
Senator office worked very hard
to get the get recurring dollars
to the water resources institute
in New Mexico state because of
that I think that there will be
a group of folks willing to step
up and it's just important to
have those different different
points of view and consistent
with the statute
Madam chairman or leader I
appreciate that answer and I I
just give me a little bit of of
calming effect my last comment
those I know she called out
political affiliation and just
for COVID I think water is one
thing you should not be
politicized I think the the our
state in its entirety is always
going to be short.
On water we just need to know
how to manage it but and I've
actually worked with Stream
Commission on so probably ahead
in Colorado in those.
Representative Colorado
headwaters for New Mexico but
those are the questions I had
and I just want to throw that
out there because I think we
politicize everything it might
be better to call some things
down take that piece out with
that are you thank you very much
is there second Senator bonded
to question just a comment
manager develop on center guy
goes comments I in center with a
and I've been working on this
this issue and related issue
with water transport for some
years I hope we can come back to
the composition of water
transport as well to center with
but it's a it's an opportunity
to maybe put an emphasis on
center guy goes comments that
you're right water shouldn't be
a partisan issue should be
politicized and the one thing
that I particularly like about
this bill and hopefully we'll
keep in mind when it comes down
the water trust board
composition had that veto you
may remember by the last
administration is requiring a
geographic diversity in the
membership you know so so having
a requirement that you have
members from each of the three
congressional districts avoids
what we have with water trust
board which is the composition
water transport is almost
entirely dominated by cabinet
level appointees and so it's you
you take the executive branch
appointments in cabinet
secretaries in the governor's
appointees they they have the
controlling authority water
trust which controls by hundreds
of millions of dollars in water
projects in.
Etcetera with me this part of
the floor yesterday historically
the water of funding went to to
projects went to the U. project
and went to the McKinley the
Navajo project and those of us
in southern New Mexico didn't
see a drop if you'll forgive the
pun but anyway anyway this is a
this is a good balanced approach
to making sure the these boards
which control great deal of
money and more important our
water of our our fair to all of
New Mexico and you all have had
very many times of the committee
talk about what I think it's
very clear inequity in the way
of we must manage water in the
state of thank you madam chair
thank you.
we are now on to a second
Senator Sedillo Lopez made the
motion.
That says Senator Hamblen
seconded.
Could the committee secretary
please call the roll on a do not
pass on Senate bill fifty eight
as amended and I do pass on
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight.
Senator Bob K. yes Senator
Gallegos is Senator Hamblen yes
Senate bill is Senator pope yes
from the committee.
The full yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Senator step
them yes okay.
Eight four I have by a vote of
eight to zero you have to do
passed from this committee thank
you very much for being here
we're now moving to Senator
Hamblen
Senate bill one sixty five of
local choice Energy act.
We take a.
Senator you representative bill
I am madam chair.
And so there is a amendment bill
get to that prior to introducing
my experts if I may madam chair
committee I come to you today
with legislation that will
empower municipalities and
tribes to generate or purchase
some price renewable energy
electricity and sell it to us
the electricity would be
transmitted over the existing
grid in partnership with the
existing utilities for the same
fees that they charge customers
this is a proven policy that
exists in ten different states
serving millions of Americans
and more than thirteen hundred
communities local choice energy
providers are proven to offer
safe reliable electricity that
frequently exceeds state
renewable portfolio standards
with many offering one hundred
percent renewable energy
electricity these not for profit
local entities have demonstrated
the ability to deliver cost
ability competitive pricing and
lower cost electricity sometimes
as much as twenty percent less
significantly local choice
energy providers catalyze a
significant community investment
and to be able to empower
communities to launch innovative
programs that meet community
needs including lower cost
programs for seniors on fixed
incomes or household cleaner
cooking and household emissions
most importantly this gives
communities choices and
communities control over how
their electricity is sourced in
price.
Going into the problem and then
I'll go ahead and move for the
amendment madam chair is that we
don't have a voice to be able to
control the trajectory of the
monopoly investor owned
corporate electric utilities
that serve seventy three percent
of New Mexicans we have no
control over their policies
their pricing in a way to stop
them from extracting critical
policies like our state's
landmark community solar program
and if you're New Mexican lives
in the service area of an
monopoly utility want power but
you have no choice but to be
subjected to the prices that are
instituted have no way to hold
them accountable.
And what we're talking about is
a high rates that go to the
CEOs salaries and Wall Street to
and yet we have people in our
state who are having to make
decisions on whether or not to
feed their children and feed
their families or heat their
homes and so at this point
Senate bill one sixty five would
give our communities of choice
in local control over
electricity procurement
generation pricing and we do
have an amendments to this that
we have brought that is
clarified some of the language
and maybe even stronger just to
note committee and madam chair
that this bill this is the third
time this bill is coming forward
it has been modified there's
been a lot of conversations that
have been taking place and and
we have quite a bit of support
in our community to make sure
that this happens so before I
introduce my experts just to
clarify what the amendments will
propose they ensure just and
reasonable rates bolster
consumer protection and create a
compliant process clarified that
that contracted electrical
workers will not be public
employees and require
verification of professional
licensure to ensure safety and
competency and so at this point
madam chair I would like to go
ahead and and if there are any
questions about the amendment
but also continue on with the
presentation so Senator it so
you move the amendment yes ma'am
right here second.
This was received madam chair
yesterday by our.
There's.
Well there's just some minor
language and and really in this
ammendment making sure that we
are ensuring professional
licensure that it's not somebody
just coming off of the street.
Programs.
So
I understand that the
That not all analysts received
this ammendment.
In advance so we will need to
roll this over.
any till thirty.
So this will be the first item
on Thursday morning you'll be in
town correct yes I will enter
okay thank you Mr I am very
sorry and but we will hear it
forth with.
And you want to save the
handouts that we all receive for
the next day so that a free
press.
That is my.
So what we're going to collect
the handouts please this so it
doesn't have to be reprinted.
Barbara speaking in back up.
The New.
There
it because you can afford it at
this point.
Right.
Thank you.
Okay so
the reason for the audiences
watching that this is being
rolled over is so that all
parties all analysts from both
sides in the pool and our
committee analysts have the
amendment to analyze in relation
to the bill.
So
because it is twenty minutes a
love in.
My bill's going to take quite a
bit of time or maybe not but
let's try Senator Steinborn are
you still in the room.
This
is Senator Steinborn in the
room.
If he's not then I'll start my
bill.
She's going to get it.
That my bill has a committee sub
and and now sis.
Okay did everybody okay let me
just ask did everybody on your
side Senator Gallegos receive
the committee stuff in the
analysis for Senate bill one
sixty nine.
Okay so that's going to carry
over to.
So we are waiting to Senate bill
one eighty to Senate bill one
sixty five and one sixteen three
over.
Rolled over.
But it is we would all want to.
Bill one sixty nine is being
carried over at the all the
committee sub in NM sis was not
received by all parties.
Thank you Mr Chavis for being
here center Chavis.
More it is senator Marty Kevin.
Dr.
Representative in the governor's
race and bill but.
And going back to Albuquerque I.
Okay sorry about that.
We're waiting a Senator
Steinborn of my bill and Senator
Hammonds Bill the all the
parties did not receive the
amendments or the analysis for.
The committee self online and
and then so it's being carried
over.
Senator Diamond come on up.
Is that money.
Senator Diamond of we understand
that there is an amendment on
years is it a simple amendment
because not all parties.
Receive it in advance madam
chairman yes it is it just
includes an appropriation of one
million dollars to fund the
program that's the only thing
the amendment this yes ma'am
okay so let's go ahead Senator
Diamond is presenting Senate
bill one eighty two recycling
and litter reduction so that the
members on webcast and as soon
will no so Senator Diamond the
floor is yours thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee so at Senate bill one
eighty two creates
eight a coordinator position
within the department of tourism
to focus on recycling and litter
reduction so what this is
actually a of requests that is
set up all of non
reimbursable grant to our local
entities to combat litter and
waste reduction consider some
point about this to my attention
a lot of the focus was has been
on the urban areas of Los crucis
at which were to focus but when
I had reviewed the bills you
know our our litter the little
problems also out in rural and
remote areas of New Mexico and
especially were making all these
investments in this outdoor part
of me and the sad part of the
reality is a long many of these
trails and in our in our rural
areas as well there seems to be
a lot of illegal dumping in our
royal Center sake yes and so
this will allow the funding
revenue for all of our local
governments regardless of size
to combat this wasted little
problem or having statewide.
So Senator Diamond before we
pass the Mike could somebody.
We have the amendment for the
past about.
Okay senator Simon please thank
you.
Thank you madam chair my experts
did an excellent job
on the bill thank you very much
for being here I I thought the
last one was going to take quite
awhile so I stepped out
it over Senator okay.
This Senate bill one eighty two
really is a is a multi pronged
attempt of Senator Diamond set
to deal with a.
Improving how we confront the
litter problem in the state of
New Mexico.
And number two how we improve
recycling and waste reduction in
the state of New Mexico and what
we're finding is that our
efforts as the state are not
organized they're not cohesive
this bill also addresses that by
having our various agencies that
we give funding independently
who are working on this
independently to work together
it really does all this by
addressing to funds the a letter
beautification fund the because
the department of tourism the
gives out grants to communities
for a little reduction kind of
campaigns and then the what's
known as rate requests and the
solid waste division of the
environment apartment which
gives out grants to communities
for infrastructure recycling
infrastructure solid waste
infrastructure and
I've done extensive work with
both departments
on improvements to these
programs and so this bill
basically just make those
improvements that makes more
funding available to communities
by updating the language of the
right grant.
It requires more quote
collaboration.
It improved to keep New Mexico
clean and beautiful program by
having a little bit broader
coordination a litter control
program so that they're not
silos in communities but also
including public lands that here
in Santa Fe madam chair so
important those frontier areas
to the public lands that they be
brought in at least in the
communications standpoint and
And finally it includes a new
piece which you all her last
time Senator time and I were
here which is requiring the
department of tourism to manage
a statewide anti litter
marketing campaigns and that's
with the amendment you have
before you this is an
appropriation to do that work
this bill goes to Senate finance
next will that fight for funding
for this but
There is one other piece of it
which is in the right grant we
also require the solid waste
division to hire a new recycling
and education coordinator.
This is kind of modeled after
what's in the litter program
we're in law we require them to
hire coordinator out of that
fund we're requiring the same
thing so we're beefing up the
staffing of
Our waste reduction efforts in
the amber Department.
So I didn't confuse you enough
I'll stop there.
Stand for questions.
Thank you very much Senator is
there anybody in the audience to
support this bill.
Great is there anybody here to
oppose this bill.
Do we have people online for
this bill okay so let's here
couple of supporters if you
please come to the middle and
I'll hold the microphone and
hold the button down.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for south central
solid waste authority we pick up
trash hall and recycle from
white sands missile range to the
Texas border in order to combat
litter and illegal dumping and
promote recycling we must have a
statewide coordination put
education first and invest again
in our infrastructure transfer
stations recycling facilities in
twenty Ana County over the last
two years we have made a
commitment to rebuilding that
infrastructure and want to thank
the Dona Ana County legislators
for helping us rebuild that
infrastructure which is so
important to keep a New Mexico
beautiful we believe that the
This bill contains some very
important elements the
coordinator is going to be very
important throughout the state
and also expanding the
eligibility of the requests
thank you for the sponsors for
bringing this legislation
forward thank you very much next
please.
This press.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Sarah
Pierpont and executive director
of the New Mexico recycling
coalition we are statewide
member supported nonprofit
organization and we have about
two hundred twenty members that
work in recycling and solid
waste throughout the state these
members depend on this right
requests for funding and this
bill cleans up the grant
application process to make it
more eligible for different
operations right now a lot of
the money goes just for tire
medication and you'll see the
amendment or the proposal
removes some limitations on that
and allows the funding to go
towards what is most needed and
the committee who is reviewing
the requests can choose what
that may be whether it's tire
mitigation or recycling
infrastructure illegal dumping
pickups and I know that our
members support that those
efforts in those changes also we
work closely with the New Mexico
environment department solid
waste bureau and we would love
to see them have additional
funding for staff thank you
thank you so let me ask you if
your mother ET that was my
husbands gramma she was here a
lot.
Yeah very much.
The.
Thank you again for your time
I'm Camilla I amend with the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club and we heartily support
this bipartisan effort we want
to see more capacity on litter
and recycling and I think just
from an economic standpoint the
better we do on the recycling
the more opportunities there are
economically to make these
products not be just trash but
some future source of economic
development thank you thank you
very much okay we're gonna move
to Canadian center souls.
Thank you madam chair
first yeah and I realize it's
already current law that I know
of Senator about this is looking
at the whole of section one.
a we go all of section one is
being a purpose statement but
it's already in current law so
we don't have to take that out
is to prevent it from the.
Being remanded to Judiciary.
How much is in the current
dumping Fund.
madam madam chair Senator
there's about a million dollars
in the fund.
The reason I ask this requires
a nifty easy for a new position
how much much is the one million
is that a kind of consistent
that it stays at that amount
from this because the new
position probably is going to
take hundred hundred fifty.
Thousand a year is full with all
the.
Extras with that Madam chair
Senators that's a great question
and that was something I
researched like they
consistently have about that
balance it's consistently coming
in because of the source of the
funds but there's a delta from
what they're actually funding
out in grants and I and that
delta can be used to hire this
position.
So I believe in that way it's
sustainable and that's exactly
what they're doing with the the
New Mexico clean and beautiful
program that's also part of this
that law actually requires that
they hire coordinator from the
fund so it's kind of beautiful
from a legislative standpoint
because we're not having
appropriate new general fund
they have a fund that we can use
to create more staff.
Madam chair moving forward if
you're really successful then
there won't be as much in that
dumping Fund yeah makes it
harder for the present season
thank you madam.
Thank you Senator about this.
Recently one of the pop.
Then thank you for and might
wanna make sure I'm reading this
right because it's puzzling to
me on page six.
You're striking existing
language on lines nineteen
through twenty two.
Which right now limits a grant
loan or contract.
To someone who receives less
than ninety five percent of
their recyclable material from
sources in New Mexico so
we've I've I reading that
correctly and with that language
struck this is really going to
allow for importing of waste
from out of the state into New
Mexico and allow for grants
loans and contracts for people
who bring waste into New Mexico
from out of state where is right
now the existing language would
prohibit.
a grant or loan or contract yeah
so tell me why it's a good idea
for New Mexico to be taken from
other states a motion we just
handle the whole tax bill from
nine now session I know
different deal different
business arrangement as well but
definitely different LFC time
that yes the question madam
chair Senator and I'll tell you
why and this is not I mean this
is something we can keep it or
not we have a few landfills just
a few that are on border
communities one of them is in
your community okay so they're
serving New Mexico communities
and so bye bye but having an
arbitrary number ninety five
percent of their let's say that
shifts and suddenly.
And now they're getting ninety
percent from New Mexico and ten
percent.
They're serving New Mexico
communities so we would be
punishing them by saying sorry
you cannot receive grants and
the fact that they're receiving
a little trash from el Paso or
whoever it is actually
subsidizing in a way it's
helping them to spread the costs
around in that operation
actually serving New Mexico that
business model but that's the
reality of their situation and I
just think that ninety five
percent number.
Just was to have a number
punishes border border
enterprises like that I think
there's one in southeastern New
Mexico to but it wasn't that big
of a deal in reality to well at
least our landfill southwest
solid waste but I haven't spoken
to the commuter rail guys on the
border but I understand that's
their situation so I just think
it's smart of us to take that
out but.
That's that's my reasoning for
doing that.
Thank you madam chair so I love
the creativity of your argument
Senator and then get the kudos
for that Michelle is is that is
that your client.
The issues could you come
forward to the bikes can pick up
on me to put you on the spot but
I just it is that no Mr chairman
I don't Representative commuter
rail in the past that I have but
it's been decades okay well I
have been here for decades so.
all right thank you yeah I be I
don't know that you know this
understand what it be curious to
know because you said you know
that that landfill and someone
park which is again my district
good right right next to Center
Hammons District that landfill
takes of you to use your words a
minimum amount of trash from out
of state that I think the
reality is the opposite I think
that landfill existence on
Parker very poor
community you will almost
entirely Hispanic on the border
and it takes almost substantial
amount of trash mill passive and
you know again I know your
commitment to the environment
Senator Steinborn it's you know
on on unassailable come in to
dig the this is in my mind has
some parallels to the hall tech
issue again which is we've got
el Paso moving a lot of it's
trash across the road into New
Mexico into a poor Hispanic
under represented community
centers are up and and
underserved and and I'm here to
be a champion along with Center
Hamlin Centers told all of us
and I'm sure the champion Act
that border community and so are
you I hope that you'll take
favorably a proposed amendment
to leave that language in
because all we're really talking
about is whether we're going to
give that that waste of a
provider that landfill the grant
or loan or a contract
In expand the ability to do that
and I don't think we should you
know we're not putting him out
of business we're not limiting
their ability to bring in trash
from el Paso we're not doing any
of that those to be able to
bring all their trash no passing
zone alright without without any
failing here the question is
what should we be giving them a
grant or a loan
or for processing and I don't
think we should encourage those
guys to be honest with you I I
don't mean to be negative to a
business it's important to
someone part they get gross
receipts taxes from it and there
are some advantages to the
community they they made a
decision to allow that facility
to operate there but should we
really be encouraging with
grants or loans you know I I
don't think so and and right now
the existing law that doesn't
allow for us to do that by this
change utilized for them due to
do so and I'd encourage you to
to consider that a friendly
amendment just leaving in the
existing language on online
nineteen through twenty two on
page six but all all hear from
other members who may have
opinions on that issue before I
make that motion capture.
Mr chair up into that a friendly
amendment and and in fact that
that landfill is doing well and
I think they're expanding so
it's not like they need these
requests but Mr my rationale but
but it's not attached to it so
okay so Senator Steinborn I'm
repeating so that everybody can
hear you're considering that a
family member that's different
that's the non unfriendly
amendment yes that's just that's
a program where that's great.
Whatever out of members of the
committee is there any comments
on the proposed amendment hasn't
been made yet.
Any comment Senator Cervantes do
you want to make the amendment a
movie chairman page six of your
bill Senator you're proposing to
strike.
The lead between lines nineteen
twenty two to strike existing
lan or subparagraph B. I would
ask that you on my motion is
that that language be retained
and that would also mean that
online twenty three that that
designation of subparagraphs C.
would remain unchanged as well
too so really leaving between
lines nineteen and twenty three
existing.
Statutory language which limits
grants and contracts to
companies that.
Only process waste that
originates ninety five percent
of the state of New Mexico as
opposed to coming from out of
state okay.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment.
Okay we have adopted this
amendment.
As you considered friendly we
are back on the amended bill.
And senator valve had come just
to.
You have.
Representative.
Madam chair Senator no but but
there is we are working on a
funding solution.
Because of the financing
normally stride rite and bill.
It.
Now we're fearless.
We're we're to find madam chair
center to finance members ready
for a discussion and ready to
fight for funding and so we want
to be
transparent and but there are
multiple solutions that we are
actively talking about this for
resources to fund.
Right.
This is an ill advised strategy
is so two things.
It is thank you Senator Sedillo
Lopez of I moved to pass as as
amended I think it is their
second percent there is a motion
and a second on a do pass on
Senate bill one eighty two as
twice amended in this committee
for the secretary please call
the roll Senator Fontana yes
Senator guy a good.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Nobel yes Senator pope yes
Senator sweeties.
Senator soul yes Senator
Sedillo.
Yes Senator yes.
On.
By an eight zero you have a due
pass from this committee on
Senate bill one eighty two is
amended thank you very much
committee members we are rolling
over or carrying over to build
from today Senate bill one sixty
five Senate bill one sixty nine
and all the appropriate
amendments in committee subs
will be forwarded to you and
your staff thank you we are in
recess for today.
