I, I do appreciate you being
here.
Madam chair.
Like I said earlier.
There are other alternatives to
these to these horse owners that
no longer want their horses.
The availability of people that
do want horses that want to take
care of them that want them
either for.
Riding pleasure, whatever the
case may be.
It's there.
I have been to several of these
shelters, these people.
A hard pressed sometimes to take
care of every animal that they
do have.
We also have
People that are out there that
are cruel to horses.
We have seen that in every
industry throughout the state.
I don't tolerate those people
very good from the cheaters at
the racetrack to those that are
just.
Starve a horse to death.
Madam Chair,
As you all know, and I, I will
say this time and time again.
I take care of my animals.
My heart still hurts for the old
horse I had to put down, my 28
year old Giling.
Um
He took my daughter to the
national finals. She was a roper
and she went to the national
finals on this horse, and I
continued to ride this horse. I,
he was the one.
That I could go out there, throw
a saddle on and go to work on
him right then.
Out on the ranch.
Madam Chair
Even whenever I retire a horse
off the track.
I find a home for it.
There is life for horses out
there if they're no longer
needed.
Or whatever the case may be, I
don't turn him over to a
shelter. I want a good home for
them where I know they're going
to be cared for.
I have people that are
interested in buying some of my
horses.
So that is an available avenue
for these people that no longer
want their horses.
Rescue facilities are great, but
it's not up to the citizens of
the state of New Mexico to care
for these horses that have a
been abandoned or abused, and we
know the duties of the livestock
board, and Mister Davis can
attest to that because I have
called him a few times over
horses or other animals.
That I felt were being neglected
or abused.
Madam Chair, Senator Hamlin.
Are you understanding what I
say, it's not the responsibility
of the state of New Mexico's
taxpayers to provide for these
animals.
Madam Chair Senator, I, I hear
you loud and clear. I also feel
that there are some
circumstances where and knowing
some of these horse rescues.
These folks are doing what other
people are not able to do
because it could be because of
sudden job loss, they're laid
off because of natural disasters
like you're talking about that
you've experienced and really do
so in the Roswell area.
Um, you know, also animals jump
and break fences and gets lost.
I think there are a number of
circumstances where those horses
end up at shelters and we can't
just abandon them.
Um, because of something that an
irresponsible owner would do.
And Madam Chair and Senator
Hamlin, I, I'm glad you do
understand where I'm coming
from.
But it all goes back to these
people that no longer want these
equines that they do have the
ability to sell them. There is a
market out there for people that
are looking for, they can even
go through the livestock board
and find out names of people
that are interested in horses.
Excuse me.
Madam, cheer right now, and I've
done a little bit of research on
this, there is a facility up in
the continental Divide area.
Where the taxpayers are now
paying and I think the number is
in excess of 90.
Forces that the taxpayers of the
United States are paying for.
These horses came out of Nevada.
These are what they called wild
horses. They are not, they are
feral horses. That's what they
are, they're called feral
horses.
That they are impounded by the
Bureau of Land Management.
Because these horses were
starving to death.
the taxpayers of the United
States are paying for these
horses.
And I'm gonna step on a lot of
toes right here whenever I talk,
you know, sometimes I do say
lots of things that everybody
else might be thinking, and I'm
the one that does say it.
Madam chair, whenever we have
special interest groups that
made sure that there were no
kill plants in the United States
for horses.
That was the biggest disservice
we could have done to the
equines that are out there.
If these horses are going to
slaughter, they go down to.
Mexico to be slaughtered. They
are held at Santa Teresa, and
I'd just like to show of hands,
Madam Chair, Senator Hamlin, if
anybody out in the audience that
has been down to the holding
facility at Santa Teresa before
these horses are taken in.
We have one over here and I,
there's another one over there,
the conditions down there are
appalling, appalling. Then
whenever they're sitting on down
for slaughter.
It would make you sick.
If the facilities were still
open in the United States, there
would be oversight.
These horses would not be
starved to the point where there
is no excrement in their guts
that the people have to deal
with.
Madam Cheer
We have problems whenever we're
telling our taxpayers that
sometimes they're having a hard
time feeding their own families
that now they're gonna be
responsible.
For feeding horses that somebody
was negligent with.
To the point that they said we
don't want them anymore, y'all
take them.
it hurts my heart that we have
people out there like that.
Madam chair, I have seen the
changes in your bill.
And the one thing I do see
missing is that appropriation.
This, uh, and that's what I'm
reading in this particular bill
right there here there is no
appropriation listed in this
bill.
Madam Chair, these facilities
that we're talking about for the
care of unwanted horses.
They can receive funding through
contributions, through gifts,
whatever the case may be.
Why aren't we continuing that?
And one other question I just
now thought of it, I had it
written down on my other sheets.
Can anybody tell me maybe Miss
Johnson might be able to tell me
this.
What is the average age of a
horse in these.
Eine care facilities. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's not
a a data number that we have
gathered from the shelters.
OK, I do want to point out,
Madam Chair.
Senator Hamlin, Miss Johnson.
That more often than not, these
horses that have been abused and
neglected have a shorter life
life span in horses that have
been cared for all their life.
OK.
And
That does prove a problem for
some of these shelters whenever
they're.
Whenever a horse has to be
euthanized because we have to
factor that cost in too.
And then the disposal of the
carcass.
Madam Chair.
I appreciate what you're trying
to do here.
But then I also have to
appreciate.
All the duties of the taxpayers
of the state of New Mexico and
this is not one of their duties,
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator Azel, uh,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, ma'am.
I was just
Oh
Yes, just to clarify, um, there,
there has been, oh.
We didn't, we forgot to move it,
um, would somebody like to um
make a motion, well, I'll go
ahead and make the motion to not
pass Senate bill.
Um, 358 do not pass Senate Bill
358 and do pass Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 358
for discussion.
Is there a second?
All right. Thank you for
reminding me that.
Um
and that's all you have, Senator
Townsend, all right. Anyone
else?
Senator Scott
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. What
was the reasoning behind moving?
To
New Mexico State responsibility
for
Managing this program as
opposed.
To the livestock board.
Madam Chair and senator, if you
recall from our last, uh, time
that we were here about this
bill, the Livestock Board had
several concerns about managing
that money, um, after uh
conversation with Adrian and
legislative finance, um, and
discussions with the livestock
board, uh, as well as animal
protection voters and LFC, um,
the logical.
Place for this would be the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
hosted down at New Mexico State
University after conversations
with Secretary Whitty and also
the deputy secretary, uh, and
after Miss Shelton had those
conversations, they felt that
that was a good fit.
There's still partnership with
the New Mexico Livestock Board.
They still would do what they're
already doing. It's just the
fund would be housed through
NMDA.
And that prevents that that uh
eliminates the anti-donation
concern, um, and any of the
concerns that Director Garland
had expressed before.
OK, so, Madam Chair and Senator,
this was
Circumnavigation of the
anti-donation clause.
Madam Chair and Senator, yes,
that was one of the concerns
from the livestock.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
share.
Senator Reel's concerns that
We're making now trying to make
state responsible for
Other private citizens
irresponsibility. Could you
address those concerns? I mean,
What
Wow
What we need to do that?
Um, Madam Chair and and Senator
Scott, thank you for the
question. Um, and of course,
Senator Azel is is right, this
bill does not impact uh a horse
owner's ability to engage in
private sale to relocate their
horse.
Um, but just like.
Dogs and cats, um, there are
horses that uh get loose, there
are horses that are abused, um,
or neglected and seized by the
livestock board or other law
enforcement, and we need humane
placement for those animals, um,
getting those animals off of uh
the roads off of the landscape.
is a public safety issue. It is
a private land issue, um, and
so, um, that is why this
legislature created the
expendable fund back in in 2013
to address those needs.
Madam Chair and
Senator Ms. Johnson, uh.
Dogs and cats aren't livestock.
And that seems to be a.
The distinction that might be
missing.
Oh
I guess, let me ask.
The question is to.
What is the current process.
That we're wanting to change is,
as I understand it.
The livestock Board is involved
in this.
In this process, can you
describe how that works today.
Uh, yes, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott. So to be clear,
this bill does not at all change
the existing process where the
livestock board, um,
investigates cruelty or takes up
the strays, um, this bill is
just focused on creating a
revenue source for the existing
expendable fund in order to
continue to support the shelters
uh in exchange for the services
that they provide, um.
It's if if there is a, a
particular part of the, for
example, the tray process uh
that you're interested in
hearing about, um.
I could describe it, I could
also defer to um my colleague
Ms. Edelman here who uh works
closely with the shelters, um,
and is, uh, very aware of the
tray process and Madam Chair,
before we get started,
That interaction between the
shelters.
And now occurs between the
livestock board and the
shelters.
That would, that would be a.
Good question.
Sure
And, uh, Madam Chair, senator,
uh, yes, uh, that is correct,
that is currently uh occurs uh
through the New Mexico Livestock
Board.
And specifically about the tray
process if other the New Mexico
Livestock Board does impound in
a stray. They're supposed to put
up that astray uh online as a
public listing for 5 days to
give uh the owner a chance to
reclaim that horse.
If after 5 days, an owner does
not claim that horse, then the
the crime shelters that are res
that are registered with the New
Mexico Lifestyle Board are given
the first opportunity to take in
that horse or uh.
If they pay the the livestock
board to the uh the care costs
for that horse during
impoundment.
So they would, uh, they have the
first chance if they have the
capacity to take in that horse
and.
Put that horse into the
sheltering process, the training
process, the rehabilitation
process, and uh hopefully
eventually up for adoption.
Um
If, uh, the shelters are not
able to take in that horse, then
the horse can go to a sale barn.
So, Madam Chair.
Expert would presume.
Because y'all are in here that
the shelters are completely at
capacity currently.
No nodding, articulate your
answer, please, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott, yes, they are uh
at or perhaps sometimes
overcapacity.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, ladies for your answers.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I
I'm just trying, what we're
doing. Is there any limit on the
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, as Senator
Townsend, I believe the
livestock board in the
inspection and registration
process for these equine
shelters establish a capacity
number, um, I, I, if
I, I know my colleague probably
has more details on that, but
there are capacity numbers for
each facility.
And Madam Chair and
Senator,
In your bill.
In in your effort to take care
of, are you wanting to limit the
amount
that you want to help, or do you
want, I mean,
I'm trying to figure out, are we
gonna have a growing population
that we just don't know what in
the heck we're gonna do with or
where does this stop? is what
I'm trying to, I, I, I hear you
and I, I know you're interested
in taking care of them.
Um
But how many are we gonna try to
take care of?
Madam Chair Senator Townsend,
the goal is to ideally have
facility capacity enough to meet
the need.
And I do want to emphasize that,
of course, these facilities are
still uh heavily funded by
private donations and grants
and, and that will remain the
case even, even with the passage
of this bill, there are also
organizations like the one that
I work at that, um, use
donations in order to support,
um, the horse owners in keeping
those horses through hard times
so that they don't have to go
into the shelter system. So it's
definitely
a multi-pronged effort to
address the issues.
Madam chair and
Senator
How do you define hard times.
I mean what point?
Do you decide that
That you're gonna help someone.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
it's usually things like, um,
sudden job loss, uh, someone who
has been injured and
hospitalized, um, and so there
it's, um, you know, these are
short term stints where a family
just needs a little bit of
support for some feed, um, or to
uh handle a gelding, um, in some
cases there are uh families who
have an aged horse in need of
euthanasia, but they don't have
the resources.
to provide that and so we're
also able to cover those costs.
Men share, um, senator, I, I get
the desire to help. I mean,
Talking to a kid that was raised
on a horse in on a ranch.
You have to look at him a little
differently. I mean,
Um
When, when the horse goes to a
sale or you're restricting, do
you know that it's might be
going.
Uh, to kill.
Facility someplace and do you
restrict that, or do you, and
where did the funds go when that
horse is sold.
How, how is all that tracked?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend, um, uh, I'm not sure
of the details of how the the
auction bidding process happens,
um, for the most part, the
shelter facilities to this point
have been able to take up most
of the trays and and cruelty
seizures from the livestock
Board and law enforcement, but
we are reaching the point where
they are having to, they're not
able to take all of them and so
then I believe it's a, a sealed.
And
Auction, um, that takes place in
order to uh for the livestock
board to place the horse.
Well it
Madam Chair, um, senator, you
know.
If you, if you look at it.
There's been some testimony
today about dog shelters and
dogs and cat shelters and we all
know what happens there after a
certain amount of time if nobody
comes up.
Cause I want to take that.
That rescue dog home. Those dogs
are all.
Euthanized or cats and they're
done away with. I mean, it's
just a rule.
part of the process of what
happens.
And
And I, I still think.
process needs to be worked on in
order to get my support because
There's there's a limit.
Of what happens and and how many
animals you're gonna try to take
care of and what's right for
society to do and
I mean, what's right for New
Mexico State to try to take care
of.
The process has to
It might be
It might be viewed by many as
being cruel, but it's just a
fact of life. I mean, if that
Horses
15 years old.
Mouths wore out.
Yeah.
You can't uh take care of
himself.
What's the right thing to do?
And so
Madam Chair
That those are the unanswered.
I, I understand the, the drive
to want to take care of them,
but the fact remains it's an
animal.
We got to take care of and we
also have to take care of
another one called a taxpayer,
and that's the one that has to
be taken care of, and it's just
a real hard fact to lie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator. Um, I am wondering
about the so.
191 abandoned in horses.
We, um.
Collected by the New Mexico
Livestock Board in 2023. About
half of them were transferred to
shelters. What happened to the
other half? Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, the, the 191 that
were collected that that those
were the ones that were taken in
by the shelter, so all of them
were taken in by the shelters,
it's just half of those that the
shelters took in came from law
enforcement, including the New
Mexico Livestock Board.
OK, so all 191 were taken in
only half of those went to
shelter.
Madam Senator,
apologize. Uh, no, all of them,
that that is the number of
equines that all of the shelters
took in last year.
There is an unknown number of
horses that did not make it to
shelters, but the 191 is the
amount of intakes that the
shelters had in 2023.
And about 98 of those came from
the Livestock Board. OK, yeah,
I, that's not how I read this.
So it says in 2023,
approximately half of the 191
abandoned in impounded at the
New Mexico livers.
Um, OK, Madam Chair, um.
The next point I want to ask
about is.
Um, the New Mexico livestocks
board role in uh day to day
operations, buying that business
finances, employee matters, how
would the New Mexico Livestock
Board be involved and perhaps
have oversight.
And uh Madam Chair, Senator,
have over the next Mexico
Livestock Board is currently
working with shelters and has
been for, for years, uh, to
coordinate the intakes of of
impact or forces they either
seize from neglect, uh abuse or
abandonment situations and again
through the tray process if uh
the horse is unclaimed, the
shelters have the right to to.
the first right to refuse uh the
horse or they have the first
right to take in the horse
before the sealed bid process
kicks in.
Uh, so the, this, this bill
would not impact uh what the
livestockboard already does with
the shelters, they will continue
to work with the shelters to
help find placement for uh
horses taken in by law
enforcement.
Um, so, Madam Chair and senator,
it's a good OK.
Um, and then our FIR spoke a
little bit about the need for 4
full-time employees. And then
with this come out of the fun,
Madam Chair and Senator Charlie,
so I believe that was, um,
information that came from the
livestock board analysis and
that was when under the original
bill, um, they were going to
continue to administer the
expendable fund and with the
sustained funding from the new
trust fund, they had concerns
about their capacity to continue
to manage the fund. We
believe that whole issue is now
addressed because the
administration of the fund is
being removed from the livestock
board over to the Department of
Agriculture. OK, Madam Chair and
Senator, thank you. We just did.
Um,
And then.
I'm really curious about Madam
Chair and Senator, um.
If the fund through the
distributions as.
And Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, I don't know if there's a
necessarily an amount that would
need the current meat. I, I
could tell you that in 2024, the
total operating budgets of all
the shelters combined was about
$2.5 million for all the 12
licensed shelters, so, uh, the
fund as envisioned right now,
certainly would not pay for, for
$2.5 million of that operation,
but it would pay a very
meaningful amount as
As envisioned because it would,
it would have about a $500,000.
Um, annual.
Transfer or distribution to the
expendable fund that could then
be distributed as uh as
contractual or.
contractual relationships with
the shelters.
Um, and Madam Chair, Senator,
for that.
The the combined of 2.5 million,
how much of that goes into
reserves. I've run several
nonprofits and know that my
reflective of how much goes
toward the actual administrative
and provide so how much of this
is going.
And Matt, Madam Chair, senator,
I don't have the exact number. I
know that it does vary because
there's uh a lot of difference
in size between the different
registered shelters, there's
larger shelters such as the
horse shelter or walking in
circles ranch, uh, that have a
staff of uh.
I know the horse shelter at 16
staff, um.
Walking in circles has about 9
staff, uh whereas there's other
smaller shelters that might have
1 or 2 paid staff or are purely
volunteer basis, so it varies a
lot, they do uh rely a lot on
volunteer services as well to uh
help with the daily operations
of the shelters and a lot of the
shelters, especially a smaller
shelters, are really running
almost out of pocket and are
paying a lot for a lot of these
things out of their own savings,
so it's, it's really, it varies.
OK, Madam Chair.
Senator, I appreciate that
answer, but when we, um, bring a
number to substantiate a claim
we I, I really wanna get in
there and understand the
breakdown and where it's going.
It's too much information is
just the same as not enough
information.
Um, Madam Chair,
And Senator, I'm curious about
the surrendering parties, are
they subject to any fees.
Or
What is the accountability look
like?
financial
Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, I don't have that
information, um.
I, I don't believe there there
would be a penalty. I think the
shelters are able to take in and
horses for if they have the
capacity from folks that are in
need.
Um, I think the shelters
determined who they could take
in on a case by case basis, so
I'm sorry I don't have.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
believe in accountability if
they can offer one another, and
if we aren't asking for
accountability in some form for
the parties who are surrendering
these animals, there's nothing
to deter them from.
Um, Madam chair and senator, I'm
really curious about where the
animals are coming from, and I
know I I wanna go beyond the.
Um, surrendering parties, but
where are people getting their
animals from? Do we have a mill
problem? Is this people buying
ponies for their birthday party,
where's where's the, what's the
root of the problem here?
Um, Madam Chair and, and Senator
Charlie, that's a, a, a good
question. So from the data that
we have, we know that about half
of the equines that are coming
into the shelters in any given
year are uh seized for cruelty
or neglect, um, by the livestock
Board or other law enforcement
entities. Um, the other animals
that are coming into this she
these shelters, um, we presume
are primarily owner surrenders
and so that can be.
You know, it could be like a
family hardship, um, sometimes
we know that there is accidental
breeding that happens that can
uh.
Sort of snowball, um, into an
unmanageable situation. There's
um
Folks that have been displaced
from a recent natural disasters
that have then needed to give up
their animals as well so um.
Um, Madam Chara and Senator, I
was done, but I'm really curious
now about the cruelty, the
cruelty and neglect, uh
surrenders.
Madam Chair and Senator Charlie,
yes, it is against the law and
to abuse uh an equine, um, I'm
sure a deputy director Davis
from the Livestock Board could
give more details, um, but we,
uh, there's there's occasional
outright cruelty, um, but I
think a lot of the cases are
neglect, they have, they find
animals with overgrown hoofs,
um.
Malnourished, uh, having a.
teeth problems or other medical
problems that have not been
responsibly addressed by a
veterinarian in a timely manner,
um, I believe it's those types
of situations where then the
livestock board needs to get
involved to um.
Uh
I believe there's there's
usually an attempt to allow
someone to kind of.
Fix the issue, but um if it's
not fixed, then they are the
animals and uh bring a cruelty
charges.
Madam Chair and Senator, along
with those cruelty charges, is
there a financial pen penalty.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, I do believe that is
one of the options. OK, and then
Madam, Senator, Madam Chair,
Senator Charlie, I'm sorry, I
don't, I do not know. Madam
Chan, senator, it does.
We can assume it doesn't go back
into the practice of caring for
the horses.
Madam Chair, Senator Charlie,
yes, we can definitely assume
that.
Um, Madam Chair, more questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Charlie,
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just, just a couple more
questions.
My understanding that horses do
not have to be identified.
In any way, there's not a brand
or.
Tattoo or chip or.
Anything of that nature is that?
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, yes,
that's correct. There's no
branding or microchip
requirement for horses. Madam
Chair and
Senator, that's something that
needs to change.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, it's
definitely something that should
be discussed.
OK.
And are there circumstances.
Were these animals that are in
need of care.
Come into the into the rescue
system.
get the care they need, the food
they need.
And then have the owners come
back and pick them up.
When they're back on their feet.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
I, I would imagine that does not
happen, uh, often, if at all,
um, really what these shelters
are doing is they're finding,
um, humane placement with an
adoptive home.
OK, well, that was my very next
question, Madam Chair.
Senator, if these animals are
not adopted.
What is the disposition? Do they
stay with you till they die of
natural causes.
Madam Chair and and Senator
Scott, um, so we don't operate
our own shelters, but we work
closely with the registered
shelters across the state, um,
to my knowledge, uh, those, uh,
equines stay with those shelters
unless they find other adequate
humane placement.
And so there, there are often
animals that stay there for.
But they are not.
They are not, Madam Chair.
Expert
euthanized.
Oh
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, they
would be euthanized for medical
reasons. And finally, Madam
Chair, Senator, last question,
no appropriation.
Madam Chair and Senator, that
was actually in a request from
um Mr. Adrian Avila from LFC
because it's going to go to
finance, uh, they would strike
that there in finance once that
appropriation was requested.
So that was actually at a
request of.
The next committee that it's
gonna.
OK, one more.
Um
Where, where do these animal
protection organizations get
their funding, Madam chair.
Madam Sharon Senators we've
mentioned before, they get
grants, they seek out uh grants,
they also get private donations.
At the moment, that's how
they're they're funding
themselves or our state, Madam
Chair, senator or state funds
already involved in this crime
process.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, so
that, um, expendable fund that's
discussed in this bill, the
equine shelter rescue fund, uh,
currently exists, um, it is a.
It is currently funded annually
by tax donation, check, check
offs, check off donations, um,
it's a fund that is listed on
the pit D forms when folks do
their taxes every year. Um, it
does not bring in a lot of money
annually, I would say a few
1000, maybe 10,000 a year, um,
and then over the course of the
life of this fund, the
legislature has appropriated 31
time appropriations to the fund.
And so that is the extent of the
state funding that these.
shelters have received over the
last decade or so.
OK.
Madam Chair
Senator an experts.
Everybody in the world is up
here looking for a stable source
funding doesn't normally have to
go through the appropriations.
Process so I can.
Certainly appreciate the effort.
I mean
Makes things a lot easier on
these.
On the organizations that are
providing these services.
Senator, uh, thank, thank you,
Senator Scott. Senator Townsend
for a motion.
Yes, ma'am, I moved the table.
OK, that is a non-debatable
motion, um.
Madam Secretary, will you call
the vote?
Senator Cervantes, excuse
Senator Charlie.
San Charlie Sanzel.
Yes
all passed Senator Hamblin. No.
And Hamlin know Senator Pope.
And Pope, no. Senator Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Dia Lopez.
No to table
No
Senator Charlie, note, um,
center.
I.
By a 4 to 3 vote, the motion to
table fails. Do I hear another
motion?
Um
Uh, OK, all right, so we have a
motion for Du pass and a 2nd,
and that doesn't mean that
discussion stops, Senator, uh,
uh, Azel, I believe, for the 3rd
time.
That correct?
A couple of more questions that
I saw in the analysis as well on
the bill.
Whenever we're talking about
these horses stayed there until
they're.
Euthanized by a licensed
veterinarian, and then they are
disposed of by whatever matter.
Can these horses be adopted out
of shelters.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
that's the, the point is to try
and find them good.
Long term homes. OK, madam chair
and Senator Hamlin, whenever you
say these horses can be adopted
out of the shelters to the
shelters put up a website or
anything to say we have these
horses available, Madam Chair
and Senator,
yes, can these horses that are
going into the shelters can a
person take a horse in and say,
uh, we can't take care of it
anymore. We're falling on hard
times. We want y'all to take it
in and then say a couple of
months later come back and say,
hey, we want the horseback and
are they allowed to do?
that, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
and senator, um, each
organization has their own
policies, but I can't imagine.
Why a shelter or rescue.
would give that horse back once
they've been surrendered.
Madam Chair.
There's lots of things that do
happen to horses, OK? They do,
uh, yes.
all sorts of things can happen
to horse just in the course of
its normal everyday life, OK?
They do get injured. They have
say they chip a knee, OK?
And that's very
Very common these horses do have
to be.
Operated on if they're going to
have a useful life after that,
so after these horses are
chipped because there is the
layup time whether it's uh
through roping, whatever the
case may be, playing polo,
running barrels, whatever. There
is a lay up time of 60 days, so
these horses could actually go
to one of these shelters, say,
OK, we can't take care of this
horse for.
However long
Can they go back and reclaim
that horse.
Madam Chair and Senator, so once
the the process works where, um.
Uh, a shelter takes in a horse
into their custody.
They have ownership of that
horse, they have title of that
horse, so they would not just
give it back.
There would be an adoption fee
to a responsible home.
And um
Yeah, I, I
I think it would make sense that
anyone who has surrendered an
equine, um, there would be
additional questions about
whether they would be a
responsible home going forward.
OK, but Madam Chair, this is the
point I'm trying to make here.
You said that there would be an
adoption fee for any horse
coming out, so this person that
originally.
Surrendered the horse to one of
these shelters, they could send
somebody back in there after the
60 day or the 90 day layup time
for this particular horse pay
that adoption fee and get it out
and that shelter has just now
paid for the care and uptake of
that horse.
Isn't that correct?
Madam Chair and senator
with the shelters, they put a
lot of money into rehabilitating
and training these horses, they
are absolutely not compensated
by the adoption fees that they
madam, are you understanding
what I'm saying, Miss Johnson,
whenever I say that is a
scenario that is possibility out
there.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
see we don't, we don't want bad
actors. We don't want abusers,
and that is and that, and I
think that is, Madam Chair,
where you're going is what we
don't want people to take
advantage of this opportunity
and make sure that they get
somebody else to pay for the
care that they should be paying
for. However, when they are
surrendered to a rescue, uh, the
rescue wants to make sure that
that horse doesn't go back into
the same situation. They are
screening those applicants, and
I can't imagine.
Any rescue, uh, giving a horse
back to somebody who willingly
surrendered that animal in the
first place.
Oh, Madam Chair.
There are bad actors out there,
they're in every aspect of our
society, and I think that people
could see this as an opportunity
to, hey, my horse is gonna be
taken care of. I'll get somebody
else to get it back out later.
Madam chair, is there a
I know that I'm going back to
the New Mexico livestock Board.
Whenever they did have to.
Go before the judge and Lincoln
County and Carrazoso, he made
the ruling.
That those horses did have to
come back to the Lincoln area.
And those horses had to be
chipped.
Miss
And Senator Hamlin.
Do you understand why those
horses had to be chipped.
And chipping what I mean is it
for those out there that don't
know, it is.
Little gun and they either in
the neck in the lip, whatever
the case may be, and they're
able to want it and it picks up
a number off of that.
So, are, do you have any idea
why these horses had to be
chipped.
Madam Chair and senator, I
believe it's because the court
ordered it and those were
considered not domesticated
horses.
No, ma'am, I will disagree with
you all day long. Some of these
horses were branded. Some of
these horses were shot, so for
you to say that they were not
domesticated, you're wrong
because the livestock code does
see horses as in the livestock
code, you need to look it up.
These horses were not considered
the wild horses.
The reason they were chipped is
the special interest groups did
not want these horses to be sold
down into Mexico.
So let's get facts straight, OK?
These horses, some of them, the
babies obviously were not
because of the.
Breeding that did go on.
Madam, cheer, I do have a
concern here, Senator Hamlin.
Am I seeing, am I the only one
that's seeing this as being
unconstitutional because if this
money is going to private
individuals, wouldn't that be a
violation of the anti-donation
multiple agencies have raised
this issue, Madam Chair,
including the New Mexico
Department of Justice, and so I,
I have a concern there.
Madam Chair and Senator, as I
mentioned in my opening, this
was actually addressed in the
meetings that we had following
the first time this came to the
committee, and this doesn't,
this committee substitute does
not violate the anti-donation
because it's going through the
NMDA, uh, and then they go ahead
and take request for proposals
and they work through the
livestock Board. So that issue
has been addressed because it
was a major concern from the
livestock Bureau.
And Madam Chair, I guess the
concern I have with y'all going
through the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. They
do not have any authority to go
out and if there's a problem
with these horses that are
running at large out there
whatever part of the state, they
do not have the authority to go
out and gather these horses,
Madam Chair, and Senator, you're
absolutely right. They're
working in partnership with the
New Mexico Livestock Board,
which is already has the
authority to do that and has the
capacity to do that.
And Madame Chair, I do want to
point out that Mexico livestock
Board works under a very
constrictive budget.
And with the number of horses
that have been abandoned with a
number of
Other livestock that has been
abandoned, there is a problem,
but there is a means where those
abandoned.
Livestock species.
Can be remediated either through
sale or slaughter.
And I know that sounds
hard-hearted.
But whenever we have people out
there that are struggling.
And we're not addressing their
issues such as the veterans.
There's a problem.
We're now elevating.
Livestock over human beings.
We're taking. I don't know what
you're ask is gonna be whenever
you do get to Senate Finance
because it is not addressed in
this.
There's no appropriation here
and in the prior bill, I think
you, you ask was.
Um
$20 million.
Do you understand how many
veterans we could help
throughout our state.
Do you realize how many
Homeless shelters we could help
throughout our state this is a
huge I'm gonna ask you to
consider your tone, please.
Madam chair, I get pretty upset
whenever I put an animal's needs
over that of human beings.
And madam to moderate.
Madam Cheer
We are asking the taxpayers to
do this.
There's already Chekhov on their
income tax return.
They do have the ability to make
contributions to these shelters.
They can make gifts to these
shelters.
They can donate hay if they want
to. They can donate grain if
they want to. They can donate
their time.
For veterinarian work for
ferriers work for equine
dentistry.
But Madame Cheer
We are asking the taxpayers of
the state of New Mexico.
To foot the bill for somebody's
neglect.
I do have a problem. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Azel, um, is,
uh, um.
Senator Hamblin, could you
restate your motion, um, and
address the issue that it's a
committee sub please, Madam
Chair, I, uh, motion a do pass
for Senate Conservation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 358.
And they do not do 3 and I
second.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, will
you call the roll?
Senator Cervantes, excuse,
Senator Charlie, yes, and to
explain my vote. Senator
Charlie, yes, Senator.
No. Tenorel, no, Senator
Hamblin. Yes, Senator Hamblin,
yes, Senator Pope.
Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott. No.
Senator Scott, no, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, no, Senator
Dia Lopez.
Yes
Center Stephonics is excused.
Senator Charlie to explain her
vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And thank you for being here
today. You know, there are real
systemic issues.
That
And changes that need to happen.
Some of them were offered to you
all today through the questions
that were asked.
Asking you to get closer to the
root of the problem.
Um, we don't know if this will
address the actual need as
shared by yourselves, the
experts.
I voted yes because I believe
this will offer some reprieve.
Um, I can't disagree with my
colleagues over there, we have
pressing needs.
And responsibility to our
taxpayers. In my district,
People don't have running water.
People in my district don't have
electricity.
And so to put this amount of
money toward an issue that we
don't know if it's gonna fully.
Solve, I have to answer for that
back home.
Um, and so I'm asking you to go
deeper and get to the root of
that problem. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie,
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, comments
made.
but
Really want to speak on.
I just think it's inappropriate
to always.
Veterans, when you don't like a
bill, if you don't like the
bill, you don't like the bill.
If you want to help veterans,
Sponsor a bill that helps
veterans.
You know, we just got done with
Capital LA.
put more money for veterans.
do that.
Let's not do this either or.
We can try to help everyone.
Thank you, ma'am.
Um, thank you, Senator Pope.
Uh, on a vote of 4 yes, 3 no,
you have a due pass from this
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
The next bill is an
appropriation bill, and it is
uh.
Senate Bill 469.
Which is sponsored by Senator
Campos.
And couples, are you ready?
Senator accomplice, thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much, members of the
committee, uh.
As we continue to go ahead and
deal with the issues that have
been brought about because of
the fires and floods throughout
New Mexico specifically to areas
like uh Mora San Miguel, uh,
counties as well as Lincoln
County and others that have been
affected adversely, uh, because
of this, one of the issues that
we're bringing before you is an
appropriations bill.
Uh, seeking $150 million to go
ahead and remove uh
approximately 160,000 trees uh
in an area about 178 miles. Uh,
that doesn't fully cover it. In
fact, some of the uh early
estimates have been that it
would probably take about 125
million to go ahead and uh and
remove those trees that are in
the burn scar.
What I'm gonna do is, uh, in, in
brevity, um.
Allow the expert witnesses to
identify themselves and to make
their statements. This is an
ongoing issue for us, uh,
specific to the Mori San Miguel,
um, Electric.
And uh cooperative and, and with
that, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, as we deal with
this, uh, it continues to go
ahead and be a serious.
A very serious life safety
issue. Uh, I'm working on some
other pieces of legislation with
uh Representative Vincent,
Senator Paul, uh, as we move
forward to address these issues,
Senator Sanchez is very much
involved in this area as well,
but that's to give you an idea
of not only the intensity that
we're dealing with, but more
than that, uh, again, the life
safety issues that we are
dealing with. So, Madam Chair,
if I may, uh, briefly, uh, defer
to the experts to make some
short statement.
Thank you, Senator Campos. Would
you introduce yourself for the
records and make you madam,
members, my name's Les Montoy.
I'm the general manager for
Murri San Miguel Electric. I've
been there for 8 years, Madam
Chair, member of committees.
rebuilding the power lines and
hazard trees.
Fire.
And Madam Chair, if I may just
ask him to make a very short
statement regarding the
intensity of the issue that
we're dealing with within uh
this particular area.
Thank you, Mr. Montoya, uh, Mr.
Brent.
Would you do so? Yes, madam
Chair, committee members, uh,
first of all, more San Miguel
Electric has gone through a lot
of issues over the past 2.5, 3
years.
Uh, we dealt with damage that
was caused to our distribution
system to the tune of about $28
million. Uh, we.
Focus right away after the fire
was contained on rebuilding the
system for obvious reasons there
were a lot of people without
power at the time.
So what we did is we uh went and
borrowed money. We borrowed
about $6.7 million to begin the
process of having contractors go
in the field and start
repairing, uh, distribution
lines. We're at a point now
where we've accomplished about
75% of that rebuild of our
distribution system, primarily
overhead lines, a lot of
underground lines still needs to
be addressed, but there are
homes that have been completely
destroyed that are not in demand
of that service at this time, so
we, we're
Less with a little time on that
aspect of things, uh, the other
thing that we're about to
encroach on now is dealing with
the issue of removing hazard
trees.
Uh, that was an issue that we
took that we looked at early on
and we decided that it was
necessary to remove trees that
are standing and burnt and
slowly deteriorating or rotting,
uh, those trees are events are
falling on trees, on our power
lines at this point. Uh, we had
a period in November, where we
had heavy winds, cold weather
that knocked over a good portion
of uh.
Of trees onto our power lines
that we had just recently
rebuilt.
And so our crews were unable to
get in there to do the repairs
timely, uh, because of the
fallen trees that were just
scattered throughout the right
of way, so, uh, we're at a point
now where we're
Uh, prepared to go into the
field, uh, are planning to the
engineering, uh, and through Mr.
Ratchford's expertise. We've
already established an inventory
of the amount of hazard trees
that need to be removed. We've
identified close to 125 to
160,000 trees that need to be
removed, the approvals through
the various state agencies have
been approved. We also have
contracts in place with
contractors that are.
Uh, have equipment stationed in
our area to go out and do the
work.
We're looking at this as a as an
issue that needs to be addressed
as soon as possible, because if
we don't address it, we're going
to end up having continue to
have outages, number one, damage
to property number 2 and the
potential for risk of fire in
that same area uh later on by
these power lines going down.
What we've done with FEMA is
we've been able to acquire uh
reimbursement from FEMMA on this
line rebuild project to the tune
of about uh 8, about $14 million
at this point. Um, now we're
dealing with FEMA on this hazard
tree removal project. They
obligated the projects under
what they consider to be a class
A and class B, the obligated the
project under FEMA eligibility.
So we went to work on getting it
ready to go to work, OK?
Just recently, about a month,
maybe 2 weeks ago we got
notification that there's some.
Hang ups with FEA authorizing
the funds to be associated with
the obligation made for this
hazard tree removal.
So we're thinking, OK, now we've
got to pull back our uh
preparation because I can't
afford to continue paying, uh,
the invoices that are coming in
from the work that's been done
in preparation, and then looking
forward at the at the invoice is
gonna come from contractors. So
we're holding back now until we
get obligation from FEMA. What I
do need is because we're a small
co op, our annual budget is
about $13 million a year, uh,
we've dealt with these extreme
uh cost issues.
And what we're looking at is
trying to minimize having to
borrow additional money moving
forward. And what we'd like so
that we don't place that burden
of the debt service on our
ratepayers at some point down
the road. Last year we did a 5%
increase when we should have
done the 10% increase on our
rates, and this year we're
evaluating those numbers again
and we'll come back with a
recommendation on what kind of
impact this will have on the
ratepayers down the road, but
again, if the urgency of it all
of the necessity.
to create a construction fund
that will allow us to start the
project, getting people in the
field working to remove these
trees is what we would hope to
use this appropriation for.
Thank you, Mr. Montoya. Mr. Mr.
Brent, do you have anything
else?
No, ma'am.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Is there anyone in the audience
that supports this bill?
two people. Is there anybody in
the audience that opposes. OK,
let's go ahead and have the two
supporters come and speak
briefly.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Convince Martinez.
I'm the uh
Interim CEO of the New Mexico
Rural Electric Cooperative
Association.
I want to remind the committee
that that the electoral
cooperatives are not for profit.
The impact of rates, it's the,
it's pay that rate.
And you know, we serve only 20%
of the population of the state.
We cover 80% of the land mass in
New Mexico.
And we serve most of our, our
members are we serve some of
the, so here was a fire that
wasn't started on any, on our.
By us, it started, as you know,
by the forest and uh every day
co-ops and other utilities,
reliability is our number one.
Great resilience is our number
one goal. So these become grid
grid issues for the for the
entire state.
Um
And then as, as Les mentioned,
they've identified these
hazardous trees.
Now we've identified a liability
to us.
One of those trees knew
We should have cut down at some
point.
So it's kind of a vicious cycle
where we're in in co op world,
and I will add, though.
Less is also received uh DOE.
Grants
To do some of the upgrade as
they go along with the latest
technology that's going to be
available in 5 years, more
electric's gonna be one of the
most modern.
Systems in the country. It's
going to have the ability where
a line snaps, it dies before it
hits the ground.
So all kinds of technologies and
all kinds of things. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Ed Rougemont. I am a
registered lobbist with New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association, but
today I am here to testify as a
private citizen.
Because I grew up in the Pecos.
25 miles east of Santa Fe, my
family lives there. My parents
live there.
Um, I have property there.
And what I have seen riding
horseback up in the Pecos.
is a right of way that is 20 ft.
Wide
And you have trees that are 80
ft tall.
And now that you have burned
trees that are dead.
It doesn't take much in a red
flag day to
To blow those trees down as as
last mentioned earlier.
And so something needs to be
Done to help those areas and to
help Moura San Miguel rebuild
their system, clear the right of
ways to an appropriate arrange,
and so because of that, I, we, I
stand in support of.
Thank you, and we had no one
online, so with that, um, let's
go ahead and.
Uh, moved to the committee,
Senator Scott.
Oh
Just 2 questions, Madam Chair,
Senator.
If in fact FEMA does come
through.
With
Dollars to mitigate these.
Damages dead trees.
Would the state be repaid?
The $15 million.
Going into the project.
The way I read the bill, it's an
appropriation. I'm looking at
utilizing the funds as a
construction fund.
You start the process, and then
FEMA would.
He must
Uh, policies require us to incur
the cost, the proper procurement
process, and then they validate
the validity of the procurement
and the cost, and then they
reimburse us and that's a timely
process. So what I'm trying to
do is establish a construction
fund without having to borrow
more money, to start the process
and then get reimbursed on the
cycle that FEMA would eventually
determine.
reasonable for them to reimburse
us. Now, whether it be paid back
or not, uh.
I'm sure we could look at that.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
if I may, also to follow up a
little bit in terms of uh
working closely with FEMA. One
of the issues again is that uh
the authorization is delayed.
But this is uh uh
An emergency project. It's been
that way for several years, our
intent is to ensure that
hopefully they will approve it.
We have the resources available
if this occurs and the state
does appropriate resources for
that. Uh, this would be part of
that reimbursement uh in order
to go ahead and uh ensure that
the project was taken care of
and resources were used for the
intended purpose. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam chair and Senator, I was
just gonna
Needed to make sure that we
weren't gonna double dip here.
If the state appropriated 15
million and then FEMA came in
with 15 million.
I believe I heard represented
that.
It's about $80,000 a mile on a.
178 miles so you.
Currently asking for pretty much
100% of.
What it would take to get this
work done.
Actually, actually, the way we
did it with our initial $6.7
million loan, is that
construction fund was utilized
to pay contractors and like I
mentioned earlier, FEMA requires
Expenses prior to reimbursement.
So at this point,
I'll just be reimbursed.
What it is that we are
borrowing.
At some point, I'll be able to
pay those loans or the part of
that loan back.
So I'm not, it's not duplication
of efforts or funds. It's
getting me started so that I
have.
Uh, a fund, a construction fund
to pay contractors.
Senator Campos, would you remind
your witnesses to go through the
chair, I will. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, and, and of
course, as we deal with this,
we'll go directly through you,
Madam Chair, uh, and then, uh,
directly to the senator and as a
follow up, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Scott, if I may.
So as we deal with this as part
of the uh implementation of the
appropriations that have been
received, they are for specific
purposes, and Madam Chair,
Senator Scott, the specific
purpose for this, uh, the use of
these resources would be for the
removal of the trees and uh that
would be uh that purpose, uh,
other things that have occurred
in terms of uh Madam Chair,
Senator Scott, rebuilding lines,
uh, ensuring that life safety is
a
Uh, at the forefront, uh, those
resources, as has already been
indicated by uh Mr. Montoya, uh,
have been appropriated, they've
been used for the uh
implementation and improvement
of the power lines in the
system, uh, but again, this is
gonna be a separate
appropriation for that specific
purpose. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Senator. Anything
else
expert just one more question.
To what extent, if any.
As the private sector been
engaged.
You may try to make productive
use.
Of what's going to be cleared
off of that.
170 miles of ride, Madam Chair
Senator Scott, if I may, I'd
like to defer to the experts for
the response.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
Um
Many of you know me. I'm
actually the association.
And
contracted to electric co op.
We are very aware of that, very
cognizant of resources, some
companies in the local area.
But the scope and scale of this
project, the number of dead
trees.
And
They the king of these trees.
Very rapidly.
Makes that you, um, and it's
actually
To be honest, so we are going to
supply everything, um.
But
Struggling to get those down
normal federal channels.
We, we actually have a disposal
problem at this point.
Madam Chair, senator and
experts.
That is heartbreaking.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have. Senator Azel.
Madam chair, I overdue pass.
OK, we have a due pass and a 2.
Are there any more comments,
questions?
Madam, um, I, I have a couple
of, of just clarifications and
and comments.
Um
I assume that uh
Well, I'll just ask, is the
removal of the trees, is it done
in an environmental way to to
reduce the flood and the fire
risk, but also not to
deteriorate the.
The
The ground and, you know, kind
of increase the flood risk. I
kind of make that assumption,
but I'd like to hear that. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair, very
good question. Again, I'm gonna
defer to the experts uh for that
response.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh.
So they removal is done with
that car.
Uh, state and federal agencies
and following all environment
very cognizant of the
disturbance and and flooding
that has caused post fire.
And
Part of our methodology, part of
our debt removal is to
um utilizes uh.
The amount allowable.
Under best management practices
to help stabilize.
those areas to reduce erosion.
To be environmentally sensitive
to and so on.
Excellent. um, OK, Madam Chair,
will you call the roll the vote,
Senator Cervantes is excuse
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, and
herself, Senorel, yes, Senator
Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Senator Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
And Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez.
Yes.
Esophonics is excused.
With unanimous vote, you have a
due pass. Congratulations,
Senator. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
I also just want to note that um
I hear that the governor is
thinking about a special session
we're dealing with all of the
problems with federal funding
that we seem to be having, and
that's something to keep in
mind, Madam Chair, thank you
very much for bringing that
forward. That's another issue,
in fact, right now what we're
doing through LFC and of course
LFC doesn't uh kick back in
until after the session. Two
things number 1, we're
monitoring, if you will, the
federal activity. #2, as we're
compiling.
And if you will, the resources
coming into the state from the
federal level just for
government alone and we haven't
talked about uh Native American
resources that are coming in as
well as some of the other ones
related to the base. We are at
$14.4 billion that is coming in
from the federal government to
assist us with many of our state
activities and so within that as
we uh take a look and measure
exactly what might occur over
the next several
months the purpose of the
special session, uh, would be
for us to be able to address
that because we just don't know
what all the repercussions and
the consequences are going to be
because of that. I'm glad that
you brought that forward because
it's time for us to start that
discussion. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you and I believe
your presentation started that
discussion. Thank you. Um, with
that, we are done for the day
and I have not heard whether
we're meeting this weekend.
Um, have you, Madam Secretary?
OK, I, um, we will hear from the
chair.
So we are adjourned until the
the chair's call.
