The here of the water project
funds first because that that
will go quickly and then we will
go to the state to the other
bill so good morning and welcome
to Senate conservation.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for hearing this bill this
morning joining me today is Mr
Marquita Russel and she is the
expert on this this particular
bill covers all the all the
projects that have been
authorized of.
For the New Mexico finance
authority to make loans or
grants to the water project
funds for water projects all
across the state madam chair and
I'm not going to receipts and
every one of these because I
don't know how many pages it is
that I was wouldn't be able to
stand is that everyone of them
is on there
let's see what else the people
that are getting these loans or
grants have to comply with the
terms and conditions that have
been established and it also
this bill also.
Contains an emergency clause so
it will be effective as soon as
the governor.
Sunset madam chair les mis
Russell has anything to say we
will stand for questions madam
chair members of the committee
good morning I would just remind
you that this bill is a
duplicate of Senate bill three
fourteen which you heard several
weeks ago and certainly be happy
to answer any questions this
time about the right project
that's great and I had the wrong
I'm checking the locator and
Senate bill three fourteen it
looks like as of yesterday was
and House Appropriations that's
correct so if this goes through
this committee then you go to
the floor.
And madam chair that's correct
okay thank you let's go to the
audience how many people are
here in support.
Anybody opposed.
Is there anybody online there's
people on the reserve okay
they're probably on the other
bill okay do you need to make an
COVID no we don't okay so
committee members of Senator
internet city Lopez I bet you
have the answer to this madam
chair phone number fifty seven
without.
The water utility forty.
What restoration and management
project
The issue my kind of.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I believe you told me
because my question was whether
that's part of the.
The little bump outs there there
that they want to build within
the city.
to slow down flood water and I
believe you told me that was not
it so you could tell me what of
what it is again just curious
madam chair thank you Senator it
is a part of the of reclamation
flow out of the waste water
treatment there's a there's a
an estuary down there there's as
part of that management.
You know it's beautiful I've I
ride my bike by their okay great
okay thank you that was my only
question.
Thank you any other questions or
comments from committee members.
It is a duplicate of something
we did go through here.
is there for suppression
committee I moved I moved to
pass.
And there's a sense of federal
data.
The committee secretary hello
yes Senator Bob.
The center and that it does.
Senator have one yes.
Senate Bill.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator K..
Senator yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Representative budget.
Yes.
Five of those six zero you have
a new path thank you for coming
this morning madam chair members
thank you all very much.
Thank.
So I see Representative Dixon
here for our next bill.
Please come on up.
And Committee members just so
you're you know there is an
amendment being prepared for
this that we can discuss about
the sunset so let's hear from
the sponsor and then we will get
into discussions.
So please Representative good
morning
Thank you so we're here to
present house bill three seventy
nine
so through House Bill three
seventy nine provides for the
smooth transition from the
production and consumption of
how to floor court apartments
are HSCs two more for
environmentally friendly forms
of refrigerants I'm as a result
of the American innovation and
manufacturing act twenty twenty
the EPA is to regulate the
production and consumption of
HSCs.
Starting in twenty twenty four
manufacturers will be providing
equipment that uses substitute
refrigerants allowed by the EPA
unfortunately many of our local
codes have not been updated to
allow for this and as a result
manufacturers will be able to
provide equipment in New Mexico
this act only applies to the
refrigerants used as required by
federal law local jurisdictions
continue to be able to find all
other standards related to H.
back and refrigeration equipment
this.
This bill would allow local
entities to have higher
standards but nothing lower than
what the EPA says
and I think with that we're
happy to stand for questions I
expert with me is Mister Keith
Gardner.
Thank you Mr.
We mentor I think my Sanchez is
set I'm happy to answer any
questions you might have this is
something that is going on
nationwide as a result of that
act the implementation time of
these of these changes is
significant it could take up to
fifteen years if you think back
to when we started changing for
vehicles in two thousand and ten
the act was passed that no
longer allowed certain
refrigerants in vehicles.
That didn't even really start to
really change until two thousand
twenty one and these are things
that something's not even
affected by local codes this is
a long term transition
unfortunately we'd like to see
it faster they're trying there's
an attempt to accelerate that
but it's imperative to also
understand that this doesn't
require anybody to change any
equipment that they currently
have it's just the current
refrigerants are phased out
which starting this year there's
a significant reduction and in
future years as those hit their
end of life the replacements
will require the required to
have these new more
environmentally friendly
refrigerants in them.
So happy to answer any questions
you might have chair.
Thank you very much is there
anybody in the audience is here
to support this bill.
And is there anybody here to
oppose the bill.
Anybody online.
Supporting or opposing their
work okay so could you make your
statement about why you support.
Please come to the middle.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee it was gonna
with the Sierra Club you're
gonna chapter that we support
this bill this bill would allow
the use of climate friendly
flammable refrigerants without
these bills we won't be able to
got the eight HFC phase down off
the ground because current
building mechanical and fire
codes and some states prevent
the use but high global warming
potential of HSCs with this
legislation climate friendly
realtors that are approved by
the US EPA and Kerry third party
safety cert cert of appliances
that can be installed in homes
and buildings only flag is that
the bill should be limited to
local codes and we just want to
make sure that the bill doesn't
ever that we take anybody's
authority to regulate
refrigerants and other chemicals
we think this bill needs a
slight amendments clarify that
this only applies to local
jurisdictions.
Again we stand for that.
Thank you thank you of yes would
you like to respond I'm thank
you madam chair and members yes
and we did make that amendment
in the house.
Is this the three.
Government elections in Indian
affairs chair okay so on page
one line nineteen and twenty.
Right or take any other action.
Online.
For two.
Any other action.
And then on page one line twenty
stroke.
Or otherwise limit.
The case and that is the
amendment that's already been
done the governing body of the
county or other governmental
entity should not adopt a
building code to prohibit.
Okay thank you for that
clarification.
So let's go to questions
comments from committee members.
Senator sold to do with a start.
Yes thank you.
I guess I'm confused what is
this trying to solve would you
indicated what it reads almost
sounds like they're conflicting
with each other the EPA is
coming out with new
requirements.
That use more environmentally
friendly.
How do we have the disparities
that are preventing the use of
those.
So madam chairman Senator souls
what's happened is the the way
the codes work currently New
Mexico I just finished building
a home in New Mexico we we
currently operate on the twenty
seventeen national electric code
twenty eighteen heating and
cooling coats and we we operate
under what's called the U. M. C.
not the ICC this is where it
gets a little bit difficult and
and hard to track.
The the the issue is because our
codes tend to be five to seven
years behind what is actually
being put out there.
You you have that lag period
where if a local jurisdiction
because you have it and then you
have this other side of the
story let me not to totally
confused but the other services
you have the aim Act that was
passed in twenty twenty and
signed into law.
That says the EPA has privacy on
this issue they're the ones that
dictate what goes out so you
have the EPA saying you can only
use the specific refrigerants
from twenty twenty four going
forward you have to phase these
in our codes allow for other
refrigerants to be used during
that time to the many factors
are stuck in a quandary that if
they have a state where it says
you can use refrigerants that
are prohibited by federal law.
They can't send equipment and.
Because it's not allowed by
local codes it's that lag period
that goes on and so it decision
was made federally that the bill
be deferential to the EPA the
environment department as you
know most of their of forty
comes from enforcement of the
PA's regulations on the specific
type of of chemicals and other.
Devices and so all it's saying
is you can't have ugh local code
that's in conflict with what the
EPA is mandating so that there's
protection for the use of that
equipment being brought into the
state.
I know it's it's a tough it took
me awhile to get my head around
it as well madam chair I've read
it several times Madam I've read
several times and what you just
said was making sense until the
end and then it sounded like you
flipped over to the other side
of it so let me see if I can ask
my question
and questions a little.
More clearly.
With this allow the use of older
refrigerants that are more
climate unfriendly into the
future or is this require the
new EPA more climate friendly
ones be used and chair
Representative Senator souls the
latter it requires the use of
the new more climate friendly.
EPA approved refrigerants in the
future.
So madam chair this would.
Would not allow local entities
to continue to allow the old
ones it says you've got to move
up to the EPA ones now even
though the codes don't say so.
Madam chair Senator yes.
It Madam chair Senator live but
I want to clarify that doesn't
mean that if you have currently
if you have a H. fax system that
runs on for ten a as the coolant
and you're a little bit low on
cool engineer able to access
that and you have your planner
to come out your your
expectations has access to that
coolant they can recharge your
system with that until your
systems and end of life so it's
not saying it to replace
everything today but it's in
future new equipment being put
in will be required to have the
environmentally friendly
coolants as the coolant in that
system.
Madam chair with this allow
municipalities to say that only
the new ones can be used
messages to you know in my car
that I'm going to and I need to
recharge it yeah there are two
alternatives the new one and the
old one do I have a choice or do
I have to use the new one so
madam chair Senator the cool one
is specific to the system so one
system replacement it would
allow the local municipalities
state or local government to say
yes the have to have the new
environmentally friendly.
As always it's in compliance
with the EPA madam chair the
EPA.
On the of the state house system
or a an older system.
Does the EPA allow the use of
the older who went with this
then there new law that you
seven twenty twenty.
Madam chair Senator no that's
the whole law is that the EPA is
required to phase out those old
cool cool once over time and
you're seeing what you're saying
is there's a blending going on
in a transitional move the
problem is the way the systems
work The New Mexico once work
with the new systems.
So as you have new systems
installed you'll see these newer
more environmentally friendly
systems going out again the
problem would be is if you if
you don't do this what happens
then is the local jurisdictions
because they're the ones that
are able to enforce it would be
able to allow these older
systems that don't have this
environmentally friendly
refrigerant in it they would be
allowed to do that and that's
not what we want we want to see
those faced out.
I guess I'm not sure I
understand the reason for the
law then it the EPA indicates
that you have to put in the
newer systems.
Isn't that the law of the land
what but jurisdiction do local
municipalities have.
Good to go against the federal
law.
Madam chair that's why there's
local codes just like today the
code for electrical there was a
code pass just recently for
electrical to twenty twenty for
every municipality in the state
of New Mexico has adopted the
twenty seventeen code and so
even though you may have a more
rigorous onerous code path past
federally because of the ability
of local jurisdictions to pass
their own code madam chair I
just went through this so it
it's unless there's a statute in
the state that says you must
enforce this section of the law
the section of the code the
states have the ability to do
that and so what we're trying to
say is we're on board with this
we we agree with this phase out
and we want to be at the cutting
edge of making sure that our
systems that are brought into
the state of New Mexico are
compliant with this new standard
and we're starting that phase
out earlier rather than later.
Madam what I'm saying is
Senator.
The twenty twenty four code will
be eventually adopted probably
in twenty twenty eight or twenty
twenty nine in New Mexico and by
that point you'll start to see.
Maybe you'll start to see the
phase out here if you don't
passes during that time the
problem is the the
manufacturers won't be able to
send equipment in so you'll see
a lot of legacy equipment trying
to be limp along during that
time to continue to maintain
because it's already existed and
it's cheaper.
And so what we're saying is we
want to see these things go away
in New Mexico we want to be
compliant with that.
That's what this let us Mr chair
madam chair yoga let me is kind
of an analogy
In the past said that they were
single pane windows in houses
the EPA says it's lots more
friendly put double pane.
In that I break my window by
single pane window am I allowed
to put a single pane window back
in.
Madam chair Senator to my
knowledge EPA has not mandated
double pane windows in the NMAA
did okay so it it is assumed and
they did then it would depend
upon the local code if they were
enforcing that.
It would depend upon the local
code because your windows unless
it was a statute like this your
windows of replacement just as
anything else in your home that
you replace when you permit you
permits through the local
jurisdiction and you have to be
compliant or subject to the
local code.
Madam when I I as I said I just
went through this whole part and
the energy efficiency all the
other things that were required
in my home we're all based upon
the city Rio Rancho is local
codes they may be as part of a
mandate from the federal
government but there I'm only
subject to what was adopted by
the local municipality because
the state has not.
Given that deviation.
It.
That a child I'll listen to
other questions I'm I'm still a
bit confused and if possible
might have some questions going
forward.
Thank you I have Senator Sedillo
Lopez thank you madam chair
Because I've been working on a
bill dealing with the with the
preemption I've been dealing
with special immigrant juveniles
and how the relationship between
immigration federal immigration
law and what you can do within
that in the state I'm a I think
this is related to what you're
what you're saying so the the
EPA allows local governments to
do this and gives them my
understanding is give them a
timeline to do this and what
this is is allowing the
transition to kind of be
launched further.
Because the EPA of the EPA said
that the regulations and then
the local governments there's a
lag time between
the part that they can regulate.
Under the EPA and when they can
do it and so what this does is
just allow the transition a
little bit it's it's like a
little bridge is is kind of how
I'm understanding it
the thing about preemption is
there's no one there's no one
size fit all preemption you have
to look at what the federal
government with when they've
occupied to feel like they did
and what environmental they have
these little places that they
allow for state or local
regulation like for example the
air quality control board their
quality control board remember
we did this a few years ago the
air quality control board had to
comply with federal law and then
but within the state years ago
wipe away and had injected
something saying that the local
airport could not be more
stringent than federal law and
then we repealed that and allow
them to be more stringent under
certain circumstances and so
that's the the interplay between
federal law state law and local
laws because we can preempt
local laws and that's what's
that's what's happening here.
but the federal law has these
places that they allow the local
governments to do their thing.
But then the state can step in
and do something if that but
does that make sense miss madam
chair.
In chair Senators syllabus
exactly the difference here is
actually we're saying is what
we're saying is you can't do
less of a standard but you can
do more of a standard like you
can have a higher standard as
local government but we're
saying local government you
can't have a lower standard and
I think that's the important
differentiation here it's not a
complete preemption and saying
we want to adopt this standard
so that we can move forward with
these more environmentally
friendly refrigerants and that's
what happened with the air board
I don't know if you recall that
we we allowed the air boards to
be more stringent than federal
federal law under certain
circumstances which previous to
that we have not and so this is
kind of an analogy that's how I
see it and so I think it's a
good bill I did have another
question madam chair that is how
long is the Senate sunset clause
that your that you're expecting
to.
no that was a PMR Committee what
you're years three years is what
we are having prepared for
discussion okay well I'd like to
not go on I mean if people are
interested I'd like to hear your
thoughts on a sunset clause
madam chair thank you madam
chair and thank you Senator so
I'll make a brief comment and
then
ask Mister Gardner to elaborate.
Our expectation is that the
transition is expected to take
more than fifteen years and this
bill does have a very limited
scope so.
I'd like for
Mr Gardner to comment on whether
three years.
Would be feasible because I
don't know if if that Gardner
thank you madam chair I
mentioned I think the the
concern we have a I I use the
analogy of the
of what's happened in the phase
out in the auto industry and the
change in the auto industry
we're seeing you're you're
saying a nine to ten year lag in
many places just to initiate and
up to a fifteen year
time frame in order to fully
implement these new refrigerant
so if there was a sunset to
actually because if you remember
if you sunset this provision in
three years as you're just
initiating these new
refrigerants into the system
that requirement goes away
you're gonna still have legacy
systems out there that then the
desire will be to revert back if
there's the potential for cost
savings or for whatever reason
to go back to those legacy
systems and continue to maintain
those legacy systems that's not
the goal here good part that's
important to remember as well as
permit permit public safety
standpoint the.
The one of the things that
requires a why there's a time
lag here is firefighters have to
be trained emergency medical
personnel have to be trained
when you have a fire on a large
facility where there's large
amounts of these big H. fax
systems are being used with
chillers and other units the
heating devices that go on
there's certain volatilities
with these chemicals that had
the firemen and those other
mention person have to be aware
of when they enter and so
there's a time for that they
have to be trained on that as he
sings rollout and we don't think
hopefully we don't think we're
at the end stage of improvement
with these chemicals this is not
a we're gonna replace everything
with A. L. shape they're called
and we're going to be done and
we've suddenly solve this
environmental issue that's not
the case this is a long term
process so madam chair because
it's a long term process when do
you think it would be a
reasonable time to revisit this
like ten years fifteen years I
don't know because because it's
it's these preemption issues are
complex and we have to we don't
know what's going to happen with
the federal government and with
the PA and we know that our
state at least now has a really
good strong environmental
policy.
and so.
What are your thoughts Madam
chair in what's a reasonable
time to bring this back for
revisiting which is what is on
the classical requires to do.
So madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez the the in talking to the
the folks from the manufacture
side as well as a coalition if
you if you saw the the coalition
it's a very interesting group
you've got many factors of the
natural resources defense
council the Sierra Club so
everybody's come together the
thought processes you know that
that preference would be a
fifteen year sunset if there's a
sunset
that by that time the thought is
this thing could be fully
implemented and the legacy
systems will go out I can tell
you I just and in the home I
just sold a few months ago or a
year ago the systems were
nineteen years old and there on
in the life and so typically
these systems have a fifteen to
twenty year lifespan that would
allow the current lifespan of
most of the equipment to have
been met and that transition
will have occurred.
And at that time madam chair
will need it or we might have to
set it out for another two years
or three years hopefully we
won't need it exactly mentor and
mentor Senator Sedillo Lopez I
think you're your description of
the bridge is exactly right
after that period of time this
becomes moot one separate time
has gone past you're actually
right this is just a bridge this
is not a highway this is the
bridge to get us to the highway
that gets us off of these
agencies.
Thank you madam chair so I would
move a sunset clause of fifteen
years
are you wait at the discretion
okay we could come back to you
all right thank you madam chair
I'll just wait for the wait for
one second we have Center Davis
and I have a question is wealth
and then we'll come back to you
and insults to.
Senator Gallegos and turn
Representative Keith I
appreciate the discussion so I'm
gonna go back so right for
session of the commission on my
mom's house point out they went
with the new product because
they had replaced a whole
condenser unit but earlier than
change Representative a key to
talk about if we change it now
and go backwards into the old.
and I'm just going to ask you
because I know in some vehicles
if you put one product in
you can't take it back out
because it of on the piping in
you know to put all that is our
problem if we were if this one
works let's say we used the
fifteen year timeline of for the
sunset would we be required to
keep those units in that product
line in not converting back to
what we use now Mr chair Senator
I am not an H. back expert
although it I've learned more
about heating and cooling that I
ever wanted to know it depends
upon the system and that's I
think the key here certain
systems as for example in your
mother's your mother's case the
reason why they're able to do
that is because essentially
everything that touches the
refrigerant was replaced and the
system was obviously knew enough
that the interconnecting parts
would still function not all
systems or that are that way and
so it really is system specific
as to whether or not that
happens the difficulty will be
in these legacy systems is the
cost if you've had to have the
air conditioner charge lately
the cost is significantly higher
census act passed in twenty
twenty and will continue to be
so we still have legacy systems
actually out there they're
actually on the previous very
very volatile refrigerant that
it's almost impossible if not
impossible to get it parts and
or refrigerate for so that it's
just system dependent Senator.
Thank you for that then turn.
Representative it and just go
back I think this gentleman was
really cautious so it already
had a project a year ago prior
and he cautioned me because then
you never fixed the problem.
But he looked into the national
under warranty so he replace
everything but I just of my
thought.
If we go three years for avid
shift back in time there may be
times you can't go backwards
because of drugs so I like to
longer look
you know I I remember
Representative mccamly always
used an eight year but in this.
Position you don't know
is that still may be too soon
you don't know what's coming
forward and how it's gonna
affect thank you so the legacy
equipment so with that I'll
yield I was more on the internal
piping and also the extension of
the timeline that we have to.
We look at this Senator you.
Thank you very much so my
question Representative Mister
Gardner is and maybe I'm missing
it
Your bill doesn't clearly
delineate that new equipment
will comply and that it's the
older equipment that.
Can still use the alternatives
is that correct.
I'm madam chair it doesn't
specifics Lee stated here
because that's what because of
the way were deferring it's
required that all new equipment
will be required because of the
EPA requirement because we're
being deferential to the the EPA
and EPA requirement through
here.
But
Representative of the Mr Gardner
if
This person has older equipment
on their floor.
Are they going to be allowed to
sell the older equipment under
this bill.
Madam chair yes.
So Representative and Mr Gardner
at what point.
Would they not be allowed to
sell the older equipment.
Madam chair Senator the at the
point the equipments no longer
available which will be at the
end of this year so many factors
have already started the process
of going to the new and I
understand the question would be
it what if there's leftover
inventory that what what happens
is is you're probably aware most
of these are not that there's
already a phase down in
production of the legacy systems
but because the manufacturers
are prepping for this new
requirement on a federal level
many states have already passed
this law and so the the the
phase out of this equipment and
if you look madam chair under
subsection a as it goes forward
it'll it it's it states I mean
that the mandate there is the
use of refrigerant that is
designed and except as an
alternative or substitute for
class one or class two substance
by United States Department
protection agency we originally
had the the federal code.
That that applies to in Council
services doesn't like to drop
bills that way as you are
probably aware aware well aware
but it's that section of the
federal code that requires that
phase out for manufacturers and
manufacturers of already said
through the dealer network
they're going to mandate this
change through their dealer
network
because frankly for them the
warranty side of this is gonna
be very important right they
don't want to have to warn a
system under a new set of
regulations that's a legacy
system when it was installed new
after this goes into effect
extremely expensive for them
because if you say you did that
you go to in your local
contractor in on January
fifteenth of twenty twenty four
cells you one of these units
that's a legacy unit and five
years later the compressor goes
out well they have a ten year
warranty on typically on those
compressors the manufacture
would then have to completely
replace your system.
Because there would be no way
to.
Fix or repair when that goes up
because they would have access
to the refrigerants that are
needed to do it so by its very
nature you will see that phase
out occur.
Mainly for warranty and
liability reasons.
Okay I don't think I'm quite
convinced it I thank you for
your response of Senator full so
you have something more.
Yes ma'am
Madam chair.
The real crux of this.
Bill is page one line nineteen
entity shall not adopt a couple
of.
The building code.
They already have building
codes.
Right they don't have to change
do they have to change their
building code as a result of
this.
Madam chair I think it's
important to to get the next two
words Senators souls to prohibit
so it's saying that they're
there and they shall not
prohibit.
Subsection a and subsection B..
So madam chair not adopt which
means a new code.
Right because they've already
got a a building code that's
adopted that might prohibit
these this doesn't require them
to change that right.
Then try to read it that way
it's it's I I would agree that
that they are not allowed to
have a code that that does not
allow these new classes of
refrigerants.
Madam chair they already have
ones that might prohibit those
this doesn't require them to
change their code.
They could leave it there
they're not adopting any New
Mexico they're not changing code
adopting means they're gonna
have a formal process of
changing their building code.
That might change these.
The manager I I I would defer to
the attorney but the in the in
the room but I don't read it
that way in fact it it's
specifically once the once the
Soto said this is what you shall
do then they they are not even
if they had a code that would be
in in in conflict with this that
code would not be enforceable
because the state has the
ability to do that center city
Lopez which I I mean I I would
ask the attorney I'm not an
attorney madam chair if if the
senator will yield I'd be happy
to yield.
Of.
It's it's it's hard to
conceptualize explain but
if so that so this is.
It the governing body of
municipality let's just say
you've got a planning code you
know planning council and the
Planning Council
For some reason decided to.
To draft a code that had that
required a certain type of
refrigerant.
And or or captcha provided the
more likely I guess I'm trying
to make this type that a little
bit realistically a little bit
realistic
really was worried about it the
the constituents not having
adequate refrigeration what's to
say for some random reason and
they decided that they were
going to permit non climate
friendly refrigerants.
Right and so they didn't do
anything with their code or they
pass something prohibiting.
Some of these alternatives that
this that the EPA allows.
They couldn't do it if we pass
this if we don't pass this they
could.
And so what we're trying to do
is as I understand it what we're
trying to do is we're trying to
let them pass.
Codes that will allow these new
For the legacy of.
I guess the new the new the new
and the legacy
systems to use these
alternatives that the EPA
permits.
And right now the EPA lets them
go and actually I don't know
because I haven't I haven't
looked at six away for the clean
air act I haven't really
specifically looked at this this
section.
And actually that reasons
another question that I have but
right now the EPA the EPA is the
directions are to the local.
The local municipalities and
counties because they're the
ones that design building codes.
And we usually don't designed
building codes we we leave that
to the local entity so now we're
giving guidance to the local
entities to find a way for the
local entities to transition
into these the new and and I
don't know enough about these
these.
For insurance but allows them to
transition to these new
refrigerants without hurting
consumers too badly.
And allowing the transition to
happen.
And and I guess and and if I had
the time I look at section six
await my guess is six await done
that or there are no regulations
that have done that and there
that's why we're being asked to
do it.
Madam chair I guess my concern
is why is this written in the
negative instead of the
governing body municipality
shall allow the U. S..
Stopped there that the use of
refrigerants that doesn't make
either use of.
Shall not get big because the
double negative but that makes
it very concerning because
double negatives can.
Differently in the.
I'm still on.
At it I don't think it's me
we're not near.
Thank you speak is yes.
There you go with me.
Of those are the same at this
one not always what is the
governing body of the
municipality shell.
Adopt a building code shall
allow for shall allow a the use
of refrigerants the.
You know I think it's because we
that's not what we normally do
we don't tell them how to run
their building codes we we put
guardrails.
They can do thank you for if you
remember the
the direction to the airport was
cut written like that too it was
we put chart well so what they
do but we don't tell them what
to do.
And I don't know if that's a
tradition or or what I haven't
been long long here long enough
to know whether that's a
tradition but that's what it's
trying to do is put guardrails.
In other words I'll not do this
madam chair what you have shall
doesn't require you know that
they shall allow I mean allow is
the word I mean but shall allow.
The use of doesn't require but
the same guardrails but it's
much clearer what the intent is
that.
So shall allow in their building
codes.
The use of refrigerant.
I agree with you it's clear but
I I just don't know if there's a
convention with how you deal
with and I think there is a
convention with how you deal
with telling local
municipalities what they can and
cannot do.
Madam chair Senator that was the
that we we had this discussion
with the drafters on a lot of
the different ways to draft the
language and this was a form
that Legislative Council told us
that we were they the preferred
form for use.
Through this piece legislation
and so we we went through what
less of council felt was the.
Because when you say when you
say that there's no disallowance
here from the municipality doing
that so long as it's compliant
with what the the the
essentially that's what the
municipality will do right if
they cannot prohibit they
therefore shall allow if they
want air conditioning in their
mistake to anything right they
shell out if they can't
prohibited it's shall be
allowed.
And.
And madam chair I'm not I'm not
the I usually defer to the
drafters.
If they have the experience.
although the judge clearly this
is confusing the way it's
written.
And I think right now the other
way is not confusing.
We do.
After six years
Representative Dixon did you
want to say something I'm thank
you madam chair.
Could you as.
Pass around the microphone madam
chair.
you.
I I did pull up an email from
our using member she's speaking.
thank you madam chair I pulled
up an email from our
conversations with Tom Kricka
who is the drafter and he did
commented that
LCS does take position about the
style of the language and so
that maybe what we
the reason for that particular
the reason it's going that way I
can read through the entire
email but we did have some back
and forth with him about the
verbiage including whether or
not to cite the specific EPA
rule in the law
so thank you and Tom is not new
he's someone to be.
And chair if it's helpful this
was part of the discussion with
the Sierra Club as we were
talking through to make sure
that we got the language that
would be acceptable for everyone
involved and so this very
specific section is where we had
all of our back and forth to
make sure that everybody is
comfortable that in fact it
disallowed cells in the future
of these legacy systems and
allowed the integration of these
new more environmentally
friendly systems and so a lot of
back and forth with those
lawyers as well.
Senator so if you have the
floor.
Madam chair my confusion still
is.
Municipalities may wait several
years before they come back to
doing building code.
Adoptions.
And this says Mr in less they
get to where they're doing an
adoption.
Things stay as they are are
there are communities that are
threatening to adopt a building
code that doesn't allow these.
Thank you madam chair Senator
The read in the regional lawyers
and counsel was that once this
passes they would be required
they are required to do anything
because they're not allowed to
prohibit and so specifically for
that support it doesn't say
they're not allowed to
prohibited says they can adopt a
building code they're already
building codes adopted if they
can't adopt the new one is what
this says which means madam
chair on a go forward basis that
section of even adopted bill and
building code would be void
because this it's it's it's
states specifically that the
state shall not have a building
code that produce that any
municipality shall not adopt or
have right eight share what you
just said makes a lot more sense
that's not what this says.
Madam I I I can tell you we do
this at the lawyers at Council
services.
Would disagree chair Senator
that's that was from our
discussion because we asked
those questions specifically
Terry of I can defer to center
look Senator Lopez madam chair I
just okay now your Mike please
madam pope.
I'll turn
off
the madam chair now I now I I
think I get the point of doing
it this way it would void a
building code where if you put
shall then you're requiring them
to do something so this is
actually is related to the
preemption issue so if they do
something inconsistent with this
it's voided has opposed to
telling them to do something.
Which you know I guess we could
tell them what to do something
but what we're trying to do is
void anything they do that's
inconsistent and that's how I'm
ended understanding this is that
your understanding mentors
Senator Sedillo Lopez that's
exactly what we were told that
this is it doesn't matter
whether or not it has been
adopted in the past it's saying
the coach shall not.
The fact that section that very
precise portion of it everything
else in their code is valid
everything else echo can be
maintained but what they can't
use the code today that doesn't
allow for these refrigerants
cannot be enforced for the use
of these new refrigerants
whether it exists or has
changed.
Chair that's not what it says
share this actually work.
Shalott have a New Mexico that
is I get that.
Not what it says the ship they
get taken actions that does
this.
Transaction board the needs and
actually they're going to take
not something that they're not
allowed to have other books
which would require.
So Senator cells do you have a
Suggestion for a change of that
language.
That as indicated before is
taking the double that in about
we have a.
A government agency shall allow
the use of the shallow water.
And then a the use of right
right.
That makes it much clearer to me
now.
Lawyer language.
So.
Let's.
Just see if there is support for
that as a motion of doing that
motion so distributed shall
allow allow and strike the rest
of it and then that way.
So that is a motion is our
second on the motion.
There have to be some other
entity shall allow the reuse of
refrigerant
Is there a.
A second.
It dies for lack of a second.
Okay.
Okay said it there is a second.
we have discussed this so let's
see how the the
amendment goes let's repeat it
the governing body of a
municipality county or other
governmental entity shall allow.
And then jump down to a the use
of.
Is that correct Senator souls
yes okay let's have the
committee secretary called the
roll on the amendment.
Senator boxes excuse Senator
echo some of.
Etcetera have a.
Yes.
Senate Bill excuse Center pope
yes.
Thanks committee is Senators
souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no
thanks.
I'm gonna say yes.
So I voted four to two but
Senator Sedillo Lopez please
explain your I but and madam
madam chair I I usually take the
position in these committees
when I don't
You know a lot about the
particular of not not messing
with the language that they've
worked so hard to to craft and
it's just my own personal.
You know if I if I'm not so
really really sure that this is
a better a better way to do it I
I don't think it's a good idea
so that's why I voted no okay so
we have an amendment on the bill
and Senators stole from
finished.
Yes ma'am okay Senator Sedillo
Lopez you're next.
Thank you madam chair I have we
have at the proposed amendment
that the chair prepared that is
to delay to have a delayed
repeal is how the sunset is
written section one of this act
is repealed and
my amendment is that instead of
effective June sixteenth twenty
twenty six it would be June
sixteenth twenty thirty three.
And I'm sorry Representative I
failed to ask on the first
amendment that was I apologize
if it was friendly run from the.
Thank you madam chair I am sorry
it totally fine totally fine I
think that the the will of the
committee worked about so on the
second amendment that the repeal
or the sunset
of twenty what date twenty
twenty thirty three twenty
thirty three is that of friendly
or unfriendly.
That takes about ten years.
I'm.
Madam chair I I think we prefer
fifteen but I think ten for
today I mean
I think that works.
Okay let's have some discussion
is that a motion.
Yes we would change it to your
amendment in online okay this
was a sure I I am.
I was just thinking that that
that's a compromise and we can
revisit it because fifteen years
it should be implemented ten
years I'm thinking we could see
how it's going and then extended
five years and that'll just.
I don't know maybe there's a
selfish thing probably around in
fifteen years I probably won't.
The legislature I don't know.
With the chair Senators the
Lopez at obviously I mean it's a
that the concern beyond even the
timeline obviously is amending
the last week of the session
this these particular piece
legislation is going to be
important because if we don't
get this through the session we
have already and then no no I
know I I'm aware so with that no
I'm aware so with with what we
already have an amendment on we
would be happy to work with that
and I think within ten year not
mention I'm not trying to push
back on the first amendment I'm
saying with that amendment it if
we having a second one of ten
years the the preference of
course of the industry is that
fifteen to get full
implementation but if it has to
be revisited in ten minutes SO
we'll committee we're we're
happy to subject to the okay so
the office what is your motion
so to add section to.
Period delayed repeal period and
then dash dash section one of
this act is repealed effective
June sixteenth twenty thirty
three for her that's a formal
motions are second by second
okay let's have some discussion
on the motion.
Anybody up up opposed.
Two twenty thirty three.
Okay would let's please show
etcetera so Senator pope Center
Hammond Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Stefanics in center
Gaydos is a yes on this
ammendment.
Okay so that amendment has been
adopted anything else committee.
Center city I just want to say
thank you for bringing this
forward I think we do need to
bridge and it's it's helpful to
observe these federal
regulations and help help our
state transition to get this.
Thank you madam chair that's all
I have thank you is there
motion.
The motion for the past chair as
amended as.
And there is a second the motion
was Senator Hamblen the second
was to do a Lopez.
And could you please call the
roll on the amended bill.
Says what this ski center that
goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senate Bill
excuse Center pope yes.
Senator maintenance excuse
Center souls yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator panic yes.
Okay by a six zero you have an
amended bill out of Senate
confirmation thank you thank you
for.
Committee members of we will be
meeting on Thursday there are
some of.
Environmental bills that are on
the house floor that would be
assigned to us so Thursday
morning let's please plan on
meeting at nine AM and we are in
recess for today and please help
yourself to the burritos and
thank you to conservation voters
of New Mexico yes just
