members of the committee then go
to the staff and then we'll talk
a little bit about the rules of
the agenda
first of all we have the ranking
member of the opposite party
Senator David guy egos the few
would doubt introduce yourself
and of your district and any
interest you have in this
committee please.
Thank you madam chair of this my
first year in selected I've been
in the house for eight years
Representative district sent
district forty one which is Eddy
Lea County and have been
we we had a ranch till recently
in Colorado the special Land
Grant that started in eighteen
thirty three currently I'm
school boarding Eunice I think
in my as a twentieth year my
once as a team but I appreciate
the opportunity to help us help
our state through and we have
come on our agenda thank you.
Thank you Senator von case.
Senator is going to be on
with and without of photos so
maybe he's not here yet
senator Kerry Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and the
committee members and.
My name is Carrie Hamblen and I
am the senator for district
thirty eight in southern New
Mexico this is my first year
here on the committee and in the
Senate and I have at my day job
I am the CEO and president of
the Los crucis green chamber of
commerce and I get to talk a lot
about conservation and
protecting our public lands in
the land and water conservation
fund and help communities sorry
my cat is trying to show up on
the meeting and showing them how
local economies benefit from our
protected public lands and our
open spaces.
Thank you very much Senator
Neville.
Thank you madam chair that she
I'm not muted
My career started out I was the
district conservationist for the
solar water conservation
district in the San Juan County
well before that in Los Lunas so
conservation is actually been my
up my background I got in the
real estate world the early in
my career and got a involved in
a lot of real estate activities
for building houses to.
Raising I'm and then I got into
the commercial personal business
and that was in my career for
the last thirty some years
on the Senator in district two
which is northwestern New Mexico
Kluge parched.
Arm
damn the want to know what's to
crash the zoom so she wants to
say hi so thank you.
Thank you very much.
next we have center Herald hope.
Good morning thank you madam
chair helpful junior district
twenty three northwest
Albuquerque newly elected just
joining this committee as well
I'm a retired Air Force officer
but I'm just very concerned and
want to be involved in you know
conservation and also protecting
our air land and water so thank
you.
Thank you representative Gregg
Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair
I represent district nineteen
which is southeast Albuquerque
as well is that all the way out
east.
To hear a cedar crest Edgewood
Moriarty and even further than
that really looking for this
committee this was my top choice
I hi.
Know that all of us recognize a
huge rural and urban divide and
I'm really privileged to have a
a unique district where I have a
good chunk of of urbanites and
then a good chunk of of rural
folks and so on I'm hoping to
help bridge that gap so we can I
think understand each other
better in the house I I had and
I pride myself in having the top
role really tied for the top
animal
pro animal voting record in the
entire legislature as well as
the number one Republican voting
record for conservation and so I
I give great thought to these
issues
I I think that we need to do our
our very best to to bring really
scientific and bipartisan
approach and try to try to
respect everybody's view points
on this conservation issues and
I'm really looking forward to
having some.
Interesting discussions on this
committee thank you madam chair.
Thank you so much for those
comments as well Senators souls.
Thank you madam chair of the
bill souls the senator from Los
crucis I represent the beautiful
organ mountain area and that
they I heard that they do have a
dusting of snow as they seem to
and my virtual background right
now is this morning there that
organ mountains desert peaks
national monument is about a two
minute walk from my door and so
I'm out in it regularly for the
this is my ninety year serving
on the conservation committee I
learned more about my beautiful
state on this committee that I
think almost any other committee
because we deal with.
Variety of issues from the
animal and hunting laws to water
to
of the extractive industries to
all kinds of things this this
committee talks about our
beautiful state and I'm very
pleased to be serving on it to
get thank you madam chair thank
you now we will go to the staff
for introductions and I'm going
for ease I'm going to introduce
a few people Veronica Ortega
would use wave she is our
committee secretary thank you
Veronica with her in the room
there are only three people in
the committee room and it's
Veronica Ortega marae up
Martinez who is her assistant
who actually scans in documents
as needed.
And Trevor Reilly however you
want to show your face.
Yes R. as soon operator there is
thank you very much now we'll go
to the committee analysts and
let's see listen that would you
introduce yourself please.
I'm in the full sun and this is
my sixty year on this committee
which I just love and I love all
the bills that come.
To this committee because
they're so incredibly important
so glad to be here.
Thank you Vicky.
Good morning
This is my third year on the
committee and I love all the
bills I love working with
Lucinda elapsed Water Rights
attorney so I do have some some
knowledge about water in other
cases of natural resources thank
you.
Thank you is surely Baca on.
Surely what is our one of our
major pool analyst is rigid my
neck on.
I wonder Veronica and Trevor if
they received invites for this
she is Bridget is also a major
analyst Thomas seat ari there's
Bridget Bridgett are you want to
introduce yourself.
Right.
You want to introduce yourself.
She's just connecting to the
audio okay anyway we'll go on
Torrez CD are you on.
Thomas seat is a minority
analyst.
And Cody Morrow are you on.
New Mexico do Morrow is a
minority analyst.
There is County thank you very
much.
So we just are missing.
Surely Baca and comments seed.
On the.
So thank you all for being here
One of the things I was saying
earlier to some of the committee
members is that we have a very
ambitious agenda.
We are trying to hear nine
bills.
Each day so that whichever bills
passed they can be reported out
on the floor in the committee
report.
There may be some bills that
roll over to next to say and
that would mean they would have
to wait till the next time we
can be in on the floor to be
read out in committee report the
importance of reading out a bill
and a committee report on the
floor is that then allows the
bill to be advanced to the
second committee.
So today
the other thing is there surely
Baca welcome surely we
introduced you already.
One thing today is that we do.
This is an experiment since it's
our first time.
We're going to start with Senate
bill eight.
The sponsor and the sponsor's
expert witness will be allowed
to speak at the beginning.
To explain the bill and make
whatever comments they want.
Then I've asked Trevor.
To put on the screen all the
people who have signed up to
speak.
Only up to a certain number.
So for example
We have.
Just so you know we have.
I don't know if this is really
great.
Everybody Trevor you put down as
a no.
On Senate bill eight is that
correct I don't mind that that
was just print out before.
So we are putting it will let's
put in ten people who want to
speak opposing it ten people who
want to speak to supporting it.
Now if we have that many.
I'll come to you in one minute
Senator Schmedes if we have that
many speakers.
On each side they each will get
one minute but this is after the
sponsor in his expert speaks.
and then if we have only five
people on each side they could
have two minutes but the idea is
to move this along because after
the sponsoring his expert after
all the public testimony then
they will be moved out.
And then we will go to questions
and comments from all committee
members.
Something that happened
yesterday and and Senator
Schmedes caught this and another
committee if you are a public
testimony please do not have
your webcast on while you are in
the zoom because it creates an
echo.
Senator Schmedes you have a
question or comment.
Yes ma'am sure thanks just just
two things on the point you were
speaking I think if the public
if you're in the waiting room
You have your webcast on if the
if the zoom feed is is not going
or if you're muted that way you
can know when you're being
called on potentially but you
just have to be careful as madam
chair saying to to not have the
feedback so and then secondly
madam chair Mike my phone was
blowing up last night with some
of my constituents that I guess
had want want inter interested
on some bills I don't know if
they're opposed or or for some
of these bills but the main
problem was.
The rules in the house in the
rules in the Senate are
different apparently for public
testimony and so some people
were afraid they missed the
three PM deadline to sign up I
was hoping that since this is
the first day that this
committee is meaning that if
especially some of my
constituents maybe maybe they
missed the deadline by a few
hours or something but they
didn't really know that there
was a deadline some hoping madam
chair there'd be a little
flexibility I'm told they've
told me that now that they're
getting the hang of it I think
this won't be as big of an issue
in the future but I'm I'm hoping
for the first day that we won't
you know lock out anybody that
wants to talk today so just want
to bring up that that point for
today thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Schmedes and
in fact I'm getting emails and
texts about that and I am
referring them to a right now
people who want to get in to
Testify on a bill they can
register through S..
C. O. M. C..
At the apercent at and M. legis
dot gov.
Trevor Reilly is our resume
authority it is Trevor dot.
T. R. eve B. O. R. got Riley R.
I. L. E. Y. at.
And M. ledges that go.
So I just sent that out to a
couple people to so they can get
the sim to register.
Now the one thing.
In relation to Senator sweeties
comments is that if we have a
hundred people signed up to
testify we're not going to hear
a hundred people we are going to
hear an appropriate amount from
each side and Senator Gallegos
did you have more names that you
wanted to send me or you did
send me.
Madam chair I did send you a few
that had come in this morning
but I just wanted to after
hearing a doctor she managed to
let you know I had given them
the understanding off our three
minute rule from yesterday so I
asked him to be condensed I do
not know if they would
anticipate a one minute of
speech verses what are some of
what we did yesterday so I just
want to let you be aware of that
because I think it's vital that
they do have an opportunity no
one limited time but the just
want to let you know what I
asked of them.
Okay and Senator I'm looking for
you and your
list right now in my email.
So I will do that while we start
okay chair what I asked them to
do is to email you and I
consecutively on same email but
in in different of that they're
not all one group there are
multiple people were wanting to
be on and so since they won also
stated they were would be
individual just to you and I.
I have a list of names on my
phone and if you'd like I can
give you those.
I will.
Let's see.
I think we need to get started
is any are any of your names for
Senate bill eight.
I do not know ma'am they just
said they just want to be able
to speak okay Sir Trevor.
how many of positives want to
speak and how many negatives
want to speak on the very first
bill Senate bill eight.
Three against in.
Fourteen for
Okay so I think
Let.
All the let's put in ten
opposition and all those
support.
And if the opposition various
things that have already been
covered they could not repeat so
that we can keep moving on this
bill Senator Wirth are you ready
to start.
I am and thank you okay please
Senate bill eight everyone.
Thank you madam chair it is good
to be in the Senate conservation
committee Senator metes I
appreciate what you said about
wanting to be on this committee
I had the tremendous honor to
chair it for four years from
twenty thirteen to twenty
seventeen and then serve on it
the last four years and it is
Senator what I'm sorry I
neglected Senator Sedillo Lopez
his handout I'm sorry.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Think about me Senator.
Thank you and I apologize to try
to get my hand down now I was
just going to mention I don't
know if you want to introduce me
later that she would skip me in
the introductions I'm sorry your
vice.
It's okay it's okay and I served
as a vice chair of this
committee this is the second
year that I at risk that of
secretary this will be my third
year serving as vice chair on
this committee and I'm honored
to be here I'd feel very
passionately about protecting
the air land water in every
corner of our precious State
thank you.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
I also did not introduce myself
I'm Senator list appendix I
cover US Senate district thirty
nine which is parts of six
counties San Miguel Santa Fe
Torrance Valencia Lincoln and a
tiny bit of Bernalillo in the
mountains and it's a pleasure to
chair this committee cell did I
miss anybody else.
Senator Gallegos.
Your hand is.
Yes madam chair I was just
wanted to verify.
What I understood is there's
gonna be limited testing just
wanted to the opposition and
more to the those favors are
going to be the same.
Be the same.
Okay that's what I want to
clarify.
If everybody you know who's not
the expert but if everybody's
test I would keep their remarks
to two minutes maybe three at
the most but after three minutes
I think I'm going to ask our
Zoom authority to move on to the
next person please and mindless
Trevor does not say who is
supporting whose again so you're
gonna have to.
Actually announce the person
speaking.
And what you know let them all
in and then you will be
basically controlling since I
don't have.
Representative list yet one of
the the one on the right are
against in one on the left for.
I know I.
I understand that okay that's
fine so now
Now senator Wirth let's try it
again great thank you madam
chair it's good to be here
Senate bill eight those two
things are related to the
environments in a man's the air
quality control acts to allow
for the promulgation of rules
more stringent than federal
regulations and it like wise
man's the hazardous waste that
to again allow state in New
Mexico to set rules more
stringent than regulations I
have a few opening remarks and
then Charles the statement from
the New Mexico environmental law
center is near as an expert
witness and madam chair I also
understand that secretary
canning Department environments
should be on the list there I
want to make sure he has a
chance to testify on this bill.
Madam chair members the New
Mexico air quality control act
and hazardous waste act as
currently written require the
environmental improvement board
to adopt regulations that are no
more stringent than federal
regulations are both the federal
laws dealing with air and
hazardous waste specifically
contain at Carlisle allowing
states direct exercise privacy
and be able to regulate in these
areas madam chair I think and
members as as we all saw from
the last administration where
there were significant
environmental rollbacks.
The effect of the current laws
New Mexico has been tagged to
and other able to impose
regulations more stringent than
those federal regulations so for
example
the limitation in the air
quality control act has made it
difficult for the environment
department to propose
regulations to address methane
emissions something that they've
been working on it during work
out in greenhouse gases
because we do a roll back to the
EPA the methane regulations I am
the last administration
essentially the environment
department has been stocked with
those.
Methane emission.
Our lord said by the federal
government and the agency is
forced to adopt regulations
limiting emissions of volatile
organic compounds and oxides of
nitrogen to try and address that
if this bill were to pass it
would give the environment The
Department the authority to be
able to impose regulations in
New Mexico that never could go
below.
The federal regulations but
could be more stringent.
White wise the environment
department and ward are limited
to the following two following
federal regulations on emission
of hazardous waste
and under the hazardous waste
act the environment department
and border prevented from
adopting more stringent
regulations to more probably
regulate operations at Los
Alamos national lab of these
limitations are particularly
problematic again given what's
iterations so essentially madam
chair and members this bill
would remove the language the
more stringent language and free
the board to adopt more
stringent regulations that are
appropriate for New Mexico and
also read in in in Albuquerque
Albuquerque has its own air
board and so it's it has the
ability to also regulate and so
I think you hear some testimony
from the City of Albuquerque in
support of this sport thanks for
this bill I just finally despite
the discussion that was had on
the floor about potential.
The cost of this bill again
looking back through FIR is from
prior bills there is no
appropriation that's required
for this bill to be implemented
so with that I am happy to a
yield to Mr to saline and then
however you'd like to handle the
secretary and and those in
support if I could yield to Mr
Salem thank you.
Yes.
Thank you senator Wirth thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee good morning my
name is Charles to sail and I
met staff attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
and I've been practicing
environment law for more than
thirty years now much of it in
New Mexico
and I Senator Wirth is really
describe the proposed
legislation Senate bill eight.
Very adequately the bill would
allow the the environmental
improvement board and the local
boards that that that are
authorized to implement air
quality control at the air
quality control act to set
regulations that are
more geared towards the issues
and problems that we face in New
Mexico and would allow those.
Boards to adopt regulations
Senator Wirth said there are
more stringent than the federal
regulations which is not allowed
now it would also allow the
environmental improvement for
two to adopt regulations that
are more stringent than the
federal regulations under the
hazardous waste act which is up
particularly applicable to Los
Alamos National Laboratory.
Thank you I'm I'll be happy that
to help out with that any
questions that the committee may
have.
Thank you Alan
we're in our is the webcast up.
Somebody has already sent me a
tax saying it's not.
I will contact them should
because that's what the webcast.
Yes it is okay so the webcast
okay is there someone in a room
that has it on right now okay
thank you yes that we're up for
us secretary Kenny.
Next.
And one of your experts Senator
Wirth thank you madam chair and
that Trevor please put in all
the speakers.
Okay.
And while we're waiting Senator
Woods of one of our former
members
has been a on this committee for
many years and he is I saw him
on them here thank you for
joining us yes a bill later in
the agenda Senator Mimi Stewart
zoom because she has a bill
that's on as well welcome
Senators and it's secretary can
either.
Are you looking for James
Kennedy K. E. N. N. E. Y..
Still waiting for him to accept
the link I sent earlier okay.
What.
And I'd like to remind everyone
who's in the zoom room that you
are asked to wear your mask
while the three of you are in
there.
And madam chair I do have a
secretary Kenny did send me an
email with his statement in
support which I also can read if
we can't get him on I just want
to give you a heads up on that.
Thank you we'll wait a minute to
see if we can get in.
Good for everybody.
Now his space is well as one of
our secretaries.
For everybody watching on the
webcast we have put up the bill
that we are on which is Senate
bill eight it is the first bill
of the day.
Senator Wirth why don't you go
ahead and read his statement.
Thank you madam chair happy to
he asked me to read this and
acknowledge that he is standing
in support of Senate bill eight
this is his statement Senate
bill eight will allow the
environment department to
address pollutants like methane
as air pollution and P. F. A. S.
as a hazardous waste which we
cannot do under current
limitation so the current law
stands in the way of science and
protecting public health the
majority of states robustly
protect their citizens from
chemical biological and
radiological pollutants but
under current law New Mexico we
cannot do that we ask that the
legislature protect New Mexicans
by enacting this bill into law
and think Senate the Senate
senator Wirth for running this
bill that's the statement of
secretary James County.
Okay thank you very much okay
we're going to go to the
opposition.
And I
The first person that I have on
my list and I do see his name
here it is are to me CEO Romero
it cover.
Could he be on no muted so he
could speak.
Hey hello my name is Argha me
she'll Romero we cover I'm
calling and speaking on behalf
of your could use United for
climate crisis action on.
Are you Sir I'm sorry are you
supporting.
Yes we stand I'm sorry I was
starting with the opposition so
you don't will come back you
okay okay I'm sorry will go back
now is our toll on the.
Zoom.
He is one of the people
registered for.
Opposition.
Okay let's undo gem Winchester.
Opposition.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester I'm the executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico thank you for the
opportunity to speak with the
committee today we do stand in
opposition of this bill we have
several concerns one of which
that if we have different
standards between state and
federal regulations it creates
confusion and burden for our
operators second of all we do
feel like the regulations in
place currently on the federal
level are more than adequate to
protect the environment
including making sure that we
have safe drinking water as well
as protecting of the atmosphere
so for those reasons and many
others we stand in opposition of
this bill.
Thank you very much for joining
us today.
Is Nick.
On.
Okay will come back is actually
Wagner on.
Yes I'm on thank you so much
madam chair and members of the
committee for this opportunity
I'm Ashley Wagner New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we are
opposing this bill because it
creates significant regulatory
uncertainty in a state where we
have a hard time bringing in and
retaining industry such as
intelligent manufacturing or any
industry that is regulated by
the air quality control act and
the hazardous waste acts there's
been a lot of talk about ways
that New Mexico can diverse
supplied to Kanemi especially
given the economic situation
that COVID has presented but
this legislation hurts the
state's ability to do just that
because it sends a message to
current industry and potential
new industries that New Mexico
does not have a predictable
regulatory environment and that
was actually one of the very top
concerns from business and
industry leaders across New
Mexico twenty twenty twenty the
state chamber of commerce held
multiple sector based focus
groups and hosted a statewide
survey about the ways New
Mexico's current business
climate is detrimental but also
about ways that you can be
improved so the bottom line is
businesses meet regulatory
predictability in order for them
to thrive this bill will
exacerbate our current economic
downturn thank you New Mexico
behind our neighboring states
thank you so much.
Thank you so much for being with
us today.
Okay do we have.
And if you have spoken could you
then leave so that we can make
room for other people
is an art hall on yet.
Is.
Pantech on yet.
Niki's.
Okay neck.
I don't see him yet.
I'm very he's connecting will
wait for a minute and you have
our hall in the waiting room.
Our art is not available.
Okay is not here.
Okay if you're ready we're ready
for you.
Paddock.
Yes go ahead please.
Thanks again I had a co chair of
the New Mexico oil and gas
association legislative affairs.
Stand in opposition of the SCA.
Is there anything more to your
statement.
We look forward to work with the
sponsor and and talk through
some of our concerns at this
point it's just a opposition.
Okay thank you very much for
joining us I have another
opposition since we can get our
call in the road he's
representing the one energy and
he Senate bill eight and he
opposes as well and that was all
he wrote in his statement.
Okay.
I'm Senator guy and goes did you
have any other statements for
Senate bill eight in opposition
Joseph Cervantes.
Welcome to the committee would
you like to introduce yourself
please.
Senator Ron Davis are you with
this.
Trying to connect.
Okay we'll come back to him.
So
I'm sorry center gave us any
other opposition.
Madam chair I checked my email
and my text messages I do not
seeing any others I still have
my questions when its program
but one of right now that's all
I see on the list thank you I
appreciate that okay so we're
now we're now moving over to
the list of supporters and if
you have spoken with you please
leave this room and go back to
the webcast to make room for
other people.
I have on here
Right.
You know what I it calling you
earlier so are you ready to
talk.
From yucca.
Please go ahead.
Can you are muted yourself.
Supporters and if you have
spoken would you please leave
this home and go back to the
webcast to make room for other
people.
I have on here
Right are you still I had called
on you earlier so are you ready
to talk.
Yes all.
Yep I'm ready to talk please go.
Okay so of thank you madam chair
and committee for giving me this
chance to speak.
Well audible.
No I'm not audible.
We can hear you.
The model now this okay.
Policies
to self.
You're fine.
Well there's there's a late so
ignore me.
So I live in
the in in would you please
leave home and go back to the
webcast Mr.
We could you turn off your
silence your
your web scale.
Are you ready to talk because
that's causing the repeat okay.
Politics is it okay if I began
members of the committee and
chair thank you.
Thank you for giving me the time
to speak my name is our mutual
Romero we cover on here's a
spokesperson for yucca youth
United for time the crisis
action we stand in support of
SB eight during the meeting held
in the fall of twenty nineteen I
was told by New Mexico
Environment secretary Kenny that
he could not address our
concerns regarding contamination
from fossil fuel extraction
because his hands were tied by
week federal standards that he
not he could not surpass we
believe local communities
impacted communities know best
with additional protections are
needed to protect the health and
the places they live in Stuart
we witnessed in the last four
years just how bad the federal
government can fail to protect
our land our air our water and
our people's we wholeheartedly
support this bill to remove that
barrier and allow our state
officials to take responsible
action defense of our health our
plan and our futures on behalf
of your we thank you Senator
Wirth for bringing this
legislation forward.
Thank you very much we're now
going to Andrew Baker.
Hello can you hear me yes hello
my name is Andrew Baker and I'm
in Albuquerque resident graduate
at the UNM culture population
health and I'm currently
employed Health Action New
Mexico.
Once again I would just like to
thank this committee and madam
chair for allowing me to provide
public comment.
I've lived in Mexico since I was
four years old and the land here
is special when I'm walking my
dog I run into people are all
the time come from around the
world to train a high elevation
seek relief from respiratory
issues.
My studies at UNM and my work
I've had the chance to see the
basis for people around the
state to deal with issues of
pollution from the people
suffering from cancer you happen
to live downwind at the Trinity
test site to the more than one
hundred thirty thousand people
who currently live within a mile
of oil and gas operations while
I can respect that we have a
large oil and gas industry here
in the state I think it's also
important to recognize the value
of our environment.
I got into public health because
I'm excited to meaningfully
improve the health of large
groups of people and I think the
state government and this bill
is particularly plays a
significant role in that effort.
I stand in favor of Senate bill
eight because it allows us to
take action to protect the
health of people and communities
around our state.
I know that this bill won't
solve all of our pop up
pollution issues I've dealt with
the smoking pollution stress and
from neighboring states but I
think that those issues just
underscore the importance of
this bill even if we can't
control those pollutants we can
still control what happens in
our borders one of my favorite
quotes is that an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of
cure and this moment allows us
to make those choices about
what's best for New Mexico and
make this preventative calls at
your as much as our current laws
help the removed from the
realities of New Mexico and in
many cases don't allow for us to
do the work of preventing
respiratory disease.
Tracking polls that measureable
that the once again I would just
like to Senator Wirth for
bringing this bill forward and
urge you all to vote for Senate
bill eight.
Thank you very much will now go
to
And this.
Good morning good morning.
My name is Joseph Hernandez and
I live in Shiprock New Mexico I
want to thank you madam chair
members of this committee to
allow me to provide public
comment in support of **** I
urge the committee to adopt this
legislation on behalf of my
daughter who is four years old
and heard thirty two appears
that currently attend Shiprock
high school virtually.
Recently you know commuting back
and forth you know through
through the community of hot
back I I I could see that Hayes
it in our community you know and
and it it just
really devastating seeing that
brownish dark color in our rural
community.
The New Mexico simply could not
rely on federal government to
make the right decisions and
should have the authority to
adopt strong environmental
protections now.
And for our communities in the
future generations to come we
must provide the state of New
Mexico and local air quality
board the authority to adopt
regulations under New Mexico's
air quality control act and the
New Mexico hazardous waste act
that stronger
federal regulations are are here
for our communities and for
future generations I just want
to thank Senator Wirth of for
sponsoring this legislation and
I look forward to you know.
More beautiful you know
outcomes out of this legislation
and thank you.
Thank you so much of Christopher
then.
Morning madam chair can you hear
me.
Yes right morning madam chair
ranking member Gaydos and
members of the committee my name
is Chris then.
I'm a Santa Fe resident I'm here
on behalf of three fifty Santa
Fe to express our strong support
for SB eight.
For too long protection of our
air water and land Mexico has
been tied to federal
environmental state.
Federal laws generally match
provide a baseline level of
protection on the ceiling.
Over the last four years we've
seen what can happen
environmental protections and
anti environmental
administration comes power
washing it's.
Rolling back environmental
protections and program.
In New Mexico blessed with clear
blue skies your water opioid
scares and healthy lands and
while.
Use natural resources are too
precious to be put at risk by
previous actions by the federal
government.
Restrictions New Mexico's air
quality and hazardous waste act
requiring environmental
safeguards to be no more
stringent relevant federal
standards are anachronisms that
it's time to run.
I'm optimistic that for the next
few years at least we'll see
much better environmental
stewardship from federal
government.
We learned the hard way that
such policies can change
dramatically.
It's C. L. saying goes once
bitten twice shy.
Never again should we rely
solely on the federal government
for key environmental safeguards
let's look out for our own
interests by passing SB eight
Cherry that Mexico is free to
take actions the that protect
our air quality and protect our
land and water should has.
Thank you for considering my
please.
Thank you very much Camilla I I
will then.
I I I'm sorry to start slaughter
your last name so don't worry
you're not the first and you
won't be the last.
My name is Camilla I will then I
am the director of the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club which covers New Mexico in
West Texas and represents over
thirty five thousand members and
supporters I'm speaking for
those people today and also
joining in our support is the
natural resources defense
council we stand together in
favor of SB eight.
We first want to thank you for
your work to protect our
environment during these COVID
times and in fact science shows
us that poor air quality for
people who live in it lead to
worse outcomes when it comes to
comment we've seen our federal
standards rolled back under the
previous administration and
repairing those standards will
take time.
That's why we need to our state
to step up and to create
stronger than federal standards
on air and hazardous waste for
our people.
Mexico Environment Department
can only address ozone
precursors which lead to all
sorts of respiratory illness if
a county is in ninety five
percent of violating the federal
standard.
Allowing state rules to be
strengthened beyond federal
rules will not only prepare New
Mexico to comply with future
stronger federal rules but will
protect New Mexicans and for
those reasons we ask you to vote
in favor of SB eight and thank
you for leader were to leave for
leading the charge.
Thank you very much Celeron
first could you tell me how to
say your first name.
Miss.
The letter at Celera thank you
Europe.
Thank you thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak today
my name is Larry Hughes and I'm
with moms clean Air Force we are
an organization with over
eighteen thousand parents
grandparents and family members
here in New Mexico committed to
protecting the health of our
children from climate change and
air pollution.
I was born in paralysis and I
attended the university of New
Mexico and like many and moved
away after graduation but when I
decided to have a family I
wanted to be here in New Mexico
with mountains are beautiful
skies and that's where I want to
raise my child today live in
Albuquerque with an eight year
old daughter however I am deeply
concerned that the home that we
have will be very different due
to the federal environmental
rollbacks and I'm here to speak
in support of SB eight and urged
the committee to adopt this
legislation given recent
rollbacks we should allow the
environmental improvement board
as well as local air quality
boards to adopt regulations
stronger than the federal
regulations the health of our
children should not be at the
whim of Washington New Mexico
should have the authority to
adopt regulations that are
proper for our generation and
future generations of New
Mexicans.
Over the last four years the
federal government roll back
nearly one hundred of the
nation's environmental laws
Mercuri regulations from coal
fired power plants vehicle
emissions standards oil and gas
methane regulations toxic air
emissions standards and more.
Air pollution like reason
regional haze also threatens our
national parks national
wilderness areas and national
monuments SB eight would further
empower the state to address
pollutants that lead to the
creation of region reason
regional hates.
For areas with oil and gas
operations SB eight would also
protect our most vulnerable
population children.
San Juan County where we have
New Mexico's infamous methane
hot spot is a perfect example
according to environmental
defense fund nine thousand
children under the age of five
and seventy eight percent of
young kids in San Juan County
live within one mile of an
active oil and gas.
This harmful air pollution that
puts these children at higher
risk for and respiratory illness
and asthma and COVID nineteen as
well the New Mexico environment
department should have the
ability to directly regulate
methane from oil and gas
operations.
Thank you for your time today
hope that you will pass SB eight
and allow these point to have
regulations that are more
appropriate for New Mexico.
Thank you our last proponent is
going to be Oscar Simpson and
then we'll go back and see if
there's any more opposition
because there's been many more
proponents and opposition Oscar
you're on thank you very much my
name is Oscar Simpson all live
in Albuquerque New Mexico I'm a
native resident seventy three
years old.
I'm and throughout the state.
Regulating all and gas
protecting drinking water
supplies both for engineering
and and.
And state regulation.
The key thing is our president
regulations and regulatory
format we cannot protect public
health in the net cannot improve
air quality and a hat and
prevent hazardous waste from
contaminating our drinking water
supplies and threatening the
public health.
Therefore since I represent the
sportsman aspect and I've been
throughout the state and watch
the Klein and degradation
habitat fragmentation and
pollution of our special places
and also the impact next to a
residence and public water
systems and Townsend I highly
recommend that you support
Senate bill eight which will
protect.
Future which will prevent the
future degradation of our air
and our contamination issues
thank you very much.
Thank you for joining us I'd
like to thank all the rest of
the proponents who did not get
to speak and I'd like to go back
and see if there's any other
opposition I didn't have more
signed up.
Madam chair I do see secretary
Kenny did come into the room yes
and secretary Kenny we did read
your state senator Wirth read
your statement and I know you're
here for the next one to but I
wanted everybody to meet you I
do want to say good morning to
everybody.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
I appreciate the opportunities
that are worth you did a better
job than I could have reading my
own statement side question
thank you.
Thank you if you are a speaker
proponent or opponent would you
please leave this zoom and go
back to the webcast we are now
going to always Senator serve on
case would you are you on.
I am on yes would you introduce
yourself for the public please
I'm sorry your a late summer my
name is Joseph tomatoes
Representative about a fourth
Dona ana county the southernmost
part including the border with
the Texas New Mexico thank you.
Thank you so much I saw you
earlier and I'm sorry I couldn't
get to you clearly.
So now we are on to questions
and comments from committee
members about this bill Senate
bill eight and you did receive
an analysis from our.
Committee analyst about this as
well.
I have US senator sweeties.
Thank you madam chair.
And the thanks senator Wirth
Yesterday we were on opposing
sides of the Hammersley of of
the bill and I I think that your
bill today we're going to be on
the same side so
at least that's my intention so
far.
I I do plan on
Supporting the bill
but I do have some questions
about it.
so I can understand and then I
also wanted to kind of
straighten out a few things that
I I think I I disagree with that
some of the the testimony today.
so I I certainly agree with Mr
man Mr Chris then from Santa Fe
who had stated in a few other
people that spoke in support of
the bill that we don't want to
be relying on the federal
government telling us what to do
with our environmental
regulations.
and I think that you and I
probably disagree on almost
everything behind this bill.
but I as I'm currently
considering voting in favor of
the bill let me explain why I
would be in favor and then I I'd
like to get to a few technical
things with the bill
Senator Wirth it is this bill
actually changing.
Environmental regulation or not
or is it just changing the
ability of our state to change
regulation madam chair and
senator smitteez thank you for
the question of this bill is
changing the ability of our
regulators to address
environmental issues up both the
federal statutes on air and
hazardous waste specifically
grant states the ability to
exercise privacy in these areas
and again for the reasons you
states
You know the federal law should
be a bass line not a ceiling is
what Mr Mann said I wrote it
down because I think that's
exactly right and it's spot on
and that's what this bill does.
Thank you and so I think that's
the biggest madam chair and
senator I think that's the
biggest reason that I plan on
supporting the bill even though
I think I disagree with what the
the environment department will
do with the bill.
because for example I you know I
have not seen evidence as it is
far as some of the issues with
global warming and anthropogenic
climate change but I I think
that for me you know this is a
bill about local control I don't
think for example I don't think
the the United States president
whether they're Republican or
Democrat should be mandating
what states should do I don't
think the New Mexico governor
should be mandating what certain
counties should do I I believe
in local control and so even
though I strong I'd like I said
I think I strongly disagree with
probably what the proposed rules
will be which is my next
question for you I do believe in
self sovereignty and local
control so so with that senator
Wirth art has the environment
department do they have some
proposed rules kind of cooked up
and ready to go and if so what
what would those changes be.
so madam chair
Senator metes I do not I'm not
aware of any pending changes I
see secretary Kenny just turned
his camera back on and I'd
certainly be willing if the
chair would like to yield to
secretary Kenny
I'm sure if you yes secretary
Kenny.
Madam chair on the Senators
she's first regulations secondly
that we do not have any pending
rules ready for implementation
whether this bill was enacted or
not.
And secretary can eight on that
point you would have of public
hearings or public notice.
Madam chair that's correct the
the bill as I understand it
would require the environment
department if we were to propose
rules to take them to the
environmental improvement board
and I think our practice in this
administration has to engage
stakeholders like we did in our
ozone rules for approximately
two years prior to bringing
rules before the board so robust
three rural development
stakeholder process is what we
would envision as the model by
which we bring rules to the
board.
Thank you senator.
The floor thank you thank you
madam chair and and senator my
next question is about kind of
trying to go top down from the
bill to work through the VOCs in
the nitrogen oxides what what
industries are we talking about
who is in New Mexico that that
is emitting VOCs and and not
should not size I'm just not
familiar.
So madam chair and I might this
point to a Mister to sailing for
specific response on those
industries.
Thank you senator Wirth the
Senator Schmedes that the
primary sources of those
pollutants in New Mexico are the
oil and gas industry the at
mostly oil and gas production
but oil also control the
refineries.
Okay thank you and and madam
chair and and senator Wirth
so want to mention the national
labs and so what.
Get this bill I mean is it going
to affect our our national labs
for example if if.
There if you know there federal
labs so if the fed were if the
state regulations become more
strict are are we are we
actually controlling what a
national lab would do.
Is there Jurich are their
jurisdiction problems can you
walk me through that.
Madam chair again yield to
Mister to sail on.
Thank you senator Wirth madam
chair Senator Schmedes there the
laboratory and other federal
facilities are required to
comply with the New Mexico
hazardous waste regulations
there there is a waiver federal
sovereign immunity in the
resource conservation and
recovery act which is the
federal hazardous waste law and
that requires the federal
government to comply not just
with the federal laws but with
the with the state laws now
there probably will be some
questions about whether the the
waiver of sovereign immunity
extends to regulations that are
more stringent than the federal
regulations
and I may disagree with the the
lawyers at the justice
department on how that should be
it implemented
but the the bottom line is that
the federal government does is
required to comply with New
Mexico's hazardous waste
regulations.
Okay.
Madam chair and senator I would
just once again in in leaning
towards voting in support of
this bill I would just like to
make a comment that I think we
should use extreme caution not
to harm our federal lands I have
a lot of constituents in a lot
of personal friends that are
here that are employed by the
labs if we were to promulgate
rules that would in any way
jeopardize the
Innovativeness and the ability
for our labs to to function in
New Mexico I I think that's that
sends the the wrong message so I
would just urge extreme caution
there.
but I I I will move on
If we could go to page sixteen
there is there is some language
that struck out.
I'm scrolling down here
one second so page sixteen we're
striking language that actually
says.
That he.
That they can adopt rules that
are more stringent than federal
regulations so Senator Wirth can
you explain why I thought the
goal of the bill maybe I'm just
misunderstanding but I thought
the goal the bill was to allow
more stringent and it looks like
we're striking language so could
you clear that up for me please
I can madam chair so again
that's existing that's an
existing exception to the
stringency that we've had in our
law and now that we're going
back in adopting a baseline we
no longer need that exception
because it's included in the
general rule so if this bill
were to pass in other words we
can do exactly what we currently
can do under the statute it just
you know longer need this
specific exception because we're
actually kind of going back to
the baseline stringency in this
in this part statute.
Okay that makes sense I'm and
and now on to some public health
things madam chair and and
senator Wirth.
you know some people had
mentioned that people are living
close to oil and gas and I you
know I I feel like some people
have developed a very kind of
discriminatory and almost
fanatical view of oil and gas
like nobody can live close to
two on gas refinery in these
sorts of things and and I I
think that needs to be evidence
based and so so those comments
senator Wirth do do we have any
data that showing
that you know what.
Any any sort of of clusters of
of disease that are in those
areas or any poor air quality
currently in New Mexico.
So madam chair again I don't
have those specifics maybe Mr to
saline has some specifics to
respond to your question I I
will say one thing though I know
there's been an issue in Artesia
with benzene emissions from the
Navajo refinery and it's a very
specific kind of area but in
terms of the quantifiable data
that you're looking for I don't
have that with me today maybe Mr
to sailing can address that
further.
Thank you senator Wirth Madam
chair Senators communities yes
there are
issues with a particularly
methane emissions and I think
that well we're probably all
familiar with the methane cloud
that's been reported in the four
corners area and much of that
coming from oil gas oil and gas
production both of the the San
Juan basin the area around the
San Juan basin and the area
around the Permian basin have
elevated levels of
nitrogen oxides and ozone and
ozone is formed as a consequence
of the release of volatile
organic compounds and the
release of of
Next next Gen oxides they react
chemically and the atmosphere
and form ozone so we have high
levels of those down I I I'm not
sure for out of attainment but
we're very close to being out of
entertainment in those areas as
a result of oil and gas
emissions and and those
pollutants are all.
Harmful to human health volatile
organic compounds for example
include benzene and benzene is a
known human carcinogen.
as far as actual health data I'm
not aware of any studies but
Senator Wirth is correct there
have also been reports of hi
emission levels from the
petroleum refinery in Artesia
New Mexico.
Thank you that helps a little
bit madam chair and senator
Wirth but.
As this committee continues to
hear bills like this
It is far as when we generate
data such as well there's
elevated benzene levels are
elevated ozone levels or
whatever type of pollutant
I'm I'm not you know I'm not
gonna hold that against anybody
unless we really have evidence
that it's it's making a clinical
or an actual changing health in
in a public.
Public population for example
you know if someone's blood
pressure goes up you know by
five millimeters of mercury
upper down given a certain day
it doesn't really make a true
difference in the health of the
individual and we have
pharmaceutical companies that
come in and they try to make
make money off of their drugs
saying there's a big difference
there but I I think we really
have to be careful to connect we
can say it went up but or down
but did it go up or down that
actually makes a difference in a
human life or human health and
so I'm hoping for the people
watching you know anyone that
wants to.
Ctesiphon these things I'd
encourage you please please
bring that sort of data but
before this committee and then
lastly senator Wirth that the
methane issue was was brought up
by the expert witness I didn't
see methane in this bill can
you.
People keep talking about it
we're in the bill are we
addressing messing here.
So madam chair and I certainly
can yield to Mister to sail in
or or Secretary Kinney again my
understanding is that that fall
falls under the umbrella of of
air quality and when you changes
we discussed up front when you
give the state the ability to go
above the federal standards.
Vast that would allow the
environment department to do
exactly that and again part of
the challenge has been kind of a
roller coaster at the federal
level with the reduction in
methane standards in the last
administration and so it's my
understanding and again
secretary canny scammers on that
if we gave the environment
department's.
authority under this act they
would then have the ability.
To engage in that area and I
might be able to the secretary
madam chair.
Yes secretary.
Madam chair and Senators
committees that the methane or
P. files or any other particular
chemical biological radiological
pollution would not appear in
this legislation that would be
up to the department to develop
rules on those particular
pollutants and bring them before
the environmental improvement
board which I might just that
has are requisite requirement to
look at health data as you're
pointing out in your previous
question to make sure that
there's evidence based
approaches moving for for
regular regulatory purposes.
Okay so so so part of that part
of the intent of the bill it
seems is to allow the department
of the New Mexico department of
environment to be become more
stringent on methane
emissions that that's part of
the intent is that correct.
Well it if I could I think it's
the intent of the bill is to
give the department of the
environment the ability to to
make that determination and if
they do that to go through the
process of Secretary canny laid
out the regulatory process the
checks and balances with
environmental improvement board
yes that's decision made at the
administrative level to take it
through that option so again it
it's it's.
At I think as was testified I
didn't bring this bill with a
whole bunch of things laid out
or ideas ready to go that was
never again the intent that I
had as a sponsor bringing it it
simply was to address exactly
where you started you know why
in the world wouldn't we as a
state.
What why would we agree to
preempt ourselves and not have
local control and be able to
deal with issues.
But but madam chair center I
mean I I feel like that's the
I'm I mean surely you've had
some communication though with
them and drafting this bill
right I mean I just I'm just
trying to to determine where
they're going and I think since
the since I know the leadership
of the state everything that's
like I said I I'm planning I'm
I'm gonna plan on voting for
this bill but I mean I just want
to kind of have some direction
here I I can only assume but I
you know what happens when we
assume and and we don't want to
consume someone's intent but I'm
just and what I know about you
even though we haven't had a
chance to work together that
much yet but I I I would assume
that the plan is is to become
more stringent so that's I mean
is that fair to say I guess I
mean I'm not I'm not criticizing
you for like I said I support
the bill but that that does seem
to be the plan is not right so
Mr chair Senators metes I again
I appreciate the question and I
didn't say this is an
interesting piece of legislation
that I actually cared for the
first time in two thousand and
five in my very first session in
the house and again it's one of
those things that just it for me
the issue really was the privacy
issue why in the world wouldn't
we have control of this and so
again I think the best thing to
do in terms of direction and
where this would go is to yield
to you know secretary Kenny
because again you know he's here
and and I I was I will say to
you in terms of having a
specific list of things that
might move forward I did not
have those discussions I really
didn't I had the discussion
wearing light wearing my lawyer
hat and Mister to sail and is
the one that kind of flag this
initially and given I've carried
it before I just I really felt
it makes it made sense from for
the reasons where you started
but I'm happy if you'd like to
be able to secretary Kenny tech
to give a sense of where.
Where that agency might be going
if this past okay very briefly
because I have
Still on the list Senator
Boniface senator Neville Senator
Hamlin Center Gaydos in center
city Lopez.
And we might at that rate get
one bill done today.
Madam chair and synergies we at
the center with indicated we
have not we don't have any rules
developed you know we are
actively developing our ozone
precursor rules for the counties
in New Mexico that have a nose
on problem we'll get the
collateral benefit of some
methane reductions however I can
address methane across the state
like and can with their wastrel
As we discussed this role much
more prevalent in my mind is the
P. I see issue and ensuring that
New Mexicans are protected from
keep us.
Throughout the state so well I
feel we have a good handle on
what we're doing with reducing
emissions climate emissions and
VOC emissions for ozone purposes
I think we're I gravitate
towards as as the head of the
environment department's first
considering at this bill passed
looking at what we can do around
P. Vasu groundwater alright
thank you ladies for sis thank
you and I and I will close madam
chair and others other people
are waiting so center where the
appreciate our debate today
thank you for answering my
questions is very helpful I I am
going to vote in favor of this
legislation
can you hear me senator Wirth.
Yes.
Okay I'm and while we disagree
with some of the background
there I do believe local control
I do think as far as the
environment department as well
as the Albuquerque board I I am
urging them to be very careful
here because what I tell people
a lot with environmental
extremism is you're voting for
poverty and we're we're
sometimes I think with some of
the rules that may be propagated
later down the road here as this
legislation is possibly signed
into law is we may just be
simply exporting jobs oil and
gas jobs to Texas and Oklahoma.
and then you know so what's
what's the purpose of that if
we're not going to work in in
unity with some of our
neighboring oil and gas
producing states
this just amounts to exporting
jobs and and increasing poverty
in New Mexico so I would urge
the people I would urge the
department to please consider
that and I hope they will work
with our neighboring states if
this is you know one environment
and one planet and one
atmosphere it doesn't make sense
just a shift oil and gas jobs
around if if people are emitting
different different compounds
into the same shared atmosphere
so hopefully we'll have some
unity there and and work
together but I do support your
bill today thank you madam chair
thank you senator.
Thank you senator Senator von
case.
Hello yes yes we can hear you
I just wanted to confirm
something there was a discussion
about the industry's impacted
here there's be primarily oil
and gas production and petroleum
of those this is volatile
organic compounds are nitrogen
oxide is that what the
agricultural industry as well.
So madam chair I would yield to
Mr to sailing.
I'm sorry I didn't quite hear
the question Senator vantage.
Yes about agricultural impact.
I'm.
Madam chair Senators Cervantes
I'm not aware of how this would
affect agriculture
agriculture's not usually
regulated under the air quality
control at.
Okay I'm just curious because a
nitrogen oxides the auto organic
compounds I have a eight varies
in my district I know that
there's some often been some
discussion concern about capture
of methane gas often carry
production I wanted to get an
understanding of whether
just so you all know Jared
productions on number one our
culture industry in the state by
the time you take into account
all the feed grains alfalfa and
everything so and in our Senator
souls are Hammond my part of the
state it's a huge industry I
just want to know what this
would impact
any regulation of dairy.
Emissions and of so that we
would that would make sure they
involved in our in our
discussion.
Us Madam chair Senators serve on
days I I can't think of any
perhaps secretary Kenny has some
suggestions but generally
agriculture is not regulated
under the air quality control
act or under that others way
staff.
All right very good thank you.
Thank you now we're going on to
a senator Neville and then
Senator Hamblen after that.
Thank you madam chair just a
real couple quick thoughts uh.
Senator street is talked about
economics and the issue and
that's that's my biggest concern
about what this bill might do
is.
making us less competitive with
adjoining states whatever any
time a state out operates in the
back and one of the major issue
we rock run that risk in New
Mexico's terrible about that we
the wrong way I don't know how
much business because many of
our our laws in place Senator
Wirth do you envision this
having some impact on industrial
type activities relative to our
current oil and gas is a big of
course but there's others
potentially that could be the
Albuquerque area whatever
Senator Wirth you have any
concept of what this might do to
our economic standing.
Well and I appreciate the
question madam chair and senator
Neville
You know I I I I certainly hear
the arguments of but I also want
to point out that we also have
an extraordinary outdoor economy
that this administration has
been pushing and that I believe
wholeheartedly and and one of
the things and one of the
challenges here and what we'll
talk a lot about this you know
during the session continue to
as we transition I just think
that.
You know the outdoor economy is
directly impacted when federal
regulations get rolled back and
it and it harms that economy and
so again I I understand the
point you're making but I just I
I think that there's there's
really potential here to kind of
celebrate.
One of New Mexico's greatest
assets which which you and I you
and I certainly you know
understand you know the beauty
of this statement and those and
those spots and so there's
there's a plus there but I think
having having smart.
Gular Tory oversight make sense
and I really appreciated
secretary Kinney's.
Kidneys response about how.
With things now in terms of the
going you know.
Process and so that that's a key
to this is making sure that the
really is notice hearing.
Things are fully thought through
so but I understand the point
you're making and.
Countered with that other side
of it.
Mr quick statement three
comments about San Juan County I
live here we have sway I'm sorry
Senator bodies are you finished.
You madam chair you might just
turn off is my can you and okay
Center renewable go ahead thank
you just there's couple comments
that several.
Back in the nineties Senator.
So methane credit let.
You know straight how much
natural gas.
COVID starts off very needing
reside or a lake it gets
shallower.
So much for methane.
We don't know how much we don't
know how much.
That regulate all you want you
may not ever sure that the haze
issue up here somebody mention
that as well agents we're
actually the lowest eighties
community metropolitan
statistical area of the country
sometimes we run second or third
but with some of the cleanest
air out their staffs are out any
significant
Our numbers as far as cancer as
some of those kind of things
that are different characters
so.
all the cheap for us but it
seems to be an issue for other
folks who are taking here's with
that I'll turn it back miss
madam chair.
Thank you so much Senator
Neville Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
I'm actually not going to be
asking questions I just like to
make a comment Senator Wirth
talked about the outdoor
recreation economy and that is
something that I've worked on a
great deal not only with the Rio
Grande del Norte national
monument with the organ
mountains desert peaks national
monument Senator souls might do
me a favor and put up his
background photo again of our
beautiful organ mountains but to
to clarify I by all means I'm
I'm recognizing the importance
of our oil and gas industry in
the state and and the concern
about the jobs but I'd like to
make a point about the outdoor
recreation industry in our
state.
Nationally outdoor recreation
economy generates seven hundred
eighty eight billion dollars in
consumer spending in New Mexico
the outdoor rec in the economy
generates nine point nine
billion dollars in consumer
spending and ninety nine
thousand jobs and especially is
what we're seeing during the
pandemic is that people are
getting outdoors more often and
in.
Open I'll pass so and I remember
when I was going for my
undergraduate degree in
broadcast journalism at the
university of Texas at el Paso
this is one of the asarco plant
was still standing that I could
taste the salt for in my mouth
every day going to school it was
not something that was pleasant
scene the haze in our skies not
pleasant at all and that's one
of the things that I think that
we need to really embrace and
support with this bill is to
make sure that when people come
to our state that they're not
remembering a haze I will never
go back to Fresno California
because I remember the haze I
don't want people to not come to
the land of enchantment because
they see communities that have
poor air quality and they can't
see the mountains and they can't
see the forests and they can't
see the Beastie badlands and
they can't see the Rio Grande
del Norte national monument in
the gorge those are things that
I think that we have to be very
protective of and I believe that
with this bill that will be able
to make sure that our air is
clean and that we our standards
and that we are not falling
behind like other states are or
that we are up to the standards
that other states have followed
in that we're not last again and
so I appreciate senator Wirth
pushing forward this bill and I
will vote in support of it thank
you madam chair I appreciate the
time thank you so much Senator
Senator Gaydos.
Senator Schmedes could you take
your hand down unless you have
something more thanks Senator
diagnosed.
Thank you and I want to thank.
Senator Wirth for the bill at
and I enjoy the discussion I did
want to say that I had a note
from
Kim Greenwalt The New Mexico
electric cooperatives the turn
opposition I know I've talked to
we had a gym on earlier
Winchester and I've also talked
to conto.
And just to tell you some of the
concerns I have is because the
The discussion on the air
quality and and I guess this
question percent of work
I am looking currently at the
air quality The New Mexico air
quality index on the computer
and I was just wondering if
you've seen that because they
only show ship rock as.
Hazard area everywhere else is
really low on the anything in
the atmosphere and I'm just
wondering if you're the
department ever references that
of the page that gives the air
quality.
So madam chair I I've not seen
that page and I'm happy to look
at it but probably that's a
question for secretary Canion
fees if you still there yes
there is ideal secretary Kenny.
Madam chair and Center guy goes
there you are.
We we if I think I know the page
you're looking at is our err
model monitoring station page
there's a couple different
networks in the in the state
where we've put that data up
there for criteria and other air
pollutants for certain air
pollutants I'm familiar with
where you're pointing to I don't
have it up on my screen right
now but I am familiar with that
and that is.
Real time error monitoring data
from around the state that we
make public.
Thanks for that madam chair Sir
Wirth and secretary I guess my
my concern so earlier testimony
brought up that our teacher was
really bad and it shows a number
nine on this list right now
reciprocation fifty two so
there's a definite difference
the Shiprock is the highest in
the state and I think senator
Neville explained that because
of the cold being so close to
the surface so we'll get never
be able to mitigate that but I
just wanted someone else to talk
about the in in the for the bill
testimony that no one wants to
live close to all guests
actually live up.
Personally my house is forty
five but from an all well I
don't own it I wish I did but
I've got a granddaughter was
razor my two daughters were
razor and and I guess my my fear
is that you guys are sort of
demonizing the the the
department are the well well gas
industry in to tell you most of
what I do live it is listed on
here and it was I believe in
line also.
now I can't find it
but my thing is I know that you
know I looked on other places
and it stated that our biggest
problem to our atmosphere to our
us guys hear New Mexico in the
air quality or fires and wind
storms and neither of those we
have any control over do you see
that Mr secretary in your side
it's been an issue statewide as
far as the fire and destruction.
Madam chair representative guy
goes.
it certainly wildfires industry
motor vehicle emissions give
rise to pollutants and it any
given time one of those could
eclipse the other in terms of
those pollutants that we're
monitoring that we see
throughout the state
I.
I have not well so that does
that answer your question I I
think it's time dependent as to
where what type of pollutant
whether we're talking about the
small particulate matters the
ozone pollutants or benzene a
toxic personagens as Senator
Wirth indicated earlier
it depends on the pollutant
we're talking about as to
whether or not there's a
particular impact our causal
relationship to that from not
pollute into environmental or
public health professionals.
Well thank you for that madam
chair sure working Mr secretary
I guess that does.
Making dependent on on where
you're at what time but I guess
just give you Mr Secretary
little bit of background I
retired from New Mexico gas
company and I've seen industry
change I had thirty years with
the and you know we started out
of looking for leaks was so been
you know it it went up to where
you had infrared detection in in
the reality industry wants to
keep the product in the pipeline
so they're not looking to lose I
mean they lose money when they
do that in just a to me is one
of those things have you seen as
far from the department of a
backlash or slow down from
industry to try to get take care
of the environment.
Madam chair and senator guy goes
from the industry and if you
mean all oil and gas what we've
seen in during the pandemic is
more emissions from oil and gas
as evidenced by our infrared
flyovers conducted with USEPA
so we've seen more emissions of
methane and VOCs coming out of a
quick then.
In twenty twenty compared to
twenty nineteen that's
documented in in reports as well
as on our our you tube channel
But so I'm not sure what the
root cause of that is in terms
of other industries throughout
the state
you know it's we.
We don't have the rules to to we
can't be more stringent than the
fed so I'm sort of looking at it
through a federal lands when I
when I answer some of those
questions
but but with the oil and gas we
have seen an uptick emissions.
Okay thank you for that
madam chair so worked in sector
that my next question for you
close to and and Dr Schmidt is
not I appreciate them but I I
think on the local control piece
I wanted to ask you how would
that work on the school board
and school board level I like
local control but I look at
local control over the air
quality you'd end up with a
patch work quilt all over the
nation how would the local
control this help us in in New
Mexico's farmers this bill with
their quality.
So I'll start and then I can
feel the secretary Kenny and and
in particular the relationship
between the department of
environment and the Albuquerque
airport which already exists but
I think the key to this bill is
that.
New Mexico would be exercising
its rights to address.
Air quality issues hazardous
hazardous waste issues.
You know and not just be stock
following the the ups and downs
of the federal the federal law
and so in fact that from that
federal law would always be the
the baseline because we can
never be less stringent than the
federal law but this would allow
us to go above that that those
those bass lines and again this
is what the federal legislation
that created both the air and
hazardous waste Authority allow
specifically for so the federal
government recognizes that
states can make this decision
and so this is the policy
decision we're facing today and
I might yield to secretary Kenny
just to explain the relationship
with the City of Albuquerque and
their their care board
and kind of the local board
piece in terms of the overall
jurisdiction issue with with
your department.
madam chair Senator Gallegos the
the relationship between the
City of Albuquerque and the New
Mexico environment department is
one where we share jurisdiction
but in reality they have their
own jurisdiction under under
federal laws so we coordinate
with them frequently on what
they're contemplating doing as
as we share than what we're
contemplating on doing obviously
oil and gas is not in Bernalillo
county
are in in the City of
Albuquerque but we look to for
that equity among our regulatory
schemes I I would also add that
if you know the consistency in
the regulatory scheme is gained
by enacting a bill like this
because right now we can only
apply rules in certain counties
based on how good or bad the air
quality is there's more equity
if you will in deploying a
statewide air program that that
has all sorts of industry being.
Equally regulated or or
regulated in New Mexico and
equivalent matter irrespective
of what county they're in which
is right now it's more patchwork
than it and this bill would
create.
Thank you for that Mr Secretary
of so madam chair so work Mr
Secretary so you're saying that
currently you have the authority
to look at county level versus
state level so would that not be
currently local control.
I'm at the idea of the secretary
Kinney.
You madam chair sorry I don't
mean to be out orders if I'm
jumping in but nine chair and
senator
It's complicated is is the
answer but but essentially
there are.
There are certain pollutants
which we have authority for in
in particular counties and
there's certain pollutants which
we don't have authority for in
in certain counties this will
give us the authority to be more
uniforms if this bill were
enacted.
So I I I it's a I'm happy to get
into it but it's a much
complicated work it's a
complicated regulatory scheme
but this bill will simplify the
regulatory scheme by allowing
New Mexico to have it's a
statewide program that that was
the necessary.
Okay well thank you for that I
guess my next question then
percent of work madam chair
would be so the way I'm reading
this this has to be do more
about the methane rule than
anything else in the state would
that be a fair judgment and my
next question on that is just
does New Mexico right now have
the authority the legal
authority to regulate methane
rule of the methods.
So madam chair all the the
secretary address the specific
last question but
again I think.
What's important here is to do
the premise of what we're doing
is is basically giving.
The state the ability to set a
standard and I and I and I
really appreciate what secretary
Kenny said because this argument
that this is going to create are
our regulatory patchwork we
already have a regulatory
patchwork and and I just think I
being able to set a statewide
standard that actually from a
business standpoint up complete
response directly to that
criticism that was made in the
testimony in opposition by the
New Mexico chamber you're
creating a more understandable
and consistent regulatory
framework but I'll let the
secretary Kenny address exactly
what this would allow his
department to do when it comes
to methane.
And madam chair center Gallegos
we do not have the authority to
regulate methane under the air
quality control act right now so
that that is not a pollutant we
can directly regulate.
Are you on break.
Thank you.
You Secretary
So so now the question I would
have from Mr secretary madam
chair center work is in the
proposal you have the statewide
the.
View of of of of the.
This meant Seneal could you mute
I'm sorry that's right.
I'm sorry go ahead Senator guy
you guys okay let me try to get
my thoughts back on track but
the question madam chair and
senator Wirth was for the
secretary if we have the
statewide air quality
regulations are asking for and
something happened in a certain
secretary would there be able to
have a variance that secretary
if they had something come up
that
would.
Francis would not happen in
Farmington what happens Lea
County they're gonna be
a lot of options for variances
in your of Senate bill eight.
madam chair and senator guy goes
I I think what you're asking
more specifically is in the
rules that we could to regulate
methane under Senate bill eight
to the environmental group board
with those rules have.
Variances and I I would say that
most environmental rules have
have various like force majeure
provisions for and things like
that but you know I think what
we would strive to do in a
future rule making that would be
very stakeholder based would be
to to not create a bunch of
patch works throughout the state
in New Mexico but if there was a
unique set of circumstances in
which an operator.
Had to to to to you know start
up for the public safety or
something like that there's
always sort of.
Some kind of clause built into
environmental regulations you're
also asking a question around
enforcement discretion and I
think those are all sort of wait
while down the road of rules
that don't even exist today so I
I understand the theoretical
question you're asking but I
think it's it's it's far down
the road at this point and it's
not to my knowledge not built
into the statute.
Well thank you for that in just
a little Madam than I've got one
last question for this Senator
but and I appreciate Center
Hamblen it made a a really good
presentation on the outdoor
economy nine point nine billion
dollars and I just wonder I I
first see this costing industry
for the oil gas sector and with
that of
Dr Schmidt is a talked about of
them leaving the state going
over Texas and working I can
really see that happening I just
fear that if we go too far too
fast and and you know one of my
questions early on was why now
in in in talking about the
pandemic nineteen was better
than twenty I'm not sure how the
industry is going to be blamed
for whatever's called because in
in twenty but it's just my
thought that if we damages that
industry we also take money away
from our students and schools
and be on school work that's
pretty important to me but my a
final question for the senator
is because I I'm afraid if we do
the variances and
In rulemaking that we would have
control over the dialogue or the
the text of it and I'm wondering
center work would you are madam
chair so works would you
consider an amendment to this
bill will support the variance
rejection provisions would allow
the companies to very from
from state law that in in time
of need
Because there's a it's it's
gonna be more stringent than the
federal law is what they're
accustomed to would you consider
an amendment and I'd love to
work with you on that.
Thank you madam chair and I
appreciate the question and I
I've been around long enough to
go through various
administrations and kind of
seeing the swaying back and
forth one of the most dangerous
things I think we can do here is
get way into the weeds and terms
of what those kind of issues
what what black and so I am very
has
to do what you're suggesting for
the reasons the secretary
counties that not I wanna give a
shout out to this administration
the way they approached the
regulatory environment which is
very collaborative which is
bringing people and and notice
due process and I just think
what we need to do is have set
the standard which is what we're
doing here and then the
regulators get involved and and
look at those specifics take all
the testimony and so you know
well I appreciate you know
your your suggestion I just
think I have real hesitation
about getting weights and
specific and and I'd been a
general bill like this that
setting a framework and then
allowing regulators to do their
job.
Well thanks for that madam chair
and senator Wirth and I guess my
proposals to be collaborative
because I was not part of the
original discussion on Senate
bill eight but just to be honest
I like the way Dr Schmidt is did
it yesterday were you wouldn't
do this without coming to you
when I do this I will be coming
to you but I just wanted to be
up front and let you know that I
have some concerns and I think
it will devastate the industry
if we go too far too fast and I
like the opportunities they are
currently working on to try to
capture as much as they can as
far as the methane rules it's in
place but without all yield
thank you.
Senator we now are moving to
center city office.
Thank you madam chair I just
just briefly before I make a
motion to to pass to pass this
bill or motion produce thousand
I served on the air quality
Bernalillo county air
Albuquerque air quality board in
the nineties and due to the
refineries to refiners in
Albuquerque the rail yards wood
burning stoves and a sawmill and
the Albuquerque box wind box we
were able to establish unique
regulations that that suited the
area and we were able to reduce
the Albuquerque brown cloud I
don't know how many people
remember the Albuquerque brown
cloud if you look into the
mountains now it is no longer
has that as it was at all and
it's because of that work in the
nineties and I'm very proud of
and with that I would like to
move to pass on this bill on
Senate bill eight.
Okay is there a second.
I second.
Okay I have a dual second the
Senator Campbell and Hamlin and
Senator pope I think okay
Senator Wirth would you like to
close.
Madam chair I think you've
you've heard the flavor and
presentation I very much
appreciate the questions of from
the committee and what what
again this is support think is a
good bill.
Thank you so much for the
committee secretary please call
the vote role.
Senator.
No ma'am.
Yes.
I don't know.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator so yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Madam chair.
would you go back to Senator
Bondi's this on.
Senator.
I don't see him okay.
Okay chairman's defending yes.
Yes and no.
Next six yes and two male and
one excused.
Thank.
Thank you right to go for that
and thank you senator Wirth for
you there your presentation New
York witnesses today and good
luck in your next committee.
We're moving on to our second to
bill it is five minutes to
eleven we will be having a hard
cut off at noon and we need to
try to Senator Sedillo Lopez you
have a question or could you
take your hand out.
Sorry I'll take that down thank
you
I couldn't even find my hand
yesterday.
we're now on our second bill
which is.
Senate bill eleven clean fuel
standard act Senator Stewart and
she has three expert witnesses
secretary Jim Kenney from
environment secretary Alicia
keys for economic development
department and Amy brown from OB
one day consulting so is
everybody on the web yes Senator
Stewart if you go ahead.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee
I'm very excited about this bill
that I'm bringing forward on
behalf of the governor and
secretary Kenny it's a clean
clean fuel standard for New
Mexico it's a smart approach it
should positively impact our
economy our public health and
our environment to try secretary
only nine pages that taxed.
We're estimating that about
forty seven million annually in
economic investments by enacting
this bill and merely by
announcing the bill our agencies
are hearing from new businesses
wanting to come to New Mexico
and others that want to expand
here these are businesses it'll
help diversify our economy
provide jobs stabilize our
revenues are also businesses
committed to cleaner energy and
less emissions we're estimating
four point seven million tons in
reductions of carbon emissions
from the transportation sector
the second largest emitter of
greenhouse gases in New Mexico
behind oil and gas industry so
this is only a transportation
fuels it does not include
aviation fuel locomotive fuel
home heating oil they would not
be subject to the clean fuel
standards so the Senate bill
eleven is our first step towards
adopting a comprehensive market
based program that was directed
by governor Lujan hunk rations
executive order on our first
days in office it will also
result in a substantial decrease
in emissions from the
transportation industry with no
change needed in consumer
behavior so how it works said
very simply it requires a
reduction in carbon intensity of
transportation fuels we're
require a reduction in its
carbon intensity by ten percent
before twenty thirty twenty
percent before twenty forty
those businesses that re find
Lynn may or import
transportation fuel are covered
by the act but doesn't apply to
fuel retailers like gas stations
so those who refer.
Fine blend maker import
transportation fuel can meet the
clean fuel standard by reducing
that carbon intensity of the
fuel itself or by purchasing
credits so the idea of
generating credits as where we
introduce this market mechanism
of credits can be generated all
across the state from active oil
and natural gas power generation
it can reduce carbon emission if
you can reduce carbon emissions
you can generate credits so to
explain a little bit more about
how this would work I would like
to ask Miss that my expert
witness at secretary James
Kinney to make the comments and
then Secretary leash he's madam
chair and then we'll be ready
for questions.
Senator Stewart out I have a
sheet here this is Amy brown is
one of your experience is that
true.
A yes she's the chief operating
officer of Adelante consultant
is she on the yes yes yes so we
you have three expert witnesses
I just wanted to let people know
that they'll be secretary Kenny
secretary keys and then Amy
brown thank you very much and
madam chair before we go to
secretary Kenny we do have a
brief amendment all it does is
corrected drafting err on the
drafter left off the
appropriation the bill is
scheduled to go to Senate
finance anyway this just makes
the bill full and ready for
Senate finance but we can do
that at any time whenever you
would like so
Senator Stewart why don't you
move the amendment since it's a
financial one.
The can I move that amendment.
I will the amendment is their
second from the committee
second.
Okay so that amendment committee
members are you have of running
everybody received the
amendment.
All
right now and then Trevor will
put it up.
Okay so Senator Stewart would
you explain the amendment so the
the to the two numbers to one
nine point one it simply as
three million two hundred
thousand dollars in the
appropriation paragraph at the
end of the bill.
Okay it is strictly an
appropriation.
And here it is on the screen for
committee members to look at
there is a a motion and a second
to accept.
Is there any objection to
accepting the amendment the
state so verbally.
Okay so who is objecting to the
amendment.
Is there any objection to the
amount.
Okay Branik of the amendment has
been accepted by the committee
so now let's go to your expert
witnesses and the amendment can
come off the screen thank you.
Madam chair then it may I
proceed yes secretary Kenny then
secretary keys that Amy brown.
Okay thank you madam chair and
good morning madam chair again
and members the committee as you
know my name is James county on
the cabinet secretary for the
environment department I'm
incredibly proud to lead this
effort along with secretary keys
and other members of the
administration on it to bring
this governor's bill before you.
Is Senator Stewart indicated a
clean fuel standard does three
things online I want to drive
this point home frequently and
often it diversifies our economy
it creates more jobs many of
them clean energy jobs and
brings new innovative business
to New Mexico but most of all
it's a giant leap forward in our
climate strategy
as you many of you know I am co
lead of the climate change task
force with secretary cultural
probes from
from and
and we need to do more to meet
our goal of reducing greenhouse
gas emissions by forty five
percent by twenty forty.
And while we are as this
committee is discuss tackling
oil and gas emissions for their
methane emissions out of EMNRD
and their VOC emissions out of
the Environment Department
and and that it oil and gas is
our number one source of
greenhouse gas emissions and say
we need to tackle the number two
source of greenhouse gas
emissions which is the
transportation sector.
It's critical that we in an act
this bill for not only are climb
it but for all New Mexicans and
if enacted which really exciting
about this bill is that will
further protect vulnerable
populations like children the
elderly and those with
respiratory illnesses which is
really compounded by COVID
nineteen.
And through air pollution and
other types of emissions that
occurred throughout the state so
this bill will address those
types of issues but we'll also
address environmental justice
communities those communities
across the state the chair in
the in equity of greater
pollution and associated health
impacts when fully implemented
as Senator Stewart Stewart
indicated that's about four
point seven million metric tons
of carbon dioxide but let me put
that in something that maybe is
a little bit more easy to grasp
that's equivalent to taking
about forty four thousand cars
off the road for about fifteen
years.
So as the secretary of the
environment department I am a
very much aware and I hear this
all the time that that that
there's sort of this I caught in
the involves choice if you will
that strong environmental policy
hurts business I think what
we're talking about today with
the clean fuel standard.
deflates that argument and I'm
really glad that we can bring
this bill before you so thank
you chair stuff onyx and members
the committee I'm going to let
move to Secretary keys of that
so basis you can talk about the
economic impacts thank you
Secretary kidding now we'll hear
from Senate from a Secretary
keys.
Thank you very much for Morning
madam chair members of the
committee I'm pleased to be here
today to support SB eleven I
think a bill that will create
jobs it's going to maintain New
Mexico as a clean and healthy
place to live and work and
create a tool really for private
investment in innovative
technologies.
This bill will help New Mexico
be at the forefront of
innovation it will stimulate
people to start thinking
differently it was for research
and development at our
universities labs in our private
sector specifically for the
private sector the creation of
an equity market of credits will
created tool for private
companies to invest in
infrastructure in New Mexico our
economist EDD have study
California and found that the
state's cleaning fuels market
grew by fifty percent between
between two thousand eleven and
two thousand and sixteen we
believe that there is huge
potential and the hydrogen
vehicle market and industry
expected to reach forty two
billion by twenty twenty six
major companies like Hyundai
Audi BMW Volvo they're all
learning leaning towards this
technology and we would like to
attract one of these companies
to New Mexico in addition in New
Mexico company called bear
attack is already working on
this technology today with
smaller more efficient on site
hydrogen production and they
just announced that they raised
a hundred and fifty seven
million dollars that is really
unprecedented for New Mexico
company.
This bill will pave the way for
potential bio methane to be used
in bio gas as is already planned
at the HollyFrontier Artesia
finery this bill will set up the
opportunity for the dairy
industry to capitalize on the
newer to renewable natural gas
projects dominion energy and
vanguard renewables are arty
party partnering to helps fund
such projects and five other
states including New Mexico we
have the workforce and we have
the technical assistance and
partnerships from the national
labs well the cleaning and fuel
standard by title may raise some
concerns.
Areas historically reliance on
coal mining and use of coal oil
and gas and other new carbon
intensive industries it should
really provide help.
Well this while this clean fuel
standard it sets the standards
it also allows those traditional
carbon industries to generate
and use credits allowing them to
maintain levels of operation
while still contributing to the
overall economy and job creation
and their regions so we think
this should be particularly
exciting for counties such as
San Juan McKinley where there is
a strong interest in this
existing natural resources and
infrastructure already there
that would add to the
possibilities of new high wage
jobs so we really feel like a
clean fuel standard could
provide a long term market
signal that we will stimulate
investment in manufacturing and
production and distribution of
cleaner fuels in New Mexico so
thank you for having me.
Thank you and before you go to
Amy brown
they're changing the number of
the bill number is still says
Senate bill eight but we're
actually on Senate bill eleven
for the public we have completed
Senate bill eight we are now on
our second bill which is Senate
bill eleven thank you and miss
brown.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Amy brown I'm chief executive at
chief operating officer about
I'd take consulting a home grown
of small employer business
I'm also a board member of the
low carbon fuels coalition and
has been about the last a year
and a half
Pursuing the idea of a clean
fuel standard for New Mexico so
just very happy to be here today
and we'll try and answer any
questions that you all have
thank you.
Thank you we I have asked our
system operator Trevor Reilly to
start letting in the speakers
for Senate bill eleven and of
the person that people are I
will go into opposition first.
And then we will go to
proponents.
And then we will go to questions
and statements from committee
members first of all we have Jim
at Winchester is he on.
Okay do we next have Gary miles.
Jacob sizeable.
Chester I see your name could
you go please.
Mr Winchester.
You can be unmuted to speak.
Do you need people.
No I'm request and I'm requests
into a new to myself okay thank
you know Jim Winchester.
He's on the screen he might not
get many more chances
Jonas Mallia.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jonas more and the executive
director for the New Mexico
cattle growers association and
I'm also representing the New
Mexico will growers association
we had a little bit technical
difficulties getting that
somebody else to log on to speak
but I'm at this time we propose
a Senate bill eleven we have a
number of questions that still
haven't been outlined in the in
the in the current draft of the
bill will the carbon credits be
personal property
also some questions about
easements in future property use
we're really concerned about one
of the.
Affects that may occur that you
know we don't really want that
people are going into this bill
not thank you would happen but
maybe could be actual real thing
that could happen and that's
taking agricultural land out of
production as many of you
already know we do have a
shrinking population of of
agriculture list here in the
state I'm also too we have
questions around the the
Jennifer generation suspect
verification process of the
credits and who's gonna be
verifying this credits.
As if this program was to be
created so thank you very much
for your guises time this
morning and I appreciate you for
allowing me to give public
comment.
Thank you very much a genesis is
Jim Winchester on.
Okay Gary miles.
Sizeable.
Ashley Wagner.
However are any of those people
in the waiting room now and none
of a more.
Okay thank you I do see him
Winchester on the screen.
Weston and the to started video
as we it is a this.
Okay we're gonna move over then
are we have Ethan absent
outstanding sorry.
Mr upside.
We're now on proponents.
I have Ethan Epstein.
Next is grammar Norreys.
Madam chair even just texted me
that he's trying to units but
not again I'm not able to.
Show that we yes Grumman go
ahead and tell me how I
slaughter your last name so you
did you did very well thank you
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to what recognize the the
efforts everyone's making a to
provide transparency and work
through this difficult time here
I represent the the low carbon
fuels a coalition it's a group
that's dedicated to the support
expansion of low carbon fuels we
commend New Mexico for its
consideration of this policy and
stand in strong support of this
is a very unique policy
structure that is gathering
attention across the US and
internationally we now see
comparable of policy that's in
place in Brazil Culver know
Google and what these policies
do is reduce the carbon
intensity by essentially
creating a value for
decarbonizing transportation
fuels it's technology neutral so
every location has the
opportunity to determine really
the market determines what
succeeds in the marketplace out
there and we see that play out
over time in not a New Mexico I
would anticipate renewable
natural gas and generally coming
off the dairy sector as being a
big part of credit generation
out there we see an attraction
to new businesses that are
advancing of the transportation
sector in all kinds of ways and
it really is the right fit for
the state in terms of what's
going to be a successful and we
also see a lot of opportunities
in the petroleum sector for
decarbonisation and those places
also create to interest I know
from I work with our carbon
capture and sequestration of
that there's interest in CCS in
the Permian basin and I believe
it another base and up that so
with the New Mexico as well and
those can be very large scale
capital intensive of new
projects.
So there so appreciate the
opportunity appreciate all
things on the agenda so I I've
stand by any questions for me
but just just the won expressed
that that brought support from
a wide range of industries are
for this proposed legislation.
Thank you very much.
Are you unmuted.
Joe Merlino.
Madam secretary members
committee thank you for allowing
me to offer comments and support
Senate bill eleven generally no
one of I partners in the
Libertad power project Libertad
was organized as the New Mexico
limited liability company two
thousand fourteen with the
objective of developing and
emerging Energy opportunities in
the San Juan basin.
Specifically we believe the
proposed legislation has the
potential to significantly
strengthen New Mexico's ability
to lead the nation it invests in
the development of the hydrogen
economy.
As the world looks for ways to
decarbonise electric power
sector and other sectors
hydrogen power production use
has emerged as a leading
candidate for this transition.
In numerous industries and
government sources the rapid
evolution and growth of hydrogen
technologies now under way.
A hydrogen economy.
Account for approximately twenty
percent of worldwide energy
consumption by twenty fifty.
That would be a market value of
approximately two point five
trillion dollars annually.
New Mexico is well positioned to
capture an outsized portion of
this important emerging
opportunity.
Here we have inherent stress for
hygienic Kanemi including
extensive energy supply chains
electrical transmission
infrastructure well trained
workforce and promising
subsurface features for both CO
two sequestration and hydrogen
storage this is a very rare
combination throughout much of
the western United States.
The economics of hydrogen
production and power generation
can benefit greatly from
compatible colocated industries
such as the production of low
carbon fuels hybrid is now
frequently discussed as an
emerging fuel for materials
handling equipment.
Fleet vehicles heavy trucks
railroads and perhaps aviation.
Creating a hydrogen economy New
Mexico would be a large scale
development that could represent
billions of dollars in new
capital investments and the
creation of thousands of new
jobs in New Mexico.
State leadership is critical in
helping us begin and become an
early mover the low carbon fuel
standard such as Senate Bill
Levin can help the state achieve
this thank you.
Thank you now are Laura to bore
or caber.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is far taper and the
sustainability and resilience
officer at the energy minerals
and natural resources department
thank you for the opportunity to
express EMNRD support for this
governor's bill as secretary
Kenny mentioned our secretary
Cottrell Propst is the co chair
of the governor's climate change
task force and our support
reflects the fact that this bill
will make significant progress
on our climate strategy by
reducing emissions and creating
investment and our state's clean
energy.
Thank you.
Thank you a Richard Mason.
Please on mute yourself Mister
Mason.
You're not Mister Mason you're
not unmuted yet.
You're still on mute.
Look at Mister Mason look at the
bottom left hand corner of your
screen.
And I on mute yourself.
There you are me that's fine yes
I apologize my name is Richard
mission I'm a owner of a project
development company New Mexico
developing alternate use your
old bio fuels and energy limited
liability corporation we're
pursuing a project in the state
the produced ten million gallons
of Bill.
Easel well as two million
gallons of cellulosic ethanol
the next paper as a.
The stock.
And these fuels a large part of
them will get shipped off to
California because they have a
low carbon fuel standard that
pays a premium for every gallon
that we can produce and I even
after paying for rail there's a
big incentive for us to chip
gallons out of the state we
would like to keep as many
ballots and reproduced inside
the state gallon renewable
diesel used in Albuquerque Santa
Fe is going to clean up the air
ship and so we would like not to
ship all the majority of what we
produce here and that she it
used within the state that's our
mission and so this legislation
will greatly enhance the
economics.
Of our producing fuels clean
fuel and distributing them here
in the state rather than next
forty.
And so this kind of legislation
very important.
I see a large number of projects
coming to the state similar to
the ones were pursuing.
And that would
I incentivized attending of our
forest as biomass can be a very
important resource to make these
fuels that's going to reduce the
chance of catastrophic wildfires
president on media staff this
legislation will have.
Presenting these kind of fires
wishing in the past will be a
very real fact on elevators like
myself
whether to do a project in New
Mexico.
Whether we're going to utilize
our.
Resources that are available to
say to make each field and
whether will keep the field in
the state rather than exporting
on because we can get more for
California thank you.
Thank you very much we'll go to
send the Beatles.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee As You
announced my name is Sydney
Beatles I'm a lobbyist and
senior staff attorney for
western resource advocates I
work out of our Santa Fe office
on energy and environment issues
in New Mexico we support this
bill and southwest energy
efficiency project joins in our
support the transportation
sector New Mexico's responsible
for significant greenhouse gas
emissions well there are several
ways to address those emissions
the clean fuel standard as
proposed in this legislation is
one of the most promising it's
an innovative and workable
approach that has worked
elsewhere we believe this bill
will protect public health and
address climate change in a
flexible but meaningful and cost
effective way so we urge the
committee to pass this bill and
thank you for your leadership
and service members of the
committee I recognize that your
work is so much more challenging
this year that's it.
Thank you very much and
Committee will be our last
proponent and us to go back and
see if we have anymore
opponents.
Thank you so much chairwoman and
my name is Camilla I woman I'm
the director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club
representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
around the state I joined with
natural resources defense
council in support of the clean
fuels built we're thankful to
the governor secretary Kenny and
pro ten Stewart for leading on
climate issues such as these we
have sent a letter to New Mexico
Environment Department with some
suggested improvements first to
ensure local air quality
benefits and investments in the
most impacted communities when
it comes to air quality second
to increase ambition for the
program consistent with other
leading states doubling what's
in the current draft even as a
floor and third ensuring
sustainability and strong
lifecycle fuels accounting and
no credits for fossil fuels
thanks very much.
Thank you and I wanted to let
there are many more proponents
that I am trying to keep this
even and as it is we had
more proponents speak than
opponents so we are now I'm
going back to see if any of our
opponents
are back in the room general
Winchester.
Madam chair yes Jim and text me
and said that he's in a house
energy and was not going to be
able to be here you just wanted
me to let you know that the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico is
in opposition to this and they
are not the large corporations
they're the into independent
producers so they have smaller
amount of wells but.
Want to give you that detail
from thank you thank thank you
Senator Gallegos is Gary miles
in the room.
Is Jacob I will and then rural.
Okay so we are now going to
Questions and comments from the
committee members will start
with senator bill then Center
Hamlin.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair sorry.
This I don't know Mr Merlino is
still on.
We are talking about the
hydrogen generation seeing still
there.
Not not there anymore.
sure you will most my questions
were directed questions I had on
what his program was in the
hydrogen I think they're the
group that is trying to use
natural gas and converted to a
reit hydrogen and sequester the
CO two that yields but I'm not
sure I wanted to find out about
that.
I was wondering if there were
and this could be answered maybe
about the sponsor would credits
be available and say something
like our coal fired power plant
that seeks to sequester a if it
become successful with it with
credits be available.
In the San Juan generating
station if a builder
sequestration program.
This is.
And madam chair as senator I
would like to secretary Kenny to
ensure that I think the answer's
yes but I'd like to hear from
him or Amy.
Madam chair I I'll be brief but
center to build the short answer
is yes and a lot of that would
be dependent upon the rule
making it that this bill would
because the environment
department to undertake
and that that's my answer I'm
looking for a need to see if
she's waiting to okay secrets.
That would be good news because
I would be something that would
be I don't know if investors be
interested or not but will.
They're going to reduce their
radically of CO two emissions a
ninety plus percent sub
recipient what about ethanol how
does S. and all play into this.
Sponsor or whoever.
Madam chair committees come the
technical questions be directed
to the secretary or Amy brown
please absolutely.
What about production we've
we've had some of that New
Mexico particularly the side.
Madam chair and Senator
renewable ethanol would be
certainly an option under a
clean fuel standard and if our
expert Amy brown wants to
elaborate I'll give her that
opportunity.
Of.
Madam chair a Senator novel in
the early years in programs and
other states what we've seen is
that ethanol made up a very high
volume of the clean fuels that
we're used to start lowering the
carbon intensity of
transportation few fuels as
additional clean fuels come on
to the market place it becomes a
smaller
of a percentage of the
reductions at least but it
absolutely it is a big
participant in the program and
has stimulated investment and
growth within that industry
including creating a new income
stream for farmers.
Well I've never been
particularly opposed to ethanol
production because of farmers
but there's always been the
question on whether the carbon
footprint was not greater
actually developing ethanol
using it as opposed to just
straight gasoline I don't know
if it's true or not but there's
a high.
Cost involved and and carbon.
Print whenever you have to plant
harvest and process and refine
and all those kind of things so
I don't know the answer to that
question so I guess if Mr
Martinez not available that's
all my questions.
Thank you very much and I
apologize I either had said
Senator pope presenter Hamlin
next so we're going to go with
Senator Senator pope's offscreen
Senator Hamblen.
I'll be more than happy thank
you madam chair well Senator
pope comes back on the screen
madam chair Senators thank you
so much I'm I'm really excited
money is more of a comment just
because I look at the economic
opportunities that we have has
Secretary keys we talked about
the different ways that we can
capitalize on this and creating
new jobs and I would hope with
the methane capture especially
given that in southern New
Mexico we have a a quite a few
dairies I would love for us to
be kind of a pilot project on
that when we get to that point
it's really looking at
opportunities for us to still.
You the industries that we are
so used to in that our budget is
so heavily dependent on as we
continue to move into newer
cleaner jobs and I feel that
that is something that we can do
I I think the reality is is that
you know we talk about moving
away from oil and gas the
reality is is that we can't do
that yet it is a long term
vision and I appreciate that
this bill along with Secretary
keys in her department are
looking at these opportunities
for us to continue to add new
jobs to our area and to our
state especially in a time of
COVID when we start seeing that
there are going to be businesses
that are going to be closing
down that there are going to be
people that are going to be out
of jobs and that we have a
communities that are going to be
financially dependent on these
new industries to help create
those jobs that keep people in
our state and not go elsewhere
but also help those communities
thrive and so I do look forward
to the opportunity of this I do
look forward to the opportunity
for providing people job
training in cleaner jobs and I
know that the secretary cues
that your department is looking
at that and that we have groups
all over the state that are
willing to partner in that
opportunity with a look at our
community colleges we can look
at our college institutions we
can look at those different
areas of providing that training
and that expertise in an
industry that is much.
More sustainable much better for
our planet and an opportunity
for us to be a leader in this
throughout the country so I
think Senator Stewart for brings
forward I think the could the
committee for this discussion
secretary Keyes secretary can
thank you so much and I will
certainly vote in support of
this this this bill.
Thank you thank you if you take
your hand down and also senator
Neville we're going on two
hundred hope than Senator
Gallegos David Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to thank us Senator Stewart
secretary Keyes secretary Kenny
on this bill just like the other
one I we really need to not get
into the argument of the false
choice of
Pushing policy that addresses
our environment and the health
of New Mexicans
you know we can do both and
still transition and I think
this is a perfect example of how
we can start that transition but
also create jobs and help our
economy I mean we really we
really need to diversify in the
state and New Mexico could be a
leader in these green enemies
clean energy type of jobs so I
just want to let everybody know
I support this I will be
supporting this bill and thank
you for bringing this for.
Thank you very much Senator got
it goes.
Madam chair thank you just a
couple of questions and
I know Senator Stewart said
Madam chair said to address
thanks to secretary Kathy or Amy
in my question goes back to
Centerville's discussion on San
Juan generation station
commutes provide me how Senator
of Secretary on how the carbon
credits for what they cost I was
really intrigued with the Navajo
refinery are working with the
dairies I just want to know what
the costs are associated to
that.
So madam chair and senator
Gaydos so as and senator
straight into the bill is very
thin it's only nine pages long
and the credit market generation
would be handled and roll making
so there there aren't any
specifics in the bill about how
the credit market will will come
to be other than defining what a
credit is as one metric ton of
carbon dioxide equivalents so
when you take that unit of
measure let's just say one ton
of carbon dioxide reviews
discussion and then you look at
the car and see question you
look at the carbon reductions
that would occur from any
business including San Juan they
would remove that to generate
credits than they would have
those creek that credit
available to them to as equity
or be able to sell it to
somebody was importing or making
transportation fuels
and currently in California
those credits are going for two
hundred dollars a ton
so you can sort of
mathematically figure out what
that could look like in New
Mexico but again we're we're
come we're sort of mixing the
California model in New Mexico
right now for the economics
discussion is from purposes of
our our time here right now but
Amy brown is certainly more of
an expert in this area of it
further discussion is needed.
Madam chair of the spell and
love to hear.
It.
Madam chair I think and Senator
guy because I think secretary
Kenny was was rapid on I'm not
sure I have anything to add
It what we saw in other states
was that the value of the
credits started out lower but as
secretary Kenny indicated
currently there are around two
hundred dollars in California
right now around I think one
sixty maybe a bit north of that
in Oregon right now and I'm not
gonna be able to convert
Canadian dollars for the British
Columbia a system but I think
it's that it's in the same
ballpark so we would anticipate
that as the market picks up that
we might see similar results
here in New Mexico.
I'm madam chairs Senator Stewart
and Amy I guess my last question
because trying to understand
everything that's going on the
product I bio diesel in Hobbs we
had well do so plant that one
under they couldn't
Make a profit and and everything
depends on profit and I'm I'm
really worried about the burden
of these costs will fall on the
distributors produce and
transportation of fuel people
but to to give you a little bit
background my dad district been
and in the eighties it started a
methanol plant in I'm three to
Colorado and they never could
make it work even with just
understanding the amount of
water that it takes to produce
ethanol
are they gonna be hindered for
you know understand the
biodiesel did make it yes mall
plant in on three so did make it
are there
problems and then being
sustainable also I just didn't
know if faster or even if they
get credits not talking about
the carbon credits but just
federal state credits do we have
anything in place for those
because the only two I've known
a bit been around both failed
then just wondering if you could
give me some detail on that.
Madam chair and Center guy goes
I am not specifically familiar
with the two plants that failed
in New Mexico happy to look into
and see how a bill like this
would have improved their
economic outcome of the you have
the ability to sell the got you
have the ability to sell the
biodiesel and very ability to
generate credits if you blend
that biodiesel or continue to
decrease its carbon intensity so
that's the way the bill would
work but I'd have to look into
those two particular matters and
sort of with the lens of the
bill to understand with the with
the outcome if there'd been a
different outcome.
Thank you madam chair Sir
Stourton and Mr K. if you
wouldn't mind to get back with
me on that we are now using that
facility looking at that
facility for a of purification
for water for the all filled but
that they put a lot of money the
county had in the D. C. it put a
lot of money into that that's
just wondering if there's any
way of of.
Have another opportunity later
in life so I appreciate the call
on that just to be able to visit
with you and that's my questions
thank you.
Thank you so much.
Senator Schmedes and then
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and the
thank you under.
I have a concern enrolled a
concern about the building a
question about something that
you said.
Senator Stewart you had
mentioned that there was an
estimate on new investment in
the state and the new businesses
would come here as a result of
this legislation but I guess my
question is why are those
businesses not already coming
here what what are we going to
do in this bill
that is going to bring them here
and why are they here already.
I'm sure if I could a secretary
Alicia keys to grant responded
that
Senator.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee some of them are
already here and through
educating people on this bill US
secretary Kenny and I have
already talked to numerous
companies that are thinking
about doing some type of
expansion this creates any
fiscal tool for them these
credits in order to finance some
of these
expansions and why are they are
not here are ready primarily
because I think that and this
would just be me guessing is
that we don't have those
incentives yet here we don't
have those creative tools yet we
are not allowed to use the data
for any kind of oil and gas
outside of manufacturing so this
is actually a very important
tool for us to be able to start
getting involved in this market
and a more progressive and also
aggressive way.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary work I'm sorry we're
in the bill does it does it as
say they're gonna in increase
financing capabilities.
Madam chair members of the
committee that's by creating the
credit market.
Thank you and so.
Madam chair and and Secretary
might my concern about this is I
don't fundamentally believe that
a government or a committee can
create a a market
I believe that consumers create
markets I believe that divesting
power and money to the actual
people allow them to make little
choices every day they can say
well the the gas price across
the street is two dollars and
fifty cents and the one across
from them is two dollars and
thirty cents on gonna go by the
two dollars and thirty cents one
so
madam chair and.
Senator Stewart and secretary
mean do do you.
Do you share my concern that
that that this is not going to
be empowering to consumers it's
going to be empowering to the
certain certain you know very
very specific industries into a
small committee of people that
that promulgate these rules.
So madam chair.
I I just want to answer that a
little bit and that is to say
no I listen to your comments
about why you're on the
conservation committee centers
meetings I was very impressed by
it.
As a consumer.
People want clean air.
They want clean water.
And many more of them than us
are very concerned about the
climate.
And what's happening to the
southwest hotter drier renew
trout it it's so warm it snowed
today first day in the winter
that it snowed right the club
the Santa Fe I have three pairs
of snow boots and all my winter
coats so I think is very
concerned about the environment
the solution this bill works
with the industry to essentially
gives them an incentive to
decarbonise by adding this
incredible up markets a system
for the credits it's working in
California it's working in
Oregon Washington Nevada
Colorado Nebraska Minnesota
Illinois and New York are all
considering bills like this.
First this is a consumer bill my
daughter has asked what she had
to leave the state so this is a
health issue this is addressing
climate change it's interesting
jobs I mean this really will
open up markets in New Mexico
that we've never had before so I
do believe it's a consumer bill.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I I completely agree
with you I agree with your your
comments on of sorry I'm having
a zoom crasher here but forgive
me for that.
I I completely agree with with
your comments that we are
expanding the market to people
that do have those concerns and
so my my my concern though is
what about the market for the
paycheck to paycheck people and
maybe they share your concern
with with climate change and
maybe they don't.
But for people that are on a
very very limited income when
they see gasoline prices go up
like they've seen in Oregon and
California as a result of
similar legislation how are we
pushing those out and and you
have a concern for for those
individuals.
But what Madam I built it
happening but I would like to of
the as secretary leadership
please to also weigh in.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I think
providing this the school tool
is going to allow companies to
invest in New Mexico and
actually create jobs and to
secretary that is really the
wave of the future and so I do
you know I do think this is for
the consumer because those
consumers need jobs and they
need to transition sometimes off
of the jobs that they already
had that are closing down so
very very much so we had their
tech who was in the waiting room
trying to get in but they just
emailed that they're planning on
investing close to twenty eight
million dollars in California
alone this year and a hundred
million over the next three
years due to their clean fuel
standard we would love them to
be able to do that in New Mexico
because there New Mexico company
so I would say that this is
really for the consumer because
we are giving them jobs we are
offering them high paid jobs.
Thank you for that and
Center and secretary once again
I I agree with that there are a
lot of people a lot of consumers
that value
reduce emissions very highly and
I think that they should have a
rights to exercise that type of
of opinion on a market on a free
market but my my question
remains for the paycheck to
paycheck people I've I've seen
different numbers in New Mexico
around twenty percent I think
I've seen as high as forty
percent in different surveys at
a you know don't quote me on
those numbers but the the the
point is that there are a lot of
paycheck to paycheck people and
I think we all agree that no one
piece of legislation is going to
change that we have the number
one childhood poverty rates in
the country in our state so the
amount of people living paycheck
to paycheck is not going to
change overnight and as but
gasoline prices can change
overnight and so most of the
people on this committee and the
secretaries and everyone we we I
I think a modest changing
gasoline prices is not going to
break the bank but for paycheck
to paycheck people I just want
to know how how sensitive are we
being to those people that don't
have the extra you know fifty
dollars a month or a hundred
dollars a month now some of the
people that don't own a vehicle
I understand you know they may
be taking public transportation
but I'm I'm not talking about
those people
what what are we I mean what are
we doing to address.
To address this problem in this
bill or at least being sensitive
to it.
Madam chair Senator do you want
to weigh in on that yes please
our enemy or secretary Keyes
said no I just I don't think
it's relevant but if you can add
some relevance to the question
right.
It thank you and madam chair
Senators committees the
The the problem that you're
speaking of that is one that
gets raised often on around
clean fuel standards but is
never actually materialized into
a problem because the gas prices
at the pump in other states have
not indicated a rise due to a
clean fuel standards in any in
any amount
so so I at that hasn't been a
been an issue but but I will
just take one moment just to say
that I think the other thing
that that I mentioned in my
remarks is that it does clean
environment up in some of those
communities that are
disproportionately burdened by
the emissions of transportation
fuels so I I think there's an
economic.
False sense here and then
there's a environmental actual
improvement.
If I may add also senator and
madam chair I think that taking
these people off jobs where they
are paid to paycheck and
providing them a living wage is
really the one of the biggest
points this legislation is CEO
creating those jobs they're
going to go elsewhere if we
don't do that and you know it's
New Mexico also you've got three
jobs we need to stop that we
need to have one job and get
paid well so that would be my
argument against the paycheck to
paycheck with regards to fuel
prices we had our economists
look at it in the EDD and the
increase they believe is
negligible it's very hard
because so many factors.
The price of oil.
So I would just work that thank
you.
Okay thank you and thank you I
I'm I'm hearing what I'm hearing
from from the center from the
committee is is is I feel like
there is least is a sensitivity
to the issue and awareness we
may disagree on what the
legislation is going to do but
but what I'm hearing is that
that there would be an intent of
new job creation and that would
help people economically so I I
do appreciate that very much I
just have one other
Session on the bill and that
that is at in relationship to
ethanol
Senator Stewart it is this can
you just explain to me real
briefly how this bill and us all
are are tied together is this
I'm assuming this is to
we're we're we're going away
from the the traditional gas
gasoline and then increasing the
ethanol content that's how to
reduce the the carbon intensity
is is that right.
Madam chair I have secretary can
answer that one or in me.
Yes certainly.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Schmidt is ethanol also will
have an assigned carbon
intensity and certainly things
like how far it's transported
will factor into that so it also
will have to be decreasing
carbon intensity blending in a
cleaner lower carbon fuel into
gasoline or traditional diesel
is one of the ways that that the
gasoline and diesel industries
can bring down the carbon
intensity it's not the only way
in ethanol is not the only
option but that that is one
option.
Thank you very much and
And madam madam chair miss
brown.
You is there is there any way to
give me like a top three or top
five strategy to bring the
carbon sensitive down just
trying to understand what what
this bill is going to
practically do is there a a
major dominator right now of of
what the strategy is is is
ethanol you know ninety percent
of the strategy or what what is
kind of the top three so just if
you give me an idea of the
whole.
madam chair Senator Cervantes at
as I mentioned before in the
early years of implementation of
programs and other states
ethanol was sort of the dominant
of clean fuel that was used
that's lessened over time as
additional investments have gone
into other types of clean fuels
we've seen a dramatic increase
in the use of electricity as a
transportation fuel for example
credits that utilities have
generated have been plowed back
into investments that have
dramatically increased
electrification so
electrification has increased
its market share we've also seen
big boom in renewable diesel for
example I had to replace a
traditional diesel and there are
others that I'm not thinking of
right now certainly hydrogen has
been mentioned hydrogen fuel
cells and using hydrogen to
again create electricity our
state of the options and there
are many more that I'm not
thinking of right now.
Okay thank you that that's
helpful and and madam share and
Senator Stewart I think I'll
just close I think there's other
people that want to talk I'll
just close with the comments
I think we could probably talk
about this for a long time but I
don't care where we get our
energy from.
what what you know I don't have
a preference is far as which
industry what I do care about is
I care about the environment the
the global and over arching
environmental
effects of the different fuels
that we use as well as the
prices to the consumers so we're
not boxing out poor people.
those are probably my my two
biggest concerns and what I'm
afraid of of what we're doing
now is is not looking at the
entire supply chain of the fuels
that we use for example with the
rise of ethanol I mean I've got
a paper in front of me I was
just doing some side research
published in two thousand
sixteen in the proceedings of
the National Academy of sciences
that is connecting increased
corn production for ethanol to
eighty eight a what is that
twenty three percent and I'm
sorry thirty nine percent
decrease in wild bee
populations.
And so I'm I'm wondering and I'm
a physics guy physics has always
been probably my strongest
subject in school growing up and
when I look at our our fuels
were using.
I think that we need to be going
to more efficient fuels and
higher density energy fuels I
think that as we are are
struggling in our country to
determine are we going to be
going to less energy dense
technologies such as wind and
solar or more energy dense
technologies such as nuclear I
am I am very very afraid that as
we go less dense that we're
starting to pick up these
unintended consequences of such
as decreasing the B. populations
and that's been shown in the
Midwest as well as central
California and SO in associate
in study by people like the
national
Academy of sciences the show
that there's issues there and so
once again I have no preference
of oil and gas wind and solar
whatever I want to be to be best
for the environment and we've
got to start thinking of the
entire supply chain yeah and as
you correctly stated I think ms
brown ethanol doesn't just show
up if we have to transported
from New Jersey or from some
other and I'm just using that as
a silly example the carbon
intensity goes up well what
happens when we destroy the B.
populations what happens when we
have other they've had other
other
issues with with turtles in
California with with solar
panels so I'm not trying to to
hate on a certain industries or
say negative things I'm just
saying we need to take the big
full picture
into perspective and as we are
going less dense in our state
the gasoline we put in our cars
at what environmental price are
we costing it are we putting all
of our eggs in one basket for CO
two emissions and at the at the
cost of these I don't know but I
I would at least like to have
have people that know a lot more
about this.
subject than I do at least
consider the entire picture and
I hope that as we go forward in
this committee people will
provide
helpful helpful information like
that but I I will Madam R.
Senator Stewart I will be voting
in opposition to the bill for
for two main reasons one is I
have a concern when we go to
less dense energy forms at the
downstream in upper upstream
affects of that as well as I
have a concern about how we're
developing the credit market for
for these credits
I I I just how the concern that
we're advocating so too much
legislative authority to a
rulemaking process but I I do
look forward to the rest of the
discussion and and thank you for
answering my questions today.
Thank you we are going to vote
in the next few minutes because
this meeting will be ending
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you very quick questions
and then I'd like to move
passage my two questions were
and this is probably a directed
to secretary Kenny I was
wondering whether of the Rio
Grande Sierra Club suggestions
which actually address a little
bit a few of equity issues that
were discussed previously can
those be adopted to roll through
regulation.
Madam chair and center city
Lopez we received a sort of
letter with a whole bunch of
questions are a whole bunch of
comments in it of which I'm
recalling a few of them now some
of them looked very easily
adoptable in normal making some
of them may require legislative
fix I I need to pull the letter
up and go.
Go through it
is there something specific.
Out of the list that was sent to
us that you're asking about or
is it just more the general
actually I I think we can go
offline and discuss this I don't
want to take a committee time
and then the second question was
how how did you come up with the
levels of ten percent below at
two thousand eighteen levels by
two twenty thirty and twenty
percent hello twenty eighteen
levels by twenty forty
I guess I'm impatient I just
wondered if we could do better
and it just if I could get an
explanation for what how we came
up with these levels.
Madam chair and Senator Sedillo
Lopez thanks for that question
we looked around at what other
states are doing and we looked
at what our what we could
reasonably think about getting
rules out the door would be so
for example in the legislation
we have twenty four months for
the environment department to
adopt rules if we if we could
adopt those rules faster and I
agree with you on I'm I'm
impatient in the sense that this
is a this is a climb it you know
that this is not only
incentivizes our economy but
reduces clinicians so if we can
move faster we would in terms of
the levels we sat I believe it's
in the bill that they're at
least a ten percent reduction at
least a twenty percent reduction
from twenty eighteen levels
I I think would be amenable to
moving those more aggressively
provided we have the tools and
the resources to do that in the
Environment Department
But that's the we look at other
states we looked at with the
carbon admissions were from the
transportation sector in New
Mexico and and sort of landed
there okay thank you that that
that's very helpful I
appreciate.
I appreciate the innovation and
well I'm impatient I think this
is definitely steps in the right
direction and so with that I'd
like to move passage of the
bill.
I'm thank you very much and I
believe Senator sold one and two
seconds the a motion yes I
second the motion okay thank you
and I understand that there
might be another commenter to
but my responsibility as a
committee chair is to end the
meeting and to try to move the
bills along so I am asking the
committee secretary to please
call the roll for about on
Senate bill eleven as amended.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am I'd like to explain my
vote.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
Yes and I would like to explain
more about.
Senator pope.
Yes.
So.
Yes.
Senator Smitty.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Yes.
Six two nine one six yes.
Six yes no yes.
Thank you very much okay so
Senator guy a ghosts and then
senator Neville to explain their
votes and please excuse me if
I'm off at twelve fifteen and
madam president president pro
tem the all pro tem also as a
commitment please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair just real
briefly one sector Keyes was
talking about a living wage and
I'd gotten information for the
bio diesel in the Carlsbad area
is five fifty a gallon come
freighted R. as we go up a
living wage we'll be taking it
out for fuel costs in going back
to Dr Schmidt he's to comment
when you increase of the
Deluding of gasoline without
call you reduce the mileage per
gallon so with those two reasons
I can't see that it would be
beneficial to all New Mexicans
so I appreciate the offer option
thank you so much Senator
Gallegos senator Neville please.
Thank you madam chair I voted in
favor of it there's a lot of
things I have concerns about the
bill may or may not before
before but I do I see some
potentials particularly with the
natural gas the credits
conceivably could help with we
are in our case the power plant
so I have some issues locally
that I think that this might be
somewhat beneficial for local
people and I'm gonna study a
little more before your final
bill to the floor but.
Those are my reasons for voting
to pass it out of committee at
this point thank you madam
chair.
Thank you so much and madam
president pro tem I am sorry I
did not give you a chance to
close but you have a successful
amended bill going out of Senate
conservation center.
Okay so those are closing so
thank you madam chair thank you
and us members of the Senate
confirmation as you can see if
we all express ourselves L. at a
long time we won't be getting
that many bills and I'm sure all
of our colleagues at both sides
of the aisles will be unhappy
with us so I will see you all
Thursday morning and if you
could log on about fifteen
minutes in advance and will try
to start promptly at nine AM
thank you so much have a great
day.
All and remember the governor is
speaking at twelve thirty on
assume thank you.
