One two three four five we have
a more than a quorum.
Okay there is a hand up coming
committee members of we will
probably stick to nine AM we
don't have that many bills to be
heard in the in the future we
have a memorial Senate memorial
and thirsty in in some house
bill's but I think we'll be able
to keep this going.
Your budget.
Okay.
So it's the time of the session
for the public to know that we
have members coming and going
because they're presenting bills
and other committees and we
appreciate that we want them to
get their work done as well so
Senator Stewart do you want to
move ahead with Senate bill five
twenty AM.
This is an emergency bill.
So we I'm gonna make the motion
that we have a do not pass on
Senate conservation or Senate
bill five twenty ended do pass
the Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty solely for
discussion purposes.
Is there a second.
Okay so Senator Stewart please
proceed.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
So for the last year on most the
groups of people have been
working with the governor's
office to try to essentially
codify her original executive
order about Climent in New
Mexico.
That process kind of stopped a
few months ago when people could
not agree.
What you have before you is a
reduced version of what was
being worked on with the
governor the environmental
community the oil and gas
industry.
So this bill does four things.
It sets an essential framework
for our continued climate action
I codifying the state's
emissions reduction targets from
the governor's twenty nineteen
executive order into statute it
sets emissions targets in the
air quality control act.
That would be at least fifty
percent of two thousand five
levels by twenty thirty.
Seventy five percent by twenty
forty and ninety percent by
twenty fifty.
Well most state agencies are
already proceeding with trying
to meet these goals this bill is
necessary to ensure the
reduction targets are a priority
across administrations and to
bring.
The ability for regulation some
planning by ensuring that
industry and agencies both have
clear mandates to meet.
Secondly it codifies the
recently promulgated oil
conservation division methane
waste rules.
It directs third it directs the
climate change task force to
establish equity and
environmental justice guidelines
for the review of climate change
related activities including
prioritizing disproportionately
impacted communities tribal
consultation and incorporation
of traditional knowledge and
experience and lastly it
requires the administration to
conduct and publish annual
reporting on the state's
progress to meet our emissions
targets and to determine the two
thousand five levels of
statewide direct emissions
baseline so that's the overview
of that I will very briefly talk
about the sections and then I
would like to turn it over to my
expert witness all of you know
him David Shelton from
conservation voters New Mexico.
So section one is the
enumeration of powers EMNRD and
OCD a section to are the
definitions that we've added to
the air quality control section
including carbon dioxide
equivalent direct emissions
greenhouse gas those definitions
section three is the
classification of the emission
reduction targets section forced
the title section five or
definitions only in this claim
future act including
disproportionately impacted
communities section six art that
equity and environmental justice
principles that we all feel are.
Have to be part going forward on
climate action section seven are
the reporting requirements of
the termination of the two
thousand five I'm missions.
So that is the bill in brief
madam chair you know I'll just
say that the work on this not
this bill but the concepts on
going and to me unless we are
trying to deal with climate
change the warming of the planet
and the emissions that New
Mexico since into the air that
contributes to all of that until
we're dealing with that more
significantly we are not doing
what we need to do.
As policy makers as leaders in
the state which is why I'm
willing to sit here and being
shot at by everybody in the
audience for not doing the right
thing for the environment for
the right thing for the industry
what you're going to be here so
first if I can turn it to bend
to be nicer and tell you more
great things about the bill.
Thank you Mr Shelton thank you
madam chair inventions in the
political policy director for
conservation voters New Mexico
if you're gonna have to speak up
and political policy director of
conservation voters New Mexico.
I would be happy to go to the
point four seven kind of run
quickly to some of those changes
if it okay I think you're gonna
have to use the hand Mike and
I'll tell you why it's the
people online who cannot hear
clearly what we're saying so if
anybody in the audience as ever
tried to listen online you know
take your money should I just
that now they heard you very
clearly.
They heard you very clearly and
I appreciate it and very much
Madam for him but please come
second refers second are
reference to a point four
version of a committee set of it
so madam chair that's we have
point four you have point four
point two was online which is
why we would like to very
briefly tell the difference in
the winter months second point
four is in your books it was
like laying on top in the
analysis from March of analysts
what's the point four okay yeah
the I prepare for the committee
ahead of time so I go online and
I read what's on line okay some
are looking on a different build
on this all get caught up only a
few dari and of the analysts did
a good job they did send it out
yesterday I think everybody did
get it in advance so why don't
you some rice point four Mr
shop.
Thank you madam chair Senators
devices you primarily to move
things in the point four so
hopefully it will be here okay
we're still not hearing you
holding the button hold down.
It's it's pretty low let's try
it again.
Okay.
Better.
Is that what what I think we're
going to turn you on.
It's all the way up you're gonna
have been like your tier by.
If you use your teeth will wipe
it up.
My teacher voice off the roof
Senator souls Konami there so
the thing the first and largest
thing to the point four sub the
change that makes from point to
as a removes the definitions for
offsets net zero emissions both
of which are on page eleven and
point to version as well
subsection D. of section three
establishing offsets based net
zero target after twenty third
fifty and what we had heard from
stakeholders was that this
offsets in this net zero
component which has been part of
this conversation was
simultaneously too big and too
small it was too small and that
a program of this size states
that status these programs spend
months if not years conducting
stakeholder outreach developing
these programs bringing parties
together and he goes it would
essentially large markets to to
trade carbon and and manage
reductions.
What we had in this bill is to
definitions about a paragraph
authorization from the general
counsel of the state agency I
don't necessarily feel I'm
standing on the most stable
ground creating a massive state
carbon exchange based on that
level legislative authorization
I also feel that probably we
also probably feel madam chair
that the legislature would want
more input on a program of that
scale simultaneously there's a
lot of groups that have a lot of
trepidation around these kinds
car markets because of the way
they tend to operate so the
easiest thing to do for the sake
of this committee was to simply
strike that language and leave
that conversation for a larger
bill and another day so that was
one of that that's how the
largest change that we see from
point four five point four from
point to.
Secondly remove the tribal
consultation requirement for the
OCD methane waste reduction
rules promulgation because those
rules have already been
propagated their palm get in
twenty twenty one so that would
have been
essentially meaningless we added
on the methane rule reduction
section and I'm sorry this is on
page six bottom of page six.
We had the effective date to the
statute to align with the
effective date in the rule that
was promulgated again in twenty
twenty one.
And finally on page fourteen
line six after
The words out of state we added
for use in state that's a
clarification that that section
that definition is for reporting
purposes we wanted to ensure
that the public regulation
commission had the ability to
try to make an assessment of the
carbon emissions attributable
treatable out of state resources
for the purposes of reporting
back to EMNRD and Environment
Department those changes in
point four from point to.
Okay thank you and
Senator we're not gonna let this
get personal.
Station and I will remind the
audience.
Used to be this is not about
response to this is about your
specific.
Comments about portions of the
field.
And fifty.
In rural I'd like to.
Bill.
Two one two.
One line.
We have four people supporting.
Eight people opposed.
So we will actually have ten
speakers on each side and I'm
going to go to the supporters
first in the room if you would
come to the Middle and use the
hand Mike and we well I think
there were about.
I respects supporters in the
room.
Separate if you're how many
supporters please line up.
So we know and then I'm gonna
have people speak online to say
one two three four five okay
we'll take five supporters in
the room and then we'll take all
the supporters online that are
there so please go ahead
introduce yourself and make your
statement we're going to give
everybody about a minute and a
half and our vice chair is
timing.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Camilla I
am and I'm the director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club representing our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters I'd like the to think
madam pro tem for using an
emergency bill for its proper
purpose which is to address an
emergency this summer we saw a
furious fires fast floods
families who have lost their
homes a recovery pace that
doesn't match the emergency that
our state our country and our
globis facing as a mother of a
ten year old and a six year old
we have to stay take a step
forward to ensure the planet
that we're leaving behind for
our kids is a livable one and
that's why this is a key step
forward there's clearly more to
do there's always more to do
there's a host of bills in this
very session that can add to the
solutions but if we don't get
these greenhouse gas reductions
into statute if we don't ensure
that they're enforced in an
equitable way centering tribal
consultation and
disproportionately impacted
communities we have a problem I
also serve as the chair of our
New Mexico methane table we've
worked very hard to see
reasonable cost effective and
health saving methane rules
passed but they need to be added
into statute we strongly support
this bill and we ask for your
support thank you.
Thank you next please yes told
them the whole time.
madam chair Deborah Condit on
the registered lobbyists for
western resource advocates me
stand in strong support of
Senate bill five twenty the
clean future act as a starting
point that lays the groundwork
toward as zero emission economy
that we get all build on down
the road this is very pragmatic
bill will start here we go from
go from there some of the at
environmental bills didn't pass
but we'll we'll take this bill
and will codify these a.
The executive order that the
governor put in place we stand
in strong support of at five
twenty thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on Charles good
marker speaking on behalf of
natural resources defense
council this morning and we
think the sponsor and everybody
involved in creating this bill
it was a difficult process and
here we are we hope for to pass
on five twenty.
We support this bill because
import include some important
steps forward.
It's one of many the need to
session
but meeting the goals call for
the bills will help protect the
economy of New Mexico and the
health of our people.
Meeting the goals call for this
bill will require all the powers
and programs that are enumerated
in the bill the gas capture and
reporting requirements are
especially important as is
codifying the emissions
reduction goals themselves thank
you for your support of a clean
environment for New Mexico.
Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee my name is Sammy
Caroline the claimant Energy
advocate with conservation
voters New Mexico and the
importance of this bill really
cannot be overstated we
understand that we are working
towards a comprehensive climate
package and this bill is the
first step in many to make that
happen our state is the second
largest producer of oil and gas
and we have seen like you
previously heard that we have
had devastating wildfires Mexico
is on the frontline of the
climate crisis and we need this
introductory framework to be
able to properly address that we
urge your support of this bill
thank you thank you is there
anybody else who wanted to
support in the room before I go
to the zoo.
Okay on zoom we have Joan brown
rose Marie said Cheney
and recommending Jim McKenzie
and Curt rakers so job.
Would you like to say anything.
Yes thank you good morning chair
good morning sponsor committee
members thank you for
entertaining this bill SB five
twenty thank you checked this
morning and I'm the executive
director sister Joan brown of
New Mexico interfaith power and
light we work with faith
communities all over the state
we have about a hundred
congregational congregations
were members more than three
hundred who are partners in over
five thousand individual members
as well
the
before the session started we
have a real letter that we put
forth it has about a hundred
faith leaders including bishops
who signed it saying that they
were very supportive that we
need and in fact strong climate
action and related to that
hearing for the water another
second agencies to do this work
and to take care of the health
of our communities as a
Franciscan pope Francis's said
that addressing climate change
it's not optional it's like we
don't have an option to say
we're not going to do this and
address greenhouse gas emissions
so this bill is one step forward
there's many steps we need to
take but we need to keep walking
this sacred path that we have
been called to and we have an
ethical moral imperative and
that includes all of us and
people that are in the trenches
people that are leaders in other
ways so we're very much
supportive of this and thank you
for reading.
Your time is up remember you
have one and a half minutes the
next person is Rosemarie sich
Jeannie.
Madam chair okay Committee I'm
rose merry to Kenny I'm a more
no sister director of the office
of peace justice creation under
the auspices of Catholic
charities to Gallup diocesan we
serve communities in San Juan
County and L. McKinley County
ansible the counties and so our
services reach out to frontline
community said you know who have
been seriously and consistently
at the front line of wants to
experience the impacts of this
intensifying climate crisis that
we are facing not only locally
or statewide for
internationally and so our
concern is for the quality of
life of our communities and also
the well being of the natural
community because as we know it
from our faith traditions of
creation is god given and sacred
and it's intended for the well
being and health of not only the
human community but the entire
life community that sustains us
as we all know we're dependent
on the very breath of the
atmosphere which is a sacred
comments so in our response to
these issues we try to
come together as people of faith
to really see that these values
are for the long term health and
well being of the whole life
community and those of us who
care about this beautiful state
of ours no that we're one of the
most vulnerable state tied to
climate change thank you your
time is up.
Thank you very much Jim
McKenzie.
Yes can you hear me yes madam
chair yes thank you very much my
name is Jim McKenzie I'm the
coordinator of three fifty New
Mexico we're an environmental
organization with.
Seven thousand members mostly in
central and New Mexico in and
around the state we stand in
support of SP five twenty we as
an organization word intervener
in the environment board
hearings in twenty twenty one
when the rule
that's the basis for this Mexico
statute was enacted
and but since that time.
The air quality rules that were
promulgated I have not been
observed and I'm not being
enforced so we need stronger
rules and by moving this these
issues into statute we're hoping
that this will help mitigate the
problem that we're facing thank
you thank you and last for the
supporters will be current
Reger.
A good morning madam chair
members the committee this is
court records director Lujan
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
with an average she also speaks
on behalf New Mexico conference
of churches denominations that
make up the conference features
include the mainline Protestant
denominations in New Mexico in
the three Catholic diocese.
I'm here to state our support
our strong support for SB five
twenty the industry in the
interest of time will simply
stay by concur with the previous
comments made in support of the
bill I want to the legislature
needs to act now as the five
twenty is indeed a framework to
begin with four like to include
by offering my thanks to Senator
Stewart for her persistence and
for bringing five twenty four.
Support thank you.
Thank you very much okay the
opposition it has organized
their testimony so first I have
on the list in if you would come
in line up I have Tiffany Rivera
Beverly's singa Chelsea Canada
Kyle Armstrong met my Estes.
then we will go to is let's see
either Gerald we sent or Ryan
shell in the room okay they're
in line and then Paul you can
get in the line of Gibson and
then we'll go to the system
after that which is almost all
ten so.
Madam chair can you hear me but
yeah just keep it pressed down
yes yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera with
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau and the bill before you
today is deeply concerning to my
membership and has the potential
to have a chilling effect on New
Mexico's agricultural industry
from our world famous chili and
onions to one of the country's
most robust Derry sectors first
and foremost we were
disappointed to see agriculture
included in the definition of
direct emissions as we continue
to make major strides in this
arena in fact EPA recently
reported that cultures GHG
emissions have fallen by more
than four percent from twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty
showing that the industry
continues to improve our overall
sustainability.
We're working to achieve these
goals through voluntary market
based incentives not state
impose mandates the bill further
state entities have the
responsibility to report on
director H. G. emissions
resources there sectors within
the introduce regulatory
jurisdiction the provision alone
full further tangled the
complexities of producers face
when having to comply with
multiple agency regulations
additionally it is unclear as to
which agency will have the
ultimate jurisdiction and
responsibility of GHG reduction
when multiple agencies regulate
a specific component of the
industries like dairy
additionally we have major
concerns of the language under
section six A. directs the
entities to apply what climate
equity principles to policy in
rural development these actions
could greatly affect agriculture
industry of the policy
rulemaking process is generally
a give and take process that
works to meet the needs of the
impact of secretary and the
regulated and thank you very
much position thank you next
this is Beverly next Grace.
It's good yes thank you and good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee I'm Beverly
it's in good executive director
of dairy producers of New Mexico
we respectfully stand in
opposition of Senate bill five
twenty farmers are the original
event of environmental stewards
as they their families and their
animals live on the land breathe
the air and drink the water
during an agriculture is a
generational endeavor as farmers
pass on their operations to the
next generation of course they
wanted to they want to leave the
environment better off for those
that follow in their footsteps.
We're already taking steps to
keep the air clean reuse
nutrient rich green materials
and recycle water several times
over before it's used to grow
crops for feed dairy farmers
whole district environmental
standards and regulations from
agencies including EPA and RCS
NMDA and and then we do do which
oversees the Derry role which
gives us the most stringent
ground water regulations and any
other dairy state in the nation
so we're constantly doing
research to incorporate
practices that protect the
environment and make our farmers
more sustainable but this
legislation is yet another and
unnecessary and costly burden on
our producers costs that cannot
be passed on for these reasons
and others that have or will be
stated we respectfully as
opposed Senate bill five twenty
thank you thank you is this
Chelsea great.
Madam chair members of the
committee uncials accounted on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce the chamber
supported efforts to address the
climate crisis from the ETA to
developing an effective methane
rule but we are concerned the SP
five twenties unattainable
emissions regulations would have
severe multi generational
impacts on New Mexicans greatly
reducing our state's ability to
diversify its economy to move
away from a reliance on oil and
gas here's one example this
proposal would impact the
ability for Amanda and aluminum
recycling plant to locate in New
Mexico then it would have a
multi billion dollar economic
impact create high paying jobs
and will be better for our
environment then mining new
input and making and
transporting new aluminum manner
plans to use a hundred percent
renewable electricity for the
plant's electrical needs but
once completed it's projected to
be the fourth largest customer
of the New Mexico gas company
melting metals requires a high
intensity heat source like
natural gas or hydrogen he
infants that electricity can not
produce if this proposal were to
pass it would make a project
like this nonviable instead of
strangling our economy and
stifling potential growth we
urge the legislature to focus on
investing in technology is an
industry that will grow New
Mexico's climate resilience and
help diversify our economy into
a new era of energy development
and economic growth thank you
thank you next please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Kyle
Armstrong I'm present Armstrong
energy corporation and Rossell I
was asked to serve on governor
Lujan Grisham's energy
transition team in twenty
eighteen and I support the
governor and many of her
objectives I represent today the
independent patrolmen's
association of New Mexico in the
Permian basin patrolmen's
association as well as the
twenty five New Mexicans I
employ across southeast New
Mexico I respectfully ask that
you carefully consider the
consequences of this bill and
vote no New Mexico after years
of collaboration among experts
and advocates from industry and
environmental groups implemented
rules that lead the nation in
controlling emissions rather
than furthering that objective
this bill puts in jeopardy what
we have achieved.
Just by way of example by
implementing a two thousand five
baseline that predates the shale
revolution we will codify
standard that we don't even know
is technically possible.
If the goal is to protect the
environment this bill should
instead be offering offsets and
credits to assist operators to
remain competitive with other
states and utilize best in class
practices that's just one
example of how we should be
working together my family's
operating New Mexico for forty
three years I would like to
continue to do so but the
reality is we may have to soon
look elsewhere this bill make
creates uncertainty that makes
it nearly impossible for myself
many companies do business in
New Mexico at the least all
right unintended consequences
that will have to be addressed
in future sessions thank you.
Thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Matt my Estes I am
with the US Mexico oil and gas
association logo poses SB five
twenty we think this bill goes
beyond the current executive
order and will be very
burdensome.
Any significant discussion and
input we need to keep working
together but I think this bill
in its current form is not the
way forward New Mexico produces
the cleanest barrel of oil in
the world we've been able to
accomplish this I Taining
Quite a strong partnership
between state and industry and
supporting science based metrics
for these reasons and motives
opposes Senate bill five twenty
thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Gerald
was seen vice president
regulatory strategy and external
affairs for New Mexico gas
company and registered lobbyists
for the company and I hear to
respectfully speak in opposition
to Senate bill five twenty as
proposed for say that our
company's expressed support for
the economy what objective in
the governor's two thousand
nineteen climate changes
executive order and we
voluntarily taken steps to
reduce emissions at our
operations but we do not see
reductions imposed on the same
time line for each sector of the
economy is our best path
forward.
That's B. by twenty does not
specify an official logical
approach to achieve stated
targets as drafted it'll also
have far reaching unintended
consequences if imposed on the
more than one point two million
New Mexicans we know reliably
serve just put twenty thirty
target but for some least half
of our customers to leave the NM
GZ system in the next seven
years and convert to alternate
energy sources that takes away
their choice and imposes an
obligation of remaining
customers to each pay more to
maintain the system they can
cost many can't afford I will
add that we do support the
principles of engaging
disadvantaged communities.
We remain ready to roll up our
sleeves on a reasonable path to
chief state climate objectives
but we respectfully submit this
bill is not that thank you very
much.
Very I called Mr Gibson first
and then I understand there's
somebody from yucca yeah I would
just that's what I wanted to say
thank you so much.
Thank you madam chair excuse me
how was it from yucca that was
going to be speaking you want to
get line please and then I'm
going to after that I'm going to
the to.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and those sponsors
findings Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy a state.
With over forty five hundred
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak in tepid
opposition to the SP fifty fifty
five twenty we want to begin
stating that we fully support
the bills of the goals of this
bill but feel that without
enforcement components goals are
not enough we also want to thank
the bill's sponsors for
accepting input from
environmental organizations who
had issues with the bill as a
result of these conversations
bill Sanchez remove the language
about net zero carbon offsets
and carbon offsets that
significantly improves the bill
however no however in order to
secure full support from retake
we feel that several other
changes need to be made in the
interest of time focused on one
we feel that the Energy
the environment department needs
to be fully funded for
enforcement it makes no sense to
have strong methane rules and no
enforcement capacity they have
eleven inspectors dedicated
field work and with two
vacancies for fifty two thousand
active wells that doesn't make
any sense at all so we are
asking for that funding so that
the bill actually has the teeth
it needs in order to be the but
to achieve the goals of seeking
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jonathan waters and I'm here
this morning speaking on behalf
of yet thank you can I do for
climate crisis action and are
thousands of members and
supporters across New Mexico
we're out of time for solving
the climate crisis our
communities are already seeing
and feeling the consequences
it's not some far off future
it's happening here and now we
desperately need a climate bill
to meet this moment we feel
scared that another session
might go by with this emergency
unaddressed but we also can't
accept an adequate action that
will give us a false sense of
security and progress we
appreciate the Sanchez effort to
take a take a step forward by
bringing this bill but we also
and we also really appreciate
the sponsor hearing our concerns
about the dangers of net zero
and offsets and removing that
from this draft of this bill
because those aspects directly
threaten indigenous and land
based communities for standing
on the opposing side today to
request further amendments we
need you to act with urgency and
therefore we offer these four
critical amendments that are
also before you and a handout
that we handed out earlier yes
we receive them thank you only
have up how many.
Twenty seven one twenty seconds
left one in Act greenhouse gas
emission limits and reductions
that comport with the science
science says we need to reach
near zero by twenty thirty five
to mandate that promulgation of
rules quickly and with full
authority and fully funded EMNRD
and and do the for environmental
enforcement actions.
Three include downstream
emissions and accountability and
thank you and we do have a your
hand out so we will read it
thank you very I don't have a
you don't have it could you find
one please to the sponsor.
Yes she doesn't have one.
Okay and so online there were
several people but I'm going to
ask is there anybody online who
does not represent industry
we've heard from several
industries people is there
anybody who does not represent
industry.
All have.
Well ask them to raise their
hands if they do not represent
industry.
Okay is this ISIS hopper one of
them.
Okay in any Cook.
Okay rapper chick.
Okay he could speak Mr Scheck.
Yes.
Go ahead
all right.
Hello I'm Robert Scheck resident
terrorist New Mexico I feel
strongly that this state should
not impede energy production
both above and below ground in
support of the world emergency
we are now facing our country
needs coal natural gas crude oil
and wind sun energy desperately
to stay I prices at the pump
heating our homes and supporting
our business.
Right mechanism involves
commonsense review of needs of
the general population what is
necessary to control in the
economics of goats.
New Mexico already leads in
greenhouse controls and timing
of this crippling bill does not
support the common good.
This is why I'm strongly against
SB five twenty in my
representatives should vote
against.
Thank you thank you very much.
Okay Shawna brought fleas go
ahead.
My name is on a broad range of
code proposed to address the
five twenty I am of lifetime
resident of New Mexico pointed
in Albuquerque New Mexico one of
the prices of of our fuels and
everything are going so why and
it's causing a lot of harm an
issue for us to be able to do to
get to work and secondly as an
example I would like to mention
that one of the things mentioned
for saving of on this bill.
You'll since that is going with
the at using written in
batteries and solar price to say
one's emissions is that however
I don't think that they're
taking into account how much
damage it does to our state yeah
up to use for a living in
batteries and.
The damage that it does all the
way around and that's not
helping our environment
throughout I am opposed with the
off I would like to see as
use a more scientific research
for us and what we need to do to
get the fire under control thank
you.
Okay thank you very much okay so
just to be clear online we heard
from ten people on each side so
we're going to move to the
committee that online we had
ISIS hopper opposing any Cook
rapper chick Shawna brought
slavery marker John Atencio
Carlos Sonntag Stephen F. Steen
and of an addition online
supporting was Kaylee shoot so
thank you everyone for coming
and participating and now we
will go to committee for
comments and questions.
Can I see Senator Gallegos from
reaching for his.
Right yes Senator Davis Senator
in center thank you for the
discussion I was just really
amaze on how of the public stop
stood up and danced in I just
had a question madam chair and
senator would you like to allow
Beverly C. insignia to talk
she's with the dairy producers
got a question for understand
she's talking about the Ag
position on this but what I'm
wondering about in Lee County we
have a lot of the dairy producer
trucks I'm just wondering if you
would address what this would do
to her transportation part
Senator Senator is it's up to
you that's fine thank you if
very briefly.
Thank you madam chair and
senator guy it goes yes trucking
is essential to the dairy
industry we have milk trucks
that come on and off of Derry's
everyday feature acts that do
the same we try to keep it local
a lot of our our milk goes to
local cheese production but
farmers try to grow their own
fee to become more sustainable
but they also have to trucking
feet from other areas and so a
lot of these regulations would
be harmful to our producers
again we can't pass on any
additional cost so the
additional cost put on those
transportation that provides
transportation secretary would
fall on our producers and they
can't pass on those costs and
their milk prices Madam chair
and centered heavily Moquino
your tracking number so in Lee
County in Lovington there's a
huge parking lot did you guys
have for the trucks to be there
I'm just wondering the numbers I
don't know if you have statewide
your area or just the county I'm
just wondering how many trucks
that would consist of.
And madam chair and senator I
guess I don't have those numbers
off the top of my head because
it's within the agency which
spans throughout New Mexico and
West Texas but I can get that
for you okay madam chair and
senator and Beverly I appreciate
we always get a block of cheese
for me all and it's one of those
things I would hate for it not
to be delivered here Santa Fe so
thank you for that insurance
center
Right down with you thank you
yes thank you thank you sorry to
be so blunt.
Madam chair and etcetera I have
one question on line on page
seventeen line three and it has
to do with your.
Thank you terming the two
thousand level Yujin that that
is number madam chair center of
I've been told that there's
twenty seventeen numbers in even
twenty eight twenty twenty
baseline numbers reason why
we're going back so far to start
our numbers to as far as
baseline.
A so madam chair two thousand
five is a generally used as a
test here free directions
because that was the year that
the Kyoto protocol Commission
targets glancing us that and we
originally set that year of
nineteen ninety for reductions
but then we'd join the you in in
using two thousand five as for
those ninety targets were
unavailable so reductions based
on two thousand five levels
remains we believe an achievable
goal in New Mexico if we
continue to be proactive.
Madam chair and etcetera then
how do we get any credit for the
progress already made if we go
back to two thousand five in the
twenty eighteen numbers from
more valid I guess I'm trying to
see what we're being penalized
to go whole way back if the
state's done some progress
already etcetera etcetera well
madam chair Senator it we've we
have made progress of some of
these areas never the less we
still feel like we need to have
a good baseline that we're all
aiming for so of course you'll
get credit for that but we've
set the the marker as two
thousand five because that's
really the last time we agreed
to those nationwide.
To the Kyoto protocol.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator David if product
another topic of we had this
chart strong who I've actually
done business with his family on
property in the past and and
they're well known in the region
in southeast in the discussion
was that if things don't change
they may have to move to another
area and Justin thought of that
if we continue to hurt our state
and people move outside of the
state or region do we believe
that we would still be able to
reduce their emissions just
thinking through if a.
Trucking company moves from
Eunice to Andrew's Texas the
trucks are going to be similar
numbers similar in jobs maybe
even further drive now
are we solving anything by
putting these.
To me it looks like we're trying
to harm their business by
putting so much on their back in
if they moved to Texas I don't
think we resolve the missions
issue I'm just trying to find
out if there's a way to balance
what we're asking then of five
eighty.
But still allow them to be a
part of our state I think we're
gonna lose revenue people an
opportunity to other states just
along that's eastern side of the
border because Texas is here to
work with madam chair and
senator I'm just wondering if
you had any discussions on what
is can do to us as a state
conclusion these I truly don't
believe we lose emissions I
think they just moved and I I
understand what you're trying to
do this wandering few having
discussions with any of them on
staying and trying to improve
their missions here.
You know madam chair that we've
been talking about this for
years we've been trying to do
this since the current governor
got elected so you know I
believe it's important that we
take care of business in New
Mexico and we are producing more
missions than almost any other
state so I think it's important
that we all try to work on
cleaning up our air and cleaning
up the submissions that we have
certainly we want to businesses
to stay here hi I don't buy into
the fear mongering that seems to
happen what you know if you had
a lot of people talk there's
unintended consequences nobody
talks about what they mean by
that so if they mean they're
moving across the border.
You know that's their
prerogative I certainly want
them to stay here just want them
to try to work with us on having
fewer emissions that are
creating what we have known now
know as the climate crisis
especially in the southwest
where we are getting hotter and
drier.
That less water.
Emissions in the air I do
believe that we've made
progress certainly on methane in
particular this gives us a
chance to make progress on other
emissions also.
Thank you for that I think
chairman Senator and can I guess
just on my thoughts on that
overall emissions of Larry Scott
had given this number four one
one thousand hello world
commissions.
And I think we're treated like
we're trying and I don't know
how to give me on that because
if the losing one business in
New Mexico hurts our state
economy and I just think that
this is just a little bit over
bearing on them as an individual
business to be able to have
Tate paired pay that burden off
their back Mr chair and center
my next question goes to of the
bill say to animal CD must
conduct tribal consultation in
the promulgation rules have we
talked to like the he could be a
nation and what this would do to
them I know they've got a lot of
oil and gas on their properties
just wondering if they've
reached out to you Senator Madam
chair Senator that was removed
from the bill all up that's the
in the point you should be on
the point four version because
that was for methane rules and
that's already done they were
part of all of that in those
rules are in progress of being
employment madam chair and
senator thank you for that
because that resolves at least
that part of that question so
and I apologize for being behind
in I'm not getting the.
For for version in time
The other question I had then is
just in in understanding what it
does to Ag you know they've
stepped up and said that they
they'll be heard about it in in
the conversation of who's
brought out about this Chile
production and I don't know what
this does to the chili industry
and matter of fact one of our
centers on Canadian is in that
industry and I'm just wondering
with that pain are.
Banner of prop produce I mean we
talked about New Mexico have
chili all over the state country
and world and just wondering
have you had discussions with
them madam chair and center on
what it's going to do
specifically to their business.
Madam chair I personally have
not but they've been part of
these conversations this last
year it's my understanding that
the chilli crop is already much
less than it spent in part
because we don't have enough
water to continue to do that
kind of
At the practices that we use now
in addition we don't have people
to pick the chilly up because we
are embroiled in this will we
let and then are not issue at
the border so our our chili
production need some help right
now I do believe the science
shows that if we can cut down on
the emissions we cut down on the
effects of climate change so
perhaps we would have more water
for more chilly so you know I I
believe everybody's afraid of
change and everybody's worried
about all of this but this I
believe is what we need to do
for the future.
Madam chair and Serra appreciate
I think this is an add on we've
had discussions in here about
the water needs for the middle
Rio Grande takes priority over
the area of a patch and I think
it's a fairness issue on that so
if you take the water issues
they're already having problems
with and then you overshadow
what with this bill I think it
just makes it harder on them
because and now they're battling
to different segments of
government not just one so with
that argument thank you I have
center city Lopez and Senator
Vontaze anyone else senator
bill.
And senator Hammond okay.
Thank you madam chair I want to
thank you so much for bringing
this bill because of.
I know from experience that that
it's it's tough that that that
environmental bills and then you
get of you know they'll having
the oil and gas industry stand
up an attack you it's is rough
and to have all of these
And to try to find a grant to
provide try to find a way to
move forward is is is.
I really I thank you for
bringing for bringing this bill.
One of the things that the that
the coalition of this coalition
wrote to us is that they're
concerned about fully funding of
of the of EMNRD and NMED
do we know what's in the and I
know I understand this is not an
appropriations bill do we know
what's this what's in H. B. two
to fund those agencies to do we
know if they've gotten that the
kind of increase they need madam
chair Madam chair Senator
certainly we've all been working
with the finance committee this
is something I've said
repeatedly as many times as I
see the people on the finance
committee for the last six
months so I believe it's much
better than we were thinking
originally I don't know exactly
where they're at right now there
right now trying to juggle that
budget there is been a request
from the governor's office to
increase our spending by almost
a billion dollars and a variety
of issues I don't know if she is
trying to get more of funding
for our two departments that
deal with the environment I
don't know if she's doing that
certainly we are it's an
important issue
It's a little bit amazing to me
that people stand up and say we
don't like this because you're
not funding those departments at
two totally different issues
really when it talks about the
legislature so I'm doing my part
I don't know where we're at yet
I know it's better than it was
last year.
Thank thank you madam chair and
and thank you madam pro tem um I
also put two hundred fifty
thousand in my junior money
toward funding those is that
those agencies I just hope that
doesn't reduce the.
the amount so I think that
that's I think that that issue I
think we can get rid of and then
the downstream accounting of
emissions that they ask
my understanding is that raises
jurisdiction issues can you talk
a little bit about that madam
chair and chair I can turn to my
experts our.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez the downstream
accounting issue doesn't present
itself so many issues of
jurisdiction as it doesn't.
the that made and I'm but I
don't understand I haven't FIR
on this bill today but there is
some costs associated with the
carbon inventory just for in
state sources
which is an issue for this bill
go to order Senate finance after
this and that's an issue madam
chair and senator that would.
That would be an issue they're
just for for accounting purposes
of the downstream that we can
figure out of state admissions I
can be kind of a complicated
calculations because it depends
on where it goes how much of it
is burned how much of it is
deployed for other uses the the
that's the reason you don't you
don't necessarily see it in this
bill because it's just a little
bit outside of the scope of
what the bill is attempting to
do and certainly what the
environment apartments currently
I.
I want to thank you also for
removing the offset stuff from
the bill I think that that was a
really great movie and I am I am
going to support the bill has
you know one of the madam chair
one of the reasons that I have
been pushing the green amendment
is so that to preserve the
regulations that the Lujan
Grisham administration has
passed so painstakingly and what
this bill does is it codifies
those regulations after the
Richard C. Martinez at the
Richardson administration the
Martinez administration funded
climate change and environmental
regulations within ten months
and so I think it's really
important to codify these
regulations so that they're not
and done in of hopefully we'll
never get an anti environmental
governor again but so that they
are in there for future
administrations so with that I'm
I'm happy just with the bill.
Thank you senator Montez.
As we were looking other members
for absolutely Senator Neville.
Sure I only have one.
This was a.
I.
That's an accurate number knock
those sort of that's an accurate
number not but
Most of those are owned by very
small producers relatively small
producers not the conduct those
are the chair on to those kind
of companies how with this bill
have any effect on them.
Chairman asked senator could you
turn your microphone on people
did not catch your question and
I'm sorry I just need to ask you
to repeat just just how would it
affect the small producers of
the fifty some thousand which
part predominantly smaller
operators.
Chair I'd like to have been
shown to help me for that.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and senator to fill the the
answer that question the
effectively what we are doing by
codifying these rules is just
putting a statutory underlined
for rules that is that are
already in place and already
driving state agency action so
the maybe action that has been
taking for that for those wells
that you're concerned about our
that promulgation of the methane
waste rules by the oil
conservation division and then
the ozone precursor rules and
then our environment departments
are generally speaking what is
but the impact of this bill is
for the certainly the
foreseeable future will be what
is happening today from the
standpoint of a.
methane understand but there's
trucking there's all kinds of
other things involved that might
be effective for the most part
the operators of left my County
I'm in San Juan County we don't
have any kind of goes anymore so
all of those are basically owned
by relatively small.
All companies that employ ten or
fifteen people that that kind of
plus all of the trucking support
and all that some little
concerned what it would do to a
lot of my small folks up in San
Juan County and the the two
thousand five bothers me the
whole technology change
drastically between two thousand
five in two thousand twenty why
are we not using a more modern
number for baseline in the as
somebody else mention of the.
Madam chair with we've already
answered that I mean.
You know it's good that the
emissions have been lowered
since then that we have the
methane rule but never the less
a two thousand five the state
really good.
State to look at because we did
not have this many emissions
then as we do now
and it was the Kyoto protocol
which we agreed to and signed on
to so
it's what we're trying to do
worldwide is have the emissions
go back to that year so to me
it's sort of part of the science
it's going on around the world
on how to reduce climate change
everywhere but most the time we
change our standards madam chair
of when technology changes
dramatically as it did no and
gas and that's that's my concern
I'll turn it back madam chair
thank you so much Senator
Hamblen thank you madam chair
and thank you sponsor for
bringing this bill forward you
know I often think of.
We're working on environmental
policy of sometimes like
back in my college days of like
trying to get through one side
of the room to the other when
you're in a rave and so you've
got all the disco I to trying to
get to the other side and it's
like really challenging and you
feel like you're walking through
mud and then it's because you're
trying to get to the restaurant
right and so.
This is this is where I see like
kind of like what this movie is
in terms of environmental
policies that we're trying to
get from one side of the right
to the other side of the right
because we have to go to the
restroom but the problem is is
that we have to get through that
door.
And that's where I see that this
this policy is like just opening
that door because if we can't
open the door then we can't make
the other changes that we need
to make and so you know I
commend you for that because it
is walking through that crowd
now you are going to be like
having house music in your head.
The two questions for you madam
chair incident and sponsor you
know the the the analysts the
the analysis this is that
disproportionately impacted
communities that this would add
language to state law to
increase government review of
activities like oil and gas it
could affect those communities
and so I'm wondering how is
there already policy that that
identifies those
disproportionately impacted
communities and I'm wondering
how they can be engaged in this
more as we move our way through
the room.
So madam chair I'm gonna answer
it but I don't will select them
to answer also so we have
started putting this language
into up legislation it was in
that clean fuels a bill that I
did three years ago and two
years ago it's being put in this
language is being put in by the
Environment Department
themselves it's just something
that we have to be much more
aware of and work towards so
that certainly for we already
have it an advisory committee
that's made up mostly of
impacted communities for the
economic diversification Task
force and the Economic
department in that
at economic development
department so
It's more of a at working with
these communities bringing these
communities in and listening to
them and so that's why it's an
important part of this bill.
I can just been to further
answer your question thank you
madam chair and senator and look
for the question I think that's
a excellent argument for
possibly some reform of the
state's administrative
procedures act which is should
be a central place where we
could codified principles around
consultation around equity in
kind of conduct some of that
Alice is what we do now as the
senator mentioned as part I
mentioned is we insert into
bills add depending to just
roughly aligned with the values
more trying to do in the bill
out on sort of a deal by deal
basis I think that the the
legislation that the person
referred to creating the
sustainable economy Advisory
Council.
and sat force I think it's not
called stable County task force
was it was a big forward step
but I think there's there's more
to go I'd be happy to talk about
administrative procedures act
all that but the case here.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and in sponsor one other
question so.
You know what one of the things
that we have that is not we were
proud of many things in the
state what we're not proud of is
having the largest nothing cloud
in the four corners area and
it's something that we still
need to continue to move forward
to reducing those emissions so
I'm wondering what what what the
setting these emissions like
actually do is there a vision.
Of what that could do I don't
know if it affects the methane
cloud that we have what what we.
What we see is as the outcome of
this bill regarding emissions.
So madam chair.
I think it's important that we
codify this is statute because
it tells agencies and then
districts and the communities
about the clarity and
consistency of that we're gonna
need to plan long term to meet
these goals and ensure the work
that towards the school doesn't
become yes.
Part of the usual political
partisan bickering we have to
all agree to do so move forward
with them in each of these
industries and with the policies
that we put forward so without a
plan if you don't have anything
without that codification yes as
been said we're moving forward
on all of these right now what
we've done with the methane
tools I think has just been
phenomenal industry was probably
involved in that and.
Although they don't some of them
don't like it very much there
they are trying now to deal with
that and that rule doesn't
really fully go into effect for
another several years so we're
working towards that so you know
unless we agree that we need to
do this we what we won't do
essentially.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you sponsor you know I I I look
at this is is the key to open
the door so that we all can get
in the conference room.
Ultimately is is how I I view
this and so I do appreciate you
bringing this forward and and
then let's also around the
conference table.
Thank you madam chair like the
right better that's right I've
got the disco ball in my office
so we can do that.
Thank you Senator von case and
then Center Davis wants to make
motion.
Of the madam chair so.
Thank you for waiting.
But this bill to go to the
judiciary.
Of course within the that the
only opportunity that but I
really have to.
K. Center yes.
Are your Senator can you turn on
your might often times we get a
chance to push bills out here
getting to ensure we can really
explore the language all know
something
you know we've been on this bill
for about an hour now.
And not yet of any the
proponents or opponents are any
presentation discussions were
has anybody talked about the
words on the page.
You know we talk about the
generalities we talk about the
goals and we talk about the the
crisis in the problems and
emergency and I I recognize all
of those things but.
You know we're here to make laws
were to write laws.
in you know we're not here to
write hallmark cards you know
this this is gonna have some
kind of a consequence some kind
of an important some kind of
an effect of of lawmaking to be
in and that's where I was
running to the challenges so for
example.
We look at.
The.
We look at section three would
like to start with some
questions about what we're
actually looking at the billion
unless I missed something nobody
who spoke said anything about
the words on the page.
And and I haven't heard the
committee up talk about the
words on the page we talked
about.
What we aspire to do what we
hope to do.
But we're we're here law making
so if you look at section three
says the annual emissions in the
state.
As measured by carbon dioxide
equivalent shall be limited and
we've and we have standards so
you Senator you know the first
question I'm gonna ask you.
Twenty twenty three that we have
to be at fifty percent less than
twenty I by twenty forty we have
to be at seventy five percent
less than twenty oh five by
twenty fifty we have to be
ninety percent.
For what.
Madam chair you know if the work
of the last several years had
produced a big solid Bill which
it couldn't because the two
sides are so far apart
I believe that there would have
been more accountability but we
couldn't get there you know
issue say you've got half the
room again staff through well
two thirds of the room against a
third of the room for and they
stand up in their offices in
their discussion you know part
of them said they don't like
having communities be involved
with their most impacted and
then other state they do that is
what we're up against you
thought of groups that are
environmental groups are against
the bill because we're not
funding the Environment
Department in there so just
imagine putting all those people
in one room and coming up with
an accountability system means
so this is this is what we can
do I really like the right can
we get a key to get in so we can
all dance together because
unless we do something like this
we're not going to be dancing
together so no there isn't huge
accountability this is the first
step and I think it's an
important step which is I was
willing to do this.
Fifteen thank you the center and
then but you said there's not
huge accountability in this bill
let's be honest there's zero
there's no accountability in
here at all and you're not in
your head affirmatively Galactus
great already district okay all
right well then perhaps I can be
persuaded that I'm missing
something here but you've heard
and this committee heard me say
this many times before you know
the this goes back to the ETA
with that we all celebrate Pat
ourselves on the back but
remember again the ETA doesn't
have any consequences either so
we don't meet those standards.
and so here on this one section
we've got these requirements
very specific we shall meet a
certain standard by certain here
that a certain percentage of a
certain level very clear
language to meet this is a law
this is a bill except.
You said there is accountability
can you show me what am I
missing here what we're in this
bill is there any account of
what happened so we don't do
this.
So madam chair an answer and
then in the current to been.
I don't believe you can even
talk about accountability until
you have standards that's what
this is about
so why do we have a whole room
against the standards
irrespective of accountability
so until we can agree on the
standards were trying to reach I
mean why even bother talking
about accountability that's the
problem I see is that we can't
get people to even agree to what
we need to do
so when I and I sensed I sent
your frustration I and I I can
see on your face because it's
kind of an interesting this one
of those moments where the lines
in the lambs are lying down
together you know it's kind of
like well we've got certain
groups lined up with certain
industries in the rain they're
outside their.
And I'm trying I'm trying to get
that whole rave in the jet of my
I have but I
But the you know it you're right
it is an interesting thing and
and I understand that that it's
hard to get everybody to the
table but again you know I I
tell all the opponents here we
worry about there's a bunch of
centers here in accountability
and if you don't mean I'm
there's no consequence of this
bill so sleep well
Ag or oil or gas because we're
giving you our hope and our
dream and our teacher on the
slogan or bumper sticker but
we're not really telling you
that if you don't do this
anything's going to happen to
you so sleep easy
I know I know it's hard for me
to persuade you to do that but.
You know I
I'm not sure if there's no
accountability and and I'm I'm
just not seeing it Senator mean
I I know I understand what
you're telling me you gotta have
standards your your arguments
you gotta have stands before you
could have accountability and I
don't think there'd not only can
separate them.
I I don't know how you have a
standard with up and
accountability.
The other leg said otherwise
it's just it looks to me like.
Bumper sticker stuff well madam
chair you know we we we've
worked very hard on the methane
rules and those are now in place
you know we have another Senator
couple of years before the full
ninety eight percent to some
place so we do have some
accountability already and that
was huge and and we and we did
that what do we do that here.
What you mean what what well is
there consequence not meeting
the methane standards.
I think there will be
if I can just been to answer
that.
Thank you madam chair Senators
about is the shortest interested
give you is that this is a
amendment two year quality
control act to the state would
be in violation their quality
control act subject to the
penalty standards in corrections
language in that the state would
be who's good who's gonna
enforce against the state.
And what and what's the result.
There are.
sues the state what happens I
know it's Senator Sedillo was
going to say you're gonna tell
me that solutions that you
remember and I think we're.
What I was going to say if the
state every time we pass a law
of the state have to enforce it
and that's the state's job in
this is to enforce it that's why
the opponents are complaining
that there's not enough no
funding which I agree with it's
just this is the funding bill
in center and Senator that the
challenge for the differences
this when you have a methane
standard and certain actor is
not meeting that standard you
can take enforcement action
action against actor these
standards are statewide
standards in other words if
we're what we're looking at here
is the years was supposed to
have a statewide state of of
reduction of fifty percent by
twenty twenty zero five.
Well.
You guys go meet in Santa Fe we
don't have County I have forming
maybe we don't have to me that
there does how do you how do you
say well we.
You'll meet in your part of the
state told me that my part of
the state do you guys and Travis
Lee Eddie whatever else you
don't have to meet it because
Santa Fe Los Alamos are going to
me that I mean when you have a
statewide standard how do you
enforce that a as a state wide
standard who'd who in a suit.
Senator Sedillo Lopez when he
got to methane violator right
you the attack the violators and
you charge them to to do what we
expect them to do but here when
the standards statewide as a
whole.
We're gonna go after them after
going to go after acting up to
Derry would have to after oil
after guests who takes the hit
here well this the way that this
is written is there is going to
be an annual report that will
give guidance to to the agencies
to to figure out how do we do
target and that's what the
agency's responsibility is to
meet our of our guidance our our
policies and so our policies in
this bill is to reduce the
emissions and so what their job
is is to figure that out we
delegating that authority we
will be monitoring it by having
a report that will you know we
will review and see how they're
doing toward that report what's
interesting is already dentistry
has been.
Has been trying to
trying to reduce emissions
trying to try to reduce the
methane trying to
And that's good I I think that
that's good and so part of that
is we're establishing policies
standards and the job is for
agencies to implement that and
this delegates the forty to do
that and like like the like the
right example it's a first step.
Into the party which I may not
want to go to the.
Yes so so we just try one last
time before I move on I mean so
I still haven't heard.
Any accountability so somebody
show me some language because
again I hear all the aspirations
I hear the goals I hear the
right I hear the first up
somebody show me words on the
page that says if we don't meet
the standards here's what
happens can anybody show me
anything of this bill that does
that.
Madam chair the bottom of page
six see the that oil
conservation division shall
require that permit approval
associated with oil and gas
development the subject to
conditions ensuring that at
least ninety eight percent
produce gases captured.
Or beneficially re use for the
permit or approval.
This does go back to the air
quality control Division we have
if we have people in place to
look whether or not these
standards are being met which
again is why the concern is are
we funding these departments
and.
Then Senator that's you are here
for to that page of that section
that's a perfect example of a
good part of a well written bill
which is here's the standard
here's a consequence there's a
requirement but that's not the
part that I'm talking about
that's that's so very clearly
ninety eight percent of the
produce gases captured for of a
permit to be approved about so I
get that there's a very clear
consequence there but I'm
talking about the section three
or section yes section three
which is these statewide
emissions standards greenhouse
gases fifty percent seventy five
percent it's zero down that list
and then.
That that other section you just
referred to has nothing to do
with this section right so so
where is the consequence for not
meeting the standards I I I've
got a I'm I don't mean to put
you on the spot and I don't
appreciate it well it turns my
experts for an answer there is a
one there's one he can't give
you an answer because there's
nothing in here that has any
consequence Mr Shelton you and
respond I would that thank you
madam chair and senator I think
my response is that the air
quality control I Civil
remaining here so sorry the air
quality control act is where the
section goes in the full
remaining so the specificity
that I that it seems like you're
looking for madam chair and
senator around
you know numeric criteria
specific remedies things like
that that's that's all in front
of us this bill is really just
essentially providing a
framework for further action
that would get us to that point
that's what I keep hearing is
well this is going to be a study
this gonna be further action
we're going to start someplace
and we're going to get into the
rave and we're going to get
through the front door and I I
again.
You know this is just me trying
to be a lawyer for a little
while which is how do you how do
you get your so emotionally so
well we will go to the air
quality standards
but I'm still left with the
question of the state doesn't
meet the standard.
Who gets sued.
Who we gonna go after to meet
the standard.
You know madam chair this is
what's happening right now in
these areas where we need to
ensure that they're not spewing
out the math thing not only do
we have a huge cloud over the
northwest part of the state we
have a huge methane plumes that
all over Carlsbad and Artesia at
cetera that all of this can be
seen from the space so we are
under the
guise of the federal government
for not reducing our missions
so.
You could amended put in a fine
or something if you want.
Yeah ten thousand dollar fine or
whatever yeah so we have people
right now in these departments
that are trying to ensure that
the standards are met so.
I hear what you're saying there
is no.
We have twice as many people in
here yelling at us if we put
fines and here but.
Hello.
Well as you've made your point
thank you the.
Yeah
and you know it and I can expand
on on your last point to it
never met you know this about me
Senator it didn't matter to me
how many people in the room are
for or against the bill in
matters not one iota because the
farmers and the people that I
represent have to travel three
hundred miles to get here and
they're not the Santa Fe group
right they're not they're not
people who come down the street
so I'm I'm never that persuaded
by how many people in the room
for one hand or the others for
in that for what it's worth
category but I I appreciate that
I just I I.
I think we have the best problem
with a memorial and I guess
maybe that shouldn't trouble so
much because I just don't think
there's any consequence to not
meeting the standards let me
move to a different topic.
Of the.
Sections.
This will this will be I think
hopefully a trip down memory
lane for you Senator Stewart
section five of the bill has
some new definitions and we we
talked a little bit about this
definition of a
disproportionately impacted
community we we've seen that in
some of the other built in
language and so forth and.
The the definition of a
disproportionately impacted
community.
To me is meaningless
because it means as a means here
community or population of
people for which multiple
burdens including environmental
and social economic stressors
inequity poverty high
unemployment pollution
discrimination made persistently
and negatively affect the health
well being and environment of
the community or populations
including tribal communities
communities of color low income
rural communities native people
people of color women immigrants
you formerly incarcerated people
lesbian gay bisexual transgender
and queer people and people with
disabilities.
We could probably add to that
list with lots of other folks
who may want to do that I'm
smaller we Senator because
remember you know where I'm
going you about fifteen years
ago you and I were tasked by
governor Richardson to rewrite
the entire health care policy
for the state of New Mexico you
remember that you do with it was
just you and then I'll parking
we spent days and we smile
because we had all the cooks in
the kitchen you could always
tell who that their input in
what part of the bill because
every group had to get their
name in there and everybody had
to get their their point so
we've got a whole long list of
people here and we should
probably you know we wanted to
be inclusive we could probably
include I would think here.
People that are more like the
the committees that that
sometimes don't end up on these
lists.
So Hispanic communities
colonias.
Farming you know we could we
could we can the list could go
on and on and on what is it
disproportionally affected
community but I.
I
When it when you and I talked
about the health care but we
could see were ever you had all
the cooks in the kitchen right
now we've got all the cooks in
the in the definition but it
that's all it's impossible
definition for me to know what
is a disproportionately impacted
community because I would say
that my entire district this and
disproportionately impacted
community by that definition in
fact right frankly I'd probably
say the entire state certainly
the entire county doing in the
counties of disproportionately
impacted community because it's
a it's a community a population
of people with multiple burdens.
in those words include social
economic stressors.
And they include inequity and
poverty and high unemployment
those are the lows all meet the
definition so I've I've got all
of those
So when we get to section six.
We're creating a climate equity
in environmental justice review.
And here's where no big surprise
to members of the committee and
and the the issues that I raised
repeatedly when I can hear the
legislature which is when we
define things when we try to
pass bills that don't have any
meaning you can't be interpreted
by any court or by any lawyer.
There unintelligible
and
Third third inconsequential in
my mind.
So when we look at section six
have been subsection a getting
on and focusing on the words on
the page colleagues those except
where expressly prohibited by
law state entity shall apply the
following climate equity
principles
so let me just start there when
it says expects except when
expressly prohibited by law the
state entity shall do the
following things so when with a
state entity not being required
to this knows when is expressly
prohibited for state entity to
do these things.
Madam chair I'd like to have an
answer that for.
Thank you madam chair Senators
about this I think it's going to
depend on legislative entity and
be a case by case determination.
So again we'll figure that out
later right will figure out that
for the building and so what the
entities supposed to do in their
policies rules as we look at the
beginning on top of page fifteen
here's what they're supposed to
do.
What is what we're this is what
we're doing is law makers we're
telling them they must do this
you shall engage in prioritize
reductions in disproportionately
impacted communities.
The house.
Really.
Show engage in prioritize
reductions in disproportionate
impact news.
Meaningless to me on that point.
Thank you yes we went up thank
you let one of the
representatives in the back of
the room get through a bill to
the go ahead the EPA office has
an environmental justice office
and they have given a lot of
guidance to agencies all over
this all over the country and
how to find out where of
community has health
if you were to look at him with
impacts on communities because
we know so many them are located
to a near areas that have
disproportionate well that that
that polluters have
disproportionately impacted
their health and so there's a
whole formula that the EPA's as
a developed to identify these
communities and this gives the
state a lot of flexibility in
identifying the communities in
the state.
Well then Senator it's at seven
the all that flexibility that
we're talking about that really
because the lack of meaning to
me so again that this law is
going to require that we engage
reductions in disproportionately
impacted communities have
absolutely no way of knowing
what that means no court could
know what that means the lawyer
could know what that means
nobody could know what that
means.
This bill requires that you
prioritize reductions.
Let me the meeting paragraph two
this bill requires that we would
respect tribal sovereignty.
Of course we respect tribal
sovereignty how do you measure
that how you say with the
respective tribal sovereignty
adequate.
I don't know but court who's
gonna decide whether we respect
the tribal sovereignty to
tribals severance made a degree
or disagree whether we respected
them or not.
I don't know how much respect we
have to give the.
A lot little.
What's what's the standard
what's the what's the number.
Of this bill requires
of collaboration and
consultation.
Who's going to decide whether we
collaborate.
consulting have no way of
knowing what that would be again
as an attorney.
This bill requires in paragraph
three that we maintain
accountability.
How we gonna measure that.
Go through requires that we
maintain transparency.
Who's going to decide that who's
gonna measure that what's the
standard of transparency.
Paragraph for this bill requires
that we incorporate traditional
knowledge but that was that.
So madam chair all of this
language has been worked out
through meeting collaborating
with these communities and
particularly now all of this
does is that it says that the
state into the shell apply the
following climate equity
principles policy.
So.
This is the modern world Senator
said a fund this and our
communities are requiring us to
bring them into the conversation
and that's what this does it
delineates what has to be done
with the state agencies that are
going to be in charge of the
standards and I think it's an
important thing to have them
built it's been in several of
the bills I sponsored and I
think this language is good
language because it gives the
direction and it gives up
policies to follow and it's been
brought forward by these
communities themselves.
And I appreciate that senator I
appreciate your passion and and
I support all those groups
coming forward and sitting at
the table and and expressing
their feelings
and we should respect people's
feelings but if you're if you're
a lawmaker and you're putting
words on the page when the
requirement here is that we
incorporate I'm gonna quote it
we incorporate traditional
knowledge and experience have
absolutely no idea what
traditional knowledges.
What my traditional knowledge
may be different than yours
maybe I would guess different
than everybody on this panel as
witnessed what is traditional
knowledge would boost tradition.
my traditions differently or
tradition and so the groups are
requiring that we incorporate
traditional knowledge will never
be able to measure that will
never be able to enforce that
will never be able to evaluate
it may make us feel good.
But again
I'm using the analogy probably
tirelessly it it's great on a
button it's nice it's nice on a
bumper sticker
But I believe this is things
that we need to take into
account when we move forward on
all of the let our legislation
perhaps it's important to put it
down on paper and I don't I'm
not bothered by the fact that.
He can have a lawsuit on it and
that we may not all understand
what these words are but we
recognize that this is what the
disproportionately impacted
communities are asking for I
don't think it hurts one iota to
put this in the bill that's a
policy that will.
So I you know I really
appreciate that the debate in
the discussion that's going on
because I think it's important
for everybody to hear and so
Senator could you wrap up the
next couple points and then and
thank you the budget we're
trying to go
again great respect for my
colleague who we Sir with for
very long time she's serve with
you to Judiciary house and
Senate so she can years twenty
years so she knows what this
drill is like and again as I
said on fortune this bill
doesn't get that opportunity to
have that kind of scrutiny will
by the lawyers but ultimately we
we're we're either deciding
whether or passing memorial or
billing what we're really
passing is a memorial this is
going to make people feel good
and and I think that's a good
thing I think it's okay for
people to feel good and have
their feelings respected and
then heard and sit at the table
and you and I can go enjoy
discussion and feel really good
about incorporating our
traditional knowledge and
experience or for maintaining
our transparency or respecting
our collaboration consultation
spill all to that.
the paragraph six this bill
requires that we advance
equitable economic transition.
Have absolutely no damn idea
what that could possibly mean
advance equitable economic
transition program six madam
chair moving along quickly this
bill requires that we prioritize
creating and maintaining
universal universal access to
utilities.
Senator how much trying to work
on something on those lines to
get to but but there's no
measure for that we're going to
we're going to prioritize access
to utilities that's good we
should have access to utilities.
and programs seven this bill
says that we should a new by law
we should reduce health and
environmental impacts.
Of course we should reduce
health impacts.
Of course we should reduce
environmental impacts how much
how little when how who
and then what happens
completion.
That all of this language to me
is is one of the memorial.
paragraph be the implementation
of the equity principles in the
preceding subsection.
Maybe explain through guidance
issued by climate change task
force either now in existence
for might be develop in the
future that is not law that is
not a law
All those things I just want
this is what will it's as we
thanks maybe later explained
we're going to we're going to
explain these later through
guidance of the task force.
That might be developed in the
future.
and so long as the guidance or
amendments is developed using a
public review and comment
process work with the with all
of that says we're going to get
to later on understand what this
means will define this leader
will to figure out what it means
later for now let's let's feel
good and the impact ourselves on
the back.
A paragraph seven the
determination of direct
greenhouse emissions levels here
we have since specific dates and
standards for state entities but
but with the state this bill is
supposed to do is to determine
the qualitative and quantitative
impacts of climate change on the
state entities programs and
operations.
I don't know how will ever know
what that means we're what that
report will be but I guess we
can always make up something and
say well here's a report on the
impacts of climate change.
I'm gonna jump ahead then checks
I know you want to hear the
bills but I I really am trying
to make as much progress as
account to really try and make
the point that we ought to get
serious about this that we
really want to do things let's
do things what's what's give
meaningful standards list of
consequences of let's give clear
direction and let's do it
programs sixteen per go for the
entities are supposed to provide
additional authority or
resources needed or impediments
that if addressed could
facilitate efforts by the state
entity again I don't know what
additional authority resources
are needed but we're not saying
what they are we just going to
say well do so with that.
Representative mom on the last
page insured mercifully so you
know of the annual report this
required from the state by this
law.
The report shall do the
following if you look on page
seventeen lines I the report
show prioritized coordination
with consideration of
environmental and economic
progress for the advancement of
impacts to disproportionately
impact communities completely
unintelligible.
Completely nonsensical
Representative.
Well and I understand the words
but how do we measure what is
prioritizing coordination with
consideration of environmental
and economic progress for
avoidance of impacts.
You can never measure that you
can never assess that you can
ever hold somebody accountable
to coordination with
consideration of progress for
avoidance.
Look at the next paragraph the
report shall contain an
inventory of greenhouse
emissions based on the best
available data was at me.
Who's gonna decide what the best
available data is I'd like to
have the date of data from the
sources of their greenhouse
emissions I don't know that
would be the best available or
not.
and almost done their manager's
base seventeen line eighteen the
report shall identify policies
and regulatory strategies that
are either in place or necessary
to achieve reductions that's a
that's an aspiration of the goal
that's memorial right we we
would like for you to identify
policies and strategies.
That's not a law the law says
you must do this if you don't do
this that's this is the
consequence and here we're
saying here's we wanted to we
want to focus on strategies.
That are either in place or may
be necessary in the future.
So madam chair that I could we
respond to certainly a few of
them would like to.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and I'll go all the way
back to kind of incorporate my
response here to your to your
particular definition because I
understand the frustration madam
chair Senator with.
All of this language because
what we are looking at our
significant systems that produce
discriminatory impact that have
taken decades to come about am
ende created and that the fact
that it is difficult and
statutory language to encompass
the scope of the problem of the
massive institutions and systems
that we're trying to correct
that we're trying to change and
trying to very very slowly nudge
towards more eco outcomes the
language isn't isn't perfect the
idea is to create to take the
first step in beginning to
create that feedback loop of.
The language out into the field
seeing if it's the start to
create results that look like
they are moving in the correct
direction and then revisiting
and coming back in correcting
perfecting and things but
happens in this building is you
evaluate maybe not as much as we
would all like to you valuate
the impact of legislation bills
and laws that we've thank you
all created.
We make adjustments there are
thousands of investments in
front of us because the problem
is massively complex it looks
different in every single
district will look different
Senator in your district from
Senator Sedillo Lopez districts
fought to from senator
guideposts district so that I
it's going to be many many years
in the making to.
Correct these institutions but
what I think the intention with
the language that you've been
walking through an experiencing
frustration with is that the
inability to perfectly
encapsulate the problem on the
page is not an excuse for
failing to begin.
And that's madam chair that's
what I guess what we Fund
millions have disagree because
as a lawyer
as a lawmaker I want to say what
I mean and mean what I say.
And it's not enough to save.
We're going to get to that later
defining what this means and
this is really difficult and
because it's really difficult we
can't really say what we mean I
think we can sit with me I think
I think we give ourselves too
much of an excuse by saying well
we really good this is so
complicated this is decades in
the making we really can't
figure out how to say what we
mean.
You got some very clear
standards of here you you need
to meet certain standards by
certain dates that's pretty
clear.
So.
What's the consequence if you
don't.
The fact that we don't have a
consequence to me is not because
it's too complicated to have a
concept.
I just think we've tried hard
enough.
and I think the but I think this
become now popular term that I
use frequently squishy language.
is really I I'm really for
expressing the frustration for
showing the and I and my
colleagues have to hear about
from all to I see a clear shift
in lawmaking process here in
Santa Fe N. last for five years.
Where we used to really write
laws.
We used to route right laws that
were clear that that was
important to us that they were
clear they were understood they
were enforceable we used to do
that here.
We don't do that anymore.
Very often we write memorials
because it makes us feel good.
But there's no standards no
forced with there's no
interpretation and as a lawyer
it just fills the books with
frankly words the I know we're
never going to be enforced never
have a meeting how can these
none of this can be enforced
none of this.
And and we've established
there's and there's no
consequence if there is an
enforcement so.
Yeah up here so that's the
frustration from his lawyer hi
hi.
I I want to have pride in what
we do here I want to go back to
when we used to right clear laws
madam chair we're sure fill with
accountability for the standards
moving forward I'd be happy to
work with you on one Senator but
that but that's not what I was
asked to do here and I can
assure you in you know the
center when when bills come to
Judiciary I think I'm very
consistent I ask this question
always in this Canadian and
every Canadian amid the the
bills always say do this and I
say for what.
You all heard me say that ad
nauseam on this committee and my
committees.
Do X. and my question is what if
I don't do X. and when there's
nothing with a silent then I
sleep easy and I don't worry too
much about it because I realized
it is a memorial.
And I think we're passing way
too many morals in Santa Fe
these days we are we out of
state what we mean and mean what
we say thank you madam chair
that's enough thank you senator
Montes Senator Stewart would you
like to close before we go to a
motion.
You madam chair I think I think
we've chatted enough you can go
right ahead okay and I I want to
thank you for bringing forward
this very large bill and topic
before we go Senator Gallegos
hunter I move to table.
There is a tabling motion which
is non debatable with the
secretary please call the roll
Senator of this.
Senator Gallegos is then Senator
Hamblen no.
Centerville yes.
Senator pope no.
Senate committee yes.
Senator souls excuse.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Phonics.
No.
By a vote of for for your bills
on the table.
Madam chair I move it has
Representative four four doesn't
pass it doesn't pass Senator
Hamblen I move the two passed
with no Representative.
There is a is there a second by
second there is a motion for a
do pass with the no
recommendation.
With the secretary please call
the roll it was senator Hamlin
and Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator about this.
Senator Gallegos no ma'am.
Etcetera have one yes.
Centerville no.
Senator pope yes.
K..
That are sold excuse Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes explain a vote
session about X..
Yes.
finish committee to explain your
vote for madam chair the the
vote fails secretary before it's
again a four four
that motion fails yes Senator
Schmedes to do and explain the
chair of the brief I was will
fascinate with the discussion
of listening to kind of the two
sides here and I I just for
whatever this is worth Senator
not as use the phrase
fundamental shift
thing is precisely correct I
also find it very almost ironic
that centers by you have a bill
to
form a constitutional commission
for review who else did that
introduced into that when he
came to power in the Byzantine
empire he reviewed all the
constitutions that he gobbled up
and there is this idea of the
old law the new law.
The nonsensical law and and the
new law the introducing was
trying to compose and I I very
much first respect your your
thinking on this and I I this is
this is the last thing I'll say
on this is I think that there is
a truly I I I don't think are
gonna commences folks because
laws authoritative and a lot of
people I think by design they
want to write laws that are
intentionally.
Non and Thor Tate of at the time
of in that way they can allow
kind of whims feelings fads to
to rule.
And and that's a problem but I
think that that's the
fundamental difference that
wasn't mentioned yet is I think
this is intentionally vague by
people that have respectfully a
different idea of what our legal
system should fundamentally be
about thank you thank you so
Senator
thank yes.
To explain oh I'm sorry Senator
Sedillo Lopez wanted to exploit
her vote I of I am sorry that
this is moving forward because
the teeth in this bill is the
enforcement activity by the
agencies and and yes we have to
expect them has state implement
our policies to proceed
aggressively with this
And the teeth that we have over
the agencies is directing the
money for their budgets.
And evaluating the performance
so I'm really I'm really
disappointed this is a moving
forward.
Thank you very much thank you
for your time this morning and
all of.
As we move on okay sense of
representative of gave us.
Has listened to our entire
debate from the back of the
room.
She's there she was listening to
everything.
He's here.
On house bill one ninety seven.
Well as.
Nobody wants to hear fishing it.
everyone exit the room quietly
we're going to keep going
Representative Gallegos please.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee I
will make this brief and the
state is going to need to but I
will be passed house bill one
ninety seven as one more weekend
day to a to annual fishing to to
annual free fishing days a year
these free fishing days and only
create an interest in fishing
from individuals who have never
fished before but will also
provide an opportunity for
families and individuals who do
not have the means to buy a
license for either themselves or
everyone in their family unit to
fish for a weekend twice here
and with that madam chair I
stand for questions thank you do
that second okay before we take
a formal vote if I could I see
any supporters in the room raise
your hand.
Are there any supporters online
okay any opponents.
Thank you we have a motion for
I'm sorry was there a hand No
Way.
Somebody was opposing this up
okay so there was a due pass
from Senator Mante said believe
in that second from center city
Lopez could the clerk please
serving the county the county
commit Committee secretary
please call the roll Senator
Vontaze that I think of his
member ID like my mobile Senator
haven't yes Senate Bill yes
Senator pope yes Senator
smitteez I'd like to cast a yes
vote
Senator souls these Senator
Sedillo yes Senator panics yes
and before I announce about
senator Gaydos etcetera I just
want to thank the.
I get to be the chairman of the
guy goes caucus I just want to
come congratulate my vice chair
thank you the chairman because
he's older.
Committee.
Okay thank you to the guy a goes
caucus for that okay we are now
on to Committee substitute for
House Bill two sixty eight and
representative Garcia is.
He's on his way and I know
there's several people here for
this.
There's are your are you his
Experts.
Okay they come to the table.
There is a.
Okay there is an amendment that
you have in your books.
Have the analysts in the
amendment yes and it's included
in your analysis.
Committee members I'm sure
you've received a.
Several emails about this.
on both sides of the topic.
Welcome representative Garcia.
We understand you have a an
amendment so would you like to
present the bill first or the
amendment and madam chair I'd
like to present the amendment
first place.
Thank you madam chair on.
The amendment is
Two two five.
Six six nine point two.
We have it.
Okay thank you madam chair okay
so is there a motion for the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Okay there is a motion to
discuss so please go ahead and
present the amendment thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair the amendment.
Adds a three some you get County
partition land grants to house
bill two sixty eight.
These are the lower guiding us
land grant which is east of
hermits peak the loss of hearing
this land grant which is north
of Montezuma castle.
And the St Augustine Land Grant
which is just south of Las
Vegas.
Madam chair these three
partitions along with the early
on the or even Land Grant
comprise all of the leading
partition land grants in our
state that have acted in unison
for the last eight years to
realize a legislation currently
before the Senate conservation
committee.
And madam chair why did we not
include these three land grants
on the house side.
Madam chair early in the session
the three some you get County
partitions felt it important to
address some concerns that
needed clarifying before they
added their land grant to house
bill two sixty eight these
concerns were clarified in a
series of public meetings after
two six eight was introduce that
involved the Chief Justice of
the fourth judicial District
Court in Las Vegas.
Madam chair at these public
meetings the Chief Justice
essentially validated the
efforts of the three partitions
to pursue their goal of wishing
to be governed by provisions of
chapter forty nine article one
which included being granted the
status of becoming a political
subdivision of the state madam
chair that clarifying event
occurred two days after house
bill two sixty eight passed the
house floor we run out of time
in the house to amend house bill
two sixty eight chair and that
is the spirit in which we bring
the amendment.
With thank you is this
ammendment post online.
sent out.
So the member was not posted
online so the San Miguel.
community did not of for the
progress of the public did not
have access to this ammendment.
Which is a concern.
We do have a twenty four hour
rule for this is substantive.
So is there anyone here in the
audience who is here to speak on
this ammendment pro or con.
On the amendment.
Only on the amendment.
Is there anybody here from San
Miguel County.
Okay and have you seen the
amendment.
Sir.
And are you could you stand up
at could you come to the middle
and introduce yourself.
Senator take a from the lower
than as secretary for the and
are you in support yes ma'am.
Okay is there anybody here else
here from San Miguel that raise
your hand.
And could you stand up minute
are you both in support.
Of this ammendment.
This.
Yes Sir interrogation and set me
up right.
Yes ma'am okay okay I just want
to confirm that there are enough
people from San Miguel County
who have been notified about
this ammendment so seeing that
is there are there any questions
comments from committee members
before we take formal action on
the amendment.
I move it do I do pass on the
amendment.
There is a motion for you to
pass on the amendment by Senator
Sedillo Lopez and the second
from Senator renewable.
And we'll have the secretary
please call the roll Senator
bought this excuse center that
goes yes ma'am Center happened
yes senator bill is Senator pope
yes.
Committees yes.
Senator souls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
That's the phonics yes.
Thanks for okay so the amendment
has been adopted so back on the
bill thank you madam chair ready
to our presentation please thank
you madam chair chair we limited
in time so well the floor is
starting so limit limit our
presentation and thanks thank
you madam chair Madam chair of
the house Judiciary substitute
for house bill two Sixtyeight as
amended by this committee.
What recognize the partition
Spanish land grants about oil
and W. a.
in between thousand Cuesta there
are going to land grant as I
stated earlier used her misspeak
those the healers grant north
and with this in the castle and
so I was think rents out the
less than us as land grants
governed by the provisions of
chapter forty nine article one
you know New Mexico statutes and
madam chair the article in
provisions also recognize these
land grants as units of
governments
political subdivisions of the
state which is a status they do
not currently have.
And of which house bill two
sixty eight we'll find.
I will defer to the Land Grant
Representative lab right on the
benefits of being a unit a
government of the state of New
Mexico madam chair.
Madam chair the milestone two
thousand and four Land Grant
reform legislation modernize the
governance structure of article
land grants by bringing greater
accountability and transparency
to one board of trustee
elections to in clarifying the
definition of air tying it to
their interest in the COVID and
blood in the H. three and
protecting the common lands of
haphazard sales of land grants
for income for me to open
meetings act I in assessing
capital outlay funds and six and
annual reporting under the state
audit act and lastly in
designating article on line
requests as unity governments of
the state madam chair the oil
industry Land Grant those the
heat as Land Grant the lower
going as Land Grant in the
Senate listing land grants our
longstanding settlements going
back to the late seventeen
hundreds and early eighteen
hundreds their centuries old
dedication and commitment to the
protection of their ancestral
land holdings is second to none.
Their non governmental status
madam chair is jeopardizing all
that these for land grants have
been in the past and what they
can become in the future with
that manager I
I yield to my experts I do like
to let the to lead off and
also working our way up from the
Arroyo under the law
To follow up Madam thank you I
thank you madam chair my name is
our direction that time with the
New Mexico land grant council
representative Garcia mentioned
these for community grants for
all intents and purposes have
operated as political
subdivisions they've operated as
a land grants they just lack the
actual official recognition in
the statute and this would
rectify that and provide them
the opportunity to have access
to not only the the
opportunities and resources but
also the obligations other
required of other units of
government thank you madam
chair.
Thank you yes Sir.
Yes good morning madam chair
committee members when we look
though you said Williams whose I
have the
well as a as a committee
clinical and school social
worker it's going to take a deep
breath as I'm talking to you
because I have the difficult an
honorable task of representing
generations from my community in
this I I imagine you all got The
presentation which we try to
show you some pictures graphical
explanations of of health for
generations we've been really
withstanding economic pressures
and gentrification being so
close to the ski valley
you know we're we're still doing
the best we can our new board we
were just elected by our elders
less than two years ago or
learning and and we're here
today to try to carry on what
what a lot of the people who
have been doing for the last two
decades my dad in the elders
themselves were up here for over
ten fifteen twenty years and and
haven't quite reach we're hoping
you can help us with today so so
with that I want to invite you
to be part of our our culture
part of our our resistance in
celebration of how we
collectively show leadership
through the generations on and
and the difficulty we have also
of being a matriarchal society
and culture and trying to
represent that input that into
this Roberts rules of orders so
other than letting you absorb
this presentation and the
pictures I I in the interest of
time all go to the last page
which is our time line and if
you all notice although the
first official date is eighteen
thirteen you know historical
academic documents show that our
families have been in that area
to make it very clear that so
here's the here's the major
dates eighteen thirteen right
eighteen twenty three we have
the formal documentation
nineteen on on eighteen ninety
two we have the claims courts we
have the documentation from
nineteen oh eight plus nineteen
fourteen right when we were
first became a state so we have
all that here to back up our our
our process I also want to
mention that in twenty five of
fifteen our elders when heading
consolidated the dozens of names
we had an English Spanish
Spanglish and now all our
documentation says the same
thing filed with the court so
We take everything on our on
care on our end from legally to
the statutes through working
with these wonderful mentors
here and without a stand for
questions Madam chair of we also
have three spokespersons for the
remaining three land grants out
I'm gonna go to the audience if
you have as the ready to address
the committee if you go to the
audience Medicaid they need to
come to the middle of the room
first of all I'd like to see all
the hands in support of this
bill.
is there anybody in opposition
to this bill.
Okay let's have your three come
up and while you have them
getting ready for how many
people we have one person
online supporting Mr Orlando
Pino thank you very much for
joining us but we're gonna have
a testimony here in the room for
three people short very short.
Please thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to you today my name is that it
can time the chairman for the
Las Vegas land grant which is
located in San Miguel County we
manage approximately three
thousand acres of common lands
and we're established in
nineteen fifty one.
I'm here today in support of
house bill two sixty eight
because in April of two thousand
twenty two we were hit with the
largest force fired our state's
history and what we are left
with is an enormous amount of
clean up to do and no funding to
help us in restoring that our
forest in our lands House Bill
to sixty it is important to us
because it allows an access it
was excuse me would allow us to
become a unit of government and
eventually have access to state
and federal funding that would
help us better manage or non.
The the the task ahead is
tremendous for us impossible
without the necessary resources
this bill would help us provide
the necessary resources to move
forward in managing our lands.
Also Madam chair of.
I want to just mention that yes
the times of the of the essence
our trees that burn have a have
a limit
on our infrastructure if it is
not addressed is going to get
worse in time due to erosion and
flooding our soils must be
protected in these terrains of
theirs experts that say that for
the next two to three years
there's going to be severe
flooding in these areas due to
the burn scar.
Our watershed is so important we
must protect our watershed
the the innocent I need to wrap
up okay I will thank guiding us
and does he less play a more
integral part of the water that
flows into the going is revert
it is the lifeblood of the city
Las Vegas for drinking water so
with that said madam chair
members of the committee I urge
you to move in favor of house
Bill to seek Sixtyeight moving
forward thank you thank you this
will be the last bill for today
because we are called to the
floor yes Sir yes madam chairman
again and take a organised land
grants secretary of the board of
we are in favor as we can tell
the chairman can Tana faced were
facing similar issues
Try to protect rural land grants
for future generations this will
allow us the opportunity to seek
funding and help not only the
community of Las Vegas but
a nurse and was speechless so
with that thank you all for your
time thank you did you have one
more.
Representative Garcia for
themselves.
That
is.
Madam chair of committee members
thank you my name is William
Gonzalez from from the sun of
the State Land Grant I come from
a community it along the guiding
us that was established in
eighteen forty one in this grant
these lines that we are here
seeking to get recognition as a
grant have serviced our
community at least since that
time and so generations of our
families have relied on this
land for grazing and timber
harvesting and firewood
gathering herbs gathering and
more recently the interest
within the grant seems to have
moved forward a little bit
in the recreational area has
more members are looking to
utilize the grant and for these
reasons I would ask for your
support and passion who House
Bill to sixty eight this
designation as a political
subdivision of the state is very
important to us both in the
sense of accountability and also
the doors that are open to the
grant for continuing to be good
stewards of that rant and so I
ask you for your support thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you we're now going to since the
entire room was full of support
and no opposition to work those
are the only three we're going
to hear from we're now going to
go to the committee for
questions comments discussion.
Madam chair just Senator Neville
real fast question does this
have any effect on private land
owners that are not here's to
the land grant.
Mentors here within the
boundaries are so for because
we're talking about over a
hundred and fifty years or
whatever it is it's a long
period of time and somebody
could come in there about a
piece of land that's.
Not a member of the land grant
out of family members came from
Texas I don't know did that
happen in our other issues like
that chair and the
Representative well this is
essentially this legislation
essentially applies to the land
holdings of these land grants
and nothing else madam chair so
if there is a piece of land that
sold to somebody outside it's
not affected is that which
direct madam chair that's all
I'm concerned about thank you.
Thank you other questions or
comments madam chair moved to
pass second there is a motion
from Santo pope for do pass and
a second from center city or
Lopez.
Could the committee secretary
please call the roll Senator Bob
this is Senator Gallegos is
explainable Senator have a yes.
Centerville yes.
Senator pope yes Senator metes.
Etcetera so yes.
That is a deal of this yes
that's the phonics yes and
before I announce the vote
Senator Gallegos in terms
Representative I appreciated are
total thank you for all you do
Mr our way and I talked
yesterday and I like the
discussion he had about the next
generations because what we've
done I was part of the COVID our
land grant in Colorado which did
not survive but the property I
had there was part of that so I
understand the second issues I
understand the next generation
issues if we don't teach our
children how to preserve our
lifestyle the we will lose that
so I appreciate this and I
appreciate Mr Boyle coming to me
personally because I think
there's a value in that as far
as how New Mexico goes forward
so thank you for that thank you
bye voted nine zero you have a
do pass thank you very much
members of the committee.
