printed rule that says we can
start as a subcommittee, but we
do have a committee this
morning, 5 out of the group.
So if we ended up with 3 or 4,
we could always start at 9 and
not take any votes until we had
a full committee or a quorum of
a committee.
So this morning we are doing
rollovers, so Senator Boone.
Uh, you have Senate Bill 231.
Welcome to Senate Conservation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm pleased to
be here this morning for my very
first bill introduction.
Um
Very first, I mean, I've sat.
In the other chair, but I've
never sat in the hot seat, so,
so I'm pleased to be here, get,
get this first one done and and
over with but I, I am pleased to
be here and, and we're gonna
present to you this morning
Senate bill.
231
And uh it is called a beneficial
substances Act.
I have with me this morning to
help me uh.
The Mexico Secretary of
Agriculture Jeff Whitty and then
I also have Katie Laney,
assistant division director from
NMDA.
Uh, they are the experts on this
and uh they will be addressing
the the questions for the most
part, but the beneficial
substances Act establishes
authority to regulate the sale
and distribution of beneficial
substances in New Mexico.
Beneficial substances represent
a new and growing industry.
Establishing a comprehensive
regulatory framework allows for
new innovations to be brought to
market while protecting consumer
and ensuring.
An equitable marketplace. The
act mandates the registration of
beneficial substances with the
department enforces labeling
standards for transparency and
safety and establishes fees to
support inspections, sampling,
testing, and administration.
It also authorizes the
department to conduct quality
and safety inspections and
grants the power to remove
unsafe products from the market
to safeguard public health.
And the environment
With that, I'll
to Secretary Whitty.
Good morning Secretary, if you
introduce yourself for the
record. Good morning, Madam
Chair. I'm Jeff Whitty,
Secretary of Agriculture for the
state of New Mexico. And I also
want to point out that Miss
Laney, this is her very first
committee hearing as well. So
it's an honor to sit here
between these two individuals,
you know, the beneficial
substances Act came about
through model legislation that
was promulgated on a national
level uh after the 2018 farm
bill directed USDA and others to
try to figure out what to do
with these new and emerging uh
products.
These consumer products, they,
they weren't necessarily
fertilizer and they weren't
necessarily pesticides. So they
were kind of in a limbo.
And uh Miss Laney and her group
on a national level have been
working on this for several
years. We will probably be the
1st or 2nd state in the nation
to consider this legislation,
although I think there are
several others that are doing
the same thing this year as
well. So this is brand new model
legislation that's going on
across the country and and with
that I'll uh.
Enter, happy to answer questions
about the bill or turn it over
to Miss Laney to give a little
summary of the bill if you'd
like.
Please uh introduce yourself for
the record, and we'd like to
hear from you.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair Committee. Uh, my name is
Katie Laney and I'm with New
Mexico Department of Ag, I am an
assistant division director, um,
within the department, I thought
I would just provide one more
tidbit of clarity on this one
and we get, we've been asked
quite a bit, what is a
beneficial substance and
beneficial substances are
substances or compounds other
than fertilizer and excluding
pesticides as Jeff had said,
that can be demonstrated by
scientific research to be
beneficial to.
And the soil or the growing
medium.
Um, they include a wide variety
of different types of products
and I would be happy to provide
examples if the committee would
like to hear any of those. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, this, this bill
will create the framework for
the regulatory structure. It is
consistent with 214 that we
heard on Saturday in in how
we've structured this with the
penalty matrix and, and uh the
the fee structure and and other
things. Uh, we did in this bill
also remove soil conditioners
from the fertilizer Act, which
is consistent with 214, just in
case one goes one way and one
goes the other way, um, we, we
will have that protected and
And, and the most important
thing would be in this bill if
this one is to pass and the
other one was not.
Uh, we are now going to the
audience. How many people I'm
sure there are lots of
questions, um, I already have a
few.
So if you turn off your mics,
how many people are here in the
audience to support this bill.
One, how many people are here in
the audience to oppose this
bill.
Is there anybody online
supporting?
Anybody online opposing.
OK, Kelly, please come forward.
And please introduce yourself
for the record.
Thank you Madam we know you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Kelly
Fajardo on behalf of the um
Mexico Farm Bureau, honored to
stand in support of this bill,
especially Sanders Boone's first
bill. We support Senate Bill
231. This legislation represents
a move toward enhancing
agricultural productivity and
sustainability within our state
by enacting the beneficial
Substance Act when we not only
acknowledging the necessity for
innovation and agriculture
practices, but also
consolidating a framework that
allows for the introduction.
use of scientically proven
non-pesticidical substances
which can scientifically benefit
plant and soil health. This bill
shows the state's commitment to
embrace an innovative solutions
for improving crop yield, plant
growth, and soil health, thereby
supporting the economic
viability and sustainability of
our farms across the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Now usually I wait till the end
to ask my questions, but I'm
gonna start today. So could you
discuss
Um, in your bill.
How any
Items that might contain PAS are
handled.
Madam Chair, committee, thank
you, um, so PIA would be a
contaminant or an adulterant in
a product, so I.
The definitions provided in this
bill, they would be excluded,
they would not be registered.
Of course
So
OK.
Apologies for the delay on that,
madam chair committee, um, under
section 76 11A 10, um, the law
specifically, oh yes, page in
line. thank you page 13. Um, the
section as a whole covers what
the unlawful acts would be under
this, um, of those, of course,
is distribution of any
misbranded or adulterated
beneficial substance that would
be an unlawful act. Ghos would
be an
adulteration, it has no benefits
to plant soil or growing in
media, so therefore that product
would be denied and it would not
be allowed registration.
So secondly, um, and then I'll
turn it to the rest of the
committee.
Just
Briefly
In somebody's words, not reading
anything. Tell me what the
purpose of this bill is.
Absolutely. So the industry in
this area is growing, and there
are new products being developed
that do not fit the definition
of a fertilizer, they do not
contain plant nutrients, things
like nitrogen, phosphate and
potassium, but they can and have
been shown through scientific
research to be beneficial to a
plant.
The issue that industry runs
into is that states have
fertilizer laws, we have one
here in New Mexico and they have
pesticide laws, but they don't
have laws that deal with this
new area, and so it's kind of a
patchwork for industry as
they're trying to bring these
products to market, and we don't
have good definitions or a solid
regulatory framework for these
types of products. So then they
kind of get regulated in an
inconsistent matter from state
to state.
Currently, we have a definition
for a soil conditioner, but it
isn't as robust or as extensive,
nor does it provide the
regulatory pathway that this
bill provides this really allows
us to set up the necessities for
regulating these types of
products and.
Yeah, that's about it. I'm
sorry, lost my train of thought
there, so I'll just end.
Uh, thank you very much. So now
we'll go to committee members.
Yes, uh, Senator Siia Lopez.
Thank you.
Could you give us an example of.
Of this beneficial substance.
Madam Chair,
Yes, Madam Chair, Senator Dia
Lopez.
Provide some examples, um, I
brought some with me just for
reference points, but um, these
are new types of materials or
materials being used in new
ways, um, some of them are
things like humic acids. You
make acids are refined from low
grade coal and they provide a
significant amount of carbon and
cation exchange, which is good
for the soil. They're not a
source of plant nutrients.
So therefore they don't fall
under that fertilizer.
Act and they're obviously
they're not a pesticide in this
case, uh, another example would
be seaweed extracts.
Seaweed extracts can provide
natural plant growth hormones,
which help the plant grow and
mature in a desirable fashion,
um, they can also provide.
Sorry, they can also provide uh
potash, so they live between the
two, but the issue with those
types of problems right now is
that they're only allowed to
make claims about the potash,
even though there are other
benefits that they can provide
and those benefits have been
scientifically validated.
Um, another one that we're
looking at is silicon. Silicon
is currently not recognized as a
fertilizer, but more and more
evidence is demonstrating that
it is essential for plants,
especially grasses and corns and
wheats because it's necessary
for the plant in order to
develop the strength in its
stance.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
So right now, those products are
sold.
Online and the department, and
I, I think it is along the lines
of Madam Chair's approach of, of
like, what is the harm we're
trying to, you know, what is the
harm we're trying to address or
what is the benefit we're trying
to achieve.
And so if I understand it
correctly, right now those
substances are sold like maybe
online and the department has
has reviewed them.
Um, and so,
You feel like there may be
uh this is a consumer protection
thing.
Madam.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, that
is correct, this is a consumer
protection mechanism as well as
establishing a consistent
framework for the industry to
fall within, um.
These products, some of these
products are regulated, they
some of them do meet the
definition of a soil
conditioner, but that definition
is rather exclusive, so some
products like plant bio
stimulants, which
Live closer to pesticides, but
they're not.
Um, are not regulated, they're
not allowed to be distributed
even though there's evidence
that suggests that that is that
those products do provide a
benefit to the plant.
And so are they sold today in
New Mexico with no.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's a
great question. So yes, they are
sold in New Mexico.
But
Only the ones that can meet the
definition of a soil conditioner
for the products that cannot
meet that definition, they are
denied and they are restricted
access or they're removed from
distribution because.
They don't meet the definition
of a fertilizer, and they don't
meet the definition of a soil
conditioner. This is to help
give a more robust avenue for
these types of products.
Thank you and Madam Cha is an
appropriation that accompanies
this so that the department will
have the
Senator Sidil Lopez, no, this
will be a fee-based program and
just like the fertilizer program
is, is currently 100% fee based.
But, but, um, at least the fur I
understood didn't think that the
fee was going to be sufficient.
What did it say? Madam Chair, I
think um.
The fur because we do not have
the ability to set the fee at
this time. Um, but we will, uh,
if this bill is to be passed and
signed into law, we will go into
rulemaking immediately and when
the uh
The
Department starts registering
these, we think that will cover,
it's, it's, uh, we, we have a
staff that is already doing
fertilizer inspections and so,
uh, the, the, the marginal, the,
the change in our staffing won't
be great, um.
They can do what they're doing,
plus we'll we'll be adding
probably a registration
specialist and a and an
inspector or two, but we can
cover that with the projected
fees. Oh, good.
So then, um, the relationship
between your department and the
environmental department. I
noticed and I, I don't know if
you're addressing this at all,
but the NMD recommends uh an
addition to list of conditions.
Under which NMDA would consider
a beneficial substance
adulterated.
And what they're saying is it
contains any hazardous waste as
defined in 74-43K that are not
themselves equivalent in
composition to a beneficial
substance.
Um, does that seem like a good
idea?
You
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, we
would not be opposed to, uh,
including the environment
department's change.
Um, but you didn't prepare
anything for that.
Madam Chair, I cause I, I would
feel more comfortable with this,
um, just because they have
expertise.
Um, and, and I don't know cause
I'm not familiar.
I make my own verma compost.
So I'm, I don't use and it's
great, so I don't use anything
else, really, um, other than
mulch. So, so this, this stuff
you're talking about, I'm just
not familiar with at all. Um,
but I know that there is
expertise and I'm sure there's
expertise in your department,
uh, but the hazardous waste
thing may be beyond.
Um, beyond so if Madam Chair.
Uh, if that would be acceptable,
I'd like to add that amendment
that NMED requests.
It sounds like it's friendly.
Senator, what is the specific
amendment?
Well, um, and while, um,
like for the committee, the
secretary has these blue sheets.
If you'd like to make an
amendment on the go.
Uh, we'll be happy to give you
one of these and then come back
to you because we need the page,
the line, the exact language to
send up later with the report.
So Senator, I'm gonna give this
to you and I will come back to
you. Thank you. Thank you. OK,
Senator Scott is next.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Lang.
Any of these substances are out
there.
Now and
How many do we anticipate coming
forward in the
Next few years
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator Scott, um, currently
under the definition that we do
have for soil conditioners,
there's 1,533 products
registered with the department.
Um, how many we expect to be
coming as a little bit of a
challenging number to put on
paper, uh.
USDA during their analysis all
of this estimated that the
industry was representing $2.2
billion in economic growth, but
what that equals for a product,
I, I don't have a good number on
at this point in time, but I can
tell you how many currently I've
registered under our existing
definitions, which is 1,000533.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator and experts.
How closely does this
legislation.
Follow the national standards
with regards to this effort.
Yes. Thank you for the question,
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, uh,
this legislation matches the
model document.
To a T
Uh, we did not deviate, uh, we
looked at it, it was a very
thorough document, uh, industry
is very supportive of this
particular regulatory pathway
when this was being built, we
worked together as control
officials, excuse me.
Patrol officials and industry
liaisons to make sure that,
excuse me, to make sure that um
it met the needs as a
regulatory.
Pathway, but also for the
industry to gain access to the
marketplace.
And these
Standards were developed me
chair.
Senator and experts, these
standards were developed by the
United States Department of
Agriculture, is that accurate,
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, so
the way that this came about was
in 2018, USDA was told that they
needed to establish a definition
or.
Biostimulants. Biostimulants are
just one of the types of
materials that this beneficial
substance Act stands to
regulate, um, they formed a work
group that included EPA, USDA
industry, FDA and um an
association which
The state is a part of called
the American Association of
Plant Food Control officials.
They drafted the definitions and
several different avenues for
which this regulation could come
to be at the conclusion of that,
they gave a report to the
Congress in 2019 with the
recommendation for definitions,
as well as a pathway where they
recommended that the states.
Through the association of
American Plant Food Control
officials, draft a model
document.
And that was supported by the
National Association of State
Departments of Agriculture,
which Mr. Witty is a part of.
Um, and so we have started the.
Building process and in 2024,
that model document was voted by
all states that participate in
the association of American
Plant Food Control Officials,
and it became an official model
document of the association. And
then we started the process to
bring it here.
Long process. Apologies for that
lengthy answer, OK, and how many
state, Madam Chair.
Senator and experts, how many
states have adopted.
Similar
Oh
Thank you, Madam Chair senator,
uh, currently California has
adopted it in its entirety,
similar to what we're proposing,
um, and then several states have
adopted definitions they had
regulation that similarly
aligned, so they didn't need to
adopt the full rule, they just
needed to adopt the definitions
of beneficial substances and
elements, um, Minnesota, I
believe, was one of those states
and then recently there was a
survey sent out about where
states are at in the adoption.
process and there are states
that are in the process similar
to us to adopting it, um.
12 to 15 states indicated that
they were in the process of
adopting it. And uh the majority
of the others will start the
process in the next year or two.
OK.
And with respect to
Of the hazardous substances that
are referenced in the FIR.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Senator and experts what
expertise.
Would the New Mexico Department
of Agriculture.
I have to bring to bear.
You evaluating.
These substances Madam chair,
Senator Scott, um.
Currently and as this continues
because it's still about
labeling and good labeling, um,
products are reviewed initially
based off of what they've
labeled and what they've
claimed. We look at that
material and we are really
specific in looking at what's
the formulation is for that
product to ensure that it
doesn't present any hazards to
the producer using it or the
environment or in some cases to
the plants that may be grown
with it. Um, we.
Aren't opposed to the amendment
that enemy suggested cuz that
provides greater clarity on if
it is a hazardous material
that's it's fate, it goes to
enemy D for them to take care
of, um, we're used to reviewing
products and material we're used
to carrying out the compliance
necessary to allow access or to
deny those types of products
based off of what is in there.
Our expertise is just a
combination of.
Understanding and years of
experience with this and working
with the Association of American
Plant Food Control officials
because that association
provides.
Other access to other state
control officials and industry,
which is knowledgeable in this
as well.
Oh, Madam Chair, senator and
experts, there's plenty of
guidance out there.
To do these evaluations.
Going forward
Yes, Madam Chair, senator, we
believe that there is plenty of
guidance out there, the other
thing about this definition is
that it has to be scientifically
validated if it isn't well
understood component. So at that
point we would take that
information that they provide us
as their scientific evidence and
thoroughly evaluate it. One of
the great benefits of our agency
is that we are paired with New
Mexico State University, where
we have ample access to
individuals who are far more
knowledgeable in this.
information than I am, and we
can lean on them for some of
their expertise.
OK. Thank you for your answers.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, you.
Thank you. I have Senator
Townsend, then Senator, and then
we'll come back.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you for the bill. I was
Reading this
And wandering.
Chemicals like um.
Epsom salt, magnesium.
Uh, sulfate.
are things that
Like aan growers used to
stimulate roots. That would be
covered.
Or is that covered in this?
Yes, sir, thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator Townsend, so
actually that type of product is
already covered under the
fertilizer Act, magnesium is a
micronutrient that we regulate
through that, um.
I have more materials I could
provide you, um, the 3 that I
listed were humic acid, seaweed
extracts, silicon, uh.
More materials would include
plant inoculants, so while we
don't grow a huge amount,
soybeans need to be inoculated
in order to be very successful,
ah, alfalfa has to be inoculated
with rhizobium in order to form
the nodules that produce the
nitrogen for the plant, uh, this
bill would stand to cover those
types of products.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator and the
amendment is being copied right
now, so we'll do that amendment
after Senator result.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate the.
Presentation this morning, so
what I following up on comments
that were made by Senator Scott.
The, uh
Whenever this act was put into
place, that was done directly
through the Biden administration
and the development of that
model statute, is that correct?
The farm bill and yes, in 2018,
that was, oh, I'm so sorry,
Madam Chair, Senator, I
apologize. Thank you, Jeff.
That yes, that was part of the
2018 farm bill, which that was
actually not under the Biden
administration, but this was
brought back forward during that
point in time.
OK, that's what I, I wasn't sure
of cause I
I know all the rules and
regulations we have to go
through it as far as fertilizing
our fields and everything and on
page 18 onto 19 of the
particular bill Boon.
I think it's very clear on page
9, well, definitions of page 18.
It to me, that's very, very.
Um, and then my concern was.
People going down to say.
Lowe's or Home Depot or the
their whatever their nursery
provider.
But I see that that is also
covered under page 19E under
specialty fertilizer.
And it does talk about home
gardens, lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, golf courses, municipal
parks, cemeteries, greenhouses
and nursery.
So I see that that part of it is
covered as well. I'm glad to see
that.
My neck, my question here is,
Seed costs have gotten
exorbitant exorbitant, madam
chair.
And right now, especially
cotton.
There's a
Coating out there for cotton
seed. It's called Roundup Ready.
Will that be harmful to the soil
in any way.
Madam Chairs and senator, uh,
no, um, so that Roundup ready
would not be covered under this
statute, either the fertilizer
Act or the beneficial Substance
Act. Roundup is specifically
covered under the pesticides
compliance Act. So it, it
wouldn't, it wouldn't have.
Any interactions here, nor would
this act preclude it, it would
just need to meet the
requirements that we have. But
Madam Chair, um,
Members up there.
That has received the
Authorization that it is OK to
plant that where it would not be
harmful in any way, shape, or
form. I just wanted that put out
there.
OK, and madam chair, one thing I
do want to point out many years
ago whenever I was first
approached about uh.
What we're trying to do to the
soil to make it better and all
this type of stuff. Cole was one
of the things that was brought
up that was beneficial to the
soils.
Another thing, um.
Whenever we saw.
And I can't remember if there's
just two major plants in the
United States right now.
That does mind potash, I think
that might be right. There's two
main plants right now.
And that is an integral part of
fertilizer that farmers do have
to put on their land.
And whenever I think it was 3
years ago. It could have been
longer ago than that. I know
that I've written checks that I
was just astounded. The cost of
potash.
Added to the cost of fertilizer
made the price of fertilizer go
up by over 300%.
So folks, if you're wondering
why the cost of your food is
getting higher, that's one of
the reasons why right there.
Um,
let's see, what was the other
thing I said.
I, I'm concerned about Madam
Chair.
And Senator Boone and your
expert witnesses.
Why are we getting the New
Mexico environment department
involved in this whenever it
goes through the auspices of the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture with the labeling
and everything because I just
see that as another layer of
bureaucracy.
Madam Chair, Senator, the, the
only
And we were close with the
environment department on
certain things they stay in
their lane, we stay in our lane
if it moved into hazardous
waste, that would certainly be
their lane, and we would
coordinate with them. They would
not be in charge of this act at
all. Um, this would be something
we would refer to them.
Uh, if we saw something that was
hazardous.
And Madam Chair, I guess what I
would like to know, Mister
Whitty is what would constitute
hazardous.
I'm gonna let my expert.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
so.
You have to forgive my lack of
knowledge, I don't know what a
hazardous waste is under the
specific law that they've
referenced, um, I'm, I'm
thinking things like uranium,
but maybe, maybe it's more
inclusive than that, um.
For us, it would have to be.
Uh, obvious, like, like uranium
or lead or, or, or contaminant
like POs, obviously those are
very clear to us, whereas.
The second caveat to that would
be that the material that
they're proposing as a
beneficial substance could not
contain more than what is
beneficial for the plant
insufficient amounts so we have
we live with this knowledge
already and fertilizer things
like molybdenum and cobalt are
fertilizer materials, both of
those in high amounts are very
dangerous, but at the right
quantity, they are benefits to
the plant, they are part of the
plant's nutrition and they're
necessary.
This would follow that same line
of thought, if it's in correct
amounts, we wouldn't have any
issues with it if it's an
obvious hazard, then we would
move that onto them. OK, thank
you for that, and madam chair.
Senator B Mr. Witty and.
Miss Lane, um,
Before any
Fertilizers or whatever is going
what is covered by your bill
right here.
Those labeling.
Statements are on everything
that comes in with approval of
the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture following the
guidelines of the FARM Act, is
that correct?
Adam Senator, absolutely. And
just for grins, can you tell me
if any of these substances that
we're talking about regarding
your bill are produced here in
New Mexico.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, that's a great
question. In fact, there are
products that fall within the
scope of this regulation that
are produced here in New Mexico,
um, up north in the Farmington
area, there's um humic acid is
is mind and uh that's that's the
one that I mentioned that's from
low grade coal that has
significant amount of carbon and
cation exchange capacity, that
one is a very popular.
If you will, um, type of
material that would fall under
the scope of this act, there's
others, um, we have a few
producers here in the state that
make microbial inoculants, so
they're intended to, um, support
the plant through their actions,
the microbial actions, um, I
think those are the two primary
that we cover here. Um, there's
currently 101 products.
That are registered that are
made in New Mexico. OK.
Thank you for that information
and I'm also looking at page 16
down at the bottom if they are
not following the guidelines
that are set forth through the
PARMA and through the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture.
There's a significant fine right
here. It's $5000 fine for any
one violation of that. So I did
want to point that out to the
members of the committee.
And with that, madam chair, I am
finished with my questions.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you very much, Senator,
uh, Senator Cedilla Lopez, your
amendment, please.
Uh
Thank you Madam Chair, and I, I
Messed up on the amendment, um,
instead of paragraph, that needs
to be line.
All right, I'll just, um, so on
page 14.
Line 18, add.
E
It contains any hazardous waste
has defined in 74-4.
3, I forgot the 3, hey, that are
not themselves equivalent in
composition to a beneficial
substance.
Um, and
OK.
Senator, how can you add an E
and less.
You insert it before section 12.
Um, that's what I'm trying to
do, OK, but it does, the
amendment doesn't say that.
OK, then the amendment needs to
say E.
Uh, before section, OK, so page.
14 line 17.
OK. And continue. This is why,
semicolon and.
Uh, E.
It contains any hazardous waste
as defined in 74-4-3K.
And um
Well, after I do the amendment,
I'll that are not themselves
equivalent in composition to a
beneficial substance.
So I looked up, Madam Chair,
74-4-3K and the definition is
hazardous waste means any solid
waste or combination of solid
waste that because of their
quantity concentration or
physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may.
Cause or significantly
significantly contribute.
Um, to an increase in mortality.
increase in serious irreversible
or incapacity incapacitating re
reversible illness or pose a
Substantial present or potential
hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise
managed.
Hazardous waste does not
include, and then it goes to fly
ashwa, body mesh waist, so I
just uh share with you what what
we need to ask the sponsor.
If this is a friendly Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
yes, we would consider it to be.
Thank you for that.
So, uh, committee members, if we
adopt this, we will take it to
ledge council to clean it up for
the right line and the language,
etc.
So is there a discussion, first
of all, uh, anybody in the
audience.
Supporting this amendment.
Anybody in the audience opposing
this amendment.
Which
You, you have
OK, so now committee members,
questions, comments on the
amendment. Senator Scott.
Oh
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I think we've heard already in
testimony that
Some of this material in the
appropriate concentrations.
Very beneficial
So
I wonder about.
Using the term hazardous waste
in this.
In this, uh
particular amendment as uh if if
it's
Intentionally introduced into
the
Into the product with a
With the beneficial.
Uh intent.
It would not be a waste. It
would be a
Hazardous material.
Is that any of that make sense?
Um
Madam chair
Madam Chair, um, this the my
addition just adds to those
things that would be considered
misbranded, if they, if they
constituted, if they were being
marketed, um, and they have this
whatever this is hazardous waste
was, um, and so,
I would assume that research,
which I think is what you're
talking about.
would be completely different.
You wouldn't be, you wouldn't,
if this, if what I understood
you to say.
If you add this this hazardous
waste thing.
To experiment to see if it
works.
It, it, that's irrelevant, the,
the department wouldn't be
involved until it was marketed
and then the department would
say, hey, this is Missbranded
cause it's got this hazardous
waste.
And the department's not OK. OK.
Uh, well,
I'm still a little bit.
Uneasy with the uh
With calling a beneficial
material a waste.
But I'll be happy to listen.
To the rest of the conversation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all.
Thank you. We are on the
amendment.
OK, is there a motion on the
amendment? I move I move the
amendment.
2
There is a motion and a 2nd on
the amendment with the
Secretary, please call the roll
on the amendment.
Amendment number.
San Cervantes excused Senator
Charlie. Yes, dinner Charlie,
yes, San Jose.
Then, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. And our Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Yes
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, Senator Saia
Lopez, yes.
And Lopez, yes, San Stephonics,
the phonics, yes, and Senator
Eel to explain her vote. Madam
Chair, thank you very much. I
guess my concern with this is.
These
The definitions are already in
here on what cons and I have a
problem with it saying hazardous
waste.
As you made the definition
pointed out the statute number
and everything.
Uh
But if it's
In agreeance with the presenter
and
His expert witnesses, madam
Chair, I'm
Voting in favor of it. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. OK, you
have a unanimous to pass on the
amendment. We are not back on
the amended bill. Is there
further discussion on the
amended bill.
Is there emotion, madam I move
that.
Senate Bill 231 as amended to
pass. Thank you. Is there a
second?
OK.
OK, was the secretary please
call the roll on the
Uh bill as amended.
Santa Cervantes, excuse Senator
Charlie. Yes.
Dinner, Charlie, yes, Senator
Azell
and, yes, Senator Hamlin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Yes. And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, Sante Lopez.
Yes, Lopez's the Phonics, yes.
You have a unanimous due pass on
your bill as amended.
Congratulations.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. We will be
happy to hear it on the Senate
floor. Thank you. Oh, where do
you go now?
Good luck.
OK,
Senator Lopez, would you please
have your, um, amendment is sent
up to uh lunch council by either
you or your uh aide.
To have it drafted correctly and
then so the secretary can get it
back for the report.
Um, thank you, we are now moving
to Senate Bill 240, Senator
Gonzalez.
Good morning, Senator. We're
here to hear Senate Bill 240
structural wood grading Act.
Very well, um.
Madam Chair and members. Yes.
Mhm.
Yeah
Very well. OK.
Thank you.
Sorry, Senator, we're present
with you now.
Good morning to all of you.
Um, Madam Chair members on the
Senate Bill 240.
But this is related to timber.
And this is enacting the
structural wood grating out.
Providing for an in-state
structural wood grading
certificate.
Provided for the use of
structural wood.
that is graded in state and uh
Madam Chair members uh to my
knowledge, uh.
I believe that there isn't.
Any of our meals that do any uh
within state grading of our
lumber.
And this would be an attempt to
create our own lumber that is uh
milled in our state and with
that I also have a our expert
wit nurse, uh Laura McCarthy.
She's a state forester.
And um she will also give you um
Highlights of the bill.
It's.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, could we turn up the
mic for her, please.
And introduce yourself for the
record.
My name is Laura McCarthy. Uh,
good morning, Madam Chair and
committee.
As you all know, we have.
Abundant
supplies of small diameter would
all across our state that is.
A fire hazard
And currently the
Surprisingly robust, small
sawmill industry that we have.
Is not able to.
Become certified.
To grade
The products.
Specifically Vas, beans.
And dimension lumber.
They're not able to grade that
would.
Or use
In
Residential or commercial
building.
Without bringing in from out of
state.
One of the 24 nationally
accredited certifiers.
And our small sawmills have made
the determination that it's.
too expensive to bring those
graders in from out of state
relative to the value of the
product that they would be
selling.
The net impact then is that.
Product
That could be used to build
homes.
is instead used for things like
chicken coops and corrals that
don't require graded lumber.
This bill sets up.
A licensing program.
And
Would house the program within
energy minerals and natural
resources department.
We would contract out.
For development of a training
curriculum.
That
Meets the national standards.
And then partner with our.
Institutions of higher education
such as northern New Mexico
Community College, Luna
Community College and eastern
New Mexico University.
Have them put on the training
hosted.
And uh, then the division would
issue the license.
And
The licensed.
Lumber grader.
An employee of a sawmill.
Would then grade the wood and
put a certificate on it.
That then gets given to the
building inspector when the the.
Structure is constructed.
I think I just described the
whole bill, so with that, Madam
Chair, back to you.
Thank you. Is there anyone here
in the audience supporting this
bill?
OK, one, is there anybody here
opposing this bill.
No one. Is there anyone in
Online for either.
Nobody online for either, so
come forward, let's hear from
you, please. And wait, they're
gonna give you a mic.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Miles Conway, I'm the
executive officer for the Santa
Fe area and northern New Mexico.
Builders Association
representing 7 great northern
counties in New Mexico. There's,
uh, there, there is still a
thriving, somewhat fledgling,
um,
Forestry industry in northern
New Mexico and all across our
state. And um this just is a is
a very simple program that is
long overdue, which just
opens up a lot more
possibilities for our builders
and contractors to use New
Mexico, uh, lumber, uh,
especially coming out of the
fire areas, whether we're using
the, the lumber post fire or, or
thinning the forests as as
Forrester McCarthy mentioned, to
lessen the the intensity of
wildfire. So we, we stand in
strong support and um
The contractors, the engineers,
the architects that will be
making use of this lumber in
our, in our dwelling units or
our commercial applications, uh,
we put our licenses behind this,
this, this forestry products. So
I think um the bill speaks for
itself. Thank you.
Thank you. And I think uh, come
on up, I think today is
homebuilder's Day at the
legislature, so we'll be hearing
about them on the Senate floor.
Oh yes, please.
Can you hear me? Um, yes, hello,
Madam Chair and committee. My
name is Rachel Wood. I'm a
consulting forester.
Um, for 30 years and 21 years in
New Mexico, and I um work with
Mills. I've created a program
called Source Verified Goodwood,
where we.
And track that would and I've.
done interviews with them and
spoken with them and
Several expressed, they need a
way to grade wood more
affordably.
So I'm here in support of the
bill.
Thank you very much. Tell us
your name again, Rachel Wood.
Rachel Wood, how appropriate.
OK, so online we do have
somebody to speak, Carrie Robin
Brunder, please go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Kerry
Robin Bruder. I'm working with
Lincoln County, um, after the
fires last summer and the floods
that took place afterward, we
pulled together a task force
representing the Sierra Blanca
region.
And one of our priorities has
been to create an economic
development piece around our
forests. We're trying to get the
sawmill up and running again at
Mescalero Apache Tribe. We
believe that this program of
allowing wood to be graded for
structures would be very
important to that economic
rebuilding dream that we have in
the Sierra Blanca region. So we
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill, and we hope, uh, for
a due pass.
Thank you very much. We are now
to the committee for questions
and comments. Senators and
Senator Townsend.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate y'all
bringing this bill together and
it's good to see you again, Miss
McCarthy.
I did to find it.
Miss Wood's name was very
appropriate for what her title
was. I, I got a kick out of
that.
Uh, right now, can you tell me
how many sawmills there are in
New Mexico.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair and senator.
I should have been prepared for
that question, um.
We have roughly a dozen.
But that number is based on our
2023 inventory of sawmills, so I
apologize that I'm not more
current and can get you that
number.
OK, madam chair and.
Thank you for that information
right there, Miss McCarthy, and.
Senator Gonzalez, um.
I'm assuming the sawmills are
small sawmills, is that correct?
Mountie.
Senator
Senator Eel.
You're correct.
And Madameer and Senator
Gonzalez, I'm assuming that most
of these are in the northern
part of the state.
No.
OK, talk to me.
Madam Chair, um, we also have
sawmills in Lincoln and Otero
County as well as.
In
Reserve
OK, and Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez is the Mescalero of
sawmill steel.
Operating, Madam Chair and
senator neither of the sawmills
that I mentioned are currently
in operation. They do have.
Their equipment, however, OK.
And Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez and Ms. McCarthy, can
you tell us why they are not
running? Adam Chair and Senator.
Wood supply has been an issue
for those mills.
OK.
And Madam Chair, I think that's
quite ironic in itself.
Uh, are these some meals that
are still in operation because
of.
The US Forest Service burning
down all of the US forces that
are in our state are the trees
that are still standing even
though they are now dead.
Are there is there are those
trees?
Can they be used for food
production for structurals.
Building.
Madam Chair
and senator, it does depend on
how.
Quickly they are harvested and.
How quickly the blue stain sets
up in them.
So
Our thinking is that.
Getting this program underway.
And
Setting the sawmills up to have
a more diversified set of
products can work hand in hand,
maybe not for say the standing
Dead that's left from.
The hermit's peak calf Canyon
fire cause it won't be ready in
time.
But for future wildfires,
that's.
The direction we would be
heading in.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I guess my concern
here is that from the
environment department that
Most
Small business sawmills are not
able to.
Stay open for business and I
have a I have a problem there
with that.
Uh, you said that right now
there are 24 accredited graders
nationally, but what this bill
is striving to do is make sure
that we do have people out
there.
That can be trained that can be
certified that can go to.
These different places where
wood is now being.
milled.
For structural uses, is that
correct, Madam Chair and
senator, yes. OK, and Madam
Chair.
And Miss McCarthy, I wrote it
down somewhere now I can't find
it. You named our three schools
that were going to be involved
in it, and I just now found it.
Are you named of
Can you refresh my memory on
that, please, Madam Chair, I was
giving.
And Senator, I was giving
examples. We have had
conversations with Northern New
Mexico Community College we have
not spoken to Luna or eastern
New Mexico, however, they are
well situated.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
also, uh, just popped into my
head, uh, two other, uh.
Very vibrant functioning
sawmills, one is the Wallatoa
timber industries in the famous
Pueblo and the other is Old wood
that operates out of uh Las
Vegas, New Mexico. OK, thank you
very much for that information.
Uh, I would make a
A suggestion here whenever
you're talking in your earlier
statement, you said eastern New
Mexican, it might be a.
Good addition to eastern New
Mexico University at Redoso
since they are in the heart of
that particular country, not
down.
But there's no timber growing
down there.
Um
Madam Cheer
But somebody uh where I'm going
with this.
A person that is owning and runs
a sawmill, they don't
necessarily have to have
certification, do they?
If they decide they don't want
to do this, they do not have to
be certified, do they?
Adventure, that's correct. OK, I
just wanted to make that clear,
um.
And Madam chair,
We have to do something with our
force. We used to have a
thriving logging industry in our
state, I know that used to
whenever I was.
Lot, lot, lot, lot younger back
in the prior century, OK, some
of y'all understand what I'm
talking about. References made
few weeks ago about on the FFR
about people born in the past
century, I are one.
Um
But those logs coming down
through Mayhill and Cloudcroft
going down to Ala MacGorda, it
was a thriving industry. People
took care of the forest. There
were healthy forests at that
time and right now whenever
there is an incident.
It's a catastrophic fire and I'm
tired of that happening, madam
chair. Thank you very much for
your responses.
Thank you very much and I think
let's see, I threw away a piece
of paper here.
Um, Senator Townsend, were you
next and then Senator Cia Lopez.
And then Senator Hamlin, please,
Senator Townsend.
Madam Chair.
Um, senator.
Uh, this would be a hard bill
not to support. It increases the
value of product that is, that
is wasting away, and then it,
and then increases New Mexico
job.
senator, that's correct.
And I think it's also important
and
Mr. McCarthy, you correct me if
I'm wrong, but time is of the
essence.
If we're going to utilize in
much of the standing dead wood.
We need to do an expeditiously
before insects.
ruin it. Is that correct?
Madam Senator, that is correct.
OK.
I have
To support for it. I
Super job bills um brought
forward that strength and.
And protect our forests and I
commend you for that.
Long overdue.
With that said, I have one
question.
There's
Comments that I get from
People across the state in the
industry about whether
They need to be certified.
Or they need to be licensed.
Certification is much easier.
Waiting for a licenser program,
it's gonna cause
Time.
What are your thoughts there?
Senator, if I may read this.
This is from the roof and
ceiling construction chapter 8.
And then part of R 802.
Yeah, so
Um
With uh
Some lumber.
Shall be identified by a great
mark or an accredited lumber
grading or inspection agency.
And have design value certified
by an accredited body.
That complies with DOCPC 20 in
lieu of a great mark.
A certificate of inspection
issued by the lumber grading.
Or inspection agency.
meeting the requirement of this
section shall be.
saw a certificate is accepted.
OK.
I appreciate that, uh, Senator
and Madam Chair, I think it
really is important. I know.
And from what I've heard in, in,
in the Northwest.
And in the southeast.
To address this. I mean, if
we're really gonna capture the
value of much of that standing
temper, we need to do it pretty
quick, because the more
Ruin it very quickly. So I would
just encourage that you continue
to work with
Uh, the
parties to make sure that the
licenger
is, is done correctly, an
expeditiously, and, and we
capture the value of this and
create jobs in New Mexico.
Nothing solves our problems
better than more jobs, so I'm
here to support. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Cedil Lopez, thank you, Madam
Chair. This is a great bill. I
thank you again for, for
bringing it forward. I just
wondered if you um had responses
to some of the issues that were
raised in the FIR whether you
thought they were good ideas or
not, um, it says here that, um.
The regulation and licensing
department notes that under the
International residential code
IRC grading requirements for
lumber are clearly outlined.
Um, and then it.
It says um
RLD, uh, cautions that
establishing a new lumber
grading program could lead to
duplicated efforts and confusion
among stakeholders. Is that a
Is that of concern?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and senator, I had a
discussion with RLD about it on
Friday and again yesterday.
And um
We clarified that the
Curriculum that would be
developed if this bill passes
will meet the IRC code.
Excellent.
Thank you. I appreciate that
because these things get um
drafted and then you don't know
if the issues are taken care of.
And then the other issue here uh
it says the construction
industries division may be
better positioned to administer
the act.
Uh, including imposing fees
sufficient to cover program
costs because understandably,
the force division said, hey, in
order to implement this, we need
more resources and um.
Although since senator is in um
In finance, maybe that could be
taken care of, but, um, is that
an issue for you, Madam Chair?
Um, Medi Senator Saia Lopez, uh.
Actually up to that part, that
was my part because they did
want to put FTEs.
And I thought the concern up to
make sure that to get the
legislation.
And we can come with the FTE
send a request even if it's for
next year, but
If it's uh able to be worked
this year, we would work out.
With this year
We can, I can bring that up and
in finance.
Thank you, but you don't think
construction industries division
would be better, Madam Chair.
Matcher and Senator, I'm not
prepared to answer that, but we
can, we can research it and find
out. Uh, Madam Chair, they're
not here asking for it, so, you
know, I, I support the bill. I
just like to clear up some of
the stuff that's in the FYR to
see whether it's, it's relevant.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I'd like
to, uh, uh.
Extend my appreciation for the
sponsor bringing this forward
because
Look at opportunities for
economic development, um,
You know, we need to to look at
all of the different
opportunities and there's a
homeowner who's constantly doing
work on my home.
Uh, I appreciate.
the opportunity to purchase wood
from locally sourced.
Uh, and locally owned
businesses, and I was very
excited to hear about.
The potential of the sawmill and
Mescalero because that's just a
hop skip and a jump from.
Where I live.
Um, and so this would provide.
Economic development for, for
many areas as McCarthy had
talked about in these different
rural, very rural communities.
Am I correct on that?
Ma I'm sure senator, yes.
OK, because I, I, I think of
when I built a house for my 45
pound tortoise, it should have
been a $250 expense and it came
out to be a $600 expense.
Because of the cost of wood.
Um, and so if I can.
by studs from Mescalero, um, I'm
much more happy about doing that
than uh doing that from a chain
store.
One of the things I'm I'm
wondering about is, is the
process of licensing because
it's, we've talked about this in
terms of like, uh, the meat,
meat packaging of that having to
go outside of our state because
we don't have enough people here
to certify that uh in terms of
of processing, and I'm wondering
along the same lines and and
maybe your expert witness can
answer this in terms of the
licensing.
Uh, for that. Can you, can you
kind of explain that a little
bit more. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and in preparing
this bill and.
Referencing the work that.
The constituent, Rachel Wood.
Described, she did a lot of this
research, there are 4 other
states that have created their
own in.
State wood grading program out.
Tennessee, New Hampshire,
Alaska, Wisconsin.
And
All of those states decided not
to use licensure, but rather to
use a certificate program.
That is accomplished in a couple
of day training.
And
Honestly, we had a lot of back
and forth with legislative
council service about the
licensure part and.
Ah
From the perspective of a nerd
general counsel.
The licature is a bit beyond the
capacity of our department.
Uh, and it requires um hearing
officers and uh some very
prescriptive administrative
process that we have noted other
states have not seen the need.
For
Uh, there may be ways, I, I know
that legislative council service
was concerned about due process
in a scenario where somebody
might have their license or
certificate revoked.
I think there are ways of
addressing that, um, but what
you have is the bill before you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I'm wondering, I
mean, it it it seems to me that
this would be something that.
would be very much like our
community colleges might be able
to provide in certification, am
I right on that?
Manature and senator, yes.
Good.
So, Madam Chair, if I may, I
mean, this might be a really
good collaboration to do that
because, you know, this is one
of those.
That makes sense. I mean, I
certainly want a 2x4 stud to, to
not.
crack under the pressure of of a
trust or something like that or
a trellis, but.
Um, it seems like that's very
much along the lines of people
who do HVAC services, who do
electrical work.
Our journeymen in and and folks
who do that, it seems kind of
along those lines and much more
appropriate for certification
rather than a licensure.
Correct on that, madam.
I was thinking
of something else. Can you
repeat that, please? Sure, I
guess in summary, it's just it
makes much more sense to have a
certification.
Then a licensure because we've
got this opportunity, especially
with the opport opportunity
scholarship, we have those
opportunities to give somebody a
certification to where they can
go ahead and do this and remove.
Those roadblocks that would
allow this this industry with um
with locally and responsibly
sourced wood to be able to
thrive in this in this state.
Manure and Senator, uh, yes, and
uh our two year programs, so.
They issue a lot of certificates
in different areas.
Right, that's all I have, Madam
Chair, thank you very much.
Uh, a senator.
No, uh, we have somebody ready
for a motion, but please,
Senator Pope, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, you touched on
the questions I had with the
licensing. Uh, I just want to
confirm the emails and the calls
I've got. We're, we're ensuring
that the standard and the
quality of the wood that's gonna
be.
So, it's, it's gonna be up to a
national standard. I'm just
concerned about.
People re rebuilding homes and
Or
Everyone is safe, so that really
will still be up to the same
step.
Oh,
Madam Chair, Senator Bo.
say yes.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
that.
Thank you, Senator, uh, senator.
had
There is a motion and a second
center you wanted to say
something. You have a new pass
motion.
Just if it's appropriate, I just
had a small comment whenever
you're ready.
Please go ahead.
I, uh, I just want to mention
that um.
You know, and we might not be
there ever again.
Meadow, for example, in the 50s,
the 60s.
In Taos of in 518 going towards
Fusco.
was a sawmill called Pot Creek.
That was the largest sawmill in
the state they employed about
150.
Employees and they were
operating 24/7, 3 shifts.
And uh you know, when they shut
down, they still had like 20
years of harvesting.
And you know, it's a shame to
see because now you look at it
and those are the
Logs that are burning
And uh the other part is on our,
on our small meals, the majority
of them, uh, 90%, I'm gonna say
our family operated family
owned.
You know, that they have done
for years from the.
the father to the son to the
family and uh.
Again, here's another window, I
think that we can really open
again.
To economic development in
certain parts of the state.
You know, and support them and
work with them, so that's all I
want to say, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. I'd like to ask the
secretary to take the uh role.
Senator Cervantes, excused
Senator Charlie. Yes, Charlie,
yes, Senator.
And, yes, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Our Pope, yes, and
her Scott.
Yes
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
De Lopez, yes, Lopez, yes, San
Stephonics, yes, it's a phonics,
yes, you have a unanimous due
pass from this committee. Thank
you very much. And Senator
Steinborn is on his way for the
next bill.
And you can
Senator Steinborn is here for
Senate Bill 260.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
the Uranium Minean, yeah.
I
The uranium mine
cleanup of contaminated sites.
Awesome.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
colleagues.
Jeff Steinborn at your service.
Um, happy to tell you, Madam
Chair, that as I understand it,
this funding is in the budget,
which was a real
Real cool. um, this is money for
the environment department to
Began to clean up some abandoned
uranium mine sites in the state
of New Mexico.
And also,
To begin to remediate and do an
assessment of 1000
non-abandoned.
No, abandoned non-uranium mine
sites in the state of New
Mexico.
Just to give you a big picture,
we have 1000 abandoned uranium
mine sites in the state of New
Mexico that were really
Primarily legacies of
The buildup of the nation's
nuclear stockpile.
That were left
After the market went away after
that demand went away.
Um, with communities left with
contaminated land.
And in the decades since.
These they call them abandoned
sites because there's no known,
there's no known responsible
party to legally go after to get
them remediated so for decades
we've all been pointing fingers
saying, boy, we ought to do
something about that. The
federal government ought to do
something about that. Finally,
we are doing a little something
about that and uh.
Using some one time money to
actually clean up some sites.
Um
Now, on the flip side, we have
1000 non.
Uranium mine, uh.
Uh, contaminated sites that are
not uranium.
Every in every one of our
communities, it's amazing when
you see a map.
Everything from all dry
cleaners.
to storage tanks, gas storage
tanks.
Many of them also abandoned
because there's no known
responsible party. So we really
have many these little mini
brown fields all across the
state.
So
You know, we're in a place now
again with one time money, madam
Chair, we had to think about
being proactive. We get to
actually clean up contamination
rather than just say, well, we
don't have the means to address
these issues.
So this appropriation begins to
go after both of those issues.
And uh
By no means is it, I mean, we're
gonna need this is a big issue.
It's going to take years of
effort, but with this
appropriation,
A, we're going to be able to
clean up some abandon your own
mine sites, but B, we're going
to be able to do an assessment
on these other sites that will
hopefully set the stage for the
Environment department coming
back and giving us a much bigger
dashboard of
Here's what we need to do.
And hopefully
Not just what I just told you
about, but it's a prong of a
multi-prong effort to go after
this contamination that includes
real aggressive legal action,
um.
Deal with these sites. So that's
what 50 million does and again,
Kudos to uh.
To, you know, our team and and
Chairman Small of the House
Appropriations Committee, but I
believe we have $50 million in
the budget.
Or this appropriation.
And with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much. Is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
I see two hands, 3 hands. Is
there anyone here to oppose this
bill in the audience.
Is there anyone online to
support.
to support anybody opposed.
OK, so if the supporters would
please line up for their
comments.
Man, we also have John Roderick
with the Department.
Thank you.
Excuse me, madam Chair, good
morning members of the
committee, I'm Adela Duran and I
represent 3 uranium mining
companies and the last time I
was before you, I explained that
my clients have not ever uh
operated in New Mexico, but
maintained that in May sometime
in the future.
My clients have asked me to be
here to support Senate Bill 260
and all that may be obvious to
the committee, Madam Chair.
I think it's worth mentioning
that the legacy uranium sites
have been a problem in our state
for at least 50 years.
It's a long time.
And I've been working with my
clients, uh, on one level or
another for about 20 I've never
seen the momentum that I've seen
beginning back in 22.
Uh, with the bills that
appropriated the funding to
create the strategic plan that
is now going to allow the state
to begin to move forward and
clean up these sites and it's
unfortunate that the federal
government has not taken the
responsibility, but it's also
admirable that our legislature
and quite frankly, our governor.
is now supporting the effort to
do what they have not.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Next, Mr.
Roderick.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm John
Roderick, the deputy cabinet
secretary at New Mexico
Environment Department. I'm here
in support of this bill. It is a
momentous occasion that we have
this bill and one running in the
house as well as governor's
support for this critical issue.
Um, this is gonna give us the
opportunity to change the
legacy.
Here in New Mexico and to begin
to deal with these sites as
Senator Steinborn said, not only
is it going to be utilized to
begin cleaning up sites, actual
boots on the ground work. It's
gonna allow us to characterize
other sites and as part of that
characterization, we're
exploring the history of the
sites looking for responsible
parties that we can invite to
our little clean up party as
well. So we're in strong support
of this and, and.
Thank everyone for this support.
Thank you. Next, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Scott Kovac with Nuclear
Watch New Mexico.
I support this bill.
Um
I agree with the previous
comments and I think it's, you
know, it's like it's said
before, it's been 60 years or so
since the first
This, since many of these
uranium mines have been in place
and so it's, it's time to, time
to clean them up. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Online,
Camilla Bibleman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me OK?
Thank you, thank you to you and
members of the committee, the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
also stands in support not only
for the clean up of 261 former
uranium mine sites and 8 former
uranium mills across private
tribal, state, and federal land
in New Mexico, but I wanna bring
light to an example of what type
of neglected groundwater spill
sites might be cleaned up by a
fund like this in my
neighborhood.
here in Albuquerque, we've seen
the Carlisle Village Dry Cleaner
Spill. This is an underground
leak of dry cleaner fluid, which
could potentially impact
groundwater, but something I
didn't know until I served on
the water utilities, water
protection advisory board is
that these
Contaminates, vaporize and
intrude into people's homes and
work places. Fortunately, the
preschool uh in the area was
just outside that vaporization
zone, but there are neglected
sites like this one, all over
the state and every single one
of your districts and Carlisle
Village is now on the Superfund
site, which will, or list I
should say, which will
potentially lead to more funds
for cleanup, um, but we
have a legacy of abandoned uh
contamination in the state and
this is a really good start and
we encourage your support for
the bill and thanks so much to
the sponsors and those who got
the money into the budget.
Thank you. Next is Sophia
Jenkins Nieta.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Jenkins Nieto,
and I'm here on behalf of Yucca,
where a statewide youth-led
climate justice organization
with thousands of members and
supporters, and we strongly
support SB 260 because it
represents an investment in the
safety, health, and future of
New Mexico's communities. For
decades, corporations extracted
wealth from our lands, left
behind toxic waste, and walked
away, leaving frontline
communities to suffer the
consequences. From uranium
mining on indigenous lands to
abandon
oil and gas sites across the
state, pollution has poisoned
our water, our air and our
people.
We cannot allow this
contamination to be ignored any
longer. SB 260 provides critical
funding to begin the cleanup of
vented uranium mines and other
toxic sites where there are no
responsible parties to pay for
the damage.
This bill is not just about
cleaning up the past, it's about
protecting our future. Every
year that these toxic sites
remain unaddressed, more people
are exposed to dangerous
chemicals, and more communities
suffer.
New Mexico should not be a
sacrifice zone for corporate
polluters. We deserve safe
drinking water, uncontaminated
land, and a future free from
toxic legacy pollution.
We urge lawmakers to pass SB 260
and take a long overdue step
toward environmental justice,
public health, and community
safety. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, we are
now going to questions and
comments from committee,
Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
we've been hearing about the
contamination cleanup.
Ever since I came up here, 21
years ago.
Nothing's been done yet.
But I do have some questions for
you, Senator Steinborn and Madam
Cheer.
Uh, can you tell me how many
sites are on sovereign lands.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, I'm sorry, apologize, Madam
Chair, Senator, um, I'm gonna
join me up here at the table.
Does that mean I get to vote
against you?
I hope not,
you know,
s, please come on. I don't,
Madam Chair.
Sorry, a little, well still uh
working out the coffee, Madam
Chair, Senator, so I, I actually
don't know the answer to that
question. How many are on
sovereign land, I believe.
I'd be guessing to say maybe a
majority of the sites in New
Mexico are on sober lands, OK,
um.
It's interesting to know there
was a massive pretty good
federal settlement known as the
Tronic settlement with the
federal government is giving a
billion dollars to the Navajo
Nation to clean up some of those
sites, but it is not covering
all those sites. There are
certainly many others, and I
know um.
Some of this funding is intended
to clean up a site at least on,
on tribal lands and then.
One of it not.
OK, well, Madam Chair, senator
Steinborn, and Mr. Robert, is
that correct, Mr. Robert? Oh,
Roderick Robert, OK.
Oh
Will any of this money that if
this bill does pass going
through the enemy.
Will it be, will the Indians be
able to the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, will they assist in
this if there's a determination
made by the ED that we we ought
to go ahead with the cleanup of
these sites. Can there be any
guarantee?
Madam Chair and senator
unfortunately, when you're
talking about federal agencies
right now, I don't know that we
can guarantee anything.
Um, but with regard to, uh,
The Indian Affairs department
here in the state and with
regard to other federal funding,
we do believe there'll be some
participation as we help
identify these sites.
There are over 500 sites on.
Navajo Nation specifically about
250 to 300 of those are
earmarked for this Trono
settlement money, that means the
other couple of 100.
Don't have any mechanism for
cleanup.
We actively worked with the uh
our, our tribal partners and are
working to identify sites on.
On sovereign land as well as
off.
Uh, to begin cleanups, we've
targeted.
Uh, right now we've got one mind
teed up in the Ambrosia Lake
area.
Um, that'll be the first that we
start in July.
With actual clean up.
Where, uh, working with, uh, our
tribal partners to identify
specific sites that they would
like to.
Prioritized for clean up.
And uh and then working through
how that mechanism is going to
happen, but this funding is in
is intended to clean up
contaminated sites in New Mexico
irregardless of whether it's on.
Tribal land or whether it's
state land or privately owned
we've got to deal with this
issue.
Madame, cheer, Mr. Robert, I do
appreciate your response here,
but it just sounds to me like
you're gonna have to develop
various entities to get these
sites cleaned up.
That that brings me to my next
question.
Is the environment department,
are they?
Can they handle another large
project project just like this,
and that's my concern because I
mean, you seems like the
environment department has their
fingers stuck in everything
that's come before this
committee.
Adam chair and senator, that's a
real good. We've got a lot of
things going on in this
particular case.
Um, you know, a few years back.
The abandoned uranium mine.
The fund was set up and we were
provided funding to hire
coordinators both in NMED and in
Mner in the mining and minerals
division.
We have sent out of that funding
been able to add uh 3 staff we
anticipate adding additional,
uh, I will say that.
The actual clean up work is
gonna be done by third-party
contractors that we will to
start our own.
Remediation program, uh, for
that.
Um, but this is something that,
you know, we deal with on
Superfund sites and everything
else, we've got the expertise.
We've got the
The individuals in place to
manage these projects as they
develop.
And with back to your prior
question with regard to
agreements we will be entering
into memorandum whole nation.
To allow them to
drive the clean up how they want
to and then.
Uh, full of funds.
That we have out of this.
this appropriation.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Senator Steinborn, Mr.
Robert, it sounds to me like the
environment department's fixing
ask for a whole lot more
full-time employees.
And
Here we go again, OK?
Uh, so I'm assuming then that if
you do have this MOU with the
tribal nations that there will
be, I don't know.
You're gonna have to come up
with.
Standards that have to be met if
they're if you're working in
conjunction with either the
tribal nations or any other
entities on these sites, is that
correct?
You said that there would not be
any, y'all aren't gonna do any
of the remediation process.
Madame Chan center, that's
correct, we won't be doing the
physical cleanup.
we are doing evaluations of the
sites and we'll be overseeing
that work as it takes place with
regard to clean up criteria,
those are pretty well set
through circle.
Um, federal guidelines for
cleanup, we're talking about
sites that have to meet the same
requirements.
But they don't, they don't rise
to the level that US EPA is
willing to take them on.
And so
But we're gonna clean them up to
those same standards.
OK, madam.
Senator Steinborne and Mr.
Robert.
Why hasn't this been started
before? Why are we dragging our
feet on this? I mean, I, I've
been hearing about this for 21
years now, and nothing's been
done. Why are we dragging our
feet and why are we?
Attempting to put restrictions
on other industries whenever we
have something that is.
that
Ominous for people's health.
Why aren't we doing anything
about it?
Madam Chair, Senator, the reason
is that there's no known
responsible party.
That's, that's the problem that
this is, these are abandoned
sites that we're talking about.
Um, and so,
There's been no easy solution.
It's been easy to point a finger
saying there's a problem.
These are sites that were
developed to develop.
uranium for literally to develop
our nation's nuclear stockpile,
about half the uranium.
For the stockpile was mined in
New Mexico.
The sites went away. This was
before the nuclear regulatory
commission had rules on
reclamation after a site went
away. So these sites.
Went away and or the companies
went away, and we've just been
left with the contamination, but
no one to deal with it. We, we,
we haven't had the money as a
state.
We haven't had the money ever to
be able to go on the offensive
and
You know, have the level of new
money that we have and so it's
just a matter of resources and
also leadership as well. I mean,
we could have gone through this
session very easily and
Never looked twice, never
thought about this, but
thankfully,
Some folks did.
So it's uh, but I'd say
primarily the reason is
resources.
And leadership.
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborn.
Are there federal programs out
there that can help?
Or we use taxpayers' dollars to
leverage funds that might be
coming back from the fence.
Madam.
There really aren't. They're,
they're Congress has created a
hard rock mining reclamation
program that's relatively small
in the last few years led by
Senator Heinrich.
We're talking, it maybe has 50
$60 million in total for the
whole country split up between
multiple states. What we're
dealing with here is a
multibillion dollar problem.
Just on defense here.
The defense era
Contamination. So it's, I think
it's a special unique problem
and uh.
So I think we have a moral
obligation to do something about
it, quite frankly, um,
Because these are New Mexicans
that are dealing with
contaminated land.
And uh but.
Since we brought it up, I, I
have been advocating forcefully
that I think largely in a
perfect world, the federal
government should be paying for
this.
And, and I have urged the
Attorney general actually to
file suit against
Federal government, the Office
of Natural Resource Trustee.
Uh, talking in the environment.
Department, you know, I think
there's legal causes of action
because this was done kind of at
the end of a contracting process
with the federal government.
You know, I think they have
ultimately the most moral
obligation to help.
not leave New Mexico with this
way. So
Funding really doesn't exist. We
have to go out and fight for it,
I do believe.
Madam chair and Senator
Steinborn, I'm reading the
fiscal impact or.
physical response from ED.
This is 97% of the funding will
go to remediation and 3% of it
will go to staffing and
overhead. So that's
approximately $1.5 million.
Oh
If memory serves me well, I
think many years ago and I'm
just kind of curious what
happened to that money.
And now I think it's very
specific what it was supposed to
be used for.
Madam Chair, um, I, I don't
recall as ever appropriating
money for this purpose, but
maybe to
Try to answer that question.
Man, um, thank you, Senator for
the question. Uh, I think.
apologies, uh, James Kenny,
Environment secretary.
Um, manager and senator, I
believe if, if we're talking
about the same pot of money we
created a uranium mining
coordinator uh through a prior
legislative session that uh is
now working in the environment
department who's fantastic. Um,
and we've put together a uranium
mining dashboard to identify
those sites that were either
abandoned.
Uh, both the, the operating mill
or the inoperable mills as well
as the taling sites, so we at
least knew where, how the, the
breadth of the problem. And
that's where we are now as we
understand the breadth of the
problem and we're now ready to
act on cleaning it up based on.
OK, thank you for that response,
Madam Chair.
Uh, one more thing, Senator
Steinborn.
Secretary Kenney sent you up
here. I'm gonna just throw it on
out there. How many of these
sites are in regard to dry
cleaning establishments.
Madam Chair and Senator, we have
got over 1000 identified dry
cleaners.
That are abandoned or or or
maybe an operation but still
potentially polluting.
Um, there's.
Over 1700.
What we call neglected
contaminated sites, including
the dry cleaners, including auto
repair shops that are closed,
um, service stations, various
different kinds of things where
there is
Contamination or a high
probability of contamination and
nobody to
To be held responsible.
I think they have answered all
my questions. Thank you very
much for your responses if I
could just add, I think it's
important. I have a long list.
OK.
OK.
Is it necessary?
I think it's important. OK, I'll
just make one sentence.
Sometimes I know we criticize
that we're giving more money to
the Environment department,
giving more money. But here's a,
here's a perfect example where
you have thousands of
contaminated sites, and we need
staff to go after every one of
these sites.
get them to get the owners to
pay for it, right? to rather
than wait and not have that
staff and so this is another
piece of the puzzle that I hope
we do fund them fully so we can
be aggressive with all these
sites. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Staff attorneys.
Thank you, Senator Thurley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator.
Um
I'm gonna dig down a little bit
deeper about federal
responsibility and state
responsibility for these, for
the cleanup of these sites.
Um, but I want to pay particular
attention and ask our, our
tribal citizens.
Of New Mexico, also citizens of.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, from
my vantage point there, yes, we
are.
We are. And under that
understanding our tribal
citizens.
Entitled to the same.
Response by our state government
as from our federal government.
Absolutely, madam Chair,
senator.
That's right.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator, why are
there so many abandoned uranium
sites on tribal land.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Well, my guess is because that's
where the uranium is, I mean.
Simply put,
Um
I don't know if there's any
other answer than that in terms
of the history of those sites
becoming abandoned.
You may know of or I guess.
Locations
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, that
is the, that is the first answer
for sure, but, um, tribal land
is often forgotten.
Um
Our government, uh, leadership
changes so often that I carry
through of initiatives and
priorities don't, um, but also
we have a legacy and a history
of leaving tribal nations
behind.
In this country and in this
state.
Um
I
Passionately support this bill,
Madam Chair and Senator, because
my dad worked in a uranium mine
in my childhood.
He's sick.
Right now.
We're constantly in the hospital
trying to figure out what is
wrong with him.
And I firmly believe it's
because he worked in.
Without proper protection.
And accountability, frankly.
Um, and so I thank you for
bringing this forward in a way
that helps us address systemic
racism in history.
Um
I think this is just an example,
and, and a cautionary tale for
us.
Um, of how extractive industries
take.
And leave
And in their wake.
Chaos
tragedy
Um, and harm.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, I have next
Senator Scott.
Oh
Thank you, madam chair. Did I?
He correctly, Senator.
Mr. Roberts, Mr. Kenny, that,
uh,
There were already it was
already.
a billion dollar.
Plus minus
Settlement with the
Navajo Nation.
You clean up
Uranium.
Madam Chair and and Senator
Sovirono settlement was brokered
by USCPA against several of the
bigger operators and that
billion dollars.
Give or take was set aside to
clean up.
What are identified as the
Tronox mines.
That funding is still.
Setting with US EPA. It was not
given to the state. It was not
given to Navajo Nation to do
anything with.
The EPA goes through identify
sites determines how they want
to do the cleanup, negotiates
that, and then they begin and
they have been sadly.
Um, very slow about moving
forward with that.
We've not seen virtually any of
that money expended.
So far
And it is specific to those,
like I say, those specific
product sites.
Um, there is not enough funding
even with a billion dollars to
clean up all of those that are
identified on the Navajo Nation,
so there's an an estimated 200,
200 plus.
That are that are not gonna be
addressed that we see.
Being where we partner with
Navajo Nation to begin to
address.
I, I will say we intend to.
At every opportunity identify
any opportunity to go back to
the federal government.
And
Collective funding from them to
find other responsible parties
and hold them accountable.
That's part of this process.
Madam Chair, Mr. Roberts, do we
have?
An estimate of the number of
Of sites that will be rehabbed.
With a billion dollars.
Madam Chair and
Senator, based on uh
Current EPA.
Estimates of that with that
billion dollars they're looking
at somewhere in the neighborhood
of 300.
On the Navajo Nation.
A couple off, but that still
leaves a substantial number
unaddressed.
So
Madam Chair, Mr. Roberts, I
believe.
I heard that the scope of the
remaining
Problem after this.
billion dollars is expended.
The scope of the remaining
problem.
Still in the billions, is that
accurate?
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
that that could be an accurate
estimate. This is a very large
Very expensive problem.
To deal with, to clean it all
up, and it's gonna, we need to
get started.
So, Madam Chair and Mr. Roberts,
how many sites do we expect to
clean up with.
Whatever portion of this 50
million.
is allocated toward.
Uranium
Madame Chair and Senator, right
now we are anticipating 2
uranium mines and then
characterization and potential
clean up of several other
neglected contaminated sites to
give you an idea.
We've got wet and dry mines, OK?
Wet mine is one where there's
potential impact to groundwater,
the cost to clean up a wet mine
is going to be in the 8 to $12
million dollar range,
potentially higher.
A dry mine we're looking at
about 4 to 6 million.
On these smaller neglected
contaminated sites, dry
cleaners, things of that nature.
Um, characterization.
Run somewhere between 250 and
$750,000 to clean up on one of
those if it's just.
soil contamination where we're,
we're basically uh air sparging
it out of the ground. We're
stripping it out. It's a $500
million site to do that if again
if you have groundwater
contamination that can go run to
10 to $15 million.
Uh, but right now our plan is to
hit the ground and and like I
say, we want to deliver.
uranium mine sites.
And up to 10 neglected
contaminated sites.
Oh
Madam Chair, Mr. Roberts,
approximately.
20 million towards uranium
sites.
And 30 toward.
Dry cleaners
Well
That's, I would say that's
pretty close, the, the portion
towards dry cleaners, like I
said, a lot of that's gonna go
to characterizing not only those
I heal them up.
Uh, determine which ones need to
be done first, and we try to
base that on what's the impact
to population centers, what's
the immediate impact of public.
So it's, it's gonna vary and
again, we may get lucky on, on a
wet mine and find out that it's
in fact not a problem and so
instead of spending 12 million,
I spend 4.
And that lets me move on to
something else.
So Madam Chair, Mister Roberts.
Well, I guess
The need to spend New Mexico
taxpayer.
dollars
For the solution of what
Ultimately
Should be a federal issue.
Would indicate to me that
You'll feel these two minds.
are of critical importance.
To spend money on.
Given the scope total scope of
the problem.
It looks like a.
The eye dropper of water and a
mill pond, and I guess the
question that I would have is.
If those are not
critical
Why are we doing that?
Rather than
Attempting to address the larger
issue.
chair and, and
Uh
Senator, uh, it's a good
question, you know, we're
putting droplets in a lot of
mill piles, if you will, around
the state, whether it's POS
contamination or the bulk fuel
spill in Albuquerque or uh
uranium mining. I mean, this is
what we do at the Environment
department. We chase the, the
polluter and try to fix the
pollution. Often I agree with
Senator Charlie that the federal
government comes into our state,
operates and leaves our state,
leaving both the feds and the
contractors off the hook for.
things that they should be
taking care of.
Um, you know, the Environment
department is going to use some
of that 1.5 million, I think
that senator is pointed out to
hire attorneys to make sure that
if there are potentially
responsible parties that we have
a game plan because the drop by
drop approaches you're pointing
out is not one we love, but it's
the one that we have before us.
So if we can go find those
potentially responsible parties,
derivatives of those companies,
even file for bank if somebody's
in bankruptcy that we put the
state in a position to go after
those.
Uh, who are trying to get out of
what I think is their moral, if
not contractual obligation to
New Mexico, and we should be
doing that. Um, I think we also
can teach the federal government
that this is going to cost more
and until we show them what the
true costs are to our
communities. Uh, we don't always
get a, a, a seat at the table,
um, with, with the White House
or with EPA or the NRC etc. uh,
so I think there's a strategy
here that we're employing, but
I, I understand your.
Thank you very much for your
answers. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Cedilia Lopez
and Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
noticed that it reverts to the
general fund if it's not spent,
and if the FIR uh.
IfIR is concerned or states are
concerned about spending it all
um.
In in one year, which seems, I
mean, it's such a massive
problem. So it seems, I, I just
wondered, um.
Shouldn't it be non-reverting?
Ma'am
And
that's a good question. I, I, I
would believe it should be
non-reverting, um, the budget,
the language is in the budget,
so it's something that I want to
check on. I appreciate it.
This
Thank you, madam chair. It, it,
it's since it's in the budget
and it's going to finance, I'm
not gonna suggest it, but it
just bothered me to see that
So, um, I, I appreciate that and
I know and you know that we
started with little grow money.
Or I guess we called it junior
back then to to get this, get
this ball rolling. I very much
appreciate this bill.
Um, the health impacts of this
stuff is really horrendous.
And it's, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, ma'am. Um, very sin,
um.
Roderick.
Senator, are you, who is most
familiar with this one be
settlement with the
Navajo and the federal
government.
Were you a party of that
settlement?
Madam Chair and Senator.
This settlement was worked out.
Prior to us being here.
Um, and then the settlement was
actually with um.
The companies that that did the
mining and milling.
And it's between the EPA, the
Navajo Nation, the Satra
identified a couple, I believe,
not on tribal land, but we were
not.
Directly apart to my knowledge
of that negotiated settlement.
Me
Uh
and Mr. Roder, can you give me a
date of
That settlement agreement.
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
looks like September 26, 2014,
2014.
And to date, how many sites have
been
Remediate
Madam Chair and Senator, um,
we're a little over our skis
because neither one of us were
in these positions and we
weren't party to it. I don't
want to speak authoritatively
that we have a great
understanding of that. Uh, we've
been trying in since this
administration started to get
the feds to release that money
and clean up as much as
possible.
There, but, but again, I'm not
sure that we're going to be uh
anything more than speculative
in answering your questions on
the settlement at the moment.
That's pretty interesting, uh, a
billion dollars setting uh Madam
Chair for 10 years is not a
billion, you know, it's
It's uh 2.5, 3.
Um
Do we know is
I'm just trying to figure out.
What do we have and how much is
out there and
Why hadn't anything been done
in, in years, 11 years.
Do you know?
Uh
Um, Mr. Madam Chair and Senator,
I'm happy to have John answer if
he knows anything more
specifically. I've met with the
Department of Justice, with the
EPA, with the NRC, um, ad
nauseam trying to get them to
move things forward on this
money, uh, in the last
Um
I don't know
John, do you have anything you
wanted to add?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
just that, uh, again this is
federal funding that's that's
managed by the federal
government.
And the processes for
identifying what site they want
to clean up and and uh.
The
And the way they want to clean
up what they wanna do.
is a multi-year process to get
to a decision of proposing how
they'd like to move forward with
it.
Um, which is one of the reasons
why it's crucial that we as a
state do something because even
when they make a decision and
you heard earlier.
About the Carlisle Dry cleaner
site in Albuquerque that was one
that we investigated in-house.
We identified it, we brought it
to the EPA's attention and it
rose to the level where they
decided to list it.
on the national priorities list.
Unfortunately, just cause they
put it on the list does not mean
that they turn any money loose
for that cleanup. We've got a
couple other super fun sites in
the state that have been on the
list.
For years that just got funding
last year from the federal
government to move forward with
the cleanup so unfortunately
it's a process we don't have any
control over.
But
My, I'm not arguing at all the
point that it that there are
sites, especially in the
desperately.
And may be deliberately wrong
time. I'm not arguing that.
I'm just trying to say, if you
had a billion dollars,
Um
11 years ago you have multiple.
100.
You got lots of money.
We ought
Ma
And I, and I don't have any
problems spending.
some money to help characterize
these sites and get it going,
but I have a problem.
Maybe I have a problem.
spend a lot of state money,
taxpayer money, when there's
More taxpayer money sitting over
there in a pile that it's not
being utilized. And so, because
they're not doing anything,
we're having to put our money in
it when we have other needs.
That's my, my only.
I think we ought to try to
figure out, do you know in that
agreement typically when a
billion dollars changes hands
and lawyers are talking, they
try to make sure that they cap
their liability. Is that one,
did that $1 billion dollar at
the government's liability going
forward.
Madam Chair and and.
Senator, I don't know the answer
to that question. I don't think
under sort of tort claims and
other, I don't know that they
can cap their liability.
Um, but again, I'm not speaking
of direct knowledge of the
settlement. Well, I, I wouldn't
think it would normally, but
it's tribal property where the
the person making the agreement
had sovereign rights that are
different from what I'm
typically exposed to, so.
I would, uh, I would be
interested in that.
I, I don't, um.
I think we have to address them.
I
I'm, I'm not arguing that. I
don't want anybody to
I think based on my comments
that I am, I'm just trying to be
a money manager and say we're
Where is the most money and what
can we do? Um, I hope.
Senator.
That because of the longevity of
this uranium contaminate that
have lived with it.
I hope the vast majority of that
money. We finally, for once, do
something that we said we're
gonna do, and we don't.
Us, directed in ways that we
shouldn't, so.
I appreciate it. Um.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin for a
motion.
Madam Chair, I motion for a due
pass.
There is a motion and a second
for a due pass.
And uh I'm sending a notice to
center Compost to come while you
call the roll, he's here right.
So the secretary, please call
the roll.
Sano Cervantes, excuse Senator
Charlie. Yes, and explain my
vote. Charlie, yes, Senorel.
And, yes, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes. Senator
Pope,
and the Pope, yes, said Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
And Townsend, yes, Senator Dia
Lopez.
Answer Dia Lopez, yes, San
Stephonics.
Soonics, yes, Senator Charlie to
explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, it's important to.
Name something in this space
which is that native people on
tribal land pay taxes. This is
taxpayer money that belongs to
tribal citizens as well. And so
that is why I'm also supporting
this and not continuing to defer
responsibility onto the federal
government. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you very much for that.
Uh, Senator, you have a
unanimous due pass. Oh,
I had to explain my. Oh, you
did? I'm sorry, I did not hear
that. Go ahead, Senator Pope. I
just want to reiterate, you
know, the importance of this.
You know, BIPO communities,
marginalized communities are
really.
Of the environmental health
costs of this.
I wish that the federal
government would step up more,
but even more private industry
that really walked away in some
instances.
There's we're gonna have this
debate and discussion about
using state dollars and taxpayer
dollars to do this in the
meantime.
People are still getting sick.
People are dying, and they don't
want to see us argue about this.
Something must be done, so thank
you for bringing this bill, and
we got it done. Thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, you do
have a unanimous due pass. Thank
you. uh, senators, uh, committee
members, Senate Bill 264 Senator
Munoz will be rolled over by his
request.
Uh, we are going on to Senate
Bill 262, but I'd like to point
out that uh you have a, a
breakfast invitation.
That is tomorrow morning, uh,
hopefully in early enough before
any committee should go to and
it's provided by the ag groups,
New Mexico cattle growers, New
Mexico wool growers, New Mexico
farm and livestock, dairy
producers, dairy of New Mexico,
dairy producers of America.
Chile producers of New Mexico,
Piccan growers of New Mexico
AgTrust New Mexico, American
Adre New Mexico Outfitters and
Guides New Mexico wine growers,
wine for breakfast, New Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts and New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. It is
in room 326, where there are
tables and chairs around the
table from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
So we thank them in advance for
that.
So hopefully you can join us. So
committee members, we are now on
Senate Bill 262.
And I understand there is a
committee sub.
So did the analysts get the
committee.
Is she here?
Mhm
Oh, she's making copies, OK.
So the analysis for the
committee sub is just coming.
So, uh, senator, would you
explain the committee sub?
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
and motions for discussion or
just explain the committee.
Sure, thank you very much, Madam
Chair. So in essence what the
committee sub does is it
modifies and takes out, if you
will, some of the other ones
that.
were in the original bill and in
essence, that's what it uh what
it does and it uh it really
codifies that and of course it
has the appropriation, but it
basically removes, I believe,
uh, from being one of the uh
OK, so committee members, could
I have a motion for a discussion
purposes on the committee sub,
Madam Chair, I move a do not
pass of Senate Bill 262 and a um
A motion to
You pass
62.
For discussion purposes only on
this committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, so now.
Uh, we have a committee sub.
I don't believe the public has
had the opportunity to see it.
Um
So
Let's go to questions and
comments from committee members,
and we might have to have more
clarification.
Senator Scott and Senator
Townsend.
Sure we're talking.
Yes. Yes.
Uh, the sub is uh that number
that you just mentioned,
0230613.3, the committee of
Analysis just got handed out.
It was sent out.
Oh, when?
It was awesome.
OK, so excuse me, the committee
secretary says
That the committee sub and the
committee sub-analysis was sent
out electronically yesterday
morning. OK, so, uh, comments,
questions.
On the committee sub.
Um, I, I think you, you, Madam
Chair, um, it was stated that
the environment that the game
and fish is taken out, um, is
there a reason for that mentor?
So, so,
Madam Chao Lopez,
as we deal directly with this,
uh, we were asking for
participants, and I understand
that uh they as one of the
groups at this point.
have asked not to be a part of
what, what is actually occurring
within the uh
With this piece of legislation,
uh, in terms of uh responses,
uh, the best that I can indicate
is that as we deal with a
different departments, uh, we do
ask for their.
OK, so there's some confusion.
Excuse me, Senator. Oh, we're
not, we need an explanation of
the entire committee sub.
OK, that the committee sub is
like one big amendment, so we
need an explanation of the bill,
please.
members of the committee and I
have a couple of experts with me
and we're gonna go ahead and
talk then about the committee
sub, which Senate Conservation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 262.230613.3.
So in essence in the committee
sub, uh, it makes uh
appropriations from the general
fund to the following agencies
and so within that, uh, and
they're going to be dealing with
uh
Issues dealing with wildfire, a
wildlife as an example and to
collaborate with other state
agencies.
Along with that, but it also
gets into is that there would be
275,000, that would be
appropriated to the um.
Division of natural resources
department.
And then also to the Department
of Environment and the amount of
275,000 and then 400,000 is
appropriated from the general
fund to the Board of Regents at
the University of New Mexico,
uh, for expenditure, of course
and fiscal years 226 and 27 for
the natural heritage New Mexico
program within the museum of
Southwestern Biology, and so in
essence, uh, that's what it does
and it appropriates the
resources to those 3 departments
and uh and then it states the
purpose.
Of course, why it's going to UNM
and then again, the last part in
expended or unencumbered
balances remain at the end of
the fiscal year 2027 from the
appropriations pursuit of this
section shall revert to the
general fund.
So that in essence is what this
particular uh committee
substitute would do, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. So would your experts
like to speak at this time.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. I'm gonna ask them to go
ahead and identify themselves
and to make a brief statement
regarding the committee
substitute. Thank you.
Hi, Madam Chair and senators.
Um, my name is Kate Cardness.
I'm the.
Community engagement coordinator
for the New Mexico Environment
Department.
Um, I am, um, on the working
group uh that uh worked, uh,
that was directed to join the
working group, um, by House
Memorial 34, uh, which is
Citizen science and state
agencies and uh.
The, um
The updated.
Um, sorry, the updated uh bill,
um, basically the differences
are, uh, we originally had 4
agencies, um, requesting
funding. It's now down to 2,
agencies, um, and some of the
language was changed to um
From uh.
Contracting volunteer
coordinators to hiring uh full
time staff.
Coordinators and also um having
the heritage foundation, um,
support.
Uh, the program rather than
oversee it, so that's the main
differences.
Mhm
Can you hear me? There we go.
I am, I am the director of
Natural Heritage New Mexico in
the Museum of South, it's a
division of the Museum of
Southwestern Biology, and we
maintain a statewide database on
environmental data and
biodiversity data and natural
resources management data.
Um
Our role here is primarily to
support the coordinators in the
various agencies to, to, uh.
Provide a database, provide a
website for dissemination of the
information that would happen in
science projects.
And we also be able to help in
the outreach for those agencies
as well. We're, we're here to
take the burden off of those
coordinators and the agencies in
terms of that database
management and the uh the
outreach capacity, wouldn't you
say? I think so. And that's our
main role, we're a support role
for the for the for the program,
and we will have a.
Yeah, database manager that
would be dedicated to this
program, plus we have asked for
supplementary fund to support
the development of the website
and the development of the
database itself.
Thank you. We're going to the
audience. Uh, are there those
here who are supporting this
bill and it's amended state it
it amended from 4 agencies
receiving the funds to 2
agencies. Is there anybody here
to support?
OK, uh, come on up, Howard.
Anybody here to oppose?
OK, come on up and you might as
well line up anybody online?
Sorry
One in support, we'll hear from
him after Mr. Hutchinson. Go
ahead, Howard.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Howard Hutchinson, I
am a registered lobbyist for the
coalition of Arizona and Mexico
counties. I'm speaking primarily
today as chair of the San
Francisco Soil and Water
Conservation District. Uh, we
spoke with the sponsor of the
bill and I indicated that the
district has embarked on doing
monitoring projects one through
the environment department
doing.
quality, uh, monitoring, so I
would classify as as citizen
scientist, uh, because we are
all volunteer on the on the
district.
The other one is we worked.
With the range improvement task
force in the US Forest Service
developing monitoring protocols.
For range
Uh, looking at livestock
monitoring and and grazing use.
And I, the only uh concern that
I, I look at this because we
went through about a year or a
year and.
That woke everybody up.
I hid it.
Um, you're standing in support,
not opposition. Standing in
support and
No, I, this is not in
opposition, it's, it's just a
suggestion that when these uh
monitoring or surveying
protocols are developed that
they can be scientifically
justified when they go through
the environment department or
whatever department they go
through. Thank you.
I'm sure.
Thank you online for a support
is Camilla Feibelman, and then
we'll go to the opposite. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just want to flag
this bill coming post the
memorial last year that the wild
Friends group brought, and these
are kids who are engaging in the
legislative process, bringing
their ideas for how to
participate, not just in
legislation, but obviously in in
citizen science.
And I think it's worth just
going over the definition of
that term, um,
Uh, really getting
Members of the public involved
in a way that helps them
understand the science behind
The natural resources, uh,
decisions that we make and
How young people getting that
real hands on experience. We
have a group called the Water
Sentinels, and they do water
quality testing up in the Tas
area and they can look at things
like, um, you know, do
pharmaceuticals get into the
water, or is there a source of
contamination in the water
that's unexpected and then be
able to flag that for the
appropriate agency. So I just
think that this is a neat way
for kids to get involved as a
child, I was sent up to the Girl
Scout camp.
And in the Hemez area and I had
a chance to learn about um good
ways of grazing and being able
to recognize over grazing on one
side of the fence and on the
other side of the fence, and
that changed my life. It made me
want to be a scientist and then
turn my science knowledge into
policymaking, and I just think
it's exciting and a way to get
our kids involved in sustaining
our natural resources. So thanks
for all involved.
Thank you very much. OK, so
we're now on the opposition,
please come forward.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Tom Patterson. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We oppose Senate
Bill 262 and its current form.
I'm also a cattle rancher from
Catron County.
For many years, we've had
private citizens, often from out
of state.
Claiming that they're monitoring
habitat conditions on our
rangeland.
They submit their so-called
findings to government agencies,
expect the government to act on
them.
And then sue them if they don't.
Not all
But many of the lay persons we
encounter belong to
organizations whose mission is
to eliminate livestock.
And livestock producers from the
landscape.
They have one objective.
And they are accountable to that
objective.
Which isn't science.
They may not even be trained. In
our case, for example, they
often can't tell the difference
between a hoof print for a cow
and a hoof print for an elk.
They report them all as elk.
As cattle rather
The ask in this bill, the one we
saw that's online.
is $612,500 a year in
perpetuity.
As we've said to the sponsor.
Absent strong assurances from
the designated beneficiaries.
On training and accountability,
real accountability. New Mexico
should not be funding or
facilitating work against our
citizens. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We are now
uh back to the committee and I
had Senator Dia Lopez first on
the committee's substitute. Is
there anyone else? And then
Senator Townsend Scott Eel.
OK, Senator Sadh Lopez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Actually, my
question was answered why, why
the reduction, um.
I, I think that these projects
are great, they're a great
introduction to science and I'm
happy to support this bill when
you're ready.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senator Campos.
This
These studies.
Where do they go and who uses
them and what what.
What validity do they have? I
mean, I'm trying to find out.
What are these answers for?
So, so, Madam Chair, if I may,
I'm gonna go ahead and defer to
uh the experts and they'll
further define what the studies
are, but they're used for and
how they continue to go ahead
and assist, if you will, and in
this particular case, uh, to
study the science. Thank you.
Madam chair, Senator, um.
So, uh, I guess the, the, the,
the question is why do we want
to collect this data and what
are we going to use it for?
That's a good way to paraphrase
it. I mean, overall, uh.
Overall, the
Madam chair
I
Sorry, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
overall, I think the, um, the
program is to instill um
excitement and support of, of
regular citizens and people, uh,
in, in, um, collecting science
and really understanding the
processes and, and having
transparency of um, you know,
exactly what those questions
are. Why do we collect this and
where does it go? Um.
The individual projects that uh
each department would be um,
Developing and, uh, collecting
the, the data for, um, have not
been developed yet, but for
example, for the environment
department, some ideas that we
have would be, um, creating, uh,
an app that would build upon our
environmental tracking system
database, so people can report,
um, concerns of environmental
leases, um, and it would give uh
people the ability to.
To uh maybe georeference or take
pictures of what they're
reporting, so it's easier than
going and being in front of a
computer or picking up the
phone. Some other data that, uh,
that we would like to explore is
um training volunteers, whether
it's from, um, an acacia from
their backyard or from uh
drinking water, um, and
submitting that and um enhancing
the.
added that the that the
environment department
department already collects to
help us be, um,
Our eyes and ears, I can't say
um exactly what.
The other uh agency might do
with it, I think they were, um,
excited about bird surveys and
also encouraging more recreation
and state parks to get people,
um, out there to, to do these
bird and and plant surveys and
recreate in state parks as well.
Madam Chair, um, Senator.
Um, how do we know and how do
you, how, how would the process?
Verify the integrity of these
tests. How do you know?
That what you're seeing is is
Fabricated
Thank you, madam chair, Senator
Townsend, again, I'm deferring
to the experts.
Senator, can you hear me still?
I hear you loud and clear.
Yes, citizen science has a long
history now, a relatively long
history of, you know, a couple
of decades we're asking the
exact question of what is the
value of the data, you know,
collected by science. And so we
We've gone through a lot of
processes of understanding when,
uh, you know, when people want
to go on black birds. We have
experts that review it and say
was that the right bird?
I see our role here in National
Heritage New Mexico has, has a
conservation science
organization to help the agency
coordinators.
develop projects that can be uh
it that followed very strong
scientific principles that can
be defended and also can go
through review.
That that will sustain those
observations, um, in the
database.
Then they become just part of
science.
Times for what we want to do to
solve problems in the world that
we live in.
So my job and the job of
of it is a
database manager here would be
to work with the agencies to
make sure that the data
collected is of high value.
All controlled and the best
science we can possibly develop
with citizen science, and then
through that process, they
increase our sign our science
education process for the for
the public at home.
Madam chair, um,
Senator.
Experts
What I'm, what I'm trying to
focus on.
is
This is new, this is new to me.
I've citizen-based science.
Doesn't sound like the kind of
science that I'm used to. I'm, I
wanna know factual based
science.
And that it's
It it's validated by people with
credentials.
That doesn't sound like what
this is, and that's what's
causing me problem.
Is it, is it in fact science or
is it?
A slush fund for people to go
birdwatch. I mean, I'm just
trying to figure out what the
heck's going on. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, and I want to defer to
the experts.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I.
Understand and appreciate your
point of view. Um, I think it's
important that the um volunteer
coordinator positions are
funded, in addition to the
support pot of money, uh,
managed by the Heritage
Foundation, um, heritage, um,
and these programs can be
vetted, trained, and worked with
our bureau staff, um, to ensure
that the data that we are
collecting and
Training people to collect is
consistent with our own methods,
so that we can absorb it, uh,
into, um,
The way that we analyze data as
well and.
To be fair, a lot of citizen
science is observational.
So, um, it's not necessarily
people bringing, um, samples
back to the lab and doing the
analyzation or, or whatever
method that you might have in
your head about, you know, mad
scientists and, and the actual
like, you know, training, um,
that would come with some really
technical things, um, some of
these projects that we're
talking about with using
volunteers is the data
collection, which is mostly
observation.
al
Um, but again, the specific
projects, um, that we would
develop within our working group
in collaboration between,
between the two different um
departments, um.
would be developed to, uh,
Great within our departments.
Just from my own madam chair.
Last year.
Um, Senator,
The Metro Heritage.
day.
What is,
what is that? Senator Townsend
again, I'm gonna go ahead and
defer to the.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Natural Heritage New Mexico was
set up at the University of New
Mexico 30 years ago as a
conservation science and
information uh uh center for New
Mexico and we collect data from
all agencies and work with all
agencies across the state for
bringing that data into
databases and disseminate it
back out to for the people to
see, including a major database
that we have that is funded by
the state called New Mexico.
So our job is, is to is to both
work with the agencies, bring
that data that's relevant to
conservation and natural
resources and the environment
into place that everybody can
use and and.
apply wherever they are um so we
have several projects we work
with all the agencies that were
originally in this bill and we
still work with us too. We have
agreements with them. Um
And so that.
So we are non very much a
science organization inside the
university of science based um.
Uh, division of the museum of
Southwestern Biology.
The biology and vice chair, I'm,
I, I appreciate it, Senator.
I'm, I'm trying to have, can you
give me a, an example of a
demonstrated success of this.
Citizens based science
historically and and the flip
side of that.
If, if
If reports are generated that
aren't factual based, who is
liable? I mean, if you cost a
citizen or an industry.
Dollars for erroneous reports.
Does the University of New
Mexico have liability for that?
Who, who stands for?
Or mistakes.
Thank, thank you very much,
Madam Chair, Senator Townsman.
It's uh Townsend, it's a very
good point as we deal with this
because liability and everything
that we do.
is uh of course those those
consequences that occur, uh, a
lot of times, either unbeknownst
to us or unintended, but again,
I'm gonna go back to the experts
to help us to further understand
who absorbs that liability if
With the information that has
been submitted, uh, as
science-based, and then from
there, uh, if it is proven wrong
or there's another uh.
side to whatever occurs, how
that is going to be dealt with,
so maybe you will have some
response to that particular
question.
Chair, Senator, uh, to be
honest, I haven't thought much
about liability and.
In this, uh, context of this
project. However, I think that.
The two departments that are
requesting funding for volunteer
for the Department of Game and
Fish and the Environment
Department. Are both agencies
that um,
are accountable to the science
and the reporting that we
produce. So I don't really see
any.
Additional, um.
Liability or or issues with that
because, like I said, we, we
already are accountable to to
the these um citizen science
projects, it wouldn't be
External
From these departments. Rather,
the working group that has been
put together is we we're
encouraging a collaboration
between our departments. So each
department has its own projects
that are uh that will be
developed and trained and done
in-house, but we will be in
partnership with the other
departments and their volunteer
coordinators and with the
natural heritage.
Um
New Mexico, you know, it would
uh help us uh with that
collaboration and that
consistency between, you know,
the products that we might
produce or Madam Chair, um,
senator.
When a report is published.
That includes
Citizen based science.
Do you make it known on the
report.
That this is
This is Citizens-based science.
This is not.
From
From a department person. I
mean, I'm, I'm just trying to
find out how does
How does the public know?
I mean, one side of me wants to
support this, the other side of
me says,
I don't know for sure what the
heck we're doing, and I'm afraid
to support it because
You haven't told me what we're
trying to get, and I'm trying to
figure it out. It's
Is it a is it a
that are talked about.
Process being developed where
people could report things, send
pictures in, I mean.
If I'm running construction
project.
Mainly some concern. Do they
know what they're reporting? Do
they know what they're seeing
when the report is made, do
people know this is from a
citizens-based.
Person, it's not from an
inspector. I'm just
I'm trying to figure this out. I
apologize for just digging into
it, but this is my nature. I'm
sorry. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend, I
that's part of your nature we
truly appreciate it because what
you're trying to do is to get to
the core of where some of the
problems or the unintended
consequences can occur as we
move along. So with that again,
I don't know if there's any
further explanation that you all
wish to share. If not, uh, I
would indicate if this bill is
allowed to move on, I would.
I would dig deeper into the
liability aspect and provide you
information as it moves along
if.
Passes through this committee,
but again, I'm just going back
to the Madam Chair, Senator, so
the example I gave about uh the
app that that you uh that you're
referencing, um, is an idea that
we bounced around at the
Environment department. That is,
that idea is um expanding and
enhancing a um reporting system
that we already have at the
environment department, which is
the environment you were to
visit.
The environment can report and
received or or concerning
environmental spills or, or.
Um, issues like that. So, um,
there's a phone number and
there's a um there's an already
used to report instances that
they see or suspect might be an
environmental hazard. So,
The, um, the apps that I used it
as as an example expansion or a
different method of that system
that we already have.
Madam Chair
Senator.
I think you lost me right there.
If we're
We're building a process for
engaged
Um.
I might be all in.
But you just described to me was
A
Paddletail reporting system, Big
Brother's watching from unknown
sources with unknown validity,
and I thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Scott, then
Senator I, then Senator Hamlin.
Hm
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator, and
experts.
Science runs.
The spectrum from nuclear
physics.
Marine biology.
And it would appear as though.
These
Efforts would be directed
toward.
Some sort of environmental
stewardship.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Scott has moved forward.
Yes, that's uh.
a very valid statement. Well,
well spoken, and again, if I
may, I'd like to again defer to
the experts because they're
dealing directly with this and
hopefully they'll help us to
better.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, yes,
would help to um uh instill a
sense of environmental
stewardship towards uh youth who
uh want to participate or even
adults, um, it's, it's for
everybody, um.
And
Going back to the origination of
why we're even here today, um.
House Memorial 34 was, was
presented, um,
By, uh, by wild friends. And so
they, they saw a need and they
were excited, um, about
environmental steward. There's
actually, um, another proposal
for an additional memorial is
focused um in the education, um.
World and there's a quote in in
this one that I like, it's it's
from a child, um, they say
citizen science can help more
people, especially our youth,
become aware and involved and
concerned about real world
issues and help scientists who
don't have time to do all the
data collection that's. Um.
Madam chair, and experts.
Before these.
Well, I, I suppose.
These folks are, are being
dispatched into the world.
Provide observations to add to
Databases and
Of course, a very obvious
question would be,
What qualifications.
Would be required from these
observers.
Who ensure that
The observations are.
Reasonably accurate.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and of course, uh,
Senator Scott and moving forward
again talking about the validity
I'm gonna let the experts
respond to that.
Madam Chair and Senator
Um
There will be training programs.
That we were that the agencies
were instill and then we would
develop those um programs and
and the protocols for how you
collect the data beforehand so
that we can train these citizen
science to collect the best data
possible and our role will be to
heritage will be working with
the agencies to figure out.
To decide what is the what we
can and cannot expect from
scientist from citizen science
and make sure that when we go
out and we expect them to
collect it and not waste their
time that they also have a a
commitment to knowing that their
science, but they do will be a
contribution to science. So we
will be training them, they
don't go out willy nilly. It
will be, you know, the
coordinators be working closely
with the, with these on these
projects and we we.
working with the coordinators
themselves to make sure that
there's a level, high level of
science, um, um.
Dictated in the kind of work
that they do. There's a limit.
how well you can do that and
there's always been a discussion
about how, how effective this
cause.
Um, is, is a citizen science. We
now know that it can be very
effective, that we know a lot
about.
There's several programs out
there like the Bosy system
management program in the
Albuquerque were involves 2 plus
more student.
Schools and doing monitoring of
the riparian ecosystem.
They learn a lot, they get a lot
and the data that comes out
there, the agencies are using.
I know the data that will come
out of these two agencies will
also be used for the agency's
work.
And
Madam Chair since her and
experts would there be?
In a licenses or certifications
or
Some assurance.
With respect to these training
programs that
The folks that
Underwent the training actually
appropriately appropriately
absorbed it and was able to
pass.
Some sort of a test and I'm now
going back to
Uh, the cattle growers
association.
The representation that some of
these observers.
Didn't know an elk hoof from a
cow hoof.
So, so, Madam Chair and, and
Senator Scott, another point
well taken as we deal with this
again, I'm gonna be uh asking
her uh experts to be very
succinct to what we're asking is
number one, what are the
credentials? #2, how do we
ensure the validity of any of
the citizen science based uh uh
research that is, is done. So
again, going back to the
credentialing, the training, and
the expertise, uh, that would
help with the oversight in terms
of.
Initiating some of these these
funds for these particular
projects. So if I may, Madam
Chair, again to defer to the
experts.
Chair and senator, uh, the
positions of the volunteer
program coordinators that we are
asking funding for. They would
be, uh, responsible for working
within their department to, uh,
to produce and create um a
training uh and project
management, um, closely with the
bureaus who and, and by bureaus,
I mean like for example, um,
drinking water.
Um
Drinking water bureau has um
standards, quality collecting
water samples, whether you, uh,
need to let pipes sit overnight
before you collect the data or
before you collect the water or
you need to flush the pipe out
before you collect the water
sample. Um, these would all be
part of the project.
Um, creation and then part of
the training of volunteers, um,
in my past experience, I have
been a volunteer program
coordinator myself with the Park
Service, um.
And what we've done what I did
in my own experience was, um,
actually.
Train and go with groups of
volunteers in these projects. So
they, um, it's not like we're
going to be recruiting people
and giving them a piece of paper
and these we we want and need
the the data that they would be
collecting to be consistent with
our own methods of collection.
Um
And
We don't want this to be a
substitute for the ways and the
ways that we collect data and
analyze data ourselves. This is
an enhancement of um a volunteer
program. It benefits the
department, but the priority
really is that outreach and
education. That's, I think, the
biggest, um.
point of the programs is to
instill that environmental
stewardship among, um, our
community.
And, and the, the data collected
is a secondary benefit.
Excuse me one second, uh, Senate
Conservation Committee members
of the floor leader has asked
that we continue until we finish
our agenda today, if for some
reason, sorry to interrupt you.
Oh, madam chair.
The senator and experts.
I'd like to now turn toward uh
Biases
That might be imparted.
Into these citizen scientists.
As you send them out to collect.
Whatever
Of what they're being.
Incentives or
Any rewards or
Other compensation for
Results.
Coming back to you.
We're hoping
To achieve
Or
Or the golden objectives.
Without bias.
Thank you, Madam Charity again
deferring to the experts.
Madam Chair and senator, I, we
hadn't talked about any um
incentive.
I think the incentive is to get
out and do science and to learn,
uh, and to get out in nature,
um, and.
I, I.
When it comes to science and
data collection. I, there
shouldn't be room for bias, um,
and part of a good scientific
study really is, is.
Designing it not with an answer
in mind. You have a question.
That you are searching for
answers, but you don't go out.
With an answer, hoping to prove
it. That's just bad science.
Madam Chair and Senator, I would
concur on those comments. And I
think
One of the things that we're
trying to do here is create a
program that is highly rigorous,
because in order to sustain the
citizen science campaign, your
citizen scientists need to know
that this data is going to be
useful, they need to understand
the question that they're being
asked to address and hopefully
it's an interesting one. And
then, and that leads to a
broader and greater engagement.
It's, it's, it's not meant at
all to be haphazard, OK? And the
science questions that each
agency will propose.
will be ones that we think of
course will be unbiased. It's
our whole idea behind science.
So the program will have
safeguards to make sure that
happens, and there are no direct
incentives except to do the good
to do good science. There's no
other kind of.
Offerings being
posed here.
OK.
Oh
Madam Chair, Senator, and
experts, I would.
Be very cautious.
About
Rolling any material
conclusions.
From a lot of this work because,
for example, uh, if, if you
Oh
In a circumstance.
With which I'm familiar.
You postulate that.
Oil and gas development in the
southeast part of the state.
Arms the habitat of
The three-toed sand dune lizard.
Now if we go out and study an
acre of ground with these.
Citizen scientists.
They don't find any lizards.
The assumption would be.
Yeah.
Oil and gas.
Actually
Armed
The lizard population.
Which
Might or might not be inaccurate
conclusion.
So
very least, I would, I would
advocate.
A great deal of caution here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thanks to everybody.
Are you
Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Uh, one of my questions
regarding the data that's gonna
be collected has already been
asked here. I too have a problem
with somebody going out there
and observing something that in
their mind might be a problem.
And then reporting it.
Because my standards, I live out
in the country. I have all my
life and I wouldn't move to town
for any, any amount of money. I
just wouldn't do it.
I like my freedom out there and
we do have.
Things that we do differently
than people that do live in a a.
A town or a city.
So whenever I hear you say that
they're going to go out there
and observe this and then make a
recommendation.
Or make an observation.
Possibly have it checked out. I
think you're setting some people
up for a liability suit.
And Madam cheer
Whenever I'm talking about
things like that, the instance
that Senator Scott just brought
up is a perfect example.
Of that
Oh
Let's see, um,
You could observe something
that's.
Because there is no, no
knowledge.
What actually goes on out there,
such as.
If it's bird season going on
and.
One of your observers see
somebody shooting a bird and
they, oh my gosh, they probably
killed some of willow
flycatcher.
Something like that.
It turns out to be a dove.
There's a problem there because
this person.
Has not done anything wrong but
in.
One of these
People's eyesight, it possibly
could be. I think anybody that
is a state biologist or working
with the water quality control.
portion of uh
A&M uh in red.
That
They would say that they are
more in tune with everything
that's going on.
And with a group of kids. Now if
these kids want to learn, that's
a whole different.
Different ball of wax right
here.
But to have them go out and then
come back and say, here it is,
this is what we saw.
Whenever they could be so off
base, it could be very, very
harmful.
To the
Individual person.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Oh, wait, wait, wait, Madam
Chair, there's one more thing,
Senator, in your bill, you, you
struck out.
The game of fish department.
You're still asking for $400,000
which is appropriate general
fund board of res, UNM.
For expenditure and physical
year 26 and 27 for the natural
heritage, New Mexico program
within the Museum of the
Southwest Biology in the
Department of Biology for the
University of Mexico. Are you
still going to have to have, I
believe I read.
What is it? 4 permanent full
time?
Uh, equivalent positions.
So Madam Chair and uh Senator
Rosel, yes, that's uh what, what
the indication is not only in
the bill, but as we've talked to
the experts, and if I may, Madam
Chair, again, just refer to the
expert to uh further elaborate
in terms of the responsibilities
and the work that individuals
like this in a full time
position.
Thank you.
Chair, Senator, I, I.
I'm
I apologize. I, I am a little.
Surprised by the um.
My suggestion of a project idea
which is madam, excuse me, I
asked the question regarding
regarding the full-time
employees, we've already been
over the other section.
Um, Madam Chair and senator, uh,
I believe since, uh, the state
land office and the um.
The Department of Game and Fish.
Um, are not.
Asking that we are only asking
for 2. OK, so, madam chair, I
know that the 4 full-time
equivalent of
Positions would have been paid
$135,000 each, so.
Madam Chair and senator with
that knock that down to whatever
half of the 550 would be.
So, so, Madam Chair, in terms of
uh what the legislation
indicates with the
appropriation, uh, that is the
amount being requested, however,
for further justification, I'm
gonna defer to the experts.
A Madam Chair and Senator, um.
So
Origins that work for agencies
involved and when we were asked
to participate as Natural
Heritage New Mexico is, is
helping with the database and
the websites and that sort of
stuff. And we requested them an
equivalent to a 34 FTEs that
we're going to be in the program
also have an FTE to to work with
the other 4 coordinators across
agencies. Now we're down to two
agencies that are involved, and
we made this, we still need to
be able to have a database.
manager in the question would
be, um,
Can
That
Have we still need an FTE there
so I can still be responsible to
the two agencies. That's why
that money still remains.
And maybe less money involved um
down the line in terms of
the actual amount of data
senator,
I hope this is on your question.
Are you a state employee? Yes,
ma'am
ma'am.
But you're with the.
Department of Cultural Affairs,
no, no, I'm with the University
of New Mexico.
University
of New Mexico. New Mexico.
So
In light of the land office not
being involved in light of the
game of fish department not
being involved, you're still
asking for.
2 or 4. You kind of gave me a
roundabout answer and I kind of
just drifted off there for a
minute.
Madam Chairman Senators for 2
years.
As a um now and that's the
amount.
funding for 2 years for the
program, not just for one.
That's the maps for
there's a map for 2 years for
the agency coordinators and now
for 2 years for us at Natural
Heritage at the University of
New Mexico.
OK, thank you very much for that
response.
I understand what you're trying
to do here. I really do senator.
And Madam chair.
We do want
Involvement we want our young
people to become stimulated
where they want to be part of
the science program and
everything, but I think what.
Might end up happening might be
detrimental to our general
public out there in some ways
that.
I think the university could
also be liable, held liable for
this and uh I.
I cannot support this. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mine is
really more of a comment because
I had a lovely visit with young
people, um, uh, last week who
were very excited about this
bill, and these were the kids
ages 8 to 11.
Um, who were very passionate and
articulate their conversation
about this bill, uh, blew me
away and and gives me great hope
for our young folks, and they
shared with me how important
this program is to them and, and
so I'm, I'm assuming that
there're these aren't just a
group of kids who are gonna go
out into the wild.
And, uh, and go and study bugs
in a particular area that
they're supervision and uh and
and structure.
Um, but you know, these kids
were talking about like various
projects that they were excited
about the one that I'm familiar
with is, is the counting of the
ladder back woodpecker that
actually I have two that live in
my yard, uh, right above the
tortoise. um, and then they also
talked about studying non life
threatening wildlife because we
have children and we want to be
careful, you know, and I'm
imagining them like sitting up
in erected platforms watching
and making sure that they can
count how many squirrels are in
the community or in this
particular area as well as.
You know, looking at water
quality and just clarity and
these are, I do a water study on
my hot tub every time. I mean,
these are just adding little
drops in chemicals and looking
at a reading. This isn't.
This isn't big science, but this
is, you know, looking at at bug
studies and, and, you know, I
feel that this is just an
amazing opportunity for us to
not only provide education and
exposure, but really the
opportunity to grow our own
scientists.
To grow our own future
scientists, and, you know, when
we talk about.
You know, having opportunities
for our young people to stay
here and have them to have jobs
that, you know, keep them close
to their families, which is very
much a part of the cultural
fabric of our state. Um, I am
fully in support of this, and so
I'm very you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I think Senator Lopez
is ready to make a motion.
Thank you Madam Chair. I move a
Du pass.
There is a motion for oh
no, oh, OK, um, Madam Chair, I,
um, voted do not pass for state
for Senate Bill 262, and a due
pass for Senate Conservation
Committee substitute for.
Thank you very much. There is a
motion in a second, uh, senator,
did you want to close?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee just, just briefly in
terms of the
support the request and uh as we
move forward, uh, what I would
like to do is to go ahead and
respond back to some of the
questions regarding liability.
12 in terms of what the
resources are going to be used
for. So I will be uh
respectfully submitting uh some
updated information to the
committee, but again, I just
thank you all very much for the
questions and for the uh uh the
concern in terms of some of the
issues that have been expressed
on regard to this particular
piece of legislation. It's all I
have right now, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Could the
committee secretary please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes, excused Santa
Charlie. Yes.
Uh, Charlie, yes, and.
No, Senator Hamblin. Yes.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope, and Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
And Scott? No. Senator Townsend.
Townsend, no center to Lopez.
Yes, Senator Dia Lopez, yes,
Senator Stefanis. Yes. There's a
phonics, yes.
Senator by a 5 to 3 vote, you
have a due pass for the
committee substitute for this
committee. Thank you very much
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senate Bill 281 committee
members, if you were out of the
room, Senate Bill 264 has been
rolled over to the next day.
We have a
Amendment that came in this
morning.
And there is an amendment on
this bill.
And both the vice chair and the
ranking member.
had the opportunity to look at
it very quickly.
And determined that it was not
uh too complicated.
Uh, to consider.
At the last minute.
So Senator, uh, why don't you
explain the bill first and then
we will go to your amendment.
OK, Madam Chair.
Just uh a brief summary of
Senate bill.
281
This legislation creates a
comprehensive framework for
managing wildfire liability for
electric co-ops.
In New Mexico establishing a
mitigation requirement.
Liability limitations.
Procedure guidelines for
wildfire related claims.
The key provisions.
In the bill.
Uh, electric co ops must develop
a comprehensive wildfire
prevention plan. The plan must
include detailed surface area
and electric system mapping you
want how, how detail would you
like me to go, Madam Chair, I
know that you probably tired.
No, uh, Senator, it's very
important there are people
listening on the line.
There are
um understanding of the, of the
bill, please. OK.
OK.
The plan, the fire mitigation
plan requires
A detailed service area and
electric system mapping,
wildfire risk assessment
methods, vegetation management
procedures, inspection and
maintenance protocols, emergency
response and operational
procedures.
Number 2, the, the approval and
oversight process the plan must
be reviewed by the forestry
division.
The public regulatory commission
approves the plan.
And it will be a 3-year plan
approval cycle.
A mandatory annual reporting on
the plan.
To read the liability
limitation.
The presume reasonable
mitigation if a plan is
approved.
The potential exemption for
liability.
Under certain conditions.
A 2 year statute of limitation
for filing claims.
And the damage camp up to 2
million per wildfire.
Um
There's 5 supporting arguments.
Risk mitigation encourage
proactive wild.
prevention, create structural
approach to reduce wildfire
risk.
And provides clear guidance for
electric co-ops.
The second, the economic
protections limits potential
financial devastation from
wildfire claims provides
predictability for electric
cooperative.
consumer protection with
utilities sustainability.
3, transparency, reduces.
Requires public disclosure of
mitigation plans and mandates
annual reporting and increase
accountability for electric coop
synthetic approach to
standardized wildfire prevention
strategies create clear review
and approval process and
established constant statewide
standards.
Balances liability at sex are
reasonable, damage limits.
Requires clear evidence for
claims and protects co-ops while
maintaining accountability.
And there's 5
Up, uh, opposing arguments.
Is the liability restrictions
Senator, you don't have to go
through the opposition. You
don't think so?
No, you know, I wanna be
transparent. These guys may not
have enough questions.
because here's my next question.
My next question is, could you
please explain the amendment so
that we could adopt.
On the amendment, Madam Chair.
If you go to the bill.
We've got a couple of places
here that were.
We're amending the bill.
On page uh.
On page 4.
We're striking the simple.
And
On page 4.
Online
8
On line 8
were striking the semicolon.
And inserting
comma, including.
And the things that we want to
include in here.
Or is the emergency contacts for
the cooperatives during wildfire
emergency.
The communication procedures to
contact federal and state agency
responsible for fire
suppression.
Fire department's first
responders and local governments
and see emergency contact email
addresses, phone numbers, and
applicable radio frequencies,
semicolon.
On page 5, we strike.
5
And insert 3.
On page 5 page 1919, page 5,
line 19 strike 5 year and insert
lieu of.
a year.
And on page 5 line 22.
After recommendations.
Insert
During a period starting from
November 1st of each year and
ending November 28th of each
year.
Those were some of the oh, wait
a minute.
And on page 6 line 3 strike.
45 and insert in lieu of 60.
That's a reporting
it's on page 67 strike 45 and
insert in lieu of 60.
Those were some of the, the uh
uh FRR.
Uh, questions and we answered
those we tried to amend the bill
and, and let me tell you, uh,
uh representative.
Dixon is carrying the bill over
in the House, and these are
exact.
Amendments that she requested to
be put on the bill and I just
duplicated them.
Uh, so that it will be the same
mayor Bill.
On both sides, madam Chair.
Thank you. Could I have a motion
to adopt the.
Thank you. Is there a second?
There is a motion in a second
for discussion purposes. Is
there anybody in the audience
who wants to support the
amendment.
Please raise your hand.
Is there anybody in the audience
opposing the amendment, please
raise your hand.
Is there anybody online for the
amendment? No.
OK, Committee members,
discussion, comments on the
amendment.
Uh, the Senator Townsend moved
to adopt the amendment. Is there
a second?
There's a 2nd.
Senator Townsend and Senator
Hamlin.
Is there anybody here opposed to
the amendment?
OK, I'm gonna have the secretary
show.
All those present voting in.
favor of the amendment.
Back to the bill.
How many people are in the
audience supporting the amended
bill.
We got 3 hints. Anybody in the
audience opposing the amended
bill.
One hand
Is there anybody online? Yes.
One yes and one no. So, uh, with
all the supporters, please come
forward.
And we'll give you the mic for a
minute.
These are supporters first.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Howard Hutchinson of
the Coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
Uh, we're in strong support of
this bill. I would like to note
that many of our member counties
have already adopted what is
called wildfire protection
plants, which will be a good
database for the for the start
of this effort. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next please.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh
Rico Gonzalez. I am a registered
lobbyist for El Paso Electric,
but I'm speaking today on behalf
of myself and my family. We're
co op members in Socorro
Electric Co op.
Territory and um and just as a
citizen, I'd like to express
our, our support for this bill
as a as a co op member. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
George Dodge Junior. I'm a
registered lobbyist for uh New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association and
Western farmers, uh, co op.
Uh, GNT, I am also a trustee,
the vice president of the board
of trustees for Farmers Electric
out on the east side of the
state and all of us stand in
full support of this bill. It's
very important that we keep our
co-ops lights on, the
electricity running and uh and
uh keep us solvent and this bill
helps tremendously. Thank you in
advance for your support. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um,
Now, 01 person online to support
Matthew Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Matthew
Gonzalez, and I am the executive
director for the consumer Energy
Alliance at CEA, we advocate for
affordable, reliable, all the
above energy options working
that um that help working
families and small businesses,
um, in my role, I've worked with
many of you, um, but I've also
worked with rural Electric Cops
across the nation, um, as a
former mayor of a wildfire
impacted rural community I've
seen firsthand how essential
these um co-ops are to the
communities they serve. They're
not just power providers,
they're member owned.
organizations that keep energy
affordable and reliable for
rural families, businesses and
critical infrastructure. SB 281
strikes the right balance
ensuring co-ops implement
wildfire prevention measures
while protecting them from
excessive liability that could
lead to higher electricity rates
and threatened service liability
without these protections, coops
could face crippling financial
strain forcing rural residents
and small businesses to bear the
burden through rate hikes or
reduced services, wildfires are
a serious threat to New Mexico
communities and rural electric
cooperatives.
committed to responsible
wildfire prevention. This bill
ensures that co-ops can take
proactive safety measures while
maintaining the affordability
and reliability that rural
communities depend upon. Um, by
prioritizing wildfire
prevention, maintaining
affordable energy and ensuring
the reliability of rural
electric services. SB 281 is a
smart balanced solution that
protects our communities while
allowing co-ops to continue
delivering the electricity we
rely upon every day. So I just
want to thank the sponsors for
the legislation, thank them for
continuing to refine it, and I
urge the
committee support. Thank you.
Thank you. We're moving to
opposition now in the room we
have somebody and online, so
we'll start online. Kelly
Sanchez, but Scott, come on up.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly Stout Sanchez. I'm
an attorney who represents
individuals who have been harmed
as a result of the misconduct of
others. I oppose Senate Bill 281
because it's severely and
unnecessarily restricts New
Mexicans' ability to use our
court system to seek
compensation for harm caused by
misconduct and negligence of
these cooperatives. Um, section
6 and section 7 of the bill
changed the burden of proof that
an individual must establish in
order to
veil to one of the highest
burdens in our legal system.
This bill's limitations on New
Mexicans.
Unnecessary, as our law already
requires an individual to prove
that an entity was negligent or
acted unreasonably, and to prove
that the specific misconduct was
a cause of the individual's
harm, as opposed to other
causes. Also, one of the most
troubling is the limitation that
it places on the amount of
compensation that can be
obtained to $2 million for all
persons harmed in a wildfire.
$2 million for all persons who
lost homes, loved ones, and
suffered burns and injuries,
means that people will be left
without any actual redress when
they are suffered because of the
misconduct of others. This will
only have the effect of hurting
New Mexicans and forcing the
state to come forward and assist
when this burden should be borne
on the entity who is at fault.
At this time, on the risk of
wildfires and New Mexico is
significant. It is important to
ensure that the entities charged
with
creating those risks are
incentivized to act reasonably
for New Mexicans. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Scott Scanlon,
registered lobbyist for
Singleton share and we love
about half of this bill.
Um, a little background, um,
this bill is based on a law that
was passed in California after
PG&E, uh, there was a massive
fire, uh, sued for billions of
dollars. The state of California
didn't want PG&E to go bankrupt.
So they, they passed a bill
which created a fund, so PG&E,
the, the electric company, um,
would, would, um, would be
liable up to their insurance
limits then a fund.
would take care of the balance.
California has a lot of people,
a lot of people pay into the
fund. So we brought this concept
to New Mexico. We're trying to
craft a bill to protect co-ops
because we too agree that co-ops
need protection in case of a
wildfire.
Um, the problem is.
The fund. We couldn't figure out
because we couldn't.
Uh, the, the co op members
couldn't be.
The fees, tax, whatever you
wanna call it to the extent to
to create a good fund.
So that was our problem, so now
with this bill.
Um
The, the as the as the the prior
um person spoke the liability
limits are very severe, um,
it's, uh,
It's, it's a bill that needs
work and we're committed to
working on it in the summer, but
this particular version, uh, we
would respectfully. Thank you
very much.
Uh, we are now going to, did you
want your experts to say
anything send please go ahead.
This is Curtis Hartenstein. I'm
sorry, sir, Arinstein, he's,
he's from uh tri-state.
Uh,
le generation and and he's one
of our experts that has flown in
to do this and Vince Martinez on
the other side over here is a a
long time.
Advocate and lobbyist and and
uh.
For the co ops, uh.
He's uh
Presently he's the uh executive.
director, I guess you would say
of the.
New Mexico Electric Coop
Association.
So they are very knowledgeable
on this subject, so.
I expect them to answer all.
Thank you very much.
OK, we are now to questions and
comments from committee members
Senator Townsend. Thank you.
chair, Senator.
Um
This bill requires all coops to
have wildfire mitigation plan.
And Madam Chair, and Senator, do
they?
That's new. They don't
currently, they're, they're not
currently required to do that,
is that correct? Let me, let me
let my experts answer that.
Madam Chair
Senator Townsend.
Co-ops already have fire
mitigation plans.
This bill actually doesn't
require them.
To if they want to be exempt.
From liability they do in terms
of of of the filing of it.
But I'll, all cops have.
Uh
Vegetation management plans and
fire mitigation.
OK.
Um
With regard to uh the one.
Mr. Scanlon's opposition.
is the
I, I mean, we've spent 50
million in this place.
It's just um.
Is there a problem creating a
fund.
Um
That would address those needs
or, or, I mean,
Is it the anti-donation? What,
what, what is the issue with
that?
Most funds are created from what
I understand about the fun and
and my experts will probably
correct me if I'm wrong.
Most of these funds are
collected from the utility
members and so if you're in
California, you've got so that
many people living there and
they can collect a small fee
from many members and and create
a huge fund.
In New Mexico, an electric co op
bunch, I don't know how many
exact members we have these guys
probably tell you.
We generally have about 4
members to the mile.
Mm
What, what, what we're trying to
do with this bill.
Uh, you've heard other bills
talked about hardening.
Your infrastructure, hardening
your homes, hardening.
Uh, the, the system against uh
fire starting a fire from
dropping the line from high
winds right now in California,
most of the time on those high
winds they just.
And you don't have electricity.
And that may be good, that may
be bad if they don't have the
loop that doesn't come that way,
uh, they could have rolling
blackouts, they could have it
many different ways.
My object was how do we keep the
electricity flowing through
those lines.
And incentivize those utilities
to keep that line on.
By doing the proper work in the
right of ways.
To, to
Limit the liability that that
that.
The line will never drop.
And there's lots of
High technical stuff that they
can do there's even things that.
When a line breaks, it will turn
off before it hits the ground.
But everything costs money.
So
How much money do we want to put
into this, and that's the other.
The piece of the deal and I'll,
I'll quit babbling, madam chair.
Well, I, I appreciate that,
Senator.
When I looked at this and and
read the title.
It seemed um
And I, which I think is correct.
I mean,
Rolling
Electric providers, all of them.
I mean, the last thing they want
is an accident, and, and I, I
think
What this bill does is provide
some assurance that
You're gonna have modification
plan in order for this to be for
them to be protected, they have
to follow the plans.
And, and if they don't follow
the plans, then
Their limitation of liability is
washed away, it's gone, and I
think that's good. I hope we
don't get to the point that
That like fighters start
shutting off power cause in the
rural areas that I serve, I
mean, one of the things I hear
constantly is I have all of
those kinds of health needs that
We can't afford, I mean, we
These people say I can't afford
to go buy a generator system. We
pay for electricity, so we can
have it. So,
I, for that reason, I
cause
Keeping power on.
Provides the one power source.
That helps put fires out and a
lot of problems, communications
go off. I mean, everything goes
off when the power goes out. So
I appreciate your.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
on this bill?
Any further comments or
questions on um this bill,
Senate Bill 281 is.
OK.
There is a motion for a due
pass.
On Senate bill.
281 as amended.
Is there a second?
There is a 2nd
So could the secretary please
call the uh vote.
Sara Cervantes, excuse, Senator
Charlie.
Saint Rosel
And, yes, Senator Hamlin.
And, um, Senator Pope.
Senator Scott
Yes. Senator Scott.
Yes.
Senator Townsend
Sarah Townsend.
Yes, Senator Di Lopez.
Pass
And Charlie.
Yes.
Senator Hamblin.
Yes, San Hamlin, yes. Senator
Pope, Senator Sadia Lopez.
Yes, explained my vote.
Lopez, yes, Stephonics.
That's the facts, yes. Senator
Hamlin, to explain her vote, um,
Recognizing that this still has
some conversation to have and
knowing that it goes to
judiciary, I wish you the best
of luck.
Senator Sidia Lopez.
I, I just want to say I had to
go down and present a
certificate of condolence on the
floor, so I missed the debate,
but I generally think, um.
Senator Woods has good ideas, so
that's why I voted for this
bill. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, by a vote of 7 to 0,
you have a due pass on your bill
as amended and I do think that
the conversation about the
liability will be uh extensive
in the next committee. Thank you
very much. So committee members,
we are in recess, they are on
the floor. We're not doing 3rd
reading today. There is a
breakfast tomorrow morning in
room 3.
326, not uh uh.
breakfast burritos, a different
breakfast.
By several agricultural groups,
the cattle growers, the wool
growers, farm and livestock
bureau, dairy producers, chili,
pecans, the egg crust, egg
credit, Outfitters and guides,
wine growers, and conservation
districts and the Department of
