But we really worked on getting
their spell to where it is today
we work at lot lots of
stakeholders to improve it
what i'd like for you to take
away from this presentation yes
my my apologies.
Committee memories and staff I
should have mentioned that the
breakfast today is new mexico
wild and western resources and I
apologize for not doing that
right upfront and I believe the
food came from tears off he is
this morning
it the one of the sister
competitors in our city okay so
you managed her it looks in
smells delicious and I think
it's plenty for you to take
the representative of tests
would you like bacon sausage or
vegetarian will put some aside
i'll take sauces thank you
thank you madame share there
wasn't as that was the slight
that was actually very i'm very
grateful i'm very grateful so
i'm gonna talk a little bit
about how the clean feel
standard works why it's good
economically for our state and
how the benefits will decrease
air pollution from clean fields
from the use of clean fields
over time first I want to talk
about the mechanics of how how
the market works so under this
bill of the there's an advisory
committee which is very diverse
includes producers of a fuel
importers tribal governments
utilities are environmental
groups they'll be coming
together and will be working
with the new mexico environment
department to create the program
of the bill itself establishes
the statutory framework around
that and has some really
important guard rails to ensure
that the program is is working
well so with an immediate and
the advisory committee we will
create the carbon intensity
standard for clean fuels and
that is a that's a standard that
looks at the whole life cycle of
a fuel's emissions based on sand
space method so you know from
you know where it's produced how
was distributed and transported
all of that that's the lifecycle
of a fuel's emissions we set
that standard and then we create
the clean fuels market which is
really only focused on
transportation fuels.
That are yes ma'am i'm sorry
there's no sound and soon so
hold off until you get well we
need to make sure that the
webcast is receiving it.
Were good thank you thank you
madame chair I hope everyone can
hear me okay now.
So.
We created carbon intensity
standard of that focuses only on
transportation fuels and if
you're producing a a
transportation fuel at or below
the carbon intensity standard
you get a clean fuel credit if
you produce a transportation
fuel that is above the carbon
intensity standard you will have
to go to the clean fields
market.
Which is set by the advisory
committee and anime to buy a
credit if you want your fuel to
be used here in new mexico.
I think it's important to know
is that this this bill requires
a reduction in carbon intensity
of transportation fuels using
the state we have a graduated
approach twenty percent below
twenty eighteen carbon intensity
levels by twenty thirty and at
least thirty percent below
twenty eighteen carbon intensity
levels by twenty forty there
these are real carbon reductions
you can not generate a clean
fuel credit unless you actually
reduce your green house gas
emissions so this is very
different from a typical carp
cap and trade a program where
you've got unverifiable carbon
credit of offset schemes.
Secondly madam chair members of
the committee
this program is is pretty
remarkable it really focuses on
in a very innovative economic
opportunity and investment in
the clean fields market
based on lots of reports and
projections we believe that we
will have at least four hundred
and seventy million dollars in
quick start projects coming into
the state between now and twenty
thirty sixteen hundred per
minute jobs twenty three hundred
construction jobs and e two
hundred forty million dollar
capital investment in production
and manufacturing.
Oh there is incentive to
decrease these the carbon and up
for print of these fuels
bringing them closer to the fuel
users right here in our state
thirdly let's talk about the
health
so speak a little bit louder.
We need the lights on up here.
The.
Okay that is good for us.
The people shouldn't stand back
there.
I'm sorry for all the
interruptions because I am
trying to file which you're
saying so police.
Thank you madame chairy a roll
with the punches over here in
the senate side
thank you
that's not an insult and want to
be really clear you know what if
this is the worst that you're
going to encounter on the senate
side that's pretty good
this member took note thank you
madame chair
thirdly that this bill is is so
important for for health in new
mexico
we are reducing the green house
gas emissions up particularly
emissions like ground level
ozone and particular matter new
mexicans one in seven new
mexicans are suffering a
respiratory illness and that is
expensive so we are we're doing
our part to
reduce those emissions to
improve the health outcomes of
new mexico and I think it's
important to note here that an
in another state organ they have
a similar clean fields program
and that's resulted in an eighty
million dollars decrease in
decreased health costs related
to restore illnesses I think
that's really really important
to know I want to address gas
prices and you know really.
Let you know that this there has
been lots of your mongering
around the the gas prices here
the the states that have this
program have other factors that
that that affect gas prices and
there is no correlation between
the clean field standard and
increase in gas prices and we
can i'm sure we'll talk more at
length about that.
Overall madam chair members of
the committee this is a program
that will decrease a missions it
will bring investment into the
state it.
It allows everyone rural and
urban areas to participate in
this program and I think it's a
it's what we need to do right
now thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
madam chair I do have an expert
witness here michelle miano rams
with piano she is from new
mexico environment department.
Thank you understood you want to
send thing okay
okay and would the expert like
to present.
No thank you manager
now we'll go to the audience how
many people are here in support
of this bill.
Yeah.
Okay state employees put your
hands out so the others the
others keep your hands up quite
a few how many are here in
opposition of the bill.
Okay and how many online do we
have in support
we have six in support online
how many and opposition online.
The.
Okay well we're finding that out
we'll go ahead and take five
speakers you know in support
five speakers in opposition but
that means a minute a piece and
the vice chair is going to be
the timer and then what take
three speakers on each side from
online okay so supporters.
The.
The.
They're going to come with the
microphone.
And we need you to introduce
yourself.
And please everybody do not
repeat each other give us
something new
okay can hear you yes so my name
is robin for cruise thank you
chair stephonix and committee
for give me the opportunity to
testify i'm the executive
director of the low carbon fuels
coalition and our membership
represents the entire range of
clean pills industry as well
service providers and and users
including fortune one hundred
companies that you all would
hurt you've heard a lot in
letters and you'll hear more
today about the benefits of this
program but I want to speak
directly to the claim that this
bill raises gas prices.
This claim is based on two false
or flood assumptions the first
is contrary to basic economic
theory in supposing that market
competition will actually raise
prices.
The second is that the
compliance cost in this case the
cost of credit in the program
will be passed directly to
consumers.
Theoretical studies reflect that
assumption when they assign a
cost per gallon but here's the
thing real world data shows that
is not the case if the cost is
passed directly to consumers gas
prices would rise and fall based
on credit prices however there
has been no correlation between
credit prices in these programs
and gasoline prices that means
these programs do not work in
the real world as speculative
studies would suppose.
On the contrary gas prices can
and do correlate to world oil.
And i'm charged members of the
committee of charles good marker
i'm speaking directly on behalf
of the southwest energy
efficiency project in the
natural resources defense
council both national groups and
their members strongly support
this bill and we thank the
governor and her team as well as
the bill sponsors.
Benefits to the people in new
mexico include saving money at
broad transition evs could save
people as much as her thirty
five billion through twenty
fifty since car combustion
vehicles are most of the cars on
the road right now they can be
adjusted to us a variety of
lower carbon fuels so this will
help immediately cleaner.
It also strengthens the case
business case for commercial and
institutional fleets to shift a
cleaner transportation
technologies.
This means that school districts
cities counties.
As well as business energies
could all create new revenue
when they convert their fleets
of buses bands and other
vehicles to more efficient fuel
sources I also quickly note I
know that there are many other
organizations they won't be able
testify this morning sierra
clubs even
etcetera when I read your vote
for this thank you.
Thank you next good morning
better chairman members of the
committee share cronies with the
public service company of new
mexico p and m stands and
support of the house judiciary
committee substitute for HB
forty one as well benefit our
state of the long term.
Pn has committed to moving
toward a clean carbon free
future in this bill is a
compliment to this important
effort I met add as we continue
to see electric vehicles on the
road this this bill supports
that effort in increasing needed
infrastructure for
infrastructure for even
statewide thank you to the
sponsor they get to the
environment department for
working with this ending strict
in this bill thank you.
Good morning ma'am chair members
of the committee patrick killing
registered lobbyists for cheron
charon believes the future of
energy the lower carbon we
support each be forty one as a
low carbon transportation policy
approach that embraces diverse
technologies and solutions which
we believe our critical to
achieving climate and air
quality policy goals we also
greatly appreciate the inclusion
of cost containment and
emergency to ferrell provisions
and the bill to help protect
consumers we are proud to
support each b forty one we
think representative has we
thank center stewart we think
the governor and the environment
department for bringing the bill
forward thank you.
Match yet morning madame
chairman of the county jason
weeks registered lobbyist for
exon mobile really the spills a
long time coming on a think
sponsors and the environment
department for working with
industry and everybody else to
get it to this point excellent
will believe evaluating co two
emissions on a life sacred basis
is the best way to provide an
apple's tables comparison of the
emissions from different fuel
and fuels and vehicles a
technology neutral life that
life based clean transportation
fuel standard could help achieve
transportation related co two
emissions reductions and at a
faster and lower cost of society
the policies focus solely on
fleet transition.
Inclusive advisory committee
periodic review process and
important cost continued
features are key design elements
we support these aspects of the
legislation creative mechanism
for evaluating program
feasibility and avoiding
potentially costly and
deplicative state and federal
programs thank you
please.
The.
And I think we only said five on
each side.
The money madam chair members of
the committee my name is joseph
hernandez and I with an email to
vote thankful I mean to speak a
clean fuel program will send a
vise more current progress to
decarponizing activities like
the solar way
with high a patch of nation the
naval nation
you know that the nap as you
know the nab nation council has
endorsed this this a bill it
also you know talking to like
school districts in my community
where we have fleet vehicles
there's gonna be a whole new
economy opening up which will
benefit schools work like like
what what where money is needed
and it it it's just to add a
closing this just adds one more
tool in two box to ensuring that
we move to cleaning up a
transportation
thank you very much online we're
going to hear from three people
terry cold go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee i'm
terry called president and co of
the greater alberto g chamber of
commerce i'm here today to
support HB forty one this claim
fuel standard bill would reduce
the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels in an
innovative way that encourages
technological advancement across
the private sector it's a
narrowly target bill and the
implementation wrong way of
about two years is appropriate
assuming that carbon intensity
reduction targets remain
reasonable this bills approach
to improving air quality is more
balanced and focused than many
of the other environmental
regulation bills we have
reviewed claiming our
transportation fuels we believe
will go a long way to reduce in
green house gas submissions in
our state we urge your support
for the bill thank you and thank
you madame chair for allowing
his to visit with you this
morning thank you very much
terry unless you're from sammy
cal.
Yeah.
The.
So I can find the new by madam
chair good morning members my
name is danny cow i'm the
climate energy director of
conservation voters in mexico
and for all the reasons for the
real we are also at the bill it
will be listed at the priority
bill for conservative voters
this year thank you very much.
Thank you next let's hear from
roblack.
And then we'll go to the
opponent.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee brought black
from the new mexico chamber of
commerce I would have the first
start with thinking the bill
sponsors as well as the
department the environment
they've been working on this
bill for many years is really me
they've made incredible
improvements and and we're very
pleased to be able to support it
today
we really appreciate the the
idea that is based on a market
based approach we think that is
that the most sustainable
economic way to achieve our
broad carbon reduction goals in
new mexico and specifically as
to terry cole mentioned the idea
around measuring carbon
intensity gets to a situation
where we're not picking
individual technologies but
we're allowing a new
technologies the market to drive
innovation and the most
efficient way we think that's an
elegant design for this program
and and please establish support
thank you.
Thank you very much okay lets
have five opponents in the room
please come up.
Only five
will hear from we have three
people against go ahead please
thank you matter members of the
committee how attention I live
in the south western part of new
mexico I was a member of the new
mexico the control commission
for over twenty years.
In that capacity we did a lot of
different rule makings.
The.
Coming up with the water quality
standards for the state of new
mexico.
Those in some instances took
years to develop and i'm
concerned that we are looking at
a timeline that's in the bill
for developing these standards.
That I don't think is a tubable.
On page two line two of of the
substitute it talks about the
fuel life cycle being a science
based on models or protocols the
metrics that would be used for
direct and indirect emissions
would have to be complex and
contain a multitude of known and
unknown components the list
contained in the bill in the
indicates this complexity
on page three line for defines
transportation fuel.
And when you add.
Are you couple this with the
determination of life cycle the
nature of necessary for these
calculations become so complex
that we may not be able to say.
Of the proposed substitutes of
energy that it is carbon neutral
and that is questionable if we
were.
Thank you thank you next please.
Madame chairing committee
members my name is tom patterson
and president elected mexico
cattle growers association the
drive to reduce carbon intensity
and transportation fuels will
cost our rural citizens dearly
especially our poor.
Many like margaret that through
heal from and I go new mexico
are elderly widows they live on
a small fixed income any
increase in fuel prices on their
existing vehicles means
something they can't buy should
also be clear they can't afford
an e v nor the cost to hall it
to albequirky for repairs if
they the panel were the
relatively high cost of those
even repairs is really myself
there's off grid near luna she
cleaned elk camps for years so
she could buy a solar system her
system is sized meets the man
from her house not from an
electric vehicle.
We don't have public
transportation in rural new
mexico we don't and likely won't
have charging stations this bill
disproportionately punishes our
rural citizens especially our
rural poor please do not pass
this bill
thank you next please.
Money madam chair members of the
committee my name is elected he
alliance i'm the coalition
coordinator for new mexico no
for solutions again I know it
seems awkward that an
environmental coalition is
standing up against this bill
but we just want to continue to
contribute to the conversation
most of our friends in
california you know have raised
the concern that the low carbon
fuel standard implemented there
has been uses a loophole for
lucrative pollution tax credit
scheme and we are also concerned
about the fact that factory farm
bio gas is not a clean energy
where concerned because we know
matthewn is eighty times more
harder and it is itself a
greenhouse gas so where
concern about these parts of the
bill and just the fact that
again as many people have
pointed out you know that we're
kicking the can down the role on
the roadmaking but we are very
concerned about offsetting and
come modifying clean air so
please both no thank you could
you please repeat your name for
the hundred alliance i'm sorry
ali hand the alliance.
Okay we might have to have
somebody take down she can get
it said we'll do that thank you
thank you.
Good morning
for morning chair members of the
committee.
Thank you sponsors for bringing
this bill is sent michael.
Morning chair members of the
committee my name is sharon
bright i'm a nurse for forty
five years plus I have a masters
of signed green nursing.
And my problem is with the feet
stock production and feedstock
generation or extraction the
trading scheme called for in
this bill is or william if
anything like the california
organ bills which this bill is
allegedly modeled after it will
lead to failures of the methane
crediting policy and carpent
intensity scores were factory
form bio gas and mono culture is
there any proof that method
investion emissions have been
reduced is there any proof of
this policy won't end up
rewarding polluters like in
california and work in.
Food and water watched out of
work predicts it will not be
sustainable without governments
the subsidies of our taxes minor
culture isn't just apply to crop
cultivation it's apply to animal
waste of dairy cousin and waste
sheep wasted pig waste this is
unhijanic waste treatment where
are the infection control
policies is anybody tracking the
ecology
but outbreaks to the food
sources manor culture leads to
worsening of pest problems weeds
and insect pess can spread
faster and monocultures because
of the lack of diversity please
fault now thank you very much
next please
madame share members of the
committee jim winchester with
the independent patrol and
association of new mexico and we
stand in respectful opposition
if you go to organ dot govern
right now and look up clean fuel
standards they show right there
that there is a direct impact on
increased fuel prices we think
that even that prediction is
conservative and that estimate
that was done by the studies we
think it could increase anywhere
from thirty to fifty cents based
on studies that we have seen
this will hurt those in poverty
and those in rural areas so we
stand in respect the opposition
thanks.
Thank you very much
online we think we had some
opposition but some of the more
supporters so let me.
Okay we have three people online
if they would get ready to speak
johnny johnson glen w and emily
lucas.
Johnny let's start with you.
Can you hear me now yes
okay thank you madame chair
members of the committee johnny
johnson and the managing
indirector in mexico truck in
association.
I'll be brief we are concerned
about the diesel and gas price
is going up regardless of what's
been said unless it's a
guarantee which we've loved to
see.
That will impact everything that
comes to your house to the
store.
It's it's an inflationary tax
that we can't afford where the
third party's state in the us
and were were very concerned
about that and we're working
very hard to get the admissions
down and one truck in nineteen
eighty eight it takes fixed fee
of today's drugs to produce the
same card and footman.
So we're doing the best we can
remove it at the rate that we
think we can were afraid of car
because my industry has
experienced a lot of pain
financially in california.
We just want you to know that
once you turn this out is like
let the genie out of the bottle
and you can't put it back in.
So please we think that those
thirty day search is not enough
time to bet this completely.
And for our sake keep the jeenee
and the bottle and table forty
one thank you very much.
Thank you next is glenw and glad
could you tell us you're last.
Good morning chair stephanics
and senators my name is glen
wickle as a new mexico based
energy systems and financial
engineer who ran data science at
a hedge fund.
I have studied this proposal in
depth.
New mexico's small state
environmental agencies don't
even have the resources to
enforce existing environmental
laws I can't imagine how they
could take on the task of
building a new financial market
for carbon credits and
evaluating the complete life
cycle of carbon intensity of
fuel production technologies
this is difficult work requiring
a highly paid citizens and
economists with advanced degrees
I knew makes co carbon market
would be too small to run
efficiently in new mexico would
be forced to join california's
unstable carbon market where
place prices plunged this year
from one hundred and seventy
five dollars to sixty dollars a
credit
joining the california market
would mean seeding environmental
policies to that state where big
oil and big agriculture have
made huge profits while one
hundred percent clean fuels have
a tiny swice of the market this
is exactly what exon and chevron
and oxy want business as he as
well that means we continue on a
disastrous climate breakdown
trajectory thank you
thank you I know it's hard to
time yourself emily lucas.
The.
Hello chairman and members of
the committee my name is emily
and good guess and I am a member
of youth united for climate
crisis action yaka we have
thousands of members and
supporters across the state of
new mexico and i'm here today
asking you to oppose HB forty
one.
The central mechanism for
implementation established by
the bill is a system whereby
individuals and companies can
earn credits by reducing
emissions and then sell those
credits to individuals are
companies who won't meet the
account balls the dandered the
global indigenous community has
asked for protections against
the commodification of the
sacred air water soil forest
please he the lessons learned
from our indigenous relatives
and other countries.
Please peter calls against
carbon market mechanisms like
carbon credits.
Carbon markets are proven not to
work and to overestimate actual
reduction and emissions I
encourage you to look into the
indigenous environmental
networks analysis on carbon
markets it is simply a scheme
that props up and encourages
more carbon emissions which is
extremely harmful.
There is no real accountability
okay you're time thank you very
much for your time please both
now.
Thank you all who are online who
got to speak and everyone in the
room who came we're going to
give the sponsor of very brief
like one minute response because
it would come out in the
questions and everybody probably
has questions.
Thank you madame chair
quickly
it is complex to determine the
carbon intensity standard but
there are models that exist they
are being used today and we will
be using those models which
include the great model that's
something that's department of
energy users to measure the
lifecycle of emissions for
transportation fuels at secondly
this is not an eve bill
electricity is one of the fuels
that that will be considered in
this but there are lots of other
fuels that people will be using
in their existing vehicles with
no modification
thirdly
regulation and is looking at
ecology and water quality and
all of that so I
that's I don't think that's an
issue here I just wanted to
address that
for with the with regard to the
oil price the gas prices in or
again
that is an academic exercise
that is not based on market
reality and i'm sure we'll come
to that again
first in with regard to whether
or not any decade handle this
program there is a special
appropriations right now for
staffing for this program.
Okay we will go to questions
comments from committee sent
we'll start with center novel.
Thank you madame chair i've been
on.
Both sides of this often
the concept doesn't bother me
but I do have problems with the
potential cost in someone county
over the last year to we've been
seeing a dollar difference in
gas prices and.
As far as I can to kit to
burning leo to fill up my tank
just so that I can save a dollar
and the philosopher up and at
least santa fe from a meeting I
philippine berlie
my people would not accept me
voting for something that's
going to raise.
Or whatever it is that matter
because of the monopoly
situation of the producer of
this markets up there.
You've got a convinceme.
Substantially a couple pinnies
didn't bother me but if we're
talking about and I don't
understand if you're going to
increase the processes for
refining if you're going to
increase having to buy credits
on it how it cannot cost more
tell me how that would work.
Madam chairs
understand that completely I
drive to espanola from tales to
fill up all the time that's just
what I do i'm and I think that
is more of a reflection the
difference in the prices that's
based on the retailer it's based
on all kinds of supplier
understand what yeah that I I
think that's that's what we're
that's what we're looking at
here but I understand your
concern I certainly wouldn't
want to bring a bill that would
increase the tax that gas prices
for my constituents in towers
who are very very poor one of
the poorest counties in this
state gas prices fluctuate
what we've seen in california
organ in washington is that
there is no correlation between
the clean fuel standard and and
the increase of gas price a
little confusing in those states
excuse me for interrupting with
they have so many other things
in their pricing so it's it's
difficult for you to sort it out
I suspect at madame chair were
at senator nivel they do have
lots of different markets and
things going on and in very very
high taxes on gas which we do
not have here but i'd like to
ask my expert to give you a
little bit more information.
Have done the analysis there's
li.
Yeah.
A lot of which we don't know how
it's f.
I can tell you that for this
particular program we can't find
in the line item.
How this affects gas prices
which under pens are statements
that we can.
This program on gas prices at
all.
The.
Thank you
madam chair and.
Representative.
There would be some increased
refining or processes and so
forth expected from the refiners
is that.
Refiner I know that for
refineries that are switching
over to a create renewal disall
that's happening so rapidly
and those costs are there at
largely
being incentivised by programs
like this but also a lot of the
federal programs and so I think
that's how you see some of those
class and investment being
deferred.
But wouldn't there be on
gasoline in particular with
their be
uh
some emphasis on increasing
things like alcohol.
The.
Intensity in the fuel with this
with you anticipate the for
refunders would start using
higher percentage of alcohol
things like that just.
Madame chair senator it could be
it could also be that for some
of the bigger oil and gas
operations that they would
you know start investing more in
the cleaner fuels like we've
seen like the renewal policy
sole or clean hydrogen or that
sort of thing and maybe
beginning investing more into
those fuels rather than putting
money into
those gasoline for fighting
processes.
That I understand it.
Alcohol for example is not
necessarily cheaper it's
considerably more expensive.
And if you had more outcome to
feel if you go from ten to
fifteen percent for now he's
about time with that not
increas.
Madame chair senator
I don't know about adding
alcohol to refining process
there could be some associated
costs if that occurs it sounds
like you might know more than I
do about that just
alcohol is kind of a misleading
it's a higher actually higher
carbon footprint I think the
gasoline is bec.
That's a debate we could have
all fine but.
Um.
But some of those kind of things
if you're I just use that as an
example if you do something
different in the refining
process there's got to be some
increasing cost that's.
Is there not
you can't make refining cheaper
with this program can you that's
my question.
Madam chair senator
I don't know for sure we can't
say for sure but we do know that
built into the the guard reals
of this bill for it for the rule
making that we will be looking
at cost containment and you know
emergency is any emergencies
that might arise that can you
know that we'll shift and change
the.
Um.
Somebody mentioned hydrogen
along the way how it hydrages.
The.
Madam chair senator this ledge
this legislation is technology
neutral and I think there are
some opportunities for green
hydrogen to produce you know
that that's used for yourselves
that can have an impact on one
whole trucking amongst other you
know other uses for
transportation field about blue
hydrogen.
The.
Chairs stepanic senator if it
meets the carbon intensity
standard it will count and so
that's what we're gonna be
looking at when we set the
carbon intensity standard and
then naturally the way the
market works you'd have the
competition to have hydrogen
used at lower and lower carbon
intensity levels
and that's what we're hoping
occurs in this market.
Okay well theoretically blue
hydrogen has just the same
carbon as green.
Yeah.
Okay I guess that's all my
questions for now
thank you center or macation
madame chair.
Represent center thank you so
much for you in here.
Why are we using grams.
The equivalent from megal.
I mean.
Earthly.
Madam chair center mccuston
welcome we have a met yet they
said nice to see you members
which were under different
circumstances beforehand
a lot of an opposition we're not
madam share senator
spend a lot of time on this
issue in in house and the
various house committees middle
at michelle take this a chair as
to finance senator reference to
meet you we are got that from
the greet model is one of the
ways that the great models uses.
Measures are carbon intensity.
Okay madame chairman center
representative thank you.
But you do talk about it being
measured in turns though right.
That's how the credits will be.
Purchased essentially is
intense.
Madam chair center yes okay
sorry metric tons met metric
times against the two thousand
twenty two oh four five whatever
it is okay.
Mountain
chair do we
do have any information because
this is really what this whole
thing walls down to right is.
You know we've got a lot of
large old company to stood up in
support of this and so you know
you always wonder you say what's
what is going on here with the
lack of with the lack of clarity
when we have you know apparent
big oil supporting something
that's going to cost money and
but as we go through we don't
have any hard and fast rules or
or outlines laid out for us to
understand exactly what it's
going to cost so just for the
crowd of want to run through
just a little just a little bit
of really quick simple math for
me because i'm i'm super super
simple like that as well but
let's just let us figure out
because everybody's been talking
this is going to be and I got
like two hundred thousand emails
on this and so
you know they're like hayes
between fifteen eighty cents I
go okay how we're going to get
between fifteen eighty since
we're where we get in that
front.
So
managers and representative.
A gallon of gas burned to my
rudimentary study he has eighty
eight hundred and eighty seven
grams is not about right I mean
obviously you can just answer
off there but that's about in
the
time of time work for it
I took series word for it so
she's she only leaves me wrong
when she's given direction so.
So eight hundred eight hundred
seven gram survivor by there is
one million grams in the metric
time.
Okay so if we divide those out
that would be the equivalent
about a hundred and twelve
gallons.
Per time of gasoline could be
corrected on that but I think I
think that is I think that's
relatively representative of
what we have here.
So then if we to buy that out
the carbon.
That the cost permetric tone for
carbon.
Can you all tell me about the
average price that you're seeing
i've looked up a few things what
is roughly the average price per
time that you're going.
Oh.
Madam chair senator were seen
the clean fuel prices to be
around seventy to two hundred
dollars okay seven seventy to
two hundred okay so
on the high end then and and and
we don't you know don't have to
use the we don't want to but on
the high end if we if we divide
that two hundred number out it
ends up being and one twelve
inconvenient about fifty six
cents a gallon so that's I think
we're everybody's kind of coming
up with that they're saying okay
solicious cut and have it if
it's a hundred which you know I
think the lowest I saw was maybe
a hundred and forty hundred and
thirty something like that so
what would you say between forty
and fifty six cents and
forth for people in my district
I think for people across the
united states and and and and
and and especially a new mexico
given the reality of our of our
state.
You know fifty cents a gal or
forty or thirty or whatever it
is or eighty if if it you know I
mean I understand there's places
in candidates and maybe as much
as four hundred is at.
I'm chairman to represent more
less correct could be.
Senator
excuse me cherished to finance
editor I don't know the cost per
gallon of the up cost permetric
time out of the canada market
currently but I have heard that
in discussions with other
legislators oh okay okay so you
know so we're we're being just
use a fifty cents for round
members if if we want to but
fifty cents per gallon is is it
is an extreme burden to be born
and the burden not to be born
just in you know going to the
doctor by new groceries or
whatever like that but it's
actually in the purchasing of
groceries and all those amazon
packages that are delivered to
your house maybe maybe.
Maybe my wife like samsung more
than everybody else but it seems
to me there's a bunch of brown
boxes always always surrounding
us so
but it as we look at that the
fuel cost the fuel and the the
direct consumer cost I I don't I
wasn't able to calculate and put
it actual cost on that
but if we're using that fitty
since the gallon in the weekend
we we compared to california
which i'm just astounded that we
would want to be like california
in any way shape reform but I
mean except for whether maybe
but you know other than that.
You know california has about a
sixty six per gallon.
State tax is what they have
weared about forty eight.
That's not correct.
Matt madam chair sen it's
seventeen cents a gallon here
for our gas tax in california as
fifty eight cents.
Just fifty eight and gallon in
california and seventeen.
Seventeen new mexico seventeen
mexico and fifty eight.
In california okay so roughly
forty cents.
Madam chair senator seventeen
senses what I don't know if you
were talking about the
difference or if you were saying
it sounded like you were saying
that him chair senator that our
gas tax in new mexico was forty
cents perhaps I miss heard well
so we have.
A attacks.
The.
And the taxes in the state and
mexico right now if I buy fuel
from the rack.
Um we have a rat cost of two
dollars and a seven cents and a
total tax burden of four seven
eight nine so forty eight cents.
The.
That that that's federal state.
Right III don't just take it
taken it senator I I don't agree
my.
My reserve shows that it's
seventeen cents a gallon and
nineteen cents a gallon for.
Okay.
So my research is different here
and and maybe I can be corrected
on that but.
We still have an average cost in
twenty twenty three of three
dollars and forty four cents per
gallon paid by the consumers in
the state of new mexico is that
more less correct.
You know that is that madam
chair senator that that is not
my experience in the marketplace
three dollars and twenty two
cents a gallons that were forty
four three forty four right now
and toused its two dollars and
seventy cents in espanol it was
two thirty two yesterday um in
informing them I believe when I
went through there the other day
was like two ninety nine
there's a wide range but I
haven't seen the prices that
that you're suggesting madam
chair and senator locate manager
center representative.
If if we're average in all fuels
across
the.
For twenty twenty three
my dad is three dollars and
forty four since the stay new
mexico average you know diesel
gas whatever it is
so three forty four
if it is if it is three forty
four then the same comparison in
california is five dollars in
five cents so just call it
roughly a dollar fifty more in
california is what we pay for
for fuel now there's a few
reasons why california pays more
for fuel one is because they've
limited their refining capacity.
That's that's what i'm
one of the mistake they have
other taxes and fees
that charge a bit more but we
are still a dollar forty four so
you know when we talk about this
and we say okay we can still
cannot get there we still cannot
get to the to the california
cost without factoring in their
clean fuels and so to say that
there is not a cost associate
with it is really disengineers
because they're more certainly
is understand that the metrics
are difficult but when we're
talking about passing something
like this that is so expensive
and they could hurt so many
people
you know the answers that were
getting just well we're just
we're just not really sure how
it's all going to check out
we're going to pass it but when
we do that we put at risk
everybody who has live and pay
check to pay check we put it
risk everybody who is who is
trying to buy food and we have
the tremendous increases in
inflation tied directly to food
and it's going to hurt so many
many families in new mexico that
we have to be extremely careful
when we go to past this and the
other question that I would like
to pose as well is why do we
have the bigger world companies
supporting this we have.
I'm sorry manager and madam
chairman
I took out I would I want with a
question
will just was kind of go with
there but madam chair senator
for to your first point to the
gas calculations about trying to
equate with
the fifty eighty cent numbers
coming from their your you the
calculation is using the cost of
the clean fuel credit and
partitioning that out into the
cost of gas there is no evidence
that that occurs.
These transactions on the clean
fuel market occur so high up in
the supply chain with the
consumer never sees them as far
as the oil companies and oil
industry that we have in support
of this bill they have their own
carbon emissions goals they're
already investing in this
technology
you know looking at hydrogen
plans are looking at renewable
diesel plans we want all that
investment to come here to new
mexico for new mexico families
and to ensure that we have
economic growth in all areas.
Thank you very much thank you
i'm sorry that we're
sure on time but we are spending
an hour on this bill I have
center city a lot posted center
gagos and center survantees
please
thank you manager I want to want
to first put on the record that
I represent the air quality
control board in
in in burning up county and
under my contract I cannot uh
participate or vote on anything
involved in the air quality
control board however I don't
think this year quality control
board in any way share performed
because anything that is
retained by eight is is not
subject to regulation by the air
quality control board so I just
wanted to put that on the record
before I have many questions
it's always very difficult when
environmental right
environmental groups that I
respect or on both sides of an
issue that that is if that makes
it very hard
but so could you first tell me a
little bit more about the
california and organ programs
and
why people don't why people feel
that they've been they've
failed.
Madam chair senator I think
we're talking about different
programs the organ program just
started a few years ago.
It's been around for a minute
according to my to my expert
there there are many different
carbon markets that exist in
those states and and what we're
talking about specifically as
clean fuels and that that that
has been successful in in oregon
thus far the california clean
field standard has also been
successful that is different
from capital or cap and invest
like that what is happening in
washington and we learned from
those programs which is not a
clean fuel standard very very
different scheme where credits
are purchased in
worldwide and a variety of
places so by focusing on the
clean field standard and the
important guard rails that we've
said in place to look at costco
team to ensure that any utility
that's participating in the
market must direct at least
fifty percent of its credit it's
profits from the credits into
low income communities those are
the ways in which we make market
that's better for new mexicans
that's more focused on your the
loan can communities that we
have here
I mean I I don't I don't really
understand beyond that what I
just said why folks are
not in favor of it this is a
clean field standard is very
very different from a capital
capital best program which this
is not okay.
A madam chair senator
if one person I don't think
everybody has to answer sorry to
sort point of clarification
well let me just follow up with
the explanation about california
one of the one of the complaints
i've heard about california it's
a lot of their
biodiesel comes from
ports legal I mean it it sounds
horrible and it also sounds like
those.
Big farmer me big farms big
agriculture
biocastle agroons
are producing our are there
unintended consequences with the
emissions that produced from
them and that is that is already
happened in california what's to
stop it from happening here.
Madam chair senator
we are
as you heard that I do not have
the support of the agricultural
industries
we wish we did because the
programs in california have been
successful they have wet dairies
in california we don't have
watteries here which is one of
the challenges of bringing that
california technology here to
new mexico we've heard a lot of
concerns from again dear that we
are different here in new mexico
so we don't see that kind of
huge industrial process that
they have in california here new
mexico we just don't have the
same kinds of dairy
the same kind of dairy
management that they do in
california that in central
valley thank you and the other
thing that we're I guess this
will be my last question is
relates to market manipulation
explain if you can while you
utilities will get to sell their
credits for reductions that
they're already required to make
under the renewable portfolio
standard
you know because if if we're
already requiring something than
why we can reward them for doing
it they're double worth them
because you know we regarded
them in that or compensated in
each
madame chair senator we see this
provision in the
bill as an accelerate of what
they're already doing and so for
investor own utilities for
example they have transportation
electrification requirements for
the transportation
electrification plans
the rate payers are funding that
and they're limited and what
they can do they have limited
plans with sea and we wrote the
bell this way so that they can
use this bill as another income
stream through the sale of clean
fuels credit to excellent rate
what they're already doing so
that they can amplify those
transportation electricities
plans and further them.
Uh along a faster timeline
so you don't see it as double
compensation to them you see it
has another incentive
madam chair senator yes and we
also wrote the bill to ensure
that
whoever is uh generating the
clean fuels because there's so
many different federal
incentives that exist we want to
make sure that the company is
that are making those kinds of
investment and clean fuels
maximize the amount of
income and revenue for those
technologies because we want
them to work in the market we
want them to work to decarbonize
and so we see them all working
together to get to where we want
to go faster
thank you manager
thank you we have severe guy
goes then next center
thank you I just have one break
question I like the dial of the
term of cutions has in guess my
thing is we're always looking
for the poor and needing to
mexico but i'm going why would
you use and and I know on page
of the judicial house to do
sharing commits serve on page
online twenty board and that's
not new that speed environmental
improvement for am just trying
to see his legslayer why will we
be given the e I b roman
authority.
Oh there would impact everything
the maximum without the any
legislative voice oversight is
there any other organization
that we could have participation
in the roommaking what in the
state they're again I know we're
vetting it here it looks like
you've got both sides arguing
different points but I think
this truly may think that sir
cut improved it the disk is
going to affect our gas prices
are you look at.
California I know you said
organs really knew they've been
doing this since two thousand
nine except for hawaii they are
the highest cost of fuel in the
in the nation so i'm just trying
to figure out as a legislator we
should participate in the
roadmaking not hand that off to
someone that's not elected by am
just wondering what to thought
on that.
That madam chair senator the yab
does a lot of rule making
already there other bodies that
do well making we have said
guard rails within this
legislation that you know that
sets the parameters
and turn representative of and
we're given test money they
picked up both ah die very
complex matters in as you saw.
With her coach and he can dig
down into the detail in the
minute I think that can start
deeply they've grown making
she'd have some kind of
legislative oversight just
because we are the body that
people have elected to be able
to manage the states.
The.
Oh we're the boy that the people
have elected to manage the state
and we are sort of handing off
our.
Obligation to the ib so I just
i'm having a hard time with them
I just wanted to really touching
where else
can I understand that you know
they they're already doing
things but this is going to
directly in fact the poranida
mexico
thank you very much center
circumstance.
Thank you
I know time is short and that's
problematic for me principally
because this bill is a house
judiciary committee subsuits I
went through the house judiciary
committee doesn't go through the
senate judiciary which leaves me
the alternative making this the
senate judiciary committee a
subcommittee and I know my
colleagues don't have the time
where the interest to do so but
that's unfortunate I don't
understand why this would go
through house judiciary not
through senator district and it
goes from here only to the
finance committee
that's problematic because i'll
just break quickly matter turn
the interest of time go through
some of the many deep
deficiencies with this bill I
support the principle the policy
the goals they're all lottable
but you're the infirmities they
be well of the of the drafting
of the bill in the complexities
of it really make it something
that ultimately could never be
enforced or or interpreted and I
can give you countless examples
going through it but i'll start
with the easiest wonder when the
principle concrete goals of this
is to reduce insection for
by twenty percent
by your twenty thirty right
that's a very concrete clear
goal
understandable interpretable and
likewise there's the other
policy of reducing my thirty
percent in the year twice by the
twenty forty but
what what is the consequence
that we don't do this.
What is the consequence of non
attainment.
In the bill.
You won't find one negative test
on rhetorical question and my
colleagues all know me by now if
you pass a law that has no
consequence that in my mind it's
a memorial it's an aspirational
policy that we want to attain
but there's no consequence for
missing it the eta's the classic
example that i've talked about
for years we have eta standards
that response to me
this morning in his face you
have an eta standard but there's
no consequence of non attainment
and this bill likewise has no
consequence of my attainment so
yet again a lot of the goal we
want to achieve things we're
telling people to achieve things
but there's no consequence we're
not attainment in the bill
itself so it may example always
the same one as we tell people
you must drive fifty five miles
an hour but unless you save the
consequence of not doing that is
a mystery meaner or crime where
some penalty are fine then
with sasperational immigrant my
missing something in the
buildings are anything in here
that that shows what they
consequence of non attainment
is.
Madam madam chair senator
savantes that's really good
point so this is different
program than kind of the command
control regulatory structure
that we have in the environment
department in the clean air act
program where we have
consequences based on
overseas emissions and that sort
of thing and then we have
penalties that are associated
with it this is a market system
so if you are a
we need to meet these goals and
the way we meet these goals is
by setting the carbon intensity
through the market and the
market will dictate the prices
of the fuels both high carbon
and low carbon that are needed
to meet those goals so it's a
market self regulating and
appreciate that in and again the
chair is going to be pushing me
to get this move because we
better be someplace else but I
just want to make sure that i'm
reading this correctly that
there's no consequence in the
bill itself in my immense that
just a yesterday answers that
somebody can say yes or not.
In the bill itself is only cons
very consequence we're not
attainment madame chair senator
there is a consequence there is
a consequence and that is having
to buy the folk feel credit if
you don't I think he's asking
about illegal is there anything
in this bill about that madam
chair center no thank you all
right and so anybody who is
opposed and concerned about the
consequences should rest easy if
there's not a consequence for
non attainment that's generally
the attitude that have about
some of these I just give you a
couple of things that just from
drafting perspective that we
would never do certainly in the
judiciary committee generally so
misunderstanding something for
example if you look on page
five.
Ah paragraph fifteen this would
be new language.
This is adding a new section to
a list that already exists in
existing law this is a listed
apartment of things the
department does and and
responsibilities and then it
goes on to say carbon intensity
of transportation fuels as
provided in section four of this
act including these fees so what
you're doing is you're creating
a statute a reference to a
section of a bill but the
section of the buildings and
appearance at you so you're
you're referring in what would
be state statute in the law to a
section of a bill but there is
no section of a bill in the wall
so we would never do that we
would never make a cross
reference to a section of a
building by making sense but
what i'm talking about there.
And that's done that's done also
on page seven.
Madame chair senator I I
understand what you're saying
yes you understand where saying
you're putting into law books a
reference to a bill but the law
books don't have the bill so we
would we would never do that as
a drafting
as a deposit as a matter of
drafting our policy making on
page two you'll see a definition
of your lifesile life cycle
I would never be able to
understand her interpret what
this means and in i've been to
this a long time fuel cycles to
find as an assessment of
aggravate greenhouse admissions
based on science based miles of
protocols
including direct admissions and
significant interactive
commissions from indirect land
use change all stages of fuel
and lifestyle production and
distribution feed stock
generation or extraction through
distribution delivery or use
finished fuel by the consumer
including consideration of
the storage transportation
commission
words out right we've never
understand what it means what
you say direct emissions
significant indirect emissions
indirectly and use changes while
those things are really earned
to find an and really bought
interpretable and again i'm not
going to ask for a response and
it's going to tell you why I
really think this should be a
lot belong in the judiciary work
expect significant floor
amendments to have to do it on
junior on the floor
if you look at a lot of these
terms there's non a definitions
so though i'll be references to
terminology without definitions
and that becomes problematic of
for me so we're giving when you
talk about i'm trend would give
you an example or two to make it
easy
you know this probably the sound
good make it easier but.
If you go to section four which
is really I think the heart of
your bill to some degree.
If you look on page eight.
The subsection see this is
really the heart the clean
transportation full standard
program shows where you're
defining with the program shall
do paragraph number one
establishing statewide
technology neutral clean
transportation fuel standard I
don't know what technology
neutral means and I don't see a
definition for it in the bill.
Is there a definition of
technology neutral but i'm not
seeing because you're definite
what the standards are going to
be they're going to be
technology neutral is that first
of all my first question is it
defined madam chair senator not
to find in this bill it means
any types of technology we're
not making a determination on
what's better what isn't but my
questions would as technology
neutral mean and if there's not
a definition of the bill you're
saying the rules must be
technology neutral but you don't
say what that means than it's
meaningless really my point
unless it's to buy somewhere
else in the law that i'm not
aware but I don't think there is
a definition of what it means to
be technology neutral and I I
don't know what that means.
Senator
renters
we have to find low income and
underserved
and i'm sorry to interrupt you
but I understand I saw those
definitions and I read those but
that's not that the question
asking for transportation
neutral no no technology we're
sorry technology neutral
there's a lot that can be uh
determined and defined in the
rule making that would define
exactly what the statute means
so I think that would be a
opportunity for that thank you
and I think I made my point
which is you don't wait to
defining the rules a term
requirement that you're saying
in the law it's got to be
technology neutral but we don't
define what that means we don't
know what it means from the bill
so um yeah I wouldn't accept the
fact that we're well will define
that later in the rules because
we're saying technology neutral
is the standard so I I won't go
through this matter of chairman
won't be laborate again I want
to commend you the goals are
laudable the bill is a very
deficient I would hope that you
would either work on this in a
sixty day session and give it to
do that that it it deserves or
make sure they get to judiciary
committee here or that we do a
lot of work with it on the floor
or incentive finance because I
would hate to see good
objectives and goals that you we
wish to accomplish and I again I
will on that even close to done
with the comments or or time on
this but it really deserves a
lot more work thank you manager
thank you center surround his
senator hamlin
i've do pat
senator gay.
A tabling motion has been
presented let's have a vote on
the table.
Senator savantes.
Is there a gaggles.
S.
The.
Center pope no.
The.
Senator source.
A vote of.
Okay.
I would send it to practice
enough.
So.
The.
Senator report
center asso.
Those two are knows those last
two.
By a vote of three
to six the tabling motion fails
we do have a motion to for a due
pass and a second the motion was
center hamlin and then senators
deal with the second career yes
oh i'm sorry I do that in china
we're short for time I don't
want to be labor this I think
everyone understands what I
meant I think it's a good policy
I support it I can't support a
table to stop here but it really
shouldn't adm.
Thank you senator
please the secretary can call
the vote.
Santa boxis.
This.
Santa mccatchen.
Senator ville.
The.
Yes and I like explain about
center souls yes.
Yes.
Okay before we have call the
vote we gave us has a comment
and center pop center guy.
The better chair you know I I
share on the same concern center
city of lopes said with some of
the folks that I really expect
their advice on the spill
I I love what we're trying to do
with this bill but I have some
of the same concerns version
we're talking about hydrogen as
well looking at the bill we have
this advisory council so what I
would suggest to the sponsors
and the environment department
to really make sure that we're
bringing these folks in if this
will be comes along and that
we're getting input and really
addressing those concerns are
from all the groups thank you
manager.
Thank you so for the sponsors
you have a due pass with the
vote of six to three thank you
very much and committed
democratic committee members
were in the senate lounge for a
caucus thank you
senate lounge.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We got to go.
I know I was like well
I don't know what I can
I try.
