Quickly and then we would move
into are substantive bills and
of I'm gonna make this
announcement again even though
it's personal I might personal
email was hacked.
You might you might get a
message saying I'm out of the
country and that I'd like for
you to buy me some apple cards
if you did by the apple cards
please donate them to domestic
violence shelter but I am not of
the country and I do not need
apple carts so sorry about that
and.
Thank you to all my friends
who've checked that out.
So this morning we'll go ahead
and start Senator Campos to
seventy to Senate bill two
seventy two we change that fine
this is the real one I'm reading
it right now okay great.
It affects.
Okay good morning good morning
madam chair members of the
committee just very quickly of
course Senate bill up to seventy
two appropriates two hundred
thousand from the general fund
to the local government division
at DFAT for it's a second
community ditch education
program if I may madam chair
members of the committee differ
at this point to the expert for
this particular program Pollock
our CEO who is the CEO if you
will of the a second so ciation
for the state of New Mexico
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Garcia morning one of the US
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
association I'm really pleased
this morning to be able to share
with you some background about
this program yes second
committed to education program
is in place to support a second
statewide with a range of of
needs I think it's our political
subdivisions of the state
there's almost seven hundred
across the state and twenty
three different counties this
fund has been used to support
over five hundred a second
statewide annually we work with
over three hundred of them on
governance on infrastructure
planning and funding on
financial compliance and in the
past two years we also started a
youth initiative it's a secular
youth leadership
project and we have a cohort of
youth leaders who are interested
in serving as a secular leaders
as in their in their careers so
we're really excited about this
program we've been able to make
a difference and communities to
keep for a second to live these
are really vital institutions in
our community that support
agricultural economy the support
ecosystem services with recharge
tore aka furs and of course they
do sustaining a really a
precious way of life here in New
Mexico madam chair so this is
also been a vital for disaster
recovery we use this this for.
Federal matching funding as well
so when there's a federal grants
to do education outreach from
USDA we've been able to use this
to leverage hundreds of
thousands of federal dollars as
well so thank you for your
consideration and I'm here for
questions thank you of before we
go to the audience for support
of this is already a line item
in the budget madam chair
members of the committee yes it
is there's about three hundred
thousand there this is what go
ahead and be an increase in that
I just wondered if it was
already a line item is thank you
very much okay so is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone online in
support of this bill.
Okay.
Okay so we have all support and
as I indicated we're going to
appropriations bills rather
quickly so I'm gonna turn to the
committee for questions or
comments.
Thank you senator Neville
anything any is there a second.
Second there is a motion and a
second could the secretary
please call the roll
Senator Sanchez excuse Senator
Gallegos excuse Senator have an
excuse Centerville yes Senator
pope yes thanks committee is
Senator also yes the Lopez yes
benefit that yes.
By a vote of five zero you have
a do passed from this committee
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you all very much for your
consideration okay Senator von
case is not here Barbara could
you go call and see if he's in
this office we're ready for him
Senator Rodriguez she in the
room we also need Senator
Rodriguez Barbara.
Senator Burt come on up you just
have to be in the room at the
right time and the Santo Daime
in here yes someone up it's
similar bills so let's hear you
both.
Two separate bills but both for
worthy causes.
So Senator that I mean you're on
the agenda for so why don't you
first talk about black fire
recovery yes thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee good morning the black
fires a little bit different as
we know that burns the areas at
the Hilo wilderness the
difference between this this
fire is that it was not the the
U. S. for services not claim
responsibility for the fire and
so because of that they're not
eligible for federal dollars
what we're doing on this bill is
a little bit different than what
we did up north this is not a
revolving loan in which
landowners or or far worse pay
back this is just a one time
appropriation of three million
dollars that will be handled
through DFA that will go
directly to our municipalities
are counties our soil and water
conservation districts to put
one time money on the ground as
we know we have three hundred
thirty thousand acres that
burned in the fire but much of
the damage was actually a result
of the floods that came after
the fires and so we have a
sticky as we have ditches and we
have roads to clean up we spent
the summer gathering list from
but both on water conservation
districts our state kias and are
counties and we feel quite quite
confident that the estimate that
we have for repairs three
million dollars wealth will
suffice and so that is this
appropriation a request in front
of you today.
Thank you and you have anybody
you would like to speak on this
bill I think we have some people
wanting in support we have this
on water conservation districts
that are here that I'll be doing
a lot of the work on the ground
but but I feel comfortable
having a conversation with you
thank you right so is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
Right is there anybody here in
opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone online in
support of this bill thank you
for one person and if anybody
opposing.
Okay we are now to questions and
comments from committee members.
Okay.
Okay there is a motion for a do
pass and there is a second.
From Sedillo Lopez and then.
Committee secretary will call
the roll Senator Vontaze excuse
Senate.
I have is Senate Bill
yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator Cheney's excuse
centers also yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes yes a
phonics test.
Six by a vote of six zero you
have a do pass thank you very
much for bringing this forward
for you constituent thank you
madam chairman I appreciate it
and senator Byrd thank you madam
chair appreciate you giving us
on to together
the.
Make bright fire was devastating
fire obviously in Lincoln County
luckily the traditional winds
blow away from the town to start
on the east side of town so the
winds were with this but it
literally had to go up to the
first hill over the hill and go.
east that's where the
traditional winds blow had gone
the other way the first thing
but it was a school would wipe
out the screen and then it would
have gone down when the main
streets and and read also two
hundred seven structures many of
them homes to fidelity's which
is even an unusual and something
like this almost sixty two
hundred acres burned the snippet
damage includes replacement and
refurbishment of water systems
sewer systems roads there two
bridges that need to be replaced
by the way one is right by that
school which is a big box
Culbert
and it needs to be replaced and
proceeded to jackhammers and all
that on that and the and the
huge amount of cleanup the
request is again for a one time
amount of money to do a lot of
this work because again FEMA has
not performed quite frankly the
way they should and we're just
asking that the state to could
please help out Lincoln County
and recover from this and by the
way this kind of comes on the
heels of two thousand six with
that little bear fire which was
as devastating if not more so
than this one I think for homes
burned in that particular and
and you know we have a
discussion about for self and
all that stuff but right now
Lincoln County would really
appreciate the help from the
state to
be able to recover from this
fire and I'll be open for
questions madam chair thank you
and for of public notice I am a
co sponsor as of Lincoln County
is part of my district and I'm
really sorry that they have to
go through fires constantly down
there.
anyway is there anyone here in
the audience to support this
bill.
Is there anyone here in the
audience to oppose this bill.
Is there anybody online.
No one okay committee members
chair if I may have a link
Crawford the more was going to
join is he's up there from
municipal league meeting and
he's the chairman of that
committee as well so he's trying
to get over here since you
possibly can okay well thank him
for his efforts to get here and
let him know that we you know
one to stand behind the efforts
we appreciate that thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
just a quick question is it also
true has as it was for a just be
there for the black fire
recovery that federal funds are
not available the they have
since some federal funds but not
nearly enough to to cover all
the damage seems committed to
value what all this but they
have never we just don't have
the communication with FEMA
they're not sending money or
discussions about getting no
money into the county and the
city to take care of this thank
you madam chair thank you other
questions comments.
I would move a due pass second
even though wait I shouldn't do
that.
As I
do that okay is.
Okay I'll move the defense.
Thank you very much.
With the secretary will call the
roll.
Senator Vontaze yes Senator
echoes
Center happened excuse Senate
Bill.
Senator pope yes fasciatus use
Senator souls Senator Lopez yes
Senator finance yes.
I go to seven zero you have a do
pass thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee thank you
committee we help this money
helps the residents of the
communities is this really okay
I don't see Senator Rodriguez so
Senator Cervantes are you ready.
okay so
we're gonna have Senator
Cervantes and then you.
That's alright.
Well let's he's different you.
Down here we don't want anyone.
Please come up.
So much for on the MFA public
project revolving fund projects
thank you thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee thank you centers
around this for this to have
Marquita Russel with me here you
depend so please and this bill
Madam chairman members the
committee is a bill we bring
before the legislature every
year we have a statute that
requires that we bring projects
that the NMFA have on the list
there potential borrowers of
loans these have not been
approved for loans but we
require the list to come if they
showed any interest in and that
intend to apply for loans that's
all this this once they apply if
they do then that list will be
more complete and we will know
for sure who gets loans and who
doesn't thank you.
That's what this does Marquita
Russel is.
Thank you misbehavior just fund
bank funds in the nation we
currently are servicing about
a thousand loans we make about
two hundred million dollars of
loans each year if the loan is
more than a million dollars we
require that the that the
project be legislatively
authorized before were able to
proceed so as the senator
mentioned this just allows
communities to access of the
public project revolving fund
The appropriation is good for or
the authorization is good for
three years has absolutely no
general fund
the impact whatsoever.
Okay is there anyone in the
audience here to support this
bill.
It would seem like every.
And supporting this.
Okay anybody opposing this bill.
Anyone online.
Thank you
to the committee members before
motions let's take questions and
comments and I have a question
after Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair I don't
know if you know very much about
the individual projects madam
chair but phone number fifty
seven on page seven a line
twenty one the watershed
restoration management project
in Albuquerque
is that for the flooding you're
creating those but fund balance
with vegetation for the flooding
in the southeast northeast
heights Demandware whether
that's the case madam chair
that's not on this particular
bill I believe that's on Senator
serve on this is bill that comes
next the the water trust board
authorization bill so that is
not a project that's currently
seeking loan funds from the
PPRF.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair thank you just for
clarification we are on Senate
bill three thirty two Senator
again this.
Madam chair and senator up
Preciado thank you just had a
couple of questions so I
understand there's thirty seven
areas of that this affects how
of those selected because
they're not all communities four
counties what's the selection
process on getting on those
seven thirty seven entities
thank you madam chair so there
no that's okay proceed madam
chair there is a annual outreach
to communities that are
qualified under the public
project revolving fund that
includes a variety of public
improvement district special
assessment districts water and
sanitation districts in addition
to your cities counties and
state governments thank you for
that madam chair center at
market is up Lea County does a
lot hers always looking for fun
so he has to a great job my last
question is the local entities
house a certification process
for them is it
Pretty detailed I guess I'm
wondering I know sometimes some
things do not of.
Are not allowed I'm just
wondering how that certification
process works.
Madam chair so once their
legislatively authorized in the
apply to the public project
revolving fund and NMFA we take
those applications monthly we
have a detailed set of policies
that we use to underwrite our
loans and if they are if they
meet those policies then they're
they're move forward through a
series of kind of approval
processes but ultimately the
board of directors approved
every loan we make from the PPRF
thank you for that one follower
madam chair center is a part of
the problem policies that you're
looking at is completion funding
so here's my fear is if if you
don't have oversight I could ask
you could give and I would not
have anything in my coffers to
be able to complete the project
is that looked at on percentage
of you know what my part is
first what loan is madam chair
yes we do look at whether or not
the project that is being that
they're applying for has
complete funding because it does
need to be a complete public
project but there is not a
limitation in terms of how much
they can apply for other than
their ability to repay the loan
so we've done loan as small as
five thousand dollars largest
hundred twenty seven million.
Etcetera etcetera okay thank you
so there's not a cost share they
could ask for the whole amount
if needed Madam that's correct.
Thank you for that I didn't
understand that portion of it
Jareth of thank you thank you
does anybody else have a
question before just money.
Okay so miss Senator miss
Russell how many counties
another thirty several projects
but how many counties are
represented in this distribution
this year Marquita madam chair
madam chair this is an unusually
small legislative authorization
list because the authorization
is good for three years there
are years in which they're much
larger lists last year was one
of those lists I cannot tell you
without doing a quick count but
I'll get back to you on that
about how many counties are
represented but but I can tell
you that the existing
legislative authorization list
is quite hearty it's a robust
list well the reason I ask
Senator miss Russell is that one
County stands out in particular
being the largest in our state
and I just wanted to determine
the equity of the program my
second question Senator and miss
Russell is how do you determine
the zero to two percent interest
rate.
K. to thank you madam chair it's
based on the median household
income of the community so if it
is a city we look at the median
household
Median household
threshold so if it's less than
eighty percent of the state's
MHI than they're able to get
zero percent for a portion or
all of their loan depending on
the size if it's between eighty
and a hundred percent and it's
two percent loan so it's based
on median household income.
Thank you and I think my last
question is Senator mistrustful
what is the full length of the
loan terms.
Arcade madam chair it's based on
the useful life of the asset so
if it's a police vehicle it's
probably going to be three to
five years if it's a water
system it could be twenty to
thirty years so it really is
dependent on the useful life
because these are tax exempt
loans we have we are we have
stringent guidance that we have
to use that the IRS promulgates
great.
Anyone else with questions or
comments if not with the
pleasure of the committee.
Some of the policies there is a
second after there is a motion
and a second on a do pass.
On Senate bill three thirty two
could the committee secretary
please call the roll Senator
Vontaze.
Bancos.
Senator Hamblen excuse Senator
Neville yes Senator pope yes
thanks committee excuse Senators
yes goals.
Yes centers that I think yes
okay with a vote of seven to
zero you have a do pass thank
you very much for coming this
morning thank you madam chairman
members of the committee and
thank you Senator Vontaze again
yeah Senator Cervantes Europe
you have enough.
Was supposed to do I haven't.
Thank you thank you this bill is
three fourteen Senate bill three
fourteen water project Fund.
Projects.
Good morning.
At this stage feels like
something look forward to all
day for me and quality you're
going to be hearing three
fourteen it's a bill we bring to
every year this follows the work
of the interim committee
on authorizing and approving in
this case fifty nine projects
worth about a hundred thirty
eight point seven million
dollars we do this annually to
authorize the projects the
projects of the water this was a
specific projects are identified
in the bill and they've been
through a vetting process to
evaluate the criteria that we've
established over period time
namely of the ready this and and
the impact and consequences of
the funding of the project so
this year we were able to fund
every project applicants and you
all know ms Russell she can
answer.
Any of your no more detailed
questions and give a little bit
more background on the process
that leads to the projects you
have in front of you for
approval thank you.
Thank you mistranslations bill
where the the authorization
granted access to apply for
funding in this instance as the
senators mentioned we've already
gone through an application
process we have vetted all of
these they're all qualified
projects in many years we have
to draw the line because there's
typically more projects demand
then there is funding given the
high levels of severance tax
bond we've been lucky both this
year and last year to be able to
ask you to authorize us to make
loans and grants to a hundred
percent of the qualified
applicants so this is the list
this list is a hundred percent
of the qualified entities they
have it as I said all been
reviewed and there's one more
review process that we're
currently under going to make
sure they have all their permits
water rates and things to to
proceed so again on like the
last one this is not a guarantee
that the money will go to that
project but because we've gone
through so much betting there's
a very high likelihood that they
will all receive the funding
that they requested.
Thank is there anyone here in
the audience in support of this
bill.
Right anybody here to oppose
this bill.
Anybody online.
Thank you very much questions
from committee members Senator
Sedillo Lopez thank you you can
guess my question and thank you
for being so gracious but folks
pointing out of the miss on page
seven the county water utility
authority for Watership
restoration and management
project is that of South in the
streets that would
divert the flood water.
Madam chair Senator I
the Albuquerque Bernalillo
county water utility authority
is on here for two projects one
is an advanced metering project
and the other is the arsenic
treatment facility upgrades
now that you have asked that
question I believe we may have
an error here that will look to
double check that it might fit
probably should be a water
conservation project but I'll
double check that and I
appreciate your question but the
two projects that they've
applied for.
I think of the long list.
Fifty seven number fifty seven
When you talk about it is I I
was looking at last year's list
I apologize
I don't know that answer madam
chair and I'll have to get back
to you.
Thank you madam chair I would
appreciate it because I've been
also as for capital outlay and I
just wanna make sure
That I'm not the.
Contributed to a project already
is fully funded thank you madam
chair thank you Senator other
questions or comments.
Committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee that in turn over to
pass second okay thanks well
have center gate goes to the
second.
Could the committee secretary
please call the roll yes Senator
office yes that that goes to.
Have an excuse Senate Bill.
Centerfold yes says maintenance
is Senators souls yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes saxophonists
yes.
With a vote of seven zero you
have a do pass thank you very
much for coming this morning
this includes Senator Pirtle.
We're going to hear Senate bill
two twenty two.
Thank you madam chair.
If if I may.
Yes please thank you madam chair
members of the committee today I
have sent a bill to twenty two
in front of you
don't be nervous because it is
only one page those are usually
the ones you have to look out
for and I understand that
essentially give a little
background
a few years back we we passed a
bill to essentially digitize all
of our water right it records
what was not anticipated is what
that would entail and then what
would be the unintended
consequence of that and so
essentially what's what's going
to happen is made to brought to
my attention within Ross was all
of these records out of Roswell
and very complex records are
going and planned to be
transported to Albuquerque taken
out of the Roswell office where
water rights users or people who
want to contest Water Rights are
not going to have easy access to
really access at all to these
records and they're to be
transported to Albuquerque
digitized copies and then
there's no into there wasn't any
intent early on been discussed
has been discussed with the
state engineer to bring them
back we haven't quite nailed out
any of those so if we can't get
anything male down
basically though the water right
records is a huge risk of being
lost being misplaced mis filed
and with my community basically
agriculture is the number one
economic driver most of these
water rights have loans against
them so if they were lost or
somehow could be proven the loan
is still there but then they
wouldn't have have the property
to to then make their money back
so this is a huge concern within
my area that these records that
have been there for hundreds of
years or over a hundred years
could be taken out of district
lost misplaced miss filed and so
this legislation would just
ensure that if there is going to
be any copying.
It can be done right there in
the district office where the
records can still be accessed by
the public by the water right
user or any buddy that needed to
and without all stand for
questions.
Thank you if you have an expert
witness.
madam chair I don't but there is
a member of the pagans valley
artesian Conservancy district
here okay so well as for
supporters and hear their
comments how many in the
audience are here to support
this bill.
Anybody here to oppose this
bill.
Publications okay so let's hear
the supporters if you come
forward and hold the Mike
there's two of you who are
wanted to support to come on up.
Okay I think I'm doing it right
good morning madam chair my name
is Erin balik I in the
superintendent of the pickets
valley artesian Conservancy
district just for a little
background the PVC the servers
about a hundred thousand
constituents and we irrigate
about a hundred and ten thousand
acres so all all just the
majority of that is from from
ground water it is a super
complicated as far as the
paperwork goes district I I
think it's safe to say that they
do to office the district to
state engineers office is the
busiest in the state and and as
mentioned we have records there
that to go back over a hundred
years so a lot of that is is
historical documents not just of
a paper trail for the water
rights and we are in negotiation
with the the state engineer to
trying to come up with an
alternative of motive operand
die but we have not reached that
as of yet so for those reasons I
stand in support and be happy to
answer any questions that I can.
Thank you so it next please.
Chairwoman committee members my
name is Bronson corn on here to
stand and support the the water
right bills whenever you not the
water right bills I'm sorry the
water right records whenever you
start looking at him there's
there are some notes there are
no trick on every single file if
we were to start transferring
all of these to a central office
here in Albuquerque and not
getting a copy of it done
beforehand and we have something
happened and they get lost in
transit or something happens
here in Albuquerque it's going
to be detrimental to everybody
in our area like they did
Senator said it's.
There are there is more than
just the Water Rights written
down on here their loans put on
here there are.
Tons of footnotes put on here
and we just ask that it it that
they come up with a solution
that works for everybody
with that being said I stand and
support thank you thank you very
much is there anybody online
supporting this okay let's go to
opposition.
Just.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is a my
comment on the state engineer
and we at the state engineers
office hold these records as
extremely valuable property of
the state and we have the utmost
desires to make sure that what
we do with those records are in
the best interests of the water
users and the state as a whole
and we have demonstrated amply
and other abstracting and
digitizing.
Offices throughout the the state
of the had developed a very
successful process with very
competent and qualified and
experienced staff that reside in
the Albuquerque and Santa Fe
offices and and and has Senator
Pirtle mentioned it is a very
complicated of of group of
records that have a long history
and we are fully aware of that
and we work closely with the
water users to develop you know
proper responses and and access
to records we have records that
are in Santa Fe that we there's
this process called relation
back that tied a record that we
have in Santa Fe so having them
centrally located to comply with
the water data act to complete
this job in us in a in a
the efficient manner with the
proper staff that are well
suited for this is is the way
that the state engineers office
has functioned very well on
other of of these abstracting
processes that in other parts of
the of the state it would be
very untenable of from just of a
management perspective and
expensive to try to use our
staff from Albuquerque and Santa
Fe and the Roswell area and so
what we've done is we've sat
down with the the PVA CDC board
and and staff and and and
discuss with Senator Pirtle
the thank great solution to this
and that is to work with the
board to get the parallel set of
records copied through a six
month delay essentially of
moving the records up to
Albuquerque in order for those
records can be to be duplicated
and we're working out the
details right now we haven't got
that completely nailed down and
were also hoping to expedite
that and and get that moving
forward so that we can complete
the project and then.
Once we've done that we've
committed to bring the original
records back to the rules will
office for them to remain there
permanently so I think I think
it's a good solution and as the
senator said the bill sponsor
that we haven't yet to nail down
the details but I think it's
it's it's it's a good way
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you is there any other
opposition in the room.
Is there any opposition online.
Okay of questions comments from
committee members Senator
Sedillo Lopez center Novell.
Thank you madam chair I don't
know if you've called as a co
sponsor of the water data act
and the whole purpose of that
act was to make sure that there
were no agency filings and to
make sure that we had a good set
of records and really to solve
the problems that you described
and so it kind of pains be that
that there are of bumps along
the road but I'm really happy
last night when I read this I
was like oh I I wonder what they
think and so really really glad
to hear from the state engineer
and and to read this that
they're working out the problems
but I just think that this bill.
May under under mine the whole
purpose of the water data act
not only make it more expensive
but then then have more problems
with having of.
Mis filed records.
Do you have any specific
examples of of problems you know
just not the theoretical problem
but actually somebody was
harmed.
Madam chair from madam chair and
senator I don't believe he's
he's online today but there's a
gentleman that works at at a.
This call add contingent hearing
that basically handles.
These types of of records across
the state and when this was done
I believe in the Hobbs area hit
there was twelve instances that
he had where the records were
ninety either not complete or
there were issues around those
and so I don't I don't think I
mean we're all human we're not
perfect and when you mess with
paper and the amount of paper or
a post it note falls off or
something along those lines and
transportation or what have you
there's going to be mistakes and
so I I think you know we are at
least getting to a point where
there's an understanding that
there's going to be miss so how
do we mitigate that and ensure
that we don't make those in a
perfect world we wouldn't worry
about how much it cost and we
would take our experts to
Roswell and copping to me that
was the intent of the
legislation that come to the
district digitize everything
where the files are so that
there are going to be in
mistakes and then be up loaded I
don't think anybody in the
legislature the time ever dreamt
of a world where they were going
to go into these districts load
up all the documents taken
somewhere else where they would
be able to be accessed and then
bring them back months later but
trust me I I want these records
digitized because through COVID
we couldn't access the records
and if they were digitized you
could at least access them and
do them so I don't think there's
any push back or any any.
Anybody that wants to stop the
your legislation madam chair and
senator I think what everybody's
in support of that is just how
do we ensure that we don't make
mistakes or I mean accidentally
essentially steal somebody's
property by not getting
something copied right now my my
family and my former gonna be O.
K. we have copies of of
everything because we're doing
things it's the small guys with
ten acres fifteen acres twenty
acres that don't have an
engineer they don't have a water
attorney they don't have these
things that are going to be
there to ensure that their water
rights have been copied in and
can be proven if there is a
mistake and so that's that's
essentially what we're doing
here I think if we move it
forward it'll it'll help where
we can come up with some terms
that everyone can agree on and
get something in writing that
you know we we're going to be
amenable I still don't want the
record to leave but if we get
copies of them I I think most
people most water users within
the pick is valley would be
would be okay with that.
Thank you madam chair.
Well then going along that on
page.
One of the bill but on line of.
Online twenty two through twenty
five well I guess the whole bill
original documents relating to
water rights and water data
shall remain at all times within
the water district for these
documents were filed as you know
Water Rights cross counties
And and you know it's a it's a
very that's one of the purpose
of the water data act was to
standardize and and and get get
these records in a way that they
would have to travel all over
the state to figure out what was
really going on with these water
rights and then of sometimes you
need to take original documents
to maybe another district or you
need to to show them
in different places so I just
think that the that it's very
it's that the statute.
Of.
It is too strong I think I could
support something that says what
you just said that copy she'll
need be made available that all
care should be taken that there
should maybe even be a charge
for for for doing this but but
this.
Sweeping original document shall
remain.
Within the water district I
think it's just too too far but
I really appreciate you pointing
out the problem and I really
Kerr I I'm glad and happy to
hear the state engineer very
eager to solve that problem I
just think that's maybe the best
way.
To solve it so I I am not
prepared to vote for this at
this time but I I do hope that
this problem is is San and if
you continue to have this
problem I think I would then be
more amenable to it but it's the
it sounds like it's the
beginning of the identification
of the problem because they act
as a been in fact that long so I
I appreciate you bringing this
bill forward and I I definitely
will watch this thank you madam
chair thank you senator Neville.
Thank you Mr the state engineer
could you tell me have you done
other counties like Sam on where
I live.
For the same thing we've we've
got a lot of water register
Madam Senator well yes we have
at the end you've actually moved
on to wherever and then the
copies and send it back this I
haven't heard anything about it
and I don't have any interest in
Water Rights anymore so I don't
know what's been going on but I
haven't heard any complaints
with the process can I get on my
computer and check Water Rights
out for San Juan County or is it
some kind of a special processor
madam chair Senator well the
water system is available in
many areas of the state the
people can get on
and and find their records
either by property name or file
number you can do that with
county real estate records but
are through the session.
Point so a non owner can also
find out about water rights
online.
The test manager thank you and
thank that's fine
that's that's kind of what I
wanted to find out is how much
was readily available to the
public and.
If you're looking at.
Buying or want to make sure your
water rates are good and it's
good thing to be able to do that
I guess I don't quite see the
problem at this point but all
of.
Do a little checking and go from
there thank you madam chair
thank you Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair
of state engineering my honest
will sit for yeah I was going to
ask a question.
Madam chair center at work so in
in in the information I've got
it shows rules rules district
two of Senator do Lopez was
looking at crossing county lines
district two's encompassing only
the southeast counties Raul
would protect Chavez Chavez
Eddie Lee is that correct
Roosevelt we can to Madam chair
Senator linking as well the
Lincoln as well okay and and to
me and turned center that give
me a little bit of comfort
because of for me in unison I
don't have any water right units
but I didn't Colorado and I knew
how hard it is when you go to
research any of it to go.
A long distance get to
so these are more regional
districts that would encompass
the counties of the next
question I have madam chair in
center for the state engineer
Hammond of with this bill going
forward does it create any
obstacles for you I like the
idea of having it in writing so
that way your department
everyone knows what the
understanding is going to be I'm
just wondering if this create
you a problem if we were to pass
this bill Senator.
Madam Senator again yes that
that so I grows in opposition to
it I I think we do understand
the problems and the concerns of
our water users about the kind
of a sense of insecurity of not
being able to access the records
the original records in their
location we we we do understand
that however for us to be able
to follow through with the
process of of.
Of digitizing and abstracting
the records locally wherever
they may reside this is a
statewide bill it's not just in
the Roswell area Mason would
would be extremely untenable
from staff management
perspective everybody our
experts are located in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe they
have families homes see on me
they have lives and to be able
to of do this in a remote
location would require you know
lots of travel lots of added
expense length in the process of
much longer than that if we
could do it in in a controlled
environment like we have in
Albuquerque have the whole floor
dedicated to this with tables
and cabinets and security and
and to to also hinge on on on
something that the Sanchez said
is there not the the the record
themselves are not inaccessible
during this time if someone
needs to look at the files they
can be transferred back
temporarily for a specific
purpose like some kind of a
litigation going on in the in
the in the in in the area or
they're they're also open for
inspection in the Albuquerque
office it's not like they're not
completely available to the
community if they need to see
that the physical actual files
but as we have strict these we
have the expertise to do
appropriately in the right order
and decipher it's like a CSI
kind of process that the experts
need to decipher all of these
like people were talking about
sticky notes and other side
notes what does it all mean how
does it all fit together and
that takes very very competent
expertise and we just can't pull
somebody off the street and Raul
do it it's it's very complex
business so so that's why it
would be very difficult for us
to do it properly thank you for
that Madam chair and center in
the state engineer of the so.
And districts how many of them
and complete.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos we
have basins within districts
that have been completed I can't
say that all.
You know in every instance all
districts have been complete we
have several adjudicated basins
particularly in the district six
which is this area of Santa Fe
Taos northern New Mexico Rio
Chama all of those areas have
been completed we've we've
completed other basins as well
but not I can't say you know my
own knowledge about the each of
the districts is incomplete but
I can certainly get that message
back to you from our
Representative director who
could today's hearing.
Thank you.
Ensure that all your thank you
thank you very much Senator of
the five goes to the second time
to center city a look this is
there any other questions or
comments.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
madam chair this was an under
funded then mandate when the
bill was passed I did donate
some contributed donates
operator contribute some junior
money of for it I have to and
this year I actually contributed
junior money for the digitizing
equipment so I I think this is
the this is a huge ask and I
think it's it's good to sort of
let them work out the details
and put something in writing but
I think a bill it's just too
much at this time thank you
thank you so what is the
pleasure of the committee chair
for me just yes certainly so
Madam will take absolutely why
don't you summarized the thank
you madam chair Preciado
you know of a few years ago the
state engineer before the state
engineer had the idea or to move
all water hearings to Santa Fe.
And I brought a piece of
legislation up to the state and
we all agree that it's not about
what's convenient for government
it's about what's convenient for
the people in the public and so
I think at the at the base of
this legislation that's the
principle here again that we
understand that there's people
that have lives but their job is
to serve the people and if the
people in the phone water right
owners can't access their water
right yes if they need to access
it to prove it up to the bank
they can drive to Santa Fe in
Albuquerque but why should they
have to do that if we can copy
and do it in Ross will so I
think that's what brought it
forward I think that was what
was frustrating to me is why I
brought this is that the the
water right record should stay
in Russell because that's where
anybody wants to contest a water
ride prove up water right if you
need to sell the water right
those records should be
available and you shouldn't be
put out to have to drive to
Albuquerque to access them thank
you madam chair thank you.
Committee members what's the
pleasure of the committee.
There's a motion for it to pass
is there a second.
There is a motion and a second
could the.
Many secretary call the roll yes
Senator Pontus yes.
That does business there haven't
excuse Centerville yes Senator
pope no.
Center street is excuse centers
also though Senator Sedillo
Lopez no Senator said finance.
No.
the bill has of failed to pass
is there a substitute motion.
Madam.
Okay is there a second on the no
Representative.
Also there's a motion and a
second.
On the no recommendation.
She.
Sorry just a minute just a
question motion yes what's the
term for.
The just Judiciary.
I tried to committees I sit on.
No.
The committee secretary to call
the roll on and recommendation
Senator contest yes.
Senator Gallegos is for Center
haven't excuse Senator avail
this Senator pope.
No.
Senator status is Senator also
though there's a deal this no
Senator finance.
Yes you have a do pass no
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much.
So sorry about that.
We now on to my bill of I have
an out of state experts who flew
in I'm gonna move ahead with it.
Two sixty.
Okay
there is a committee substitute
in an analysis by our staff that
was sent out yesterday.
We take it.
What the
hell.
Yes.
Okay.
This is.
Madam chair I think we have
madam chair I think we have a
committee substitute July of do
I hear a do not pass on on SB
twenty six and a do pass on the
Senate and the Senate
conservation committee
substitute.
For discussion purposes.
When.
Thank you senator said what this
so you've got you've got we're
now on the committee substitute.
Madam chair members of the
committee the committee
substitute in the analysis of
the committee substitute was
distributed yesterday morning by
our committee secretary
and that the panelists all
receive them yesterday as well
so of the reason that you have a
committee substitute Madam chair
members of the committee is that
we have the opportunity to clean
up the language and tighten the
bill before we got to this
committee
and what here is what Senate
bill two sixty two six committee
substitute Committee substitute
doesn't do probably better
English than that
it establishes a minimum
portfolio standard for retail
distributed energy resources
that are five megawatts or less
not larger five megawatts or
less it positions New Mexico to
secure hundreds of millions of
dollars in federal incentives
recently approved through the
inflation reduction act which
are specifically structured for
projects that are less than five
megawatts and as a customer and
equity component to the
renewable energy act which
supports customers directly
participating in and benefiting
from the energy transition.
It creates a long term vision
for and implementing in New
Mexico and it expands the local
solar and storage industry
attracts private private
investment creates in demand
jobs and drives economic
development it does not increase
or accelerate the existing
renewable energy act
requirements it does not create
a new form of distributed
generation or required the PRC
to develop any new programs it
creates a fiscal impact it does
not create a fiscal impact to
the state budget with me today I
have Mr Kevin Cray and he is
representing of your different
groups so I'm gonna let turn the
Mike over to him as my expert
witness.
Thank you senator and thank you
madam chair for the opportunity
to speak today my name is Kevin
Craig and I and the mountain
west regional director with the
lateralization for Committee
solar access the coalition for
community solar access to the
nation's national trade
organization solely focused on
the community solar industry or
activities maybe it maybe if you
use them like a dad with project
is that better thank yes if you
push the button the whole time.
Start with that
with the coalition for community
solar access representative over
a hundred fifteen member
companies were active across the
country at the federal level we
represent our members that state
legislatures like this and so
well at that public regulations
commission here in New Mexico we
stand to increase access to all
American households to the
benefits of clean energy
also staying here in support of
a handful of other organizations
including the coalition for
stabil Communities New Mexico
rent re New Mexico which the
local energy solar energy
industries association of
conservation voters New Mexico
with goes on this is a broadly
supported bill.
So with that we stand for
questions and comments after
support and opposition.
Thank you is anyone in the
audience in support of this
legislation.
And who in the audience and in
opposition to this legislation.
Okay is there anyone online.
In the in support or opposition
support.
So if we just in the interest of
time if you could pick of three
weeks the supporters.
I had this wasn't planned so the
first three to come up okay the
first through the come up please
so if you're dying to speak
please hurry up.
You have to hold the button
down.
Good morning Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jim dejar Dan Representative
the renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico many
people notices ria we have sixty
diverse members who do business
in the state of New Mexico been
around since two thousand and
four.
A modern resilient and cost
effective grid.
Will you will need to have the
optimal mix of renewable energy
generation resources these
resources will need to include
large utility systems utility
scale systems but also
residential and commercial
rooftop systems and community
solar on smaller plots of land.
This bill provides a framework
that provides over time the in
public implementation of this
optimal mix.
Additionally with the recent
passage of the risk inflation
reduction act the timing expects
full and.
To initiate the strategy so we
can take advantage of federal
incentives.
Finally utilizing distribute
energy resources part of the
modern grid result in
significant job creation
economic development well
helping to preserve land in
rural New Mexico we strongly
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr chairman.
For.
When Mr.
Madam chair you have to hold
down the button the whole time
okay how's it that's great thank
you ms Graham can use here
Representative both the Sierra
Club Agran chapter in the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico we
support this bill is a classic
case of not putting all your
eggs in one basket that is you
can have solar everywhere
throughout the state not just a
few industrial sites which
creates a lot more jobs and yet
so the benefits of solar
distributed no pun intended
throughout the state thank you
very much.
Thank you thank you Mr Hughes.
Thank you madam chair committee
members
I'm I'm Beth Beloff executive
director coalition of
sustainable communities sorry
about my voice
and I too want to reinforce our
support for this bill it's
broadly supported by our member
company counties and cities and
who are in large part customers
of our ideal use why do we
support it it optimizes the grid
it supports energy customer
choice it enables low income
direct participation in at the
energy transition you heard
about job creation economic
development
and it adds an equity component
to the renewable energy act that
is important to our members I
hope you support the bills thank
you.
Thank you Mr of so I think there
were about four or five hands if
we could get them up again of
our opponents.
I their three hand so if you
could just come up in state your
state your opposition.
For maybe four yep that.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Terry Cole I am the
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
in New Mexico we've set
aggressive targets for renewable
energy produced electricity good
for us but within the parameters
of those goals and in fact to
ensure we meet them we need to
allow our utilities the space to
determine the right mix of
renewable energy sources years
what will keep energy costs down
for customers what can we
reliably bring into the grid
we've set the broad goals and
the strict parameters by getting
overly prescriptive as this bill
does the legislature risks
diminishing this affordability
and reliability of our power
generation at which point
families and businesses are
really the ones who were
impacted.
Moreover no regulatory oversight
is required of these generators
to ensure fair right to
reliability the kinds of things
the PRC requires of a regulated
utility and there's no workable
mechanism to ensure that low
income customers benefit from
this proposal or that a utility
actually needs the supplies it's
risky we believe it's
unnecessary legislation and it
just has too many unknowns so
with all due respect we would
appreciate your voting against
the bill thank you so much for
giving me a moment.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We will the thank you Mr.
The morning madam chair members
the committee Mike d'antoni with
Xcel energy we serve electricity
to the eastern part of the state
many of you were here when the
landmark legislation for the
energy transition act passed
along with the renewable energy
act that was very hard hard
fought there is several
stakeholders many stakeholders
in and and in that up process
and this legislation
unilaterally changes that it
mandates distributed generation
on our system we're as addicted
it takes way are flexibility as
utilities to provide the least
cost renewables we have forty
percent renewables on our system
right now New Mexico and out the
other utilities have different
resource opportunities this this
mandates and it's interesting on
online line of the nineteen page
eleven it gets away it gets rid
of the reasonable cost threshold
that applies to distributed
resources which is a really big
red flag for each of you to see
that they're not gonna be able
to do it as cheaply as we can do
utility scale renewable so this
will drive up costs for for all
of our residents it'll reduce
economic development
opportunities and it's just not
a good bill for New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr dent Dantonio.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose H. B. R. SB
two sixty six.
The New Mexico chamber of
commerce said behind the
cohesive thoughtful and broadly
supported twenty nineteen energy
transition act.
We believe opening up the ETA
creates an unstable regulatory
environment that really hurts
our local economy our businesses
and communities and critically
our progress for zero carbon
future we are concerned as
stated in the FIR by EMNRD that
these are new renewable
portfolio standards would impact
the ability of utilities to
modernize the grid stating that
our current great is not capable
of fully utilizing two way
energy flow Garcia is on its way
to zero carbon future and
creating great on reliability
will be a barrier yes being a
leader in clean energy with
consistent responsible
implementation we all can
achieve the clean energy future
were all working so hard for our
climate and our communities need
our help now more than ever
please vote no on espys two
sixty six thank you.
Thank you.
Okay good morning madam chair to
hold the button the whole time.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Carlos to Sir
with the Public Service Company
New Mexico we respectfully
oppose some Senate bill two
sixty six the public utility has
no control over how much behind
meter dispute distributed
generation is installed by a
customer or how much community
solar that supplies low income
customers a develop this means
the public utility has no
ability to require hard there
part actions to meet the R. P.
S. requirements.
Now this bill seems to expand
the size of the community solar
program and this community solar
is just brand new in statute
only a couple years old and the
PRC just recently passed or
approved of.
the working plan.
And we still have yet to see
develop development of community
solar as the process is still in
play on these developments.
And really it's about.
you know with this the whole
community solar was a phased in
pilot program so we really want
to see how this pilot program is
going to work for as far as
community solar so for these
reasons and reasons we've heard
be from others we oppose this
bill thank you thank you Mr
Senator.
Okay one more and then I I
realize I we're trying to make
this hybrid process works all go
to a supporter online that I
forgot go ahead.
Of of the thing that madam chair
and and Committee Rico Gonzalez
without Paso electric I'll just
point out real quick on page six
lines I threw six and lines
thirteen through fifteen there's
issues with those from from up
our perspective not only from
how to implement it and and how
it affects our rack counts but
also how the rules would be per
looked at inside of inside of
the regulatory process so all
state court just leave it there
but thank you sorry.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez and I
apologize online we're trying to
make this work so Justin.
Let's or built built a is is on
line but he's as a supporter
okay if we could speak briefly
morning can hear me okay yes Mr
but thank you bill yeah thank
you madam chairwoman members the
committee my name's Justin build
some director Policy strategy
with cypress creek renewables
we're a leading utility scale
community solar and storage
developer with projects across
the United States we've actually
been active in New Mexico for
several years developing solar
projects and so participate
today to express my support for
the bill we appreciate the
chairman chairwoman semantics
leadership on prioritizing
deployment distributed energy
resources include and including
community solar we think it'll
be a special meeting the state's
level climate goals must provide
benefits to customers integrated
distributed energy resources
like community solar expand
access and choice for New
Mexicans allowing underserved
communities that so often host
energy infrastructure realize
the benefits and cost savings of
renewable projects may also
provide private investment and
jobs communities regarding some
of the concerns brought about
the the implementation to the
grid and the community solar
program being new I would just
suggest that the bill doesn't
have a flash cut to an
increasing percentage of
distributed energy resources and
immediately actually is a ramp
up over time starting at least
twenty twenty five so there
there would be several years
before the the the distributed
energy resource standard to take
effect so I think some of those
concerns are addressed in the
bill thank you so much.
Thank you Mr bills do you have a
response Madam madam chair I
think we will wait for questions
and comments from the committee
and will be happy to answer
questions okay with that I will
turn it to the committee.
Senator Neville.
I've got a.
And I think this is the concerns
some of the ponens has.
when you start doing have you'll
put piecemeal type
solar and wind and whatever
the economics kinda get skewed
and how do you address that our
house is going to assure that we
get the best deal if you're on a
PNM or.
One of those accounts I mean
that's that's my concern is
whether the small for entities
coming in and patch in New in
reality can't do the efficiency
the large company can.
Thank you Senator madam chair
I'm gonna defer to my expert
witness to start.
Madam chair senator I think that
was certainly the old school way
of thinking is that you know
centralized large scales better
new bodies of researchers
showing that by optimizing the
amount of DVRs which isn't
certainly a hundred percent of
the grid but increasing about D.
R. as in the system actually
balances the operations of the
grid overall and can lead to the
lowest cost created I'd point
folks to the local solar for all
road map which is an innovative
national study that showed the
as a country we could save
upwards to half a trillion
dollars by optimizing the use of
the E. ours across the system
this eliminates trial losses due
to the transmission system it
allows for more efficient use of
existing transmission assets
with coach look which customers
have already paid for and it
enables the smoothing of the
peaks and valleys that are
inherent with a highly renewable
grid which we're all moving
towards.
If.
Some of the smaller companies
make a substantial for a
proportion of our.
It's a utilities work or load.
And then as time goes on they go
bankrupt the wear out there
whatever how do.
How do we how do we maintain the
system if we've got a lot of
these smaller companies that may
or may not be as stable in this
monitor is a public utility.
Thank you madam chair Senator
miss macrae.
Madam chair senator I think that
it is a potential concern but
we're diversely just like you
diversify your four oh one K.
we're diversified our energy
portfolio so if one or two
projects were to fail we don't
have a massive gap in the system
I believe PNM was supposed to
bring on a resource replace San
Juan in twenty twenty two into
the best of my knowledge there
that did not happen and we have
no plans to actually have
replacement power for that
system if that same amount of
capacity was allocated across
dozens of distributed energy
projects it's highly likely that
all of them would fail
simultaneously.
Just a side note whenever that
plant closed.
Electric bills are going up
dramatically in the Farmington
area because we had a I think
seven percent ownership of that
plant so but that's neither here
nor there but just come in I
guess that's my concern is that
Solar isn't to it has to be
replaced or twenty years and
things like the the panels to
last forever and so these
companies could find themselves
in a.
Some kind of a situation where
they can't continue.
so that was my concern of the
one thing and how would the
small companies pay for the
right to then tap into the PNM
or to the el Paso electric or
any of these other.
Utilities so chair Senator of a
year or two ago I tried to get
the public regulation commission
to do a study about how you
transition into other
I use and and local choice
Energy in public power and it
the study was declined but
exactly your question would have
been answered because there are
many of issues that would have
to be result the of buying of
the assets the tying in to the
transmission of the costs that
would be consumed by the some
consumer it's cetera so I do
believe that that is an issue to
be studied but perhaps madam
chair Senator my expert has
further comment.
Yes I guess the what Madam chair
Senator the one thing I would
point out in addition to the
comments that centers the
phonics is made is that the
interconnection costs are paid
for one hundred percent by the
inter connecting customer so
we're going to use private
dollars to modernize the grid
and remove all of that cost
burden from the ratepayers
that's an additional significant
savings repairs by increasing
the use of distribute generation
because we're modernizing the
grid where customers actually
live additionally the inflation
reduction act now allows for
projects less than five
megawatts to applaud the federal
investment tax credit towards as
interconnection upgrades and so
that allows New Mexico to secure
hundreds of potentially hundreds
of millions of federal
incentives to modernize the grid
and not have that paid for by
local customers.
Five megawatts is in a very
large amount of electricity when
you look at the total grid some
of these wind turbines are two
and three and four megawatts.
S. T. so do you envision when to
be a significant part of this
are we put potentially a
significant amount of this.
Madam chair Senator Mr creek
chair Senator the the regulation
or this this bill from a behind
the meter perspective is
technology agnostic so if folks
wanted to install wind turbines
or biomass plants or geothermal
or hydro facilities they're free
to do so very good okay thank
you madam chair.
Thank you senator Neville.
Senator Gallegos David chairman
Senator I just couldn't find an
FIR do you have any numbers of
maybe I missed it with the new
pack
Madam chair senator I was
informed by our analysts that
there is not an FIR on the
committee so only the original
FIR dated February fourteenth
two thousand twenty three madam
chair and senator do you know
there significant changes you
know just.
That are referred to that FIR
two.
Look at detail madam chair
Senator I don't think I can
answer that question I probably
have to look to the analyst who
did our.
Phone analyses to determine if
they think there would be a
difference.
Listen to.
I'm sure we can't quite hear you
sing your would you like to come
to a place.
Like perhaps Senator.
The majority of one of the major
changes as part B. on page six
they took it's the public
utility shell because retail
distributed generation to be
inter connected to the public
utility system by encouraging
customer adoption access course
the previous bill had said they
required to do this and so that
that's a major change and there
are some other major.
Changes as far as the PRC
evaluating the efficacy of the
program.
So.
The kind of substantial thank
you madam chair senator I think
our of expert witness could
comment on that from encourage
to require are required to
encourage thank you Mr.
madam chair senator along the
lines of those change it was
brought to our attention by one
of the legislative analyst's the
the the pre existing language
more may not comport with the
fact that the utilities may or
may not and all of these assets
the community solar act does
explicitly allow for utility
ownership of community solar
projects but behind the meter
projects tend to be on by
individual customers in order to
connect to comport with that
feedback we adjusted the
language just to knowledge that
really it's an encouragement
from the utility or a removal of
red tape to allow more
distributed energy projects to
come online that may be caused
around.
Thank you for that thank you for
the help I guess my my concern
is because I I work for PNM on
the gas side and I understand
gas utility same thing for
elector were the pastor goes to
the customer and I have the same
fear the Senate bill has with
the cost increases in for the
limit is a if if we're damaging
the utilities by doing this or
taking away their flexibility I
think there's a problem and
that's what I was hoping of pine
and FIR for that they had any
kind of significant issues that
came across on that but
Center then Cheryl you.
So the only question thank thank
you very much thank you senator
goggles Senator seven this you
madam chair so we it's always
been entering to me because we.
Always get into the general idea
behind these types of eight
pieces of legislation and and I
support them and will always
afford everything we can do to
two of.
To encourage renewable energy
and I know that's I think that's
a sure goal of everyone hear the
challenges always and what does
the bill say we never really
spent any time talking about the
bill itself and we talk about
the broad perspectives and what
the goals are and how we all
feel strongly about those goals
but you know that's the the
lawyer and you want to read the
bill and figure out what it
means and and oftentimes the
bills have the opportunity to go
to Judiciary for that but this
one doesn't have that
opportunity and so I I have some
of those questions here you will
certainly I hope you'll of
to go through those so when the
page three and four you've got a
new the definition of retail
distributed generation.
And that definition continues on
page four and it says is.
Is a new or existing energy
facility.
No greater than five megawatts
and then it says is is either
located behind in New Mexico
customers meter is that is that
a clear meaning to and what that
means when it says that that the
generation facility is I'm gonna
read from the bill itself
located behind in New Mexico
customer's meter would what does
that mean madam chair Senator Mr
crank up madam chair senator the
purpose of that is to knowledge
that there is a clear clear
demarcation between utility
owned assets and customer owned
assets which is at the utilities
meter so everything behind the
customer's meter would be like
to elect panel of rooftop solar
system things that the customer
would be would be owning and in
control of and responsible for
maintaining everything ahead of
the meter would be something the
utility is responsible for
installing maintaining and
keeping up to date and and I
understand how this works I
guess the question for me is
that the best way we define that
knows there's not a better
definition for where that
demarcation line exist is other
than the state's bits behind
them the meter.
Madam chair senator that is the
best definition I'm aware of and
it is common across many other
states in the nation.
It would seem that that that
becomes a pretty important the
location.
Hoping to be deployed during the
the
On the page six.
Fifty six and seven are all
pretty straightforward to me
when it comes down to the
increased percentages.
For retail sales and the and the
I guess the plan and the dates
and so forth so all of them
expense were are yet really tied
up right now with this bill is
on page six with the beginning
of subsections of subsection B..
So I'm just going to go through
it with you says as part of the
resource acquisition needed to
comply with subsection may which
is existing public utility shell
because retail distributed
generation to be interconnected
to the public utility system by
encouraging customer adoption
and access there's a period
there.
So this becomes problematic as
lawyer because you this this
here says this section is as a
public utility shall do
something.
but it but that show is been
described by encouraging
customer adoption access which
really doesn't have any meaning
you know to say that your you're
encouraging because reduction of
I'm please do this you know I'm
encouraging right so when you
say you shall do this by
encouraging those two things
seem inconsistent to me how do
you when you say shall mandatory
but the only thing you're
requiring is that somebody
encourage someone to do
something that that to me seems
pretty loose so help me to
understand what's intended there
so Madam chair Senator we did
have require instead of
encouraging but one of the not
ours but one of the Energy
analysts in the legislature
spoke with my expert and
encourage them to change the
language so Mister correct.
thank you madam chair and
senator yes we we did change the
language in light of some of the
recommendations from that
legislative analyst we felt that
that I guess more aligned with
the spirit as I was discussing
with centered care goes that you
know the utilities may or may
not own this and so it is really
through encouragement of
customer adoption this can be
done through the removal of red
tape this can be done through
seo supporting future expansions
to these existing renewable
programs it's really just meant
to align incentives between the
folks that would like to see
more distributed energy
resources on the system and the
utilities that are accepting
those distributed energy
resources by creating a common
goal that everyone is working
towards yeah and on that point
this excuse me Senator Woods
eliminating eliminating
barriers.
Of be a better no no it really
whatever it really with because
it doesn't mean anything right
when you say you shall eliminate
barriers was at me when it with
use that so now we're
encouraging and that's because
you took upward requiring and
even if it was requiring you
shall require customer adoption
access as meaning doesn't say
but you have to do it just says
you require customer adoption
access that would how do require
customer access was at me
it's really not a law it is
really memorial language again
it's it's aspirational it's
things we want to do it's the
good ideas but included so you
must do something and here's the
consequence for not doing it
that's what the law is so you
know if it was written said
requiring we see this a lot
which is you put in something
that's requirement and then well
people push back on it so we
won't require it will encourage
it that's that's memorial that's
not a law
and so you know I'm always
conflicted by these kind of
things because.
On one hand all the utilities or
hearing concerned about this
should be okay because in should
like the point that I'm making
because essentially what I'm
here I see I'm smiling out there
they know that this is was
largely unenforceable right they
can't be held to it
and so they're probably okay
with that and and so you know
they're they're maybe they're
opposition isn't as strong as it
might otherwise be if you're
really talking they must do
something but they're we're
we're we're going to require
that they being encouraging
their customers to do something
so I'm conflicted I hope you can
understand why Senator you know
and
it's it's a.
It we're passing a law that
really doesn't really I think
too much and that's too bad
because I think we should be
passing laws to do good things
here and I think we all agree
with that the next sentence
reads compliance so you know
again we're we're we're gonna
require that customers being
courage to do something on this
is compliant show demonstrated
by public utilities retirement
of renewable energy certificates
so tell me how that works how
how how will you determine that
the utility is encouraging
customers by retiring of
renewable energy certificates
I'm missing how how does that
work and that was how how many
of those renewable energy
certificates have to be retired
to meet the requirements
requirement show that the
customers were encouraged.
Madam chair Senator Mr correct
Madam chair Senators that is an
excellent question we did use a
carryover language from the
existing subsection B. of the
statutes we tried to align with
the existing R. EA to the
maximum extent possible rex
Representative one make a lot of
renewable energy or the
renewable attributes of that one
megawatt of renewable energy and
so the accounting mechanism
would be that the utilities
would collect the appropriate
number of those racks to
represent the given percentage
of their retail sales and that
would show that they are in
compliance with with this
regulation.
Well this is reserves as
complexion we demonstrated by
the retirement of renewable
energy certificates.
For retail distributed
generation so again how how do
you how do you know that what
right or what pace there have to
be these renewable or just
retirement every renewable
energy certificates out how we
gonna show that that right or
that timing is going to be the
compliance that's intended here.
Madam chair Senator it is a very
common compliance mechanism
across the country to look at
renewable energy credits they
are the standardized accounting
mechanism for renewable energy
so I think it is a tried and
true method for developing and
ensuring compliance just like it
is on the utility scale side of
the grid wide side as it is for
distributed energy projects they
would just be designated kind of
a a special type of renewable
energy certificate if you will
if they're coming from something
that's defined as retail
distributed energy resource.
Well it well All I appreciate
that and this may be commonplace
you so this will be a special
type of renewable energy
certificate but we don't just we
don't explain that anywhere here
what is that what is that
renewable energy certificate and
I'm so back to the question
which is how quickly to the the
the do there need to be these
retirements of renewable energy
certificates to show that
compliance I mean you how do I
do a show.
B. because realize the that
sentence compliance shall be
demonstrated that refers to the
preceding sentence which again
was already confusing to me
anyway right the the preceding
sentence was as you shall
encourage customer adoption
access and then I'm going to
prove that I did that I
encourage the public.
I require encouraged the public
to adoption nexus by retirement
of energy certificates how many
do I have to retire and how
frequently to show that I've met
that encouragement.
So I'm Mr chair Senator are you
suggesting that there needs to
be some of further definition
and standards set for that
section
I do I do Senator me that's
always the unity let's I'm I'm
I'm a broken record over here
which is simple you know a law
says you shall not drive faster
than fifty five miles an hour if
you do you shall be cited and
pay two hundred dollars then
that's a clear demarcation here
but but when we're passing a law
proposed in the past law here
that says you shall encourage
customers to do something that
is not a clear standard at all
and then and then when you say
we're going to determine whether
you did that compliance shall be
demonstrated by the retirement
of renewable energy certificates
within state health faster how
many certificates or anything
offense so I'm going to measure
the compliance here by an
equally undefined at least to me
include undefined standard so
once again it seems like one of
those those issues where there's
really never gonna be able to be
in the teeth to this but you
know all the one because I don't
want to belabor the the
committee to long I wish this
was going to Judiciary of I'm
sure I'm dealing with you
probably that feels that way but
then it then goes on to say
there's a semi closes provided
the associate renewable energy
is delivered to the public
utility and it goes on and
assigned to the public utilities
customers explained for me what
that means I understand that the
renewable energy is delivered
the public utility I think I
understand what that means but
then it was an assigned to the
public utilities commission
customers what is that language
need to be there with him with
me so chair Senator Mr gray.
I'm sure senator that just means
that the you know the customers
or the project are allocating
their renewable energy
certificates to the public
utilities for them to retire for
compliance if we look back at
the community solar act as an
example it does dictate that all
of the rex from the community
solar facilities to go to the
host utility for their use this
would kind of dictate that they
would use those wrecks to prove
compliance with this portion of
the law there is.
There is a an additional section
underneath this page you may
also have questions on that came
back from the legislative
analyst as well it was just
getting to the heart of how
their accounting for behind the
meter rex particularly for self
consumed generation as opposed
exported generation on to the
system where the utilities truly
purchasing the Energy verses it
being used by the customer that
owns the asset so that language
was really meant to to clarify
that I think it is companion
language that is included in SB
three twenty six I recall
correctly yeah I'm in I I
oftentimes hear that civilian
language from someplace thousand
in another billing I'm on always
per se that's a really good way
to do things because it's in my
my son is just kind of compounds
the problem right so let me just
ask you a simple question is
what would change is if you
eliminated on lines nine and ten
the languages and assigned to
the public utilities New Mexico
customers which what would
change that language was in here
I mean it's it's obviously it's
going to be delivered to the
public utility.
What what is the meaning of
assigned to the public utilities
to Mexico customers.
Madam chair senator Mr cracked
madam chair center I think that
is an important education to
ensure that these renewable
energy certificates remain in
New Mexico and serve the
customers of New Mexico
increasingly on the open market
value selling these renewable
energy certificates to
California or other states that
have higher compliance targets
is becoming more and more
commonplace but that means that
the people of New Mexico or not
actually benefiting from the
creation of these wrecks locally
so I I do think that is an
important provision to ensure
that the benefits of doing this
state in New Mexico and are
passed off to other states for
monetary gain and I would
understand that except that's
not what this says it doesn't
say anything about the
certificate senator says that
about hope clause up with some
icons as provided the associated
renewable energy so time of the
indigenous certificate of tax
rates as as the energy is
delivered to the utility again I
that makes sense as I said we're
we're requiring the energy of
the renewable energy be
delivered to the utility but
then says Mrs assigned to the
public utilities New Mexico
customers so we're not talking
about anything but the Energy
itself what what with the Energy
be assigned to the public
utilities Mexico customers I
understand your argument for
certificates but that's not what
this is this that sources.
Madam chair senator I mean I
think we we want that energy
again to stay in New Mexico to
benefit local customers here the
whole purpose of defining it is
retail distributed generation is
that there's a customer
component a direct access to
access the benefits of these
projects so I think that it's
kind of the spirit of that
language but would certainly be
happy to work further with the
the legislative analyst's and
refining that language yeah I
hope you will because again I I
think you could eliminate that
and probably not do yourself any
harm
Then it goes on to the next
sentences in the case of
qualifying facilities that are
net metered and what does it
work what we define what is a
qualifying facility because our
state here in the case of
qualifying facilities so what is
a qualified facility.
Madam chair center Mr Cray chair
Senator qualifying facilities is
a common term defined under the
federal probe of laws so it's
simply a carryover from from
that higher level statute they
refer to renewable energy
projects typically eighty
megawatts or less in this
particular case it's honing in
and ones that are net meter
located behind customers meters
so it is a a bit narrower
definition of kind of the
overall definition of a
qualified facility.
Yeah I I think you'll be legal
litigate litigate that issue
right because you want when
you're so you're so you're not
you're changing your saying okay
in the case of qualified
facility so I would expect it to
be a definition of what is a
qualified facility you're
telling me well everybody will
know what that means because it
refers to federal awesome place
in rural lawyer I'm gonna I'm
gonna try and challenge the
requirement here I'm gonna say
there's no definition what is
qualified facility I understand
your point because it will we
would know what that means.
We're Courts oftentimes don't
always agree lawyers always
agree so I would expect there to
be a definition here of what is
a qualifying facility is as in
the case of qualifying
facilities that are net metered
all the energy generated shall
be deemed to be purchased by the
public utility.
and all the energy consumed on
site goes on to talk about that.
so evidence and white white is
the energy that's generated by
whatever of qualified facility
is because again that that's
again that get the term is
repeated against as all of the
energy generated by qualified
facility shall be deemed to be
purchased by the public utility
does does the public does that
is the intention here the public
usually actually does purchase
that that energy.
Madam chair senator Mr correct
chair Senator I think in the
case of the net metered system
there are two types of energy so
there's energy this could be
self consumed by that's actually
across the customer's meter the
threshold we talked about
previously and then there is
energy that does cross that
threshold is purchased by the
utility and may be sent back to
the customer at a later date the
the spirit of this part of the
language is to allow for a full
accounting of the generation
whether it is exported to the
grid or whether to self consumed
on site is it all kinda ladders
up to the overall retail
purchases of electricity by the
customers in New Mexico and so
the the goal here is to align
that accounting treatment to
ensure that everything is being
occur appropriately accounted in
that utilities are getting
appropriate credit for the
efforts that they're making on
behind the metered systems so
that they get to apply that
towards their compliance for the
overall R. EA and I understand
that but with the link to
leverage the puzzles me is what
it says the Energy shall be
deemed to have been purchased so
what why is it important to say
that the energy was deemed to be
provided we just say that it's
it's credited against that or
whatever else may be what what
ways deem to be purchased
notices of the utility required
to pay for that.
Madam chair senator really that
is to align with the the
previous sentence which I
understand you have some
concerns with so really it was
just a line that if utilities
are getting credited for the
energy that they're purchasing
there you use us are there
standardizing the treatment of
the Energy regardless of whether
it's exported to the grid or not
so it's really to help align
with that prior sessions and you
know if and create some
uniformity around the county of
the the different forms of
energy and if you would could
you repeat that last part again
to which is you are you saying
that the energy is is.
Deemed to be going to the grid
whether it that whether it
actually is accomplished or not.
I'm sure Center for accounting
purposes yes.
Is the is the public utility
required to.
Purchase that based on whatever
that metering is.
Madam chair Senator under under
federal purple laws the
utilities are required to
purchase energy from qualifying
facilities but but we're talking
here I I realize that they're
required to purchase a bit about
the quantity those that for the
whatever the the the measure
right is out as the measure deem
to be purchased regardless of
whether it actually reaches the
grid and all.
Madam chair center that that is
the spirit of of this part of
the language just.
Yeah you you'll you'll know
where I'm going with that too
which is that you know I I love
of the spirit and I began my
talk by talking about you have
the spirit of things but
you're you're gonna end up by
the magic of the fight over that
issue too so the rest the rest
of it I'll I'll I'll just move
on the the rest of this other
information is pretty straight
forward I think when you're
putting of a standard million a
year and a deadline all that
seems to be pretty clear.
The only other area that seem to
be of the question for me was if
you look on page eight says any
person may contest the public
utilities compliance by bringing
a complaint.
Right now what is this what is
the stand this is a legal
concept that we lawyers call
standing right million with who
has the right to spring a
lawsuit who has standing in this
section says any person may
contest of this by bringing
complaint is that is that
currently the law before the PRC
can anybody essentially bring
complaint before the PRC for any
reason.
Madam chair senator I believe
anyone is able to make a comment
and bring a a general complaint
I think this is giving explicit
rights to challenge these
particular segments of the
statute to the the public of New
Mexico yeah I would think that
that you know I'm always
surprised the PRC doesn't show
up with these things and have of
the you know they did of the ETA
them the PRC was all over the
bill on solution center souls
stepped out
B. Garcia was at a great deal of
opinion and thoughts about the
the E. T. the energy transition
that we're passing it I'm kind
of surprised the commission is
not involved here maybe because
it's new and new members and
they're kind of getting their
feet under them but but we see
any person may contest this by
bringing a complaint I've got to
believe the commission's gonna
have lots of complaints anyone
of you all the room could bring
a complaint in in the New Mexico
resident bring complaint and I
I've got to believe the
commission would want to have
some requirements of expanding
the and so passing lots as
anybody can bring a case where
the commission could mean the
commission's gonna be very very
busy so I think that that's it
madam chair again of.
Madam chair Senator on that
issue standing I have I now sit
on the rules and I met with
several of the new Pearcy
commissioners and I indicated to
them that we as legislators
would like to hear from them
about changes in the law that
would relate to their
responsibilities and we haven't
really had that in the past and
I hope that the new group would
be proactive thank you it's a
good observational being sincere
out all works out you know the
of the idea was to
professionalizing and to have
individuals with with greater
qualifications and experience in
the that's those are all good
things and then the perhaps in
the past but
I'm kind of curious to your
point
Senator that we haven't heard
from the PRC at all on this bill
but I'm aware of and some of the
others that would seem to very
much to implicate what they're
going to do and their job my
concern is that they'll.
this that maybe Dawn on them
between now and the final
passage of prop the governor's
signature but but I hope this
message gets out to them
hopefully they got a staff and
somebody who's looking at these
bills and saying yeah this is
this is what we want to do it is
that we want to do and rejoined
by Senator also just talk about
US stock about how when we did
the ETA we have the PRC very
actively involved with some
pretty strong opinions about of
the fact that we were taking way
a lot of their authority in many
cases and and here this one
section essentially says anybody
can bring up complaint before
the commission I would imagine
the commission will be very very
busy as a result of that and I
would expect commission might
give us some guidance whether
they think that's a good idea or
not but for now
This is the bill that's in front
of us thank you thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator souls thank
you madam chair up.
The kind of back on the section
that Senator about this on page
six.
The.
When we're talking about the.
Who gets to count the retail
sales the ETA I think you
indicated percentage of retail
sales that utilities have to
comply with is that correct.
For the R. P. S..
Madam chair Senator Mr correct
Madam center yes that's correct.
And.
They counted as their actual
sales yet there's lots more
renewable energy on the system
than what they actually sell due
to rooftop solar and others
right.
Chair Senators that is also
correct and so madam chair I
think this whole section what
it's talking about is that all
of the energy that's on the
system should count towards the
R. PS that they need to reach
and counted as a total sales
even though there's not actual
money that transfers but there's
energy that's been generated
this on the system that now gets
counted towards the R. P. S.
standards is that.
Madam chair center that is also
correct so I think that's what
the purpose of that section is
is so that all of the room
renewable energy that's produced
that is system wide even though
it doesn't cross the meter as an
actual sale is viewed as if that
was generated by the utility for
the accounting of renewables on
the system my understanding that
correctly madam chair center
that's about right okay so just
to clarify I think that's what
that section is now whether the
legal language that's outside
my.
The us that things you know I
also am worried bothered by
things like encouraging you know
how much encouraging how far
does that go I mean those
languages and Senator you've
taught me well to to be
skeptical of squishy.
Language with it up I think the
other important piece of this is
understanding first that part
about accounting for all of the
renewable energy that madam
chair as we get down to.
The bottom of page six where it
talks about the percentage that
six percent.
Of the total distributed
generation retail distributed
generation that at least six
percent should come from.
The these re that rooftop solar
or these out of retail.
Generation this is not in
addition to what the current R.
PS is is that correct.
Madam chair center that is
exactly right this is a
component of the existing pre
established our PS schools so
this doesn't change those levels
at all this just indicates that
within that section six percent
of that needs to be from.
Retail distributed generation
and then ramps up in twenty
eight that eight percent.
Is there a national standard
sweet spot for how much should
be retail distributed generation
as far as maximizing of
renewables on systems.
From chair Senator the local
solar for all road map that I
had cited to earlier you know
really highlights a kind of a
ten to twelve percent retail
sales across the country but
that's also taking into
consideration place like the
eastern seaboard which are much
higher the more densely
populated and so the distance
between existing generators and
customer load is significantly
less New Mexico as we all know
it's it's much more sparsely
populated in there long long
distances between generators and
where customers are actually
consuming electricity so New
Mexico would stand to benefit
from an increased amount of
distributed energy resources we
are also working with New Mexico
State University on a New Mexico
specific study to hone in
implement area results actually
exceed the percentages that
we're looking for here to
account for that we've included
a look back by the PRC and
twenty thirty two so they can
evaluate the status of meeting
these compliance goals and
recommend additional or further
compliance to the legislature
that time based on the
prevailing technologies
available that.
So so madam chair yeah it seems
like the the two big.
Purposes of this R. one how we
count the renewable energy for
the R. PS that everything on the
system regardless of whether
there's actual money taking
place should count towards the
renewable energy standards set
by the ETA.
And then secondly with in those
standards how much needs to be
set by retail distributed
generation and so it's just a
percentage within those for each
of those targets is the and I
get that right that Madam chair
Senator that's exactly right.
I
Madam chair do we know now how
much of the renewable energy
that comes from which source by
each.
utility how much is being
generated behind the meter as
opposed in front of the meter
for each of those is that
accounting available now.
Madam chair senator we have we
estimate that there is a a
little north of three percent of
retail sales from the investor
owned utilities currently coming
from distributed energy
resources these are almost
exclusively behind the meter
because as we all know the
community solar program is just
getting off the ground which is
good actually encourage front of
the meter distributed generation
development I think with the
addition of the two hundred
megawatts of the legislature's
already approved of community
solar we should see the
utilities essentially coast to
the first compliance target in
twenty twenty five and really
the the impetus of this bill is
to to further encourage
development of distributed
energy resources after that time
frame is that percentage ramps
up and we also expect retail
sales will potentially grow in
the state and so we would
account for that as well in the
determination of the amount of
retail distributed generation
that is needed for compliance.
Madam chair and thank you at it
again I think the key thing is
this.
This bill has us counting all of
the renewable energy on the
system as meeting the R. P. S.
rather than just the the
monetary sales which I think is
important what we're trying to
as a state get our renewable
energy we ought to be counting
it all properly and then within
those ramps up towards the yeah
what seems to be this the sweet
spot of somewhere around ten
twelve percent or more on the
system I guess up to fifteen
percent here by twenty thirty
three of ones that are retail.
distributed generation and
though so thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator souls
I've been here trying to
Trying to think about how to
address these concerns as you
know of one of the biggest
challenges with legislation for
me has been these these energy
bills because of the specialized
language
so my suggestion and I'm just
going to throw this out there
and I certainly differ and would
be interested in Senators
advantis take on this because he
has so much more experience with
drafting than I do
but I was just thinking that
perhaps on page six one five
instead of encouraging.
It would be facilitating.
Customer adoption.
And then compliance Shelby
instead of demonstrating
measured.
By the public utilities.
Of.
Increased weight retirement of
renewable energy certificates.
For for retail distributed the
distributed generation.
Increasing by six percent.
For an increase of six percent
by January first two twenty
twenty six and two percent each
year there after through January
twenty twenty three.
So that their specificity about
what the increase is expected
and very modest but consistent
with the overall goals and then
in search after in the case of
qualifying facilities insert
after that under federal law
that we just to clarify where
that where that term comes from
because that's what always gets
me qualified facilities what
does that mean and I didn't know
came from federal law but that's
just in experience with this and
then
Shall be deemed an on page
thirty online thirteen have been
purchased by the public utility
for accounting purposes.
And that way we know why
you know what what the purposes
of the of this deeming because
the deeming thing every time in
the law when you deeming
something it's just a legal
fiction and that what you're
explaining why you're having the
legal fiction
I don't know what I'm throwing
those out for suggestions it
probably of would be better for
went to judiciary but I those
those are my contributions to
try to solve the language
clarity issues
to avoid litigation so there's
absolute clarity and then with
respect to standing.
Of I understand why you want any
person but it's in the courts
standing is that you have to
there has to be a connection
between the harm in the
complaint unit and the the
remedy and so perhaps any person
affected.
Of by by the alleged utilities.
violation of this section may
contest or violation of these
provisions may contest and that
way you've got the connection
and you've got to find somebody
that's actually been harmed by
it and you satisfy sort of the
standard standing I'm just going
of out there to limit of has a
limit which is what the courts
used
I I'm not asking you to adopt
these amendments unless unless
you want to but I'm just trying
to problem solve because I
strongly believe in the goal I
really believe that
diversely is going to allow
resilience appropriate
resilience in the system as we
address the the Energy both the
energy crisis and and the
climate crisis so
I strongly support this I really
think the sponsor for bringing
this forward and is there any
anybody else Senators advantage
ask a quick follow up questions
really to Senators souls point
just real quick
The challenge I have with regard
to these this table in these
standards.
All of we're requiring six
percent of the U. to public
utilities total retail sales be
a certain amount.
From retail distributed
generation without reach out
distributed generation they they
don't have control over that
right now is that's not that's
not generation that there
that they're responsible for.
The challengers disabuse me of a
concern I have which is we're
requiring the public utility to
acquire more sensually a certain
amount of retail distributed
generation but there and they
have no control over that so
what what happens of there's not
adequate retail distributed
generation for the public
utility to acquire would they do
that.
Madam chair Senator Mr Craig.
Chair Senator I would say that
you know there are abilities for
the utilities to own some of
these assets again under the
community solar act also
referencing community solar you
know we heard from the
commission staffer that they
received over ten X. the amount
of capacity bids for the
community solar R. F. P. than is
needed sits over two gigawatts
of shovel ready community solar
projects that are ready to put
in the ground today driving
significant economic development
for the state so I think that
there is significant customer
demand I think there is
significant supply of available
projects to meet the standard.
So you're so you're confident
the even by the standards that
there will there will be
adequate retail distributed
generation the public utility
could meet the requirements from
Senator Senator yes okay and the
most important question of all
of this is my always my
criticism of the ETA what
happens if everybody just blows
us off what happens we just
ignore all of this if they don't
meet any these requirements of
six percent by twenty twenty six
we're in we're in the bill is
our consequence.
Madam chair Senator that that is
a great point again we really
did our best to a life of an
was our little ones I got you
know because that's always my
issue here is like you know what
I was given the example don't
drive fifty five minutes through
an oil or else you're gonna pay
two hundred dollars we don't
have to pay two hundred dollars
part of this bill right so usual
drive fifty five and I say or
what it is I know nothing so you
know it's again it's one of
those deals where we have good
aspirations we we have a like
minded intention but we have all
these requirements in here by
this date all pages six and so
of the state you show me the
center by another date we have
all for the twenty twenty six by
twenty twenty eight twenty
thirty by twenty thirty one by
twenty thirty three of all the
standards are requirements to
meet them so my question though
is what I was of I just blow it
all off and just so you know I'm
just not going to do that and
what I understand the answer to
be is nothing.
So madam chair Senator I I just
want to make the point that out
what we're doing here is
amending the renewable energy
act and it's come to me as we
discussed several things that we
could do in the next iteration
of a substitute is not identify
anything this in the R. E. A. as
new language so that people
understand it's in existing
language and that we add for the
doing definitions such as his
bid that discussed today and
that we speak with the drafter
regarding page six section B. to
look this over and also perhaps
use the PRC expanding definition
because.
I would be I would not want to
set a new standard if they
already have one or if they're
proposing to come to us with the
change in their standard.
But I've heard several things
today and it goes back to the
renewable energy act but we have
an and what we don't have an.
Thank you and so I can make a I
hope you'll show me someplace
you know between on the floor
will perhaps or this continues
in your committee process
because maybe there is a
consequence that's in the act
that I'm not aware of I'm just I
don't see it in the building so.
Maybe there is that this was
always my to my big concerns
with the ETA it remains at a PTA
in my opinion is mostly to some
memorial right because again to
just like this bill there's no
consequence so we we all have
press conferences we Pat
ourselves on the back for
creating all these ETA standards
and deadlines and dates but
there's no consequence we don't
meet any of them so again that's
not really a bill to me that's
an aspiration so thank you madam
chair I'm I'm conflicted had a
vote for this but I do
appreciate the sponsor.
Really absorbing I think a lot
of the suggestions she's getting
really thinking there's room for
improvement by the suggestions
thank you senator serve on this
and I'll just throw this out
maybe on page eight this is
probably gonna be very
controversial but you you put in
and the remedy will be
injunctive relief and fines.
So that there is a consequence
so.
With any other of any other.
Senator souls thank you I move a
do pass.
Your second perfect Madam okay
madam secretary will call the
roll Senator process so.
Senator that goes from the.
Senator haven't excuse senator
Neville.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator Senator souls yes in
the short explanation.
Center city office yes says the
phonics yes.
I
would agree with a vote of four
to three years and I and we need
to explain who was at the needs
of by Senator souls needs to
explain is that thank you and I
just yeah as it moves on to the
next committee is some of the
suggestions and things and
trying to clean up some of the
language and maybe definitions
and some of those so some of the
areas may make more sense I
think certainly work talks about
encouraging the encouragement
comes a little bit further down
that in order to meet the
requirements for those things
because they don't have control
they need to make sure that
that.
The retail generated generation
is online utilities need to
encourage that to make that
happen so but clean up some of
the language thank you for my
book to measure yes of course
Sen Elizabeth Liz would like to
explain his vote no just Ripley
I I again I hope it's clear I
support all the goals and
objectives here the I'm always
resistant to suggests that we
pass a bill that in other
Canadian fix it of some place
down the road I think that
that's probably on wise and I
generally resist that as a
solution to any problem we have
here so thank you madam chair.
Thank you senators about this I
think we rely on Judiciary
Committee.
Hey Andrew there
thank you madam chair
congradulations forty three
you've got to pass thank you
madam chair members of the
committee we have I will five
minutes of okay so let's go
ahead and start with the next
the.
The next item on the agenda
which is free roaming horses.
Senator McKenna.
Representative McQueen welcome
to our committee.
This is the Senate bill three oh
one.
Just
thank you madam chair is this.
A little bit louder if you could
speak a little louder this is
Mike working okay.
As long as you project yes
project okay I promise to
project.
A good morning madam chair and
committee members.
Thank you for scheduling SB
three oh one which addresses
free roaming horses.
I would like to welcome
Representative McQueen co
sponsor of the bill.
Our subject matter expert
joining us is miss Jessica
Johnson juris doctor and she is
also the chief government
officer for animal protection
New Mexico.
This bill madam chair addresses
urgent matters regarding equine
safety welfare and human safety.
Currently in communities such as
proceed us and real does so
there are no local authorities
are allowed to transport free
roaming horses that are found
wandering on state lands.
Over the past several months
Representative Matt McQueen and
our ad hoc coalition and I have
had held discussions about how
best to proposed changes to the
current statute.
Are we've had a number of
excellent contributors to this
To this coalition madam chair
including Mr Chris Morgan New
Mexico our council.
and I also want to use to add
that Senator Pat Woods was part
of the discussions and his
contributions are valued
reflected in the bill you see
today we want to thank him for
his advocacy in this legislation
in twenty twenty one and the
years before.
The stakeholder discussions were
held with the New Mexico
livestock board county
commissioner Brock.
And Sandoval county BLM cattle
and wool growers New Mexico
eight point rescue association
New Mexico counties employ C.
yes residents.
Representative McQueen and I
want to relate to you madam
chair and members that we feel
so strongly and want success for
this bill that we have both
contributed to your money this
year
to help The New Mexico livestock
board and are proposed our
expert to carry out the.
The goals of this bill.
at this point I would like to
Defer to our subject matter
expert Jessica she would like to
talk to you about the bill but
before that I think I'd like to
give the microphone to
Representative McQueen for any
remarks he would like to make.
Thank you senator Representative
making thank you for welcome to
our committee
then chair members be pleasure
to be here House Energy
Environment that's resources
meets the same time so I I don't
get up over here as often as I
would like but happy to be here
today I just want to say that
that this bill is not a
comprehensive comprehensive free
roaming our management bill it
doesn't address everything that
could be addressed because
they're really difficult issues
and managing free roaming horses
but I do think it's a
significant step in the right
direction thank you madam chair
thank you Representative ms
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members as the the
Sanchez just mentioned we've
been working on this issue for
many years now this is not the
first time that this issue has
been before this committee but
it's it's apparent that it's
going to take many more years of
work to build consensus and
resources for a big
comprehensive plan in the
meantime while there are free
roaming horses in the state that
live without incident there are
areas of the state where there
are conflict with people and
with natural resources in those
areas particularly and Sandoval
county in Lincoln County and and
so we are eager to make some
some changes to the state law to
help in the near term
This is the approach of this
bill is is really to more the
framework of existing laws so in
two thousand seven the states
wild horse statute was passed
almost unanimously there was one
can at one dissenting vote in
the legislature so broad
support.
Clearly behind the concept of
protecting and and well managing
our state's free roaming horses.
At the what we seek to do with
this legislation is to address
some of the problems that have
become apparent since then so
importantly I want to say that
this bill keeps the same
outcomes for horses as there is
an existing law so at that
management strategies allowed
for free roaming horses include
fertility control and if
relocated they can go to other
land with capacity to a preserve
or a rescue for sanctuary or
adoption and humane euthanasia
only for severe health
conditions so we know that there
are some people that are
concerned that this bill is
going to result in mass
euthanasia and wipe out of all
the forces the plain language of
this bill makes clear that that
is not true.
In fact there are additional
protections that have been built
into this bill to protect horses
including an explicit
prohibition against
selling or transporting a horse
to slaughter and also not
allowing helicopter in ATV round
ups which have proven to also
because humane issues
particularly at the federal
level where that's most often
use.
further the improvements in this
bill are important so while like
I said fertility control and
relocation is an existing long.
Relocation has never actually
happened under the the guise of
the current while for statute
because there are strange and
lease and gaps in the language
that have made it pretty much
impossible so this bill
clarifies aspects to
The process of humanely
relocating horses including
currently state law only speaks
to what can happen to a horse if
it's captured on public land
it's silent and everything else
and so the process sees in this
bill apply across the board
we're allowed.
It removes a DNA test of that
has been required to identify
whether a horse has some sort of
Spanish colonial our lineage and
in that case then the only
outcome for that of course would
be to go to a Spanish colonial
our reserves which does not
exist in the state of New Mexico
it mmhm there might be a few
groups in other parts of the
state and importantly that the
entity that the the law sets as
the authority for managing wild
horses is the University of New
Mexico museum of southwestern
biology Division of mammals and
at just this morning we were
able to receive a letter from
them confirming that they did
not ask for this authority
they've never exercised that
authority state would like to be
replaced as that it entity that
manages wild horses
this bill keeps I have copies of
the letter of the chairs
interested in that so this the
bill keeps the livestock board
as the statewide agency
overseeing this work and creates
a qualified expert that I can be
approved by the board and then
contract with others to conduct
humane management work it is at
want to note that FIR seems to
presume that this is an agency
FTE that is not what the bill
contemplates that this would be
an independent contractor the
role of the board would just be
too administer at the sort of
licensing process
so I will I will and there and
will stand ready for any
questions.
Thank you
do we have any proponents in the
audience.
Do we have any opponents in the
audience.
Okay and we have online we have
for supporters and for in
opposition so let's go ahead and
stick with the three from each
side just in the interest of
time if I don't know if you like
to
Pick your three.
Proponents.
Yeah sorry the joint okay thank
you you could come to the middle
and use the Mike to state your
your support for the bill and
then if the opponents can start
planning for their three.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person on the executive director
for New Mexico counties this is
an issue that has stopped us for
many years and we've often been
asked to weigh in we've worked
diligently with the advocates
for this initiative over the
last couple months and we really
feel this is a very wise
compromise we feel it's a state
issue counties are not prepared
in animal shelters to handle
anything above and beyond
companion animals and we keep
getting looked at for dealing
with horses we don't have the
expertise and we don't have the
resources we think the livestock
board with their relationship
currently with refuges and
others makes a lot of sense and
with that are point stands in
support thank you thank you ms
bars the.
Chair.
Members of the community.
My name is Mike needs to live in
close he yes which is ground
zero for free roaming horses
Senate bill three oh one
addresses the category of course
that has fallen between the gaps
in New Mexico statutes and this
is created public safety.
Environmental and private
property issues that need to be
addressed the I've been coming
here for
over a decade now on issues that
have come out of the current law
that needs to be taken out
seventy seven eighteen I which
is in this bill
it's hard to understand how
eight hundred pound horses can
go unmanaged in New Mexico today
but they do an implicit is we've
got a hundred and seventy five
of these horses the number is
growing even with the
administration of PZ P. the
population of the horses grows
approximately eight percent per
year or fifteen horses per year
this is the PDP has not help our
rural roads in please see this
in the past ten years thirty
horses have died on the roads of
proceed is fortunately no
individuals have died as of yet
but it shows that this is an
issue that has to be addressed
and I support this bill I think
it's time for the legislature to
take some action this bill could
help to it thank you.
Thank you Mr knees.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Peggy
Roberts I'm a resident plus CDS
and I served as the vice chair
of the Sandoval county free
roaming our council.
I'm also our or not owner and
for the past ten years I've had
extensive experts looks parents
with the proceedings free
roamers.
Has Mr NY said policy this has
part three hundred and seventy
free roaming horses living
primarily on private property in
a small suburban rural community
approximately seven thousand
residents has development and
population within the community
have incident creased and her
numbers have grown the health
and safety of the horses and the
community is increasingly at
risk and environmental
degradation is accelerating.
After years of doubt and free
roaming horses there's no
natural vegetation for the
horses or other wild animals to
eat.
In order to not watch horses
starve residents have undertaken
the financial burden and dangers
of feeding them feeding has
called semi domestication now
some horses even approach
residents while they're walking
or riding their horses this is
cost frightening situations.
Frightening and dangerous
situations.
The proceed as horses are in an
unnatural unsustainable
situation that is causing food
aggression between hertz semi
domestication and our staffs by
vehicles the course is cause
huge conflicts between neighbors
destroyed landscapes frighten
people and because property and
vehicle damage these problems
have been existing for at least
the past ten years.
As a member of the our council
the council for in its final
report.
Said that proceeded could not
support the number of existing
horses and the only community
acceptable solution in addition
to the county continuing the
contraception efforts was to
reduce the number of courses by
placing them in sanctuaries or
preserves and through our
adoptions at least some of the
horses need to be relocated this
cannot be done without changing
New Mexico statutes seventy
seven eighteen I I ask you to
support this bill thank you very
much thank you now we'll turn to
opponents of the legislation.
madam chair excuse me of the
Majority Leader has indicated
that we should go ahead and
complete this bill that there is
several memorials that are being
done on the floor so if anybody
could stay we'd appreciate it.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair also if I could ask a
favor and that is to if we could
please hear from the New Mexico
livestock board director Miss
bill Linda garland
she's been a important partner
in our developing the bill
today.
Is she standing in support of
okay of course thank you I did
I've this garland I'm sorry I
didn't recognize you
Please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity dollars I'll be
brief because I know that
everybody's got a tight schedule
so The New Mexico livestock
board has been involved with the
the writing of this bill we
think as the licensing agency
for a free roaming our expert
kind of falls in the parameters
we now license all of the our
rescues across the state so we
think that would go hand in hand
with the licensing that we are
currently doing
we do not believe that this is a
fix all for these horses but we
think this is a strong step in
the future to allow for some
expertise to bring sports some
thoughts and some suggestions on
how to improve the life of these
horses that are now standing
without forage.
Thank you Mr garland it was
important to hear from you that
that you accept this
responsibility that your agency
accepts responsibility now will
turn to opponents and I believe
there were more than three but
do we have three who are ready
to speak.
Do we only we have one who are
is ready to speak.
Six okay to.
Thank you and then the prize
will go up will go online for at
least one.
You madam chair committee
members my name is Bronson corn
on here Representative in the
New Mexico cattle growers more
stand in opposition of this bill
as we we agree there is a
problem
but there are things in this
bill that are going to hinder
part of the management tool to
be able to.
Work on fixing the problem.
One of the things that I am
concerned about it is why the
why the definition calling I'm a
free range course
I understand that they are
roaming wild but they're still
our and they're still under the
purview of the New Mexico
livestock board and I'm glad to
hear that you all are working
with the New Mexico livestock
board on this issue.
What you know what what's gonna
be done with these excess horses
that can't be adopted or find
suitable lifelong facilities and
and cannot be found to be
determined whenever the carrying
capacity of these lands are are
degraded there's no there's no
standing forage you're not gonna
be able to fix this problem
without proper management proper
management entails the calling
of livestock then you're gonna
have to be able to manage these
numbers and we understand that
this is a very emotional driven
problem.
I sympathize with that but if a
problem is gonna be resolved
hard decisions have to be made
and why not make the our heard
is as healthy as it can and you
can't get that done without the
natural calling of her the our
heard I have one a couple other
for small point real quick.
If you're looking for a place to
stick some of the sources I
would a I would greatly
encourage you talking with the
game and fish department and
taken over and stick them on the
L. bar I think that would be a
very suitable spot for them due
to the fact that it's now not
has does not have anything on it
except for wildlife and it's a
state owned ranch so I think it
would be a great spot to stick
some of the sources.
The New Mexico livestock board
had this bill
actually that out because you
all are working good with them
on the the livestock larceny
bill that has come forward there
was it was shut down in Senate
due to the fact that it had.
Continuing charges for each
animal that was stolen.
And then this bill there is
continuing charges for each
animal that goes to slaughter
and I don't see how it's fair
that for the people that are
surviving off of this livestock
that is stolen can't get
multiple charges per each
offense but on the our bill
hello it's multiple charges
preacher fence on our water so I
would I would ask you and I
would urge you to reconsider and
I would urge you to come up with
that with the management plan
that is actually feasible and
will work and I appreciate your
time thank you thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Serrano
Ishar and I'm representing the
American wild horse campaign in
New Mexico.
The American wild horse campaign
is the nation's leading wild
horse protection organization
and operates the world's largest
well our fertility control
program in Nevada.
Our habitat conservation
programs are implementing humane
solutions to keep wild horses
roaming free in balance with
their environment and other
lands in the west.
On behalf of our nearly one
million followers and supporters
including more than five
thousand New Mexico citizens I'm
here today to express our
significant concerns about this
bill.
Well this bill focuses on
addressing population numbers it
lacks a provision to preserve
wild horse herds that have
significance to communities in
the state.
As written the bill gives full
authority to manage these herds
to a free roaming our expert
potentially undermining an
existing county contracted
fertility control program.
Further management decisions
would be at the discretion of a
single unelected expert who
could utilize their authority to
control their herds in other
words this bill would allow that
Representative of livestock
board to cast castrate all males
of all our wild horses and
basically manage them out of
existence.
The designation of the livestock
board of experts to control
could also preclude the public
from having a voice in the
future of these herds by
contrast an existing county
contractor fertility control
program for the procedures free
ranging our allows for direct
citizen input to the local
officials elected to represent
them.
Finally the bill puts any free
roaming horse herds in New
Mexico squarely within the
jurisdiction of the New Mexico
livestock board which it is not
under today.
The New Mexico livestock board
despite prevailing case law that
explicitly excludes wild horses
from the definition of livestock
in state law.
The American wild horse campaign
appreciate the sponsor's good
faith effort we do understand
that there are problems and
they're real issues.
And we have the need for
solutions for the our welfare
and public safety issues of
several local herds we strongly
support the provisions in the
bill that prohibits slaughter
and destruction of healthy
horses removed from the range.
That require microchipping and
branding for any horses removed
from the range.
As a result we stand ready to
work with the Sanchez.
And your committee as the bill
moves through the legislative
process to achieve a well
balanced.
Thank you Mr chart lists are
thank you I want to indicate
there are four people terribly
masamoto of low dental for love
the more
Nina Heilmann Katherine brunt of
brooch and Kimber Christo's who
support the bill there are four
opponents Gary miles Pam Burke
Marty with the last name and
money it can Donna we will free
quality we'll hear from two
opponents briefly let's start
with the Mr Kerry mills.
Okay.
Briefly Mr mills miles.
Is your okay Mister miles of you
could be brief.
Okay how about the ms king
Donna.
Good morning everyone can you
hear me yes.
Okay my front my concern is as
opposed to just resident and
also as an investigator for a
nonprofit that this is going to
make our easier target of our
wild ones are and are free
roaming horses for the our
lawyers first traffickers one of
the largest in the United States
is right most loan us here in
New Mexico.
I have personally witnessed him
our.
Courses I have followed him to
the border I've seen the
conditions there I've seen the
conditions that those horses are
exposed to at slaughter in
Mexico itself.
There has to be some provision
maybe even with microchipping
and branding freeze marking that
does not work forces have been
seen on these trucks with free
sparks going to slaughter there
has to be a better way concise
way to prevent any of these
horses from going to slaughter
in this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Donna and I also
want to note the cat that
Catherine bridges at a county
commissioner in central county
so I apologize to all of the
people that we didn't have time
to listen to it's just a matter
of time Senator do you have a
response org or summer.
thank you madam chair I think
I'd like to differ
any remarks that would be
appropriate to my subject matter
expert Jessica Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members perhaps it a
couple of points that I could
address right off the bat
there is there was a concern
raised that this bill is putting
wild horses under the
jurisdiction of the livestock
board when it currently isn't
that is not true so the current
while our statute which this
bill amends so it'll remain the
same statute is in chapter
seventy seven article eighteen
that is included in the
livestock code livestock board
is the administrating agency of
the livestock code
I understand the concern about
preserving wild horses and I
think many New Mexicans cherish
wild horses don't want them to
go away
however what we have written
into the bill is that control
measures could only be taken
once I heard exceeds
once the range and have ended by
a herd or our exceeds its
carrying capacity so even not
withstanding the desire for
preservation if the land is
beyond its carrying capacity and
cannot sustain the forces that
and control measures should be
allowed according according to
this bill
I'm.
And in there was a concern about
undermining of a PC P. program
it's not clear to me how that
would do how this bill would do
that the the qualified free
roaming our expert as is defined
in this bill and and and
utilized in this bill is very
similar to what one of the
counties is already doing that
contracted with an independent
organization that has conducted
a county wide survey counted the
forces there I administering
fertility control to horses
and had have brought fully
numbers down from many many
dozens every year down to just
single digits and it a group
like that also being able to
work to humanely relocate some
of the horses to the limited
funds outlets available in law I
would make sense
Thank you Mr Johnson committee
members.
Senator Neville thank you madam
chair I think is interesting
that of the two opponents are
from totally divergent sides of
the.
Of the issue I would like to
point out another feral animal.
Wild pigs what has happened and
they're creeping into the
southeast corner of New Mexico
there working away they're gonna
be everywhere with the only
thing that keeps our numbers
down is the fact that most of
our country's very dry and
doesn't have much vegetation and
makes it difficult for me to
survive I drive down here from
farming to the four corners and
all around much of its Indian
land our numbers are phenomenal
just and I can't tell exactly
someone could be actually owned
horses but I think most of our
federal and that's it's gonna
it's going to be a tremendous
problem this is a step in the
right direction I don't think it
quite goes far enough I think
the problems can get bigger and
bigger and bigger and
Unfortunately what Mr corn said
maybe some part of the solution
and I hope we don't have to get
that way to that point I gave
junior money last year the
senator or member to one of our
facilities up there that takes
rescue horses I don't want to
see.
The extreme to the steps taken
we're going to do something with
this and I think although for
this because I think it's a step
in the right direction I don't
think it goes far enough and
duties be a lot more done and I
appreciate the Sanchez thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Neville.
Anyone else on the committee.
Do I hear motion.
Senator bill of with the motion
the two passed.
Yes do I have a second.
Senators maintenance with a
second.
Madam secretary would you call
the roll Senator Sanchez yes
Saturday.
Use Center happened is Senate
bill yes Senator pope yes thanks
committee.
Senator also yes yes hello yes
session I yes.
With with a vote seven of it
with a vote of seven to zero you
received a do pass
congratulations Senator
Representative thank you
committee members of.
The committee is recess.
