In the lower run off then then
we would have expected and
that's due to the higher
temperatures.
So I mentioned that the compact
negotiators had that or thought
feet and climate China climate
scientists are warning us that
it could go significantly lower
than that they've suggested that
look at is just a line that
shows the overall storage and
lakes Powell and Mead the lakes
Polin meet are the two largest
reservoirs in the United States
In nineteen eighty three both
reservoirs were spilling and
those reservoirs remained
largely full of through the
eight the remainder of the
eighties and into the nineties
of water in storage you can see
them in the next four years
there was a precipitous drop in
the storage because of the the
the drought the the
by hydrology every year in two
thousand and four it the the the
few actions were taken that that
help to stabilize the the levels
in the reservoirs for a few
current operating rules for the
Colorado River system were
negotiated and and put in place.
At the end of two thousand and
twelve you can see that it again
drought contingency plans to try
and stop or control the the the
depletion of the the the
resource in these reservoirs but
again precipitously we started
in twelve a two thousand with
forty two million acre feet of
water in storage and in twenty
by twenty twenty at twenty
twenty two we were down.
account the and I say we but
that was largely the lower base
in the states of
California Arizona and Nevada
the if the these two reservoirs
slide three is a simplified
cross section of Glen canyon dam
that's the damn that's right
above Lee's ferry that Mike
right in the middle and on the
on the left side is the upstream
side where the reservoir is and
you can see that the when the
when the reservoir is full the
thousand five hundred twenty two
feet
so it's almost two hundred feet
down in that resort any of you
that have ever visited that
reservoir know that it is a huge
so we've lost as I said
of those very very significant
portion of water.
Now.
dark blue line and then a
lighter blue line and there's a
label underneath the the river
outlet tubes that that label
corresponds to the lower light
reservoir down into the
generators that generate
hydrolift hydroelectric power as
from of the power.
from the from the reservoir
would be primarily through those
penstocks and through the
generators
flowing into a tube is sometimes
it'll create a awarded for text
that draws air into it if that
begins to happen and you dry air
into that and it runs into the
the the the bubbles of bursting
in in in that in that screen
control can created a tremendous
amount of force.
if you've just yesterday we saw
we got a pretty good snowstorm.
The upper basin overall we're
the the the snow melt is going
to start and the the in that in
the or the water's gonna start
flowing into this reservoir and
this year and probably into next
year so this went hydrology has
given us a reprieve but we we
still have to we still have to
generate hydropower and as you
know many people in New Mexico
rely on the head of power and
throughout the west we rely on
the hydro power this is also a
critical infrastructure system
into into production mode.
The so if we get past that the
the generating tubes the
penstocks at thirty four ninety.
while you can can you can use
them you have to take them out
of service periodically and make
sure that they're inspecting and
the inspected and and
functioning properly.
speak we call that the head of
the the amount of water that's
above that that that exerts the
pressure down on on to those
tubes and as we get the that
hydropower but we can't deliver
the water that the that is
needed and lower basin.
So we we need to
plans and those helped but they
were simply not enough.
So that hopefully explains kind
of the nature of the emergency
that we're facing and and by the
in context in the lower basin
the there's probably close to
twenty million people that rely
on that water there is a huge
so.
Now I'm gonna talk briefly about
what we've been doing and in
response to that emergency we've
done a number of cooperative
actions last year first of all
million acre feet of water what
that what that would have
ordinarily flow down to the
lower basin excuse me.
Was held and lake Powell to prop
up the the water levels in their
look back at the map on on page
one.
Our slide one there's several
reservoirs they're not nearly as
big as lakes Powell in need but
aspen all unit there's some
really there's some water that
stored in there that could be
released down.
Up up lake Powell and in New
we're able to send some water
down so this last year we did
just that we agreed to send up
to a half million acre feet of
a reprieve well but this is what
got us to where we were able to
get that reprieve.
Thank you thanks.
basin additionally the bureau of
reclamation initiated
recognizing this this
they needed at this lower end we
never expected that we were
going to be working or or
operating the reservoirs at that
low end we have to do we have to
be allowed or reclamation has to
Representative back in November
reclamation gave notice that
they were going to do a
supplemental environmental
impact statement that's it S. C.
I. S. for short to expand the
analyze what would happen if we
just keep doing what we're doing
the no action alternative second
they were going to create a
unilaterally they were going to
create a and alternative
amongst all seven states that
they could also analyse we work
that that we didn't have a lot
of time in time for that but and
we were not able to get to a
and then we work with Navajo in
Arizona to the size that a
little bit and we develop that
into a consensus all consent
actions that would be taken.
So.
I'm just very very quickly the
difference between the six state
would
Give up require California to
contribute and and take some
shortages along with Arizona and
junior and it should should be
taking the brunt of that but
from a practical perspective I
think it's probably impossible
to fully cut Arizona uses all
The another difference is that
the six state alternative begins
taking action at higher water
levels in lake Mead that is we
level not letting them get all
the way down to the bottom but
in turn it in in overall
magnitude of cuts
both the six state alternative
all costs and to do so it will
require the lower basin to cut
any at somewhere between three
and four million acre feet of
between the the positions of the
state.
The schedule for this S. C. I.
S. reclamation hopes to release
the draft the as the I just in
year's operational plans are put
in place in in August.
So that I I hopefully that
interim guidelines those interim
guidelines are set to expire in
twenty twenty six so once we've
dealt with this a current
emergency and thankfully the
when the current guidelines
expire so that will be a new
nepa process it'll be a separate
he I just environmental impact
including in New Mexico and so
we've had a very regular
engagement with the tribes in
the in the within the state
nation as well we've kept
someone basin water users Erin
Chavez the that is represents
the sun one water commission and
and is also the president of the
He regularly invites us to
present to his to his commission
we meet with other water users
that that express any interest
Santa Fe City of Albuquerque
they get a significant portion
of their water from the Colorado
River system it flows from the
tributaries of the sun one
pick that up so this water is
important to the state as a
whole.
we engages regularly with those
contractors as well we engage
them I was asked to address
decision making on the Colorado
River.
So I've been appointed to make
mention I I I've been appointed
as a commissioner for the upper
Colorado River compact
state agency staff I have to
coordinate really carefully what
with I S. C. and state engineer
of first
closely with my canon state
engineer my common and Rolf
Schmidt Petersen the director of
the I. Essie on decisions we go
along we present to the
Interstate Stream Commission as
needed
authorization from this body we
would keep you apprised and and
we welcome opportunities like
today to keep you abreast of of
what it is that we're going on
Thank you is that one Madam
chair of senators members of the
committee I'm going to bring the
issues we're we're engaging with
anywhere on the Colorado River
overall I could be anywhere from
sixty to a hundred fifty people
in the room for decision making
directly to the Interstate
Stream Commission of for
decision making and I think you
all are aware that for the I. S.
C. for any funding that we
our commission they of review
that information and then make
determinations on them based
upon those terminations we act
then that would be alley and
Dominique in myself and other
Mexicans and so slide amid a
start with is the one that's
just the table that says
averages of estimated
consumptive use
go into the details of it of the
table itself right now except to
say if you look at the the
bottom number consumptive use
around four hundred and ten
thousand acre feet year on
seventeen and a half million
acre feet.
On the Colorado River in the
year New Mexico's uses are
almost within the error bars of
those measurements for the the
bigger part of the Colorado
River basin compact so it's
really important to understand
that for the for New Mexico like
in in most well actually
everyone of the other upper
basin states we're not anywhere
are arguably using of the full
allocations that they have if
not more because some losses in
transit you evaporation entrance
the lower basin not in the upper
basin and in the upper basin is
a step on mentioned we don't
have the reservoirs upstream of
us that when we want water we
with Colorado if the surface
waters that not there you don't
have water and so we experienced
shortages and they apply to
probably experience some of the
in California have never
actually experienced a shortage
and system to put into context
the other thing I want to
mention that first item the
the new project.
And it is the largest water user
on the San Juan river with in
New Mexico you know within the
Madam framework that exists
there for the Navajo Nation of
district Amit Pueblo Pojoaque
valley construction project
House area rely on for their
water supply interrelated you
know and just giving you an idea
thousand acre feet here closer
to forty today and declining
and then you know municipal of
that there and representative a
lot is that on the lower side
map and that the couple things I
just wanted to point out of
Stephanie mentioned the San Juan
Chama project that takes water
from Colorado tributaries of the
Chama project brings water into
Herrin reservoir which is the
firming reservoir for it C.
Navajo reservoir that's off to
the left of that and then below
that you see a line for cutter
pipelines that go south from the
San Juan river are the major
parts of the Navajo Gallup water
supply project this is now a two
The I. S. C. is charged with
supporting that project in
providing the state Koster state
Koster has been met but this
project is not complete the the
pipeline or the San Juan lateral
that will bring water to Gallup
and ultimately window rock
Arizona is still in construction
of a lot of money being spent on
thousand foot deep wells as
backup water supply until this
pipeline is completed we're
actively working to do that so
settlement in getting this
tribes their water and the city
of Gallup additional water out
of the San Juan river system
still a small amount forty three
mention here also you can see
near the town of Durango on this
map there's a lady there called
lake nighthorse lake nighthorse
is part of the Animas La Plata
Mexico and for the Interstate
Stream Commission long term goal
of ours is to help get that
water that's in lake nighthorse
apportion of it available to
Farmington Aztec and Bloomfield
Chair just a couple minutes
the next thing I just want to
mention here is I I on the next
slide it's the San Juan Chama
project history of shortages and
so as I mentioned before the the
New Mexico on our reservoirs now
for ten to fifteen years if not
longer in fact most of our
reservoirs are empty and they
have been for a significant
period of time so what the
slide since two thousand and
twelve for diversions of water
from Colorado into the San Juan
Chama project there is an
allocation ninety six thousand
pin I think three years in the
last ten that we've had a full
allocation we've had a number of
years that are close to that the
last two years or actually
twenty twenty two is not on here
allocation even with the the the
largest types of cuts that
Esteban mentions for the
Colorado River system downstream
they may approach that but they
drought that we've had you don't
hear in the national is
but New Mexicans Santa Fe
So they have resilience in their
supplies even with the shortages
of we're advocating within the
lower basin that they just need
to do the same kind of thing.
Last slide I want to mention is
that we have in place and it
we're we're seeking to
find waste in day at to help
endangered species on the San
be provided to the lower basin
or too late Helfrich uses in the
future in exchange for us being
able to continue diverting water
we have a ten year lease now
with the hickory Apache nation
infants this is the first year
of that lease it is unique a
sovereign to sovereign
Mexico because it lost its lease
with San Juan generating station
when that started closed down
get them revenue and then get
endangered species on the San
Juan river and by doing these
operations to help those species
will help with something called
the San Juan recovery
implementation program which is
San Juan including the San Juan
Chama project.
We will track the water as it
makes its way down to lake
Powell and you can see here from
the graph or the map that I'm
showing the far right circle is
there so we can track it.
We will basically send the water
down track it and then basically
tag in the reservoir as New
Mexico water.
For exchange later on in the
future this is to prepare New
the Committee and I'm gonna do
this going alphabetical order I
believe senator Siobhan basis
excuse today so Senator Gallegos
do you have any questions or
comments.
I live in southeast New Mexico
we've got the aquifer I am I to
understand in the California
Arizona area just because are
dependent on the Colorado River
Thank you for that question
There are aquifer's but they are
very very poor quality aquifer's
compared to what you've got and
Arizona and California our our
our
Are not they don't yield much
and in large part they've been
drained and and Arizona they're
I think that Madam chairman and
Mister Lopez so my next question
would be and and I'm just
thinking all the way down the
Colorado River when you get
towards California and Arizona
we looked at any processes from
the California side to do cellum
bring up into Arizona or Nevada.
it's called the Carlsbad plant
actually and and there is that
there's a lot of a lot of
interest in irrigation
about their their technology on
a regular basis a lot of people
are engaging with.
Thank you for that and a
gentleman madam chair and
Just just not thought.
Then turned Lopez twenty you
have your a page three it's of
Glen canyon dam.
electrical generation have we
ever looked at what it would
take to and I know you're gonna
have to have output all the time
looking at the of the light blue
line in order to keep the and no
it's going to be depend on the
level that keeps generation
instead of going into the river
coming back up into the lake has
I know the electrical of
dependency on that is pretty
severe and as just wanting if
they're looking at any kind of
all the evaluating the
possibility of trying to reply
on that the the internal
workings of that of that
reservoir such that they can do
exactly what you're talking
about Transcat of generating
at the options beyond that as
well.
Madam chair Mister Lopez
gentleman thank you for the
inside of I've been.
that just came up so I know you
guys are on the Colorado side
yes also look at the Rio Grande
in the pickles.
so I can move on madam chair I
appreciate that I was going to
look at it a trading deficits
but madam chair and gentleman
couple of quick comments of the
chairman diversions what couple
hundred thousand acre feet is
that what I remember.
downstream use that that's what
they have available under their
contracts if you just combine
all of them.
What is.
I I know the answer but what is
Senator it's said that in the
mid fifties that for that
project similar really to just
fifty six with regards to the
The Navajo dam and the Chama
diversion they're all nineteenth
mid fifties as I recall yes Sir
also correct so I'm I'm just
trying to set the stage here so
that everybody understands that
the New Mexico.
Current landowners should have
priority over the water within
Madam chair the Santo the the
I I I believe that the at its
California and unless we're not
delivering that seventy five
million over ten to the lower
basin as a whole and that's what
if you look at the table that I
provided with the on average is
of use for slide for the number
three nine net agriculture
and those are water uses that
are essentially within the upper
basin senior water right users.
Madam chair senator Neville was
one point seven million acre
feet approximately.
individually fifty million acre
feet combined.
Fair enough I just a Navajo
seems like a big lake but it
doesn't quite compare with those
two thank you Mr chair madam
chair.
Okay I'll I see Senator mantises
joined us do you have any
questions or comments Senator.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez I'm assuming you're
talking about the sun once on
the project is that rents are
the some lunch on the project
above their so we're at the
mercy of the hydrology that's in
those upstream tributaries
further there is a significant
that might be better manage to
to increase the security of that
supply and what are those
procedures that are being looked
at to better manage it and how
much do you know do we have
overgrown forests so it's it's
the work that forest of the for
service in the and others other
large land managers are doing
throughout the west so I guess
And with with that include
following following land what
are the kinds of the techniques
that would be used it madam
chair since the Lopez at I don't
think we would do following up
Which would include what is the
name has been named controlled
burns things of that nature
trying to make sure that we
never get an out of control
Madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez I think certainly advocate
advocating for resources for
that sort of the work generally
and working with the someone
some contractors a lot of them
Number four power it was said
that the.
That the the use of water for
the the title here says
estimated consumptive use and I
just think about all those oil
wells and all the all the water.
you certainly in the Permian
to come up and adds more that
you've noticed as you noticed in
the stable we don't see a lot of
water use for oil and gas coming
it's gas producing you know area
where the water is drawn down in
order to produce gas and then
that water is rejected into the
commission and others but it's
small in comparison to these
other numbers.
So they they're using although
for water and what is the
relationship to the surface
for use by any parties in the
San Juan basin of New Mexico in
in parts of the area here if
In it and so it's not a really
reliable supply other than that
you're talking these
consolidated settlements that
the oil and gas is taking water
Thank you I I have one or two
questions and I don't know if
this would be for Mister Lopez
but I understand that there is
do projections with the snow
mass in terms of what will be
coming down into our reservoirs
could you comment on that.
Excuse me.
Madam chair
I I think you're referring to
across the United States there
is one for Colorado basin as
well and the acronym is CPR FC
and day to generate forecast
Immediately but if there
projections indicated
that there would be a more flow
projections it's interesting
because every single time we
meet with the bureau of
reclamation
and that's probably weekly every
the the current hydrology the
current what hydrology in the
upper basin right now is
expected to
would likely into next year but
beyond that it's still could
come be coming down and there is
a little bit of uncertainty as
to exactly what that happens
because it and and the last few
temperatures have risen so we're
still learning that to some
degree.
Okay thank you and then Mister
Lopez has there been any
discussion about creating.
undertaking literally had the
that that that that that Dennis
massive and but but yes
reclamation is studying all
because as it gets lower and
lower it doesn't even matter
that you have a a a to read at
the bottom of the reservoir you
can only move the water through
reservoirs.
Thank you and that maybe
sometime I could discuss with
you the tribes from throughout
the seven states and and their
interactions because I believe.
Madam chair all I'll answer just
very briefly we we've resolved
the the claims of the Navajo and
Jicarilla Apaches we have not
has I believe it's twenty two
tribes and they resolved very
few of them maybe three or four
of them so they've got a huge
would like to thank you all for
coming this morning we really
appreciate your time madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your attention and and
your interest in this topic.
DS to commence hearing bills
your books and your name please
have been set up there thank
you.
You guys.
We have the best.
Good morning Sir.
Senator share.
Senator share doing so the storm
water facility as municipal it a
utility please thank you madam
chair and thank you for
rescheduling this.
the same thing as providing
electricity or providing water
and sewer those kind of things
and here's why I believe this is
important.
what on ways to control the
senator so what this does is it
allows doesn't make it allows
local governments municipalities
to have a.
this so some of the dealing with
it might be pretty simple okay
let's put a culvert here some of
it might be a lot of more
intense because you don't want
all of this water just rushing
so that's what it does madam
chair.
Thank you and would you like
your expert witness to talk a
little yes so expert witness
Thank you senator thank you you
bet it'll be very short madam
chair Madam chair Senators good
for I am the the civil engineer
I'm licensed in three states I
serve as acting chair currently
on the governor's water quality
undergraduate is in civil
engineering.
This is a I I'm I'm really
grateful for the opportunity to
speak on behalf of Senate bill
seven thirty two it's sponsored
Today our question you join in
recognizing with the forty seven
other states that have primacy
that's for storm waters as a
utility so they recognize that
as a utility the other forty
seven states and I'm advocating
availability that the home rule
cities currently enjoy in all
cities it would then be provided
in New Mexico
mandates such as the one the
ones that are currently in
process since the legislation of
two thousand seven of which are
would be New Hampshire New
Mexico Massachusetts.
We need it because of what
prevent flooded streets when we
have our monsoon and and lastly
Any other standard stormwater
costs which occur today must be
city of Farmington this tent is
only to find readiness and to
take proactive steps.
To allow for choices in the
future thank you for your
Is there anybody here to oppose
this bill.
A committee member's questions
comments.
Ansel's okay.
Senator Neville.
If you have to pull it out.
So you have a.
There it is.
First off if you set up one of
these how how would you.
Charge maybe cover this new
presentation again I apologize
if I'm in an area that is
So there's several different
ways and that would usually be
workshop before the the city who
Of in some cases.
Because of
Would this be for new
developments are existing
federal government which has not
yet come to the non primacy
States in the larger in the
smaller cities in Albuquerque
now for what is referred to I'm
sure you've heard of MS four
permits in that's going to be
expanded for we're going to be
required to cities come up of
some how this would fit in but
some of the flooding in
Farmington where I live has
occurred because of poor
is good for any utility there
are some deport decisions that
historically have been made by
all people and unfortunately
when I come into a situation
information from people and you
try to use good science and you
just right now again Farmington
that we do not have any funds
appropriated for that and I
particularly as a community
works director who has to put in
and the state highway floods or
in the in the two thousand ten
and two thousand thirteen I
think you all know about the
devastation that occurred
because we didn't have good
absolutely and the lack of the
damn that's by the high school
the yes Univest of that great
improvement aniline through long
mainstreet river car dealers are
that Morton Bircher fault but
and.
but they happen because the city
developed and they weren't
addressed is the in a timely
fashion on the development
happen right well for several
years of I'm sorry.
apologize please forgive me.
But madam chair and senators
The the.
experience shut such monsoon Act
activity as we did in two
thousand ten and two thousand
thirteen at it since the forties
then you have monsoon at this
level if you are D. caught off
guard that you've had several
you want to respond quickly time
trying to just for a moment so
madam chair the problem exists
now whether it's new or old it
has to be solved now whether
it's new or old.
the idea and I understand the
costs can be divided that
you'd mentioned MS four permits
can you explain that to me.
committee member.
The MS four permits are water
quality permits that have
and stream values and values of
pollution elements that come
through the arroyos during
monsoon especially and it
the pike for the new upgraded in
this for an NPDES permit
trying to understand so of we
don't have in Lee County the
problems you guys will have with
run off so trying to think
through talking earlier about
Madam chair and the Senators my
what we have in place now is a
the future and we have all of
the most essential and
from the last set of monsoon
between even some of the.
storm water facilities includes
dams in the maintenance there
of.
would assume after you've got
these of facilities in place you
would returning back to the
river and at that time the value
So just a thought process and so
do utilities and costs of an
extreme sense COVID Q. have any
Farmington but do you have any
kind of thought process on the
total cost for the Farmington
area Madam chair Senators we we
shortages and inflation's we
need to update those costs but
lot of assistance and help in
the two thousand ten and two
thousand thirteen.
monsoons as a result of those
through FEMA and such and but
Catch the low hanging fruit and
most importantly
Protect life and
And home and safety.
once they come back because of
the
melts after the the winner of
everything happening calf care
can't.
emergency right now but I'd be
really good get ahead of it in
this last madam chairman and
center and gentleman I'm looking
what your needs are so madam
chair I yield thank you thank
you on on that like to let
everybody know I have Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator vontade
environmentally sensitive
approaches to protect our water
will be used but I do have a
question about the fees would be
probably these areas were more
low income areas because they
were kind of with the cheap
route in in figuring out the
drainage and everything else and
Is there anyway we can go back
against developers or and and
there's nothing in the bills
that that well and maybe we
Madam chair and and Senators I
would answer that question
pretty simply first of all my
district is the more wealthy
areas that are.
of a program and what I tried to
clarify but I don't think I did
a very great job and that is.
municipalities just as as a
The.
I'm sorry the name went out of
my head the home rule cities can
public hearing process receive
all the input go through all the
science do the calculations and
do our best to make it equitable
I agree with your concerns.
are low income the water's
coming through their house
today.
Of so we are at least have the
chance to fix it and at least in
this in city of Farmington the
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Montoya said Ron
returns to C. will go to
Senators souls.
first the basic question is it
illegal now to have a municipal
waste water.
so that it can be the same as
water sewer.
Things like that.
Madam chair of the is are those
required to be in law do we have
it might excuse me my madam
chair and senators my
My S. city attorney tells me no
we may not have a stormwater
law that you in order to have
any city utility you must have.
Authorizing language.
but the law today actually does
speak specifically
about other utilities and I am
looking for that now.
or any interest in jointly owned
generating facilities so that's
in law what's not in law is
storm water facilities and so it
can be done so we're just adding
that to a list of things are
already in law.
Madam chair and and senator
I mean typically deal with the
my bill in Los crucis my water
bill is in some ways based on
how much go DO which covers the
sewage system as part of that
madam chair and stand Senators
the law that the federal
government has established a is
that we will no longer combine
not mix sewage.
Okay I guess I'm not
answers that question when we
were talking about this madam
chair last
When was that Wednesday when we
have this my basic question was
larger impact and small property
owners less for instance a a
mall that has huge amounts of
parking lot produces large
amounts of waste water would
have a substantially larger
Senators as I as I was
discussing before this these are
the details would be worked out
but certainly I as a
As if by my recommendation it
would be but if if council so
chose to do it a portion in a
different way that would be
their decision.
Thank you madam chair and
centered some type back over
here so you have to for you is a
juggle things around.
earlier when I think you said
Senator that you were told by
your local attorney that you
needed this authority in the
statute doesn't exist that's
statutes as for purposes of
protecting the inhabitants from
damaged by floodwaters a
municipality may construct and
maintain within or without the
waters.
From damaging property or
threatening him lies within the
municipality that's all existing
language enters the three dash
forty one dash one a.
removing the obstruction of any
stream within or without the
municipality for purpose of
opening a channel and diverting
floodwater so all of that well
that's existing statutory
language it's very it's very
structures cetera so I'm I'm
puzzled MMI is there something
that I'm missing here because
Which provides for a flood
control municipality levy a tax
this kind of use the center sold
question earlier is when what is
the what is the impacts and
who's going to be responsible
that taxable properties subject
property taxation all for
purposes of controlling the.
Of storm waters.
And the actually that section
protection purposes which I
think is what you're trying to
address here's what I what we
were talking about is it Madam
we're talking about flood
protection over documents to us.
Yes I'd like to yes I would I'm
a plan having give me a chance
answer back to the early
questions even with just the
control and to construct and
levy taxes for flood control so
madam chair this isn't about.
being legal to to do that this
is about how to fund it how do
this does is it just simply puts
the city in the same category is
how do you fund sewer systems.
Also Senator souls points out of
your you know you're not really
correlation correlation a gallon
coming in is assumed to gallons
going out but in the summertime
it's not that because we're
we're water in our garden so we
can grow our Chiles and tomatoes
fund of a mechanism so that you
can actually do what that law
says there's a difference
between being allowed to doing
it and being capable of doing it
the bill this is entirely all
new language
looks like.
Well section one is new I can't
tell the section two is not new.
And then and then storm water
services I'm I'm sorry I'm not
seeing anything here and all
consistent with what you were
just saying which is this is
about establishing a the funding
at page three a municipal
utility okay this is an existing
language of municipal utility
means sewer facilities water
facilities gas facilities
utility system for the city and
so we're simply trying to make
this part of the utility system
and that's really so that you
can figure out how to.
back to where's there so that
I'm always looking to you know
do we really need this law and
in the section one.
Authorizes munis agency that
municipalities by ordinance to
exit just it's not called
stormwater it's called flood
control
but there is a language that I
think that it's a side early
which is perfect for purposes of
existing law already authorizes
for you expressly municipality
to do this and so section one
which seems to do the same thing
It
and then.
I'm a little troubled frankly by
the proposed section one
subsection B. which is a
with that which is you know what
when you say that you can charge
just a reasonable fee
and you're gonna do that teach
property owner that that's
different than what's an
controls if you look at three
dash forty one dash to talk
about how you actually do
election and help of folks can
impose a levy on the electors
and and so forth.
how the right now anyway how how
would you envision that that
language is as a municipality
may require percent owning.
To pay a reasonable fee for
stormwater Services.
I don't know how you do that.
municipality charges for for
stormwater Services on we can
get a gas bill your water bills
electric bills I remember ever
seeing a bill for for
So you
madam chair and senators you
you've asked several questions
stormwater there's of course
crossover and when someone says
there's a flood or just a
regular downfall of rain that
municipality not not to
necessarily a boundary outside
which.
Most cities I don't think would
be interested in setting new
Larger slide districts I think
the think there's three that I
know about in the state of New
Mexico that have made use of the
ordinance that you speak of.
They can already add stormwater
as a utility it's those that are
not home rules so we've we've
divided the state on who can
deal with stormwater who can't.
between home rule of four were
other organizations as many
municipality doesn't distinguish
at all the existing statute and
and likewise the the section
thirty three dash forty one dash
to home rule.
And and then I really encourage
you to look at that that one
section three dash one one dash
it social I think those
questions our soldiers asking
how do you how do you do that
and and your language says they
can charge a fee but in really
explain how but at least under
the existing law it's pretty
are are
Essentially impose based on that
taxable that property value
which may or may not make any
sense but at least that's all
pretty extensive existing law
issuing bonds for for paying for
these kind of systems which
against again I think probably
COVID all of us.
I know Dona ana county we have a
pretty extensive flood control.
foot control but it and then
over we've got a pretty
expensive in system and a lot of
the water runs through through
our storm sewers and and gets
gets held on October in lake
provide super tire section for
eminent domain and condemnation
which makes some sense for
quarrying land easements right
of way.
unobstructed ingress and egress
on land necessary to carry out
the provisions.
And in fact immunize them from
liability for damages.
this doesn't go to Judiciary so
I've got a million or make
myself satisfied here that this
is something that's needed them
I'm still puzzled I'm not and
I'm not persuaded you've told
municipality and then and then
thank you also indicated that
that the bill does something
with regard to the funding of it
but right now I'm I would
presume I can't think of any
be so
I know if I've explored quite a
bit Madam but again I'm just
from.
Questioning the need for this
statute that would seem to do
the same thing that that creates
challenges for courts and
lawyers which which section
should they be looking to and
why.
others stature that's one most
amusing things about what the
courts do in terms of what
lawyers call statutory
construction which means the
courts presume.
The legislature does all the
It's it's a it's a pretty big
assumption that the court makes
its inception for anyone of us
to think that we we all know all
of the state laws but I but the
I think the court would say well
to be done so thank you madam
chair and I've got some some
links on this but I'm just not
persuaded this bill is needed
thank you we have one more
a hard stop here on the floor
ten thirty because the Senate
chief clerk has to set up so we
will probably finish this bill
and may be here the next bill
we'll see.
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you.
Thank you it's been madam chair
one of the the issues that were
not aligning for some kind of
federal grant money to manages
stormwater is that one of the
reasons for the bill yes one of
Is to be prepared when the new
national discharge permits come
out and this will come out to us
because we're not one of the
will need funding it because it
is an unfunded mandate okay and
and mentor center
We also have water you know
waste water treatment.
And what I don't see in the
existing statute.
Well let me say what I do see.
but you're asking for also
treatment and disposal I guess
we could say we could maybe
argue that diverting for
disposal could be
stormwater is a rising pollutant
in the United States at least
where the EPA wells listen to
this question is the at the end
And so
I I I I'm I'm listening centers
around is I think I with my
limited knowledge.
it into this this flood control
but I I think one of the why I
raise this point is this is a
flood control section that has
nothing to do with treatment it
has nothing to do with pesticide
municipalities if they want to
and they have either is the EPA
or it's it's our own Environment
Department this says Hey we have
storm waters there caring
I I think it's important to note
that and I think because this is
kind of a maybe a bit of a
hybrid situation it's not just
flood control it's it's also for
like it may need a little bit of
work but I of course committee
think about that were treatment
that's on page one line twenty
three of your bill I I just
don't see how that's allowed in
in flood controls is in statute
because we have this concern.
forced what stormwater doing for
pollution is not just preventing
erosion here which I think if
you're just preventing erosion
flood controls the existing
on this one but just just note
that I I think we should we
should take the judiciary chairs
comments seriously have had a
turn signal look at it and and
additional work so I don't know
if you would like to withdraw it
carried over and and do that
work because
I think that Senators
maintenance make makes a good
point does this give you enough
the fees in the way you'd like
to has opposed to what the
statute says that so I guess
what my suggestion would be
rather than tabling the bill a
you Senator Cervantes for a
second time.
The manager
Thank you management manager you
know I I would love the
which again is that section that
split.
Seems to be in conflict with
existing statute and that's also
the one that troubles me because
it has a the language it says
you can and charge a fee but
leaving the other section to.
Senator Lisa puts the the.
Language you want to storm water
facilities in the list of other
utilities that of that is in the
comfortable so I think you I
think you accomplish of that's
the goal that in the section to
any other sections but social
ones troubling for the reasons
of expressed earlier and so
madam chair in the committee
strike section one and remember
there after.
And there is a second.
The public.
Is it a friendly amendment.
Centers of office.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
finance yes okay so the
amendment has been adopted I'm
gonna make my comment and then
we'll go to a motion on the bill
my comment is I've tried to
carry some bills in the past
concerns me a little bit so what
is the pleasure of the committee
on the amended bill.
non debatable so could the
secretary please call the roll
on a table in motion by Senator
Cervantes.
Senator a ghost.
Senator Hamblen.
Senneville.
Terrible yeah.
Thanks committee.
My vote of five to for your bill
and let Senator Gonzalez had
asked Senator Sedillo Lopez to
carry this next bill and it
looks simple to me but of course
And this is out of respect for
our Senate chief clerk that were
occurring.
I mean sorry next Tuesday at
eight thirty AM I'm already
jumping ahead weeks.
Center city Lopez for Senator
Gonzales.
Agreements following with the
definition of agriculture
agricultural use now encompasses
a natural resources or would
encompass and natural resources
witness Leslie Allison who has
some brief remarks in support.
The missiles very briefly
otherwise we will be hearing
this today madam chair members
percent of the land in the state
is in private ownership and
that's farms and ranches
covering more than forty million
acres the state water plan
forced action plan state
wildlife action plan in the
be met without the private land
participation and.
Senate bill three ninety three
amends the definition of
agricultural activity under
seven thirty six twenty two
Will stand for questions thank
you madam chair thank you is
there anyone here supporting
this bill.
I see one two three four.
Okay and we're gonna go to
committee members for questions
and comments.
Senator Gallegos.
benefit from the definition
change up Senator if you go too
long I'm gonna have to in this
coming in this bill thank you
landowners.
on top those posing is a
landowner and that is the reason
for my question is it ranchers
farmers all.
ranchers or farmers who were
talking USDA Department
agriculture programs for
example.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator
out there is an underlying
discussion point that I don't
see that you Madam chair thank
you what committee this is going
to.
or comment about.
Most mostly just comment madam
chair I think we we should be
cautious about this bill but but
I for maybe different reasons
I'm kind of surprised to see
maybe the act community oppose
in this this is a kind of a
and then this change in the law.
Expands the definition of
agricultural use which means
that it would it would allow for
somebody to have their land tax
less because it's an
conservation program with an
agency of the state or federal
government so in essence you
could take land and not really
be farming it but say that it's
this is pretty good deal and we
were pretty clever about it
because we do have to farm it
right we we can just call it
part of a or put or put it in
register into some kind of
natural resources conservation
wanna make sure we know what
we're doing what we're doing it
and I appreciate this was the
taxed we initial explore that
thank you thank you are there
any other questions or comments
I think in response to senator
savant as well might madam
chair.
There's a program this real
state has programs too so this
would allow farmers particularly
in some areas house is a good
example were a lot of these
farms are there historically
been in the same family for
it's a legitimate use that fits
under agriculture and that's
that's what I think it's a it's
a good program thank you.
Thank you senator Neville
Senator Schmedes.
roll Senator boxes.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Center.
the office yes Senator phonics
test.
You madam chair members of the
committee thank you the bill has
a do pass
members of the public and
committee members on Tuesday at
eight thirty AM we will do the
