this is one directors of the
house right.
For more.
The
general fund copyright.
Okay.
Good morning the Senate
conservation committee is called
to order for our our first
organizational meeting and I'd
like to thank all the members
for coming the purpose today is
to work out the bugs and
obviously there is one New
Mexico actio echo.
September what we do.
The volume speakers your.
So we'll start this morning with
introductions and we'll start
with our members please first
will wait for the chair and the
by your last so Senator so thank
you madam chair
I always have that effect on
people.
Because of all this will do is.
The it might be because of the.
This might stem cells are
working okay now I'm bill soul
state senator from Los crucis
and Representative the Florida
mountain area I've been on this
committee since I've been in the
Senate so this is my tenth year
sitting in this seat no and so
this is one of my favorite
committees to be on it deals
with all kinds of interesting
things about our state that I
didn't know before I became a
senator so I learned so much on
this committee thank you madam
chair thank you.
Thank you madam chair help of
junior Senator Senate district
twenty three Albuquerque's and
Bernalillo county northwest side
just happy to be here again
working on this committee.
It's been a year now being a
senator and still learn stuff
every day and is happy to be
here and and you know contribute
thank you thank you.
Yes it's that chairmanship
sometimes.
Good morning I'm Joseph about
this are present Senate district
thirty one about half of that
district is in the city of Los
crucis the other half of it is
the south valley where I grew up
it's a farming community for the
most part and the district goes
all the way to the border of
Mexico and Texas so it's got
unique communities of Anthony
shopper also part but also
booming sent that that just so
I'm an attorney and on this
committee my focus is been
oftentimes on water issues and
it's interesting how much my
legal practice now overlaps with
environmental issues water
issues thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Good morning.
I and senator Kerry Hamblen from
district thirty eight seven New
Mexico.
And I represent much up farming
communities my district also
borders Senator offices and we
have a lot of farming
communities including the mesa
Gen buddy no agency keep a lot
of and also part of the historic
part of Los crucis during the
day I'm the CEO and president of
the Las Cruces green chamber of
commerce we talked about the
importance of locally owned
businesses and by the way
strongly encouraged whose donuts
which is a locally owned
business here there krones
mazing and also protecting our
public lands and the organ
mountains desert peaks national
monument proud to be part of
that as well as some of my
colleagues here in the
legislature thank you.
Thank you
It was going to get that out
because I guess it's all good it
would take their turn money
instruction eighties I live in
to get us New Mexico just
outside of Albuquerque so my
district is
both on kind either either side
of the Sandia's got a southeast
corner pocket of Albuquerque the
Four hills area and and border
Senator Lopez district
and then I've got the eastbound
so cedar crest as with her a
cedar park Moriarty that whole
area out there
very diverse group we have
farmers and ranchers have a lot
of people that love public land
because we've got National
Forest there get foothills
Albuquerque open space from the
county on that sort of stuff a
lot of outdoor recreation areas
sports men and and that sort of
thing so very very happy to be
on this committee I requested it
because it's a great importance
to me and of my constituents
thank you could be here.
Thank you madam chair
I'm Steve developments in the
district to which is the north
east corner of San Juan County I
have about a third or fourth of
Farmington and I have a as to
Bloomfield Navajo dam that part
of San Juan County
I graduated Morty high school so
this is my Senator over here to
my right so I guess that we have
something in common of most of
our my areas well it's a some of
the City of course but lot of
farming ranching Year geisha in
the I don't have any the number
of your vision project but I
have the rivers of the San Juan
in the Animas river of running
on the side of Farmington so
quite a bit of agriculture my
district to hear geisha waters
always a big issue up there and
when it didn't snow like it's
not doing this year it's a it's
a big deal force.
Oil and gas we have a lot of
natural gas in my part of the
world of
which hasn't been very active
because of the prices last
couple years the last ten years
or so and has actually got a
little resurgence in the last
few months to the prices so
they're always very interested a
lot of the activities is
committee because it has to do
with conservation has to do with
the oil and gas and energy
lot of solar projects coming in
our area we have a lot of
interest in that in the of the
governor's hydrogen bill is a
concern or interest of our
people and
trying to do something to modify
some of the economics in our
community so that's my interest
not appreciated in the committee
thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator guy in.
Thank you madam chair David guy
egos of state senator from any
Lee County just start off in
Carlsbad loving.
All the units general more to
Hobbes imports of Lovington.
but I just wanted to thank you
for the opportunity.
this is my second year on this
committee and I was eight years
in the house
Bridget what we discussed here I
come from the heart of oil and
gas country obstacle from
Centerville but we bring you
greetings and a lot of money
from home just like you thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
My name is Antoinette Sedillo
Lopez and I represent.
And I represent district sixteen
I'm a native New Mexican I was I
have very deep roots in New
Mexico I was raised in Valencia
County in a farming community
this Chavis and I am now
Representative.
An interesting district did hate
grew away a little bit from the
university area and now it goes
all the way up to four health of
now at Senator Griggs which
meetings and I are neighbors so
all the I'm looking for to
learning a lot about that for
hills area and that be part of
the district.
Thank you.
I'm listed panics and I am
Senate district thirty nine and
parts of six counties Bernalillo
Lincoln San Miguel Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia in the
next election I will drop down
to four counties of a right now
I appreciate representing all of
the counties that I have the
farming ranching rural
communities in suburban areas so
we will now go to the staff and
we have a brand new the
committee secretary this year
Veronica Ortega could not join
us this year but she might be of
it available in future years
spent Micaela is no stranger to
the legislature so we have
Micaela Gonzalez I wanted to
tell people where you came from
and what you did here.
Hi my name is Miguel Gonzalez
I'm just born and raised here in
Santa Fe New Mexico and I've
been here for the legislature
really this is like my fifth
year been able to do everything
from intended to capital outlay
analyst to secretary now to
committee secretary so I'm here
to help you and everybody as
much as possible and learning
something every day and I
greatly appreciate being here
and working with all of you I
believe you guys do a excellent
job here for the state of New
Mexico and I'm here to support
and help in any way I can
welcome to the committee thank
you
I like.
Terry
need this to committee when you
counted a committee or come to
the office.
If you need assistance she's the
first person you see inside the
door and show either take care
of you or direct you to the
committee secretary so let's go
on to the analyst for the
committee of the Senate in
addition health center also and
this is my seventh year through
many different to committee
chairs but I love this committee
I echo of centers all says the
topics are so interesting.
I'm again and and this is my
fourth year of the committee.
Great thank you very much
the major pointless Paul.
Prime will determine this about
my seventh year of the working
in the legislature and all the
wireless solutions on the
writing of the Philippoussis
would be richer not here
is the problem from this
committee the.
Thank you the minority pool
analyst is not here today for a
family matter but his name is
Cody Morrow.
And we'll welcome him and now we
go to our attendance in
Senator I'm so why don't we
start but I think right there go
ahead.
Good morning my name is Senator
is this.
If you're in Santa Fe New Mexico
border raises several I lived in
Las Vegas for thirty seven years
and we've been there radio
station.
State insurance agency at a
night club.
Date would do not drink and
drive during the night it would
bring it right.
But anyway
I'm here I'm glad to be here
again I've been here for several
years I was with Senator for a
month is it in this community.
Off and on and then I am the
Education Committee New Mexico
committee's time thank you to
good to see everybody and
underserved so anything you need
just let me know I don't know if
that for you as I could as I
used to but yet they're.
Great thank you welcome to the
committee and George.
Good morning to everyone my name
is George Shendo from the public
payments I forgot parent image
thanks for for approximately
seven years of the of the US
Senate chambers of started out
as an attentive of course last
year to a deputy sergeant at
arms so I'm here to serve the US
centers in the committee so
anything you need just just give
me a call thank you very much
and we have a surgeon arms no
removal from Hispaniola hi then
with the sergeant at arms three
fifteen year and K. to Irvine.
Thank you so much I'm going to
ask Miss attendance and sergeant
ours if we become crowded in the
audience to help them out the
crowd for maybe participants on
a particular bill.
are allowed to zoom and comments
they're allowed to be here in
person but we certainly don't
want people's standing all over
each other in this committee we
have a few minutes and I would
like to mention to the committee
members that this the two clocks
are different this is the
correct time this is the
incorrect time and we won't get
it corrected.
In the meantime we're going to
operate the committee much like
we did in the past you all will
receive at least the day before
the analysis the bill the F. I.
R. in the analysis of the
Bill electronically if you are
here for the meeting you'll have
it in a paper form as well but
if not you'll receive it
electronically the day before
and let's see are there any
questions from committee members
before we go to up interjections
from the audience.
Yes Center souls Madam chair we
often have floor sessions are we
going to ensure that we get to
four sessions on time what we
will continue on a four on bills
no continue the work that you
have a plan for for how that
might work as far as timing on
the end of the meetings thank
you essentials for that question
we're going to try to get to
every floor session on time if
there is an extremely long bill
and we've been asked to complete
it that day I will work with the
floor leader to determine
whether we come back later or
whether we finish and go to the
floor late sometimes when there
has been such a bill that's been
deemed that important they have
held floor sessions until
committees have finished but we
will try to always finish in
time for example today we are
only meeting for less than a
half hour but the floor doesn't
start till noon today so if we
change it will move around thank
you.
Senator Cervantes the manager
the other is nearly me for
thirty minutes today is because
we have a ten thirty committees
committees on gonna have to
excuse myself because we start
promptly there we go through a
lot of bills so in the forgive
me for stepping out on you I've
made myself on that committee
the self appointed the
Representative tell people that
if you're a particular the
freshman this because this is
here for you know thirty day but
if you have built and they're
not the moving their second
committees committee come senior
figure out how to get your bills
moving because of there's a lot
of bills are getting healthier
just because would be the not
germane and you have to medicate
to persuade somebody otherwise
all right right thank you and
well we certainly understand
when you leave any other
questions comments.
Okay very quickly let's go
through the audience learn let's
start.
Committee my name is Laurie
Patterson I president New Mexico
cattle growers association and
I've had the honor the last two
years in the Representative that
thirteen hundred ranking
families in the state every
county in the state I just
starting next week you'll
probably see a president elect
funding across the board but I
think you'll find the place
plainspoken integrity you guys
expect for members I will choose
like coming around or not.
Okay actually the year off okay
thank you.
Okay yes.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
recidivism within cooperative
extension service we are
a non formal educational arm of
New Mexico State University
program you're probably familiar
with we do work with a lot of
agriculture water issues we deal
with a lot of youth development
through operating program we
work with our communities and
development within our
communities and help them in
like two bridges and other kind
of projects and
anything we can do to help you
all
Appreciate being here thank you
very much.
Members of the committee.
Services New Mexico State
University my colleague did a
great flyover of our.
Operation and look forward to
working with you all and
anything we can.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Joe Culbertson Power
Rangers Harding County and also
I pressed hard for New Mexico
gov Association.
Thank you.
Yes thanks for being here
ladies.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning and thank
you for allowing me to introduce
myself Tiffany Rivera with
Mexico farm Alliance drive out
been around the committee for a
couple years now I'm very
excited to continue to work with
you guys if you need anything
pertaining to agriculture please
reach out to me and I'm glad to
assist thank you very much thank
you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Kate
once probably I've been working
with New Mexico for my stop here
for about a year so I work with
eleven of our county farm bureau
organizations on the eastern and
central New Mexico and I also
assisted me with policy thank
you thank you is there anybody
on the soon that would like to
introduce themselves.
So are you going to be able to
put the zoom pictures up on the
on the screen.
Sure.
If they share their.
madam chair can you hear me yes
we can time go ahead.
thank you Senator madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Tom Solomon and I am the co
coordinator with the.
The group called three fifty New
Mexico in the there's quite a
few bills we'll be coming before
this committee that we're very
interested in working thank you
thank you.
So anybody else Stephanie.
You are muted currently got
Do you know who you're talking
to.
The question.
Evoking yes we can.
The Canadian men's top need I'm
a senior policy analyst with
western resource advocates.
Regional conservation a
nonprofit students thank it's my
first session for that I was
with the Santa Fe National
Forest for five years.
One
research issues when units or
intersection publicly this is
the to reach out thanks.
Thank you could you tell us your
name again.
John.
Hayden thank you.
Is there anybody else Stephanie.
No one else okay committee
members is there anything else
that you'd like to bring to the
table today.
We will hear some appropriations
bills Tuesday morning depending
upon the time of the floor
session if we start at eleven
let's try to gather at nine
eight AM so that we can get
going on those appropriation
bills usually are not that
controversial we should be able
to get for I finish that
morning.
Thank you very much for coming
today and thank you to the
