Okay.
To.
So I'd like to let the public
know that the committee is all
here we have one committee
member by zoom and.
Senator great communities has
not arrived yet and.
Okay thank you very much Senator
so we did introductions last
week at our first introductory
meeting so we are ready to go
except they don't fear for
Sanchez.
Senator Ingle Ingle.
Introduced by senator Clemente
okay so I'm gonna let Senator
Sedillo Lopez introduced her
shadow first and then we'll get
started thank you thank you
madam chair of some of these
things six feet away is that one
one time who is a masters in
public policy at Hollins
university and he's a UNM
undergraduate and he gets to
spend the day I don't know if
his good about following me
around all day today.
Welcome very much thank you.
Okay so yes Senator Cervantes
that be great.
So the first bill up today is
Senator Smith Senate bill
seventeen and all we have a.
All wonderful secretary who has
stepped in today because our
committee secretary is still out
Senate bill seventeen so this
is.
Mary Ann students right.
Through the stands.
Thank you very much very and for
doing everything for us during
this period of time so Senator
please proceed thank you madam
chair Senate bill seventeen is a
bill that comes to us every year
in this case once again with the
endorsement of the interim
finance committee oversight
the project here or the bill
here is to identify projects
eligible after vetting for
funding from the water project
fund and again we do this
annually the applicants of make
their submittals with deadlines
they're reviewed study by the
board the water trust board and
recommendations are made to us
that are in this bill so market
movements Russell is with me
she's of given me some hand out
information but rather than the
re from her and a lesser just
expand on a little bit chair.
Right welcome thank you all take
up my second mask so you can
hear me better madam chair
members of the committee again I
just pull it toward there you go
thank you my name again is
Marquita Russel I'm the CEO of
the New Mexico finance authority
and we are the staff to the
water trust board and I sit as a
member of the water trust board
as senator savant as mentioned
this is an annual application
process and the projects before
you have been vetted by a group
of seven review agencies
unusually this year because of
the high amount of severance tax
bonds that are available all of
the projects that met the
qualifications and of we're
ready to go our before you in
this bill so in many past years
we had far more demand than we
had capacity to fund and this
year because of the high spike
in severance tax bond proceeds
we are expected to be able to
fund a hundred percent of the
projects that have been
submitted and I would note that
all of these projects
Representative at least a
standalone phase so the first
money from that nine percent of
the severance tax bond proceeds
comes to the water trust board a
ten percent of that then get
shipped off to go to the office
of of the state engineer so
again madam chair these projects
are ready to go they need your
authorization there is one final
step that happens in the spring
we insure at that time that they
have our meeting all regulatory
compliance and for instance
water rates safe drinking water
act compliance and otherwise
than they are presented to the
finance authority probably in
may this year to be awarded
funds and with that chair very
happy to answer any questions
thank you very much Mr thank you
for.
Being here this morning will now
go to the audience will first to
the in room that will do online
of I is there anyone here to
support this bill.
Is there one here in the
audience to oppose this bill.
Is there anybody online who's
raised their hands.
To be recognized to support this
bill.
To
do Ramos are you on there.
I am madam chair.
Please go ahead.
Thank you I don't know if I ate
this.
I don't see how I put my camera
on that maybe that's not
important thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name standard MS and I'm here on
the behalf of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club which
represents thirty five thousand
members and supporters in New
Mexico and el Paso.
the Sierra Club is in support of
Senate bill seventeen we
understand that this is routine
but we just want to stand in
support of these kind of
projects that will help make our
communities more resilient and
to protect our precious water
resources thank you madam chair
and centers of on K. and members
of.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else thank you.
Debbie Hughes.
Good morning
Madam chair members of the
committee Debbie Hughes
executive director for the New
Mexico association of
conservation district yes we
stand in strong support of this
bill we Sir have a seat on the
water transport and the soil and
water conservation districts are
one of the primary of local
government entities that deliver
in some this money on the ground
for the watershed restoration
projects and so we just wanna go
on record supporting us and we
appreciate all the work by all
of the senators and now and also
the New Mexico pointed story
thank you very much thank you is
there anyone else okay that
concludes our of public
testimony other questions or
comments from committee members.
Senator pope.
Thank you madam chair
I just want to thank Senator on
this last year was able to kind
of bring this to the floor you
can help me get across the
finish line first of friction
Senator presheaf that so I got a
crash course in this legislation
the question I have is you said
that you were able to find all
of the request.
I guess what so what does that
mean going forward I think this
is there what is the benefit of
that and do we see maybe in the
future let's projects that will
be fun the madam chair thank you
for that question Senator what
it means going forward is simply
that there won't be on you
demand that can't be met this
year that we get pushed into
subsequent application period
making more available in future
years to other applicants
at this point it's not clear
whether or not we'll be able to
fund more than the requested
amount for instance a second
phase that may be part of a
project but that's certainly
something we would try to do to
maximize the award going to an
entity so they can fully take
advantage of construction crews
that are able to come to their
areas.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you miss Russell for the help
last year as well appreciate it
that's all I have chair thank
that you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this this bill
this looks like the really great
projects all the different
projects I just had a curiosity
about of the City of Albuquerque
projects I noticed wants to the
city proper and then when it's
of Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water he truly at thirty but
they're both for the same thing
to water conservation treatment
recycling.
What what what is three of them
in one or two projects do you
notice in summary what these
projects are for the for the
water treatment plant for the.
madam chair I believe they are
re use projects the City of
Albuquerque is reuse projects
worth parks some of its parks
and then the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county water utility
already is for its water system
as a whole but I don't have more
specific information on the
Albuquerque Bernalillo water can
get that to you excellent I was
just curious as we all looked
fantastic and of course this is
a great film thank I thank the
senator for presenting.
Thank you any other questions
before I make my comment.
I think this group really I'm
sorry for your you should go for
I think this group does a great
job vetting projects and I
really appreciate your doing the
work for us to make decisions
Senator Cervantes thank you Mr
the only thing that the that I
think would be useful for the
committee to have in a last
Marquita miss Russell to help us
find that is the specific
funding so we have the projects
identified in the bill but it I
think would be useful for us to
see the amounts
for each project and
to the comments of everyone else
but again for this some of the
newer members just as a
refresher the this product is
something we can be really proud
of with NMFA and the Senate
because we when I chair this
committee and back on a chair
then I say we we we redid the
whole process what used to
happen is that everybody who
applied would be approved by us
and then they would go back
after the session in the side on
the projects which ones actually
Fund we're we're doing it the
other way around now we we of
make them apply in advance they
have to be vetted and then by
the time they come to us we're
actually approving the projects
that are ready to go at this
point so we really have a much
more meaningful role in theory
and where the this year that
matter because everybody who had
a project of application got
funded but there's always been
that we we've always had in the
past generally a lot more
requests for funding that we
have resources available so with
the good here the only other
point I'd make madam chair
important is of again for the
new members in particular we
skim off the end of a price let
me use that word but that the
right word we we skim off ten
percent of this every year to
the courts and to the state
engineers office and and this
was kind of a controversial
issue in the past I bring it up
because we we probably some
point I may want to rethink that
issue and we'll have to discuss
more with miss Russell and
others but what we did is years
ago we decided that we just take
ten percent off the top to go to
the state engineers office for
education that's not an
inconsequential number this year
I I was looking for them it's
about what eight million dollars
I agree that right.
yes madam chair no that's about
eight million dollars going to
state engineer this year from
this money this project along
just for education that's a lot
of money and that matters
because of you're not passing
judgment with this this year
recall the state engineer
resigned and his chief general
counsel resigned and others and
the reason given was that an
adequate financial support for
some of the work they were doing
but there's a quite a large
infusion of money going the
state engineers office this year
than this eight million dollars
and then the court takes the
percentage of that that is
required by the courts
specifically for education so
kind of wanted outside of the
projects alone make you aware
that that was all part of this
entire process as well too and
and the recognize that we're
we're doing a good job of
supporting some of the judicata
process thank you Mr.
Thank you so of Senator would
you like miss Russell to go
through the different amounts
for the I don't I don't mention
I don't think it's probably
makes sense for us to take the
time to do that for every
project but but in the past I
think we just what we press
spreadsheet available that with
and then for that.
Hi I'm sure our even do have the
highs and the lows or every
chair I can present to you all
all sent to the committee the
entire list in the amounts that
they applied for and I think
that would be the best way to go
about it it would have a brief
project description as well to
answer Senator Sedillo Lopez is
question specifically.
That be great a fund that thank
you any other questions or
comments from committee Senator
Gallegos do you have any
questions or comments.
So let's no you tell so that.
Okay thank you so is there a
motion.
I move.
There is a motion for do pass
all second and there's a second.
So would our secretary please
call the roll.
Senator serve on issues Senator
Gallegos.
Second Senator Gallegos.
No.
Compact and Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
pope.
Yes Senator metes.
Senator soul.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Schmedes.
I'm sorry.
Yes hear me yes we can.
Thank you we recorded that.
And centers that some sorry yes
and Senator panic okay before I
vote center Gaydos zoom goes.
Is colleges on the delay I was
listening on my phone so I'd
like to vote yes thank you very
much Senator Gallegos and
Senator.
Yes without you having unanimous
vote thank you very much
Work.
Thank you we are on to our
second bill Senate bill thirty
seven public project revolving
fund appropriations with senator
Reid through.
Then.
Actually having somebody on the
ground to explain why we're
doing this to Mister Turner that
it's difficult for people
outside of the building
understand you know I don't know
what coordination means maybe we
need to define that I would say
that the law this no lobbyist.
People think money is somebody's
not they were.
There.
We just learned only confuse in
another meeting this morning
that
This room had interface two
different committees together so
we have to watch out if this is
happening here.
So
Okay so Senate bill thirty seven
Senator Rodriguez thank you
madam chairman many of you may
be familiar and I have Marquita
again here sorry from the NMFA
we many of you may be familiar
with this bill it is an annual
bill that we bring before the
legislature and it it has to do
with the the public project
revolving fund we used to do it
separately each one of these
three things that I'll be
presenting in a minute or three
appropriations or transfers of
appropriations we used to do a
separate bills but this is the
second time it seems much more
easy or easier to do it and and
and more streamlined to put it
all into one bill so that's what
we have done in Senate bill
thirty seven is the New Mexico
finance authority's public
project revolving fund
appropriation bill and I'm carry
this legislation on behalf of
the New Mexico finance
authorities legislative
oversight committee which voted
unanimously to endorse the bill
The bill appropriates a total of
fourteen point two two million
from the public project
revolving fund two three
identified funds the main
purpose for appropriating these
funds from the PPRF which is the
public project revolving fund
into the three funds is to get
matching funds primarily from
the federal government it is
required that we transfer these
funds into these three funds to
be able to leverage federal
dollars and I will explain
house.
Six of the fourteen point two
two million from the public
project revolving fund six point
seven two what million would go
to the drinking water state
revolving loan fund held at the
New Mexico finance authority
this appropriation will serve as
the twenty percent state match
for the annual federal drinking
water capitalization fund and
ten percent state match for a
supplemental drinking water
grant to authorized by the
bipartisan infrastructure law.
The next is two point five
million would be transferred to
the waste water facility
construction loan fund held at
the New Mexico environment
department this appropriation
will serve as a twenty percent
state match for the annual
federal clean water
capitalization grant and ten
percent state match for a
supplemental clean water grant
authorized also by the
bipartisan infrastructure law
then finally the five million
dollars to the it will go to the
cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund held at the
department of cultural affairs
and this appropriation would be
used for capital improvements to
various state facilities to
carry out the purpose of the of
the law
in this as I said this is the
second time the legislature has
considered these appropriations
and an omnibus bills that I'm
bringing before you that's all
it does and it does not affect
the general fund to just
authorizes the transfers that
are required thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee the key to thank you
and miss Russell do you have
anything you'd like to add madam
chair only to say that this
year's appropriations from the
PPRF are larger because of the
size of the federal grants are
coming down and the supplemental
requests under the bipartisan
infrastructure law so they're
much larger typically we're
looking at about thirty five
percent of the money being moved
from the PPRF to other funds
this year because of that size
the the typical appropriation
over to the local government
planning fund is not being made
or not being recommended so
that's one where we may have
decreased activity as a result
of these larger federal funds
coming in so that's all I'll
mention madam chair and I'm
happy to answer any questions
thank you very much is there
anybody here in the audience who
is here to support this bill.
Is there anybody in the audience
here to oppose this bill.
On the zoom do we have any
speakers.
Diana Rees Rees.
Good morning Senators.
Good morning.
Thank you I'm from the south
valley of Albuquerque and water
resources here are so incredibly
important we've seen such a hard
time this year so I want to
stand in support of this bill
and to thank the senators for
their work and to ask that you
support it the wonderful
projects we have some funds now
thank you please support.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Okay we don't see anyone else to
speak on the soon so we are now
on to questions comments motions
from the committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
that these are absolutely
information on you might.
Thank you these are actually
important projects in the match
makes it I to to quota Senator
Rodriguez a no brainer so that
this is great I did have a
question about the cultural the
cultural affairs project because
I've had people contact me about
point public arts projects that
are deteriorating because of the
agencies that have been awarded
the projects but don't have
sufficient funds to maintain
these sculptures and and
different different things is
that with this money would be
going for.
The gentleman Marquita thank you
madam chair thank you senator
for the question the cultural
affairs facility fund is was
established to help the
department of cultural affairs
maintain its buildings they
maintain separately from General
Services Division all of the
buildings under their management
so it's for they have a capital
improvement plan and this
partially funds those department
of cultural affairs receives one
percent of the government of
gross receipts tax which is
insufficient for them to
maintain these buildings and so
two or three years ago the
legislature broadened the
purposes for which transfers out
of the PPRF could be made and
we've been appropriating five
million dollars this will be the
third appropriation to the
department of cultural affairs
of five million dollars to help
them maintain their facilities.
Thank you that that clarifies it
very well thank you madam chair
thank you any other questions
comments motion.
Is there a motion approved
second there is a motion by
Senator souls second by Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
The first to pass.
Anything further before we go to
the vote.
Okay could Marian could you call
the vote Senator von yes.
Senator guy a ghosts.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope yes
Senator committee.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez VS and
Senator Stefanics yes.
Thank you very much you have a
unanimous vote we appreciate
your coming this one thank you
madam chairman and members of
the committee appreciate it.
Yes I just sent a message over
to I now have Senators consult
with confer with.
I I got a message from.
So we have Senator Gonzales and
then myself so
Will stand in place for minutes
you Senator Gonzales comes in if
not then I'll move it.
It's on its way okay.
We just received a message he's
on his way and coming through
the hallways.
And we will be going to Senate
bill forty six.
I think yeah and community gets
Fund Act funding.
Committee members all while
we're waiting on Tuesday morning
besides hearing appropriations
bills Mike Hammond who was
contracted by the governor to
work on water infrastructure has
confirmed that he will Senator
Gonzales come on down he will he
did confirm that he'll be here
at nine AM to talk about what he
is doing for the governor his
role with water and I'm assuming
with our but funds may be more
and he'll be here the first
twenty to thirty minutes before
we go to our bills Tuesday
morning at nine AM.
I'm sorry what is today Thursday
today's.
Hello I'm not a given in the
wrong date and.
I need to reconfirm that he can
do thirsty because I just
referred to speak next.
Yeah but this way that I think
you might be thirsty let's wait
and I forget my head on.
Senator Gonzales welcome to this
committee Senate bill forty six
the acequia and Community ditch
Fund Act funding.
Will thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee of.
With the.
The synopsis of this bill is
that
You know Senate bill forty six
appropriates four hundred
thousand from the general fund
to the a second community and
ditch fund for expenditures of
FY twenty three cents up when
physical used to carry out the
purpose of the a second
community DH Fund Act.
To provide financial assistance
to the acequia and to the
community to system to develop
hydrological studies acquire
technical and legal research in
other information services
necessary to conserve and
protect water for New Mexico
future through the adjudication
of water rights well madam chair
hello it's asking for those four
hundred right now the fund has
the six hundred thousand the
experience as being the you know
that the need is there and
without four hundred thousand he
would definitely up give a much
better hello.
For the program you know and to
meet the needs of what is being
requested now this so funds
don't help or not have an
individual basis it has to be
within of the criteria of you
know the the.
That is with the second
community and it's fun and with
the the madam chair I have
expert witness Paula Garcia who
is for many years being the
director with this program and
the executive director for this
and with that I will be able to
her.
Thank you welcome to the
committee miss Garcia good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico a
second cessation thank you for
the opportunity to present this
bill this morning Senate bill
forty six is a very important
appropriation for the a second
this was administered by the
department of agriculture and it
helps to cover the cost of legal
representation and expert
witnesses of and the good to the
process generally about a dozen
associations of a second the
plan qualify for funding on an
annual basis and in the past few
years we've documented unmet
need of where we have a much
more in applications is
available funding and and that
the NMDA so the four hundred
thousand is the difference
between what what's in the fund
and what the unmet need as
of the state legislature passed
a C. D. F. in nineteen eighty
eight so that to ensure that a
second community ditches as
parties to WaterAid education
could have access to legal
representation
if necessary to meet this unmet
need and
the fund is it's been really
instrumental in defending the
water rights of a second
hundreds of a second across the
state and several counties
including very buff it out go
some yes Santa Fe the Baca said
one of the fifth two thousand
Cibola so this is a fund that
benefits I think it's from
throughout the state madam chair
and I'm available to help answer
questions and our attorneys also
on zoom if we need legal
questions answered thank you
thank you very much we'll go to
the audience is there anybody
here in support of this bill.
Yes please if you don't stand up
and identify yourself.
Committee my name is that in the
middle of a registered lobbyist
Mexico association of
conservation districts we for
this.
endeavor every year.
There's a lot more.
Needed for the it is.
The money that we.
Thank you thank you so much
Tampa.
Madam chair committee members
names hello I'm here.
Mexico they never cultures
Policy Council and the rocky
mountain farmers union stand in
full support of this music is
our critical waterways for our
who farms of fiber production in
New Mexico and we need to
support their efforts
everywhere.
So much thank you.
Is there anybody here in the
audience to oppose this bill.
Is there anybody on the zoom
wishing to support the bill.
This is the worst okay okay
there's several people on line
of if you do keep your comments
to one to two minutes I'd be
great Robert Apodaca.
Yes.
The New Mexico state commission
is missing and number in the
state are relying on the CBS
news is for the committee thank
you very much thank you next we
have sira namaste.
Thank you madam chair.
Can you hear me yes.
I am here today in support of
this bill I am the director of a
nonprofit called the American
friends service committee that
has worked in New Mexico since
nineteen seventy six we work
with a large network of small
scale family farms many of whom
rely on the thank you to get the
water that they need to water
their crops to sustain their
families and our communities so
we hope that you will support
the spell thank you thank you
next is don boost does.
My name is don our.
On the on the smaller Gainey
farmer appearance on loose in a
villages sometimes in Rio Arriba
county I'm also the president
the real camallo Alliance
renewing manual in the sun
through stream association.
We are upwards enough to access
some of these funds and
participate in their annual
distribution of resources to the
educated regional associations
that are entry to the patient in
my experience and this is a
personal experiences of that up.
There's not enough funds to go
around we're we as citizens of
New Mexico are forced to compete
against each other to be able to
grow food to feed our families
so we feel are I feeling
Association.
These resources that are being
advocated for are very much
needed in our very well received
in the communities to help
protect our families for future
generations.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Next we have Kim.
Martin.
Madam chair my name is Kim
Martin I am the executive I am
the recording secretary for the
Rio camallo real for holidays
real many and Santa Cruz stream
systems community ditched
Association I speak out strongly
in favor of this bill and echo
what John who still says this is
key to our our communities so
please support thank you for
your time.
Thank you
next we have Carol Trujillo.
good morning.
You madam chair this is Cheryl
Trujillo president of the New
Mexico Astrakhan Association and
also president of the S. and P.
R. and I just love in one act
and to the patients have become
very complicated and require a
lot of technical support for a
sec just to have a good standing
and that could be friends in
addition as we just noted in the
hearing the state engineers
office he's getting some
additional funds to do a
communications so I can see that
the demand for this I will be
increased so I strongly support
this legislation and I hope
that you will help us with this
thank you very much thank you
John Brown.
Yes can you hear me yes okay
great thank you so much and
ensuring committee my name is
John Brown kind of the director
of New Mexico interfaith power
and light in the Franciscan
sister and I really support this
appropriation but also the work
of the city is this working with
for financial assistance to
conserve and also protect the
future vital yes yes serve our
entire state and are grounded in
spiritual cultural ecological
and economic ways that are just
vital to us thank you so much
for our hearing additional.
Thank you I have not the other
but I don't know the last name.
Hello I just might is it my S..
Yes thank.
Go ahead members of the
committee on behalf of the south
valley regional association of
the second we support this bill
although education has not been
conducted in the middle Rio
Grande Valley we support our
brothers and sisters our
western New Mexico thank you
thank you very much I have
Patrick to Hermio.
Yes.
To you yes you need to speak up
a little bit.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee up for
I am the co director of the
American friends service
committee my name is Patrick
Hermio in for all the reasons
mentioned previously I just keep
my comments brief by echo and
lift up everything that those
before me have said and so I
request we ask that you support
this bill thank you very much
thank you
there is a about twelve more
people some only take two more
and then I'll read the rest of
the names Jeff woody.
Good morning madam chair good
morning what's the.
New Mexico department of
agriculture we're we are on to
answer any questions we
administer the funds so we're
available to for answering
questions that come up with the
committee thank you thank you
Jessica S. one.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is just this one and I am a
young farmer and supporter of
the second test I am also a
member of agriculture with a
cooperative network and we
support this bill SB forty six
because they provide equitable
access to legal and technical
assistance that is needed for us
to give people in our state
thank you.
Thank you.
So I'm gonna just read the rest
of the names and if you have
something important that you
need to say that's not been said
you could raise your hand and
will no but I have Daryl Madrid
and McCartney hello good Garcia
read Van **** Robert Templeton.
Kim Martin already spoke di ana.
Trujillo.
Judy Torres and.
John Brown already spoke so is
there anybody who needs to say
anything that's different
through your.
Diane Trujillo please go ahead.
But that.
Diana Trujillo did you want to
speak.
Okay madam chair thank you
my name's Stephen through he'll
I am residents of Taos County
and I just like to add that the
second need to teach fund was
successful for the abate the
sentence you inTaos
only because we had the funds
and the necessary legal
assistance to negotiate persons
litigation of the adjudication
as a soloist strongly support
the state of a CD I have
if without that and have not
been able to accomplish what we
did thank you day thank you so
much we're now on to comments
questions from committee members
and we have centered David guy
egos.
Thank you I do have a question
for Seneal that means all of our
partner and Paul Garcia and I
appreciate what you do qualify
for the second our recently last
year sold my property Colorado
no longer on the second but I'm
wondering if you guys of looking
money through the state
engineers office I use prime
diagnosed no relation but up to
look at some tell me ring for
the second in any of this wanted
to have you looking at any kind
of electronic metering it's
really hard to.
Justify the amount of water
through the secretary with that
something that they had gate I'm
just wondering if they need the
money for allocated towards
that.
Sure yes sure madam chair and
senator by a ghost of that's it
excellent question and this this
I doesn't deal specifically with
metering and measurement of its
goes to NMDA and it's a grant
program for regional Essex
associations but it's it's my
understanding that there there
is a a metering measurement
program at the state engineers
office and do that there there
was money in the executive
recommendation are there was of.
requested funding and executive
budget for additional metering
and measurement and of and
you're right that that it is an
important part of a lot of
administration and
the state engineer does handle
that and and they have money in
their own budget that's separate
from this bill I thank you madam
chair Senator.
Thank you madam chair serves
Austin Pollock if you would at
some point time Paula give me a
call my junior money already
allocated as of five o'clock
last night that was one of the
concerns I had I am reaching out
to you earlier I think I'd like
to be on part of that in the
future to be able to get
clarification on the water you
so thank you for your
information and I will wait for
the vote thank you Madam thank
you.
Questions comments Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
There is a motion for you pass.
There is a second from Santo
souls the first motion was from
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Could you please call the vote.
Senator Pontus.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope yes
Senator metes.
Senator tolls yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator budget
yes have a new path thank you so
much you have unanimous do pass
thank you for coming this
morning Senator you madam chair
thank you members please
remember us in finance.
Right now.
So at this point I'm going to
ask the vice chair to take over
what I present my.
Lots of the morning.
Yes.
The one of the September.
Well.
We will get.
Good morning madam chair.
With me today I have miss
Marquita Russel who you on those
now I'm here to present Senate
bill eighteen and Senate bill
eighteen would have carried the
water and natural resources
committee
Heading but we could not agree
on the amount.
Of the amount of we discussed
going to the water trust fund
was anything from thirty five
million to one hundred million.
And while there was great debate
and this bill to the most debate
of all the bills that we
endorsed and you can see it's
not endorsed because we couldn't
agree on the amount I am caring
separately a bill for fifty
million dollars the purpose of
this bill is to go into the
water trust fund the fund was
intended to carry a corpus of
one hundred million dollars.
It has never carried that.
So right now since its creation
in two thousand six it has
received fifty five million but
no new capital since the fund
was intended as I mentioned to
carry a corpus of a hundred
million.
The fund distributes four
million dollars annually to the
water trust board which
authorizes spending on various
projects it could potentially
give more if more was available
currently we believe that there
is between forty one million to
forty two million in the water
trust fund.
This bill is an appropriation
bill intended to build up the
water trust fund so that the
money can move over to water
projects from around the state
we have heard that there is a
great need madam chair and that
all projects do not get funded
we were lucky this year for the
applications and it sounds like
we some people might need some
technical assistance applying
for some of the funds.
So at that point I will stop and
see if miss Marquita Russel who
is my technical expert he didn't
offer to come running up here.
She could explain more and see
if he has anything he wants to
add.
thank you madam chair of this
bill is important in maintaining
the corpus of the water trust
fund in the years in which
there's a low amount of
severance tax bond proceeds it's
an important contribution to the
projects that we Fund this year
it's a very small portion but in
many years it does make up a
substantial portion of the money
that's made available
similar to the of severance tax
bond proceeds ten percent of the
money that's distributed
annually from the water from the
state investment council over to
the water project fund ten
percent of that is then
I think the were raised earlier
shaved off and sent over to the
office of the state engineer so
three point two million is made
available for water projects
annually and in many years that
is a fairly large portion of the
money that's available
I would also note that the water
transported it's November
meeting voted to support any
additions or any legislation
that that appropriated money to
the water trust fund because the
water trust board felt it was
that important it's the first
time it took such action and
with that manager I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank.
Thank you for that presentation
is there anyone in the audience
who wishes to speak in support
of this bill.
Is there anyone on soon but
wishes to speak in support of
this bill.
The first one is.
This is a and the party.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for allowing comments
I'm part of the three tip my
name Sandra currently part of
the three fifty New Mexico rural
advocacy committee and we stand
in support of this bill we think
that fully funding the water
trust fund it is important so
there are the funds available to
the board to give out to needed
and meaningful water projects
across the state to encourage
the committee to vote in favor
of this funding for the water
trust fund.
Thank you thank you Mr McCartney
next I have Carol Thompson.
Good morning madam chair in
senators I'm up constituent and
a voter a citizen in rural to
harass New Mexico and I'm
standing in support of Senate
bill eighteen today in my
community water is really
precious I have neighbors whose
wells have dried up and some of
my neighbors only source of
water is brain what.
Maybe Mr Thompson you what we
could you open yourself.
Yes can you hear me yes now we
can.
Okay thank you good morning
madam chair in senators I'm a
citizen and voter in New Mexico
I lived in the world to harass
New Mexico and I'd like to voice
my support for Senate bill
eighteen in my community water
is extremely precious I know
neighbors whose wells have dried
up in the past few years some of
my neighbors only source of
water is rainwater collection
many families haul water or have
it delivered at considerable
expense we need all the help we
can get to fund infrastructure
for water in east mountain area
we need planning for the future
as more of us join the ranks of
those whose water has run out
water management and
conservation projects are
critically important for so many
of us thank you for letting me
speak this morning.
Thank you Mr chairman Kerry
Peyton.
Gary Payton.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Gary
Payton and I represent the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico our
coalition consists of the cities
of Albuquerque Los crucis Santa
Fe Santa Fe County and and Los
Alamos County and through the
legislative priorities
resolutions of the city councils
and these county commissions
we've offered strong support for
the enhanced water management
and water conservation that can
come through the water projects
supported by this appropriation
we are true to support SB
eighteen.
And all of its full
appropriation to the water trust
fund thank you for receiving
this Madam.
Thank you Mr president Diane
Reese.
Diane Reese.
Thank you my name is Diane Reese
I am a resident of the south
valley about the Albuquerque
living in this area with many
small farmers and neighborhood
of garden back backyards I'm
urging you to support SB
eighteen and put the additional
funds to allow us to build those
projects to help us with
resiliency and sustainability
water is life thank you so much
for supporting SB eighteen.
Thank you mysteries of
misspelled remiss.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
my name is Gail during mass and
I'm here on behalf of the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club which represents thirty
five thousand members and
supporters in New Mexico and the
el Paso area the Sierra Club
strongly supports SB eighteen
and fully funding the water
trust fund funding for these
types of infrastructure projects
are particularly important right
now to help make our communities
more resilient to drought the
changes in the climate and also
to protect our precious water
resources thank you Senator
Stefano acts and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee for bringing this
bill.
Thank you Mr remiss of this Joan
brown.
Ms brown thank.
Yes thank you chair and thank
you Senators defiance and in
committee my name is John Brown
time with New Mexico and el Paso
region interfaith power and
light and we support this bill
and we see water as a sacred
trust and we need to be
allocating more funds for the
great concerns we have which are
many as we move into a warming
world and as some of the
speakers spoke are on this
precious gift of water is more
and more of a challenge so we
need to be really for site full
in line more funds in order to
address this which is already
emergency which will become even
greater so thank you so much.
Thank you Mr.
Madam vice chair members of the
committee broadband like
government affairs director for
New Mexico association of
conservation districts and we
are definitely support this bill
that the value that the corpus
has to the water project funding
is so important making sure that
these projects get funded making
sure leverage with other project
dollars available but this
corpus of the base that that and
it's so important we have a
viable help the base for this
water project and I ask you
group you to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Van **** is there
anyone on zoom in opposition to
this bill.
Thank you now will turn to come
if you have anything else center
I'm no madam chair does going to
finance who will determine its
fate all right now they have
not.
The house nor the Senate is
taking water seriously.
In there but if.
thank you senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair just
Clear up some confusion it says
on the FIR which has nothing in
it that.
It's is that it's fifty million
non recurring under
appropriation but under
estimated revenues fifty million
I understand that's a balance
with the Mrs recurring so I have
your time at a one time dollar
amount that we will take so much
out of it every year for however
many years we can.
But that's not a recurring
revenue number that's correct
madam chair and senator it was
intended as a one time influx to
the what I I know it was I just
that seems to be a problem with
the F. I. R..
But I just want to clarify that
that's all it thank thank you
for the clarification senator
Neville Senators maybe.
Thank you madam chair and
senator so
I'm looking at this committee
prepare them.
Analysis describing this as a
permanent fund but just kind of
doing some rough math I mean if
we're it around forty one or
forty two.
And we're spending for a year
you've got to be doing really
really really well.
In your investments year over
year of naming coming and so is
this are we had a sustainable
position right now.
madam chair senator thank you
for that the question I'm gonna
turn it over to miss Marquita
Russel because she's the expert
in the investments.
Thank you madam chair senator
it's not sustainable the water
project finance act directs the
amount of money that comes out
of the water trust board and
moved over to the water project
fund annually and that amount is
set at four million dollars and
it has been since inception
eating into the Corpus two years
ago when we are be a two years
ago when we first this bill was
first presented the state
investment council was surprised
that the balance was as high as
it was the and they were
delighted that it was as high as
it was but it their estimates
are that it's a fifty percent
chance it'll be depleted within
twenty years.
On that point mentor.
The.
If you if you think to get this
up to around ninety million I
suspect four million probably is
roughly sustainable because only
of five percent return
investment counsel typically
runs more like seven eight
percent so I think it's probably
reasonably it will go a long
time and with the inflation
rates are starting to see I
think you might even see some
growth that's just an
observation and not necessarily
expert opinion.
Thank you senator Neville any
other comments he Senator Smith
thanks madam chair center I just
I'm I'm surprised to hear about
this I mean because this is
something that's very specific
to our state business to be a
common kind of cancer
financially in our state to kind
of how we deal with permanent
funds you know we have flagship
institutions eating into their
endowments we have our the big
debate on the the permanent
signing of a permit from the
severance tax refund as part of
funds that we're continuing to
kind of either way at in it just
it it's bothersome to me
because I I think we do when we
do this sort of thing we're
eating into the future what
whatever topic it is whether
it's water or.
Find out you know education
funding university funding and
so I I really hope we can do
this and I really hope we can
stop damaging all of our current
funds
and so I I highly highly support
this I also think that either
new mac probably New Mexico tech
award Mexico state on those
should be a nationwide leader in
water engineering civil
engineering these sorts of
L. yes Senator pope yes Senator
sweeties yes Senator also
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator the pandemic yes we have
a few parents thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you madam chair.
