Senator Cervantes.
Senator guy.
Your.
Senator Neville.
Here.
Here.
Senator.
Excuse me Senator sold their.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
In terms of CENIC's yes present.
I here and for excused.
Okay so we have a an up to
precede and good morning members
to date we were asked to have
the utilities come to visit us
to talk about the rolling cut
offs blackout power outages and
to hear their plans about how
these are being handled and will
be handled in the future.
And I've asked of the different
I used to present and the and a
representative for the cops to
group Representative and each
presentation would be no more
than ten minutes and then we
will go to committee members for
any questions or comments that
you have but we will try to move
on at ten A. M. to our bill that
we have scheduled for this
morning.
So that gives an hour and a half
for discussion with utilities
about what is affecting not only
our energy our electricity but
all of our constituents.
So
Committee members of.
Just take note I already had
Senator souls on the list for
questions and you can let me
know when you want to go as well
but we're going to wait to all
the presentations are finished
so this morning we're starting
with David Hawkins of BP for
strategy and sustainability from
el Paso electric.
So Mister Hawkins are you here.
Yes I see his name and Senator
Sedillo Lopez is with us now as
well.
Mr.
Yes I'm on okay so we're giving
you a about ten minutes to talk
about did you hear what I said
was indicating that the
discussion was about.
I I I miss that part I
understand it to be our
experience through last week's
events well it is we've been
asked to discuss with all the
utilities.
Of how what the existing plan is
for the rolling cut off black
outs and what the future plans
are and then after all the
utilities in the coop
Representative speech that we're
going to go to questions and
discussion but the committee
members and we will have this
part of the.
Agenda completed by ten AM okay.
Thank you receive your the first
on the hot seat.
Well I I I'll have to get you
follow up with information on
the cut offs I I I came talk
speaking on the operational
issues that that we have taken
on regarding interruptions to
customers okay but
I want to make clear just in and
I think everybody knows this
that although we are in el Paso
we are not part of caught you're
not part of that regional entity
we are are part of the western
regional entity the wack
and we had our obviously our
share of issues ten years ago
what where we learned a lot of
lessons about trying to keep our
generation more reliable we made
investments into whether rising
our generators which benefited
us this time around we plan
ahead of time we knew the storm
was was coming in on the
fourteenth one of the issues
that we have on the storm coming
in
has to do with the president's
holiday weekend the three day
weekend so when we acquire
resources whether it be natural
gas or power
for this Sunday the fourteenth
we actually did our load
projections acquired resources
on the Thursday three days
before that so as the
temperatures are changed and as
they came in it was nothing that
we could respond to the day
before but have the to do so on
a real time basis
the low was about two hundred
megawatts which was about twenty
percent higher than we had
planned for on that Sunday.
We ahead of time we conducted
operational meetings we
conducted fuel supply companies
and we felt confident that we
have sufficient generation going
into that.
We did lose generation during
the event despite the weather
weatherization that we had put
in ten years before the
difference being ten years ago
when we lost a generator.
Our equipment froze up almost
immediately and we were not able
to bring that generation back
online for days we have to wait
for for things to fall out
literally the steam that is was
produced produce electricity
that water source froze on us
for days.
this time around we lost
generation we were able to
return that generation within
hours because of the
installation with you tracing
one's program we're able to keep
instrumentation water lines from
freezing so that was certainly
beneficial.
The other thing that we did
yes we have four new generators
in the last ten years their
their gastrointestinal produced
in medical research and it's
it's just that a combustion
process of just natural gas that
that creates that electricity
through generators and we didn't
have those ten years ago those
are numbers are Montana power
station.
And.
When we lost the race and we
were able to bring those
generators up quickly now how
those additionally served us in
the following days when there
were stashed fuel shortages
going on.
We converted the fuel those gas
turbines to fuel oil.
And we were able to
offset the deficiencies that we
were experiencing a natural gas
or fuel oil.
And for.
You'll hear more today probably
about the spot prices of natural
gas we went into the month with
natural gas costs and roughly
two dollars a and and and be to
you is what we had and we saw
spot prices of over three
hundred dollars and be to
that first Monday so what we did
to avoid paying those prices and
and we're not sure if even if we
agreed to pay those prices
whether the supply would be will
not we could over to our fuel
oil and then system wide
services Texas New Mexico our
calculations state our customers
about nineteen million dollars
over the course about four five
days by converting over to fuel
all on as opposed to the the
natural gas and being subject to
those prices so we will have
lessons learned from this I mean
we we don't want to lose
generator for two or three hours
but we did not have any customer
interruptions we have some minor
interruptions but they were not
due to supply just distribution
feeder issues they were returned
to service probably within a
matter of thirty minutes
nothing out of the ordinary as
far as that goes for us a little
note on our solar yeah it was
impacted a little bit on Sunday
as the storm was in but whatever
solar production we gotten on
that Sunday or whatever solar
production we got through that
we can help offset the need to
purchase additional natural gas
so overall I am just pleased to
say that
you know although we are still
scarred from ten years ago a lot
of our employees were here a lot
of our employees take that very
personally
We were eight that we got
through through this event and
and lot of it is is our fortune
on the weather but sometimes you
create your own fortune so we
feel good about what we do.
And and I don't know if that
covers you and I apologize if
you were seeking more for me and
I at the glad to.
The only other thing I would ask
you eat there might be questions
for you later but so.
In the future
I guess that's part of what this
committee is concerned about.
Is as we've gone through a polar
eight vortex so such as it's
been called and we going to any
other extremes what are your
plans for handling any of that
or do you feel that it's.
Adequately handled.
Sure
so.
We mention our current resource
pictures so we have Palo Verde
which gives us some geographic
diversity from whether it's it's
west of Phoenix and in this
February time frame we get about
sixty five percent of our our
energy supply
during my favorite from poverty
so it's it's a relatively it's a
it's a stable fuel source it's
we're not out on the spot market
we know it has it is that fuel
is there and we have that supply
more so we had about sixty five
percent of our energy needs
covered through through Palo
Verde nuclear
in the future yes we will be
adding more solar
it is part of the New Mexico
ETA.
Along with that I for CS Adaran
adding batteries that extend I
think batteries
I'm not sure I've heard in in
batteries and electric cars
sometimes you have to charge
more often colder weather in
maybe that's just because people
are running there Peters I think
we'll get more information on
battery storage we we still
planned on at least for the
next.
gosh the generation we put in
has a life at least three twenty
fifty five.
And and whether you know I would
I would hope.
That emergency events
Mexico Texas they understand
that there's gonna be times when
you need fossil fuels in an
emergency situation and and we
do have quick start generating
for that purpose.
But the generators will be their
Texas has not made the same
commitments that New Mexico has
at this point it doesn't mean
they won't
Texas from the instructions that
we are given as far as future
resources is a least cost
resource although there is and
and that has meant fossil fuels
for generation.
so that may change going forward
but as of now
we will have fossil fuels on our
system and how that relationship
plays out between Texas on
resources New Mexico on
resources we have not thought
of.
Okay great thank you very much
and you'll be able to stick
around for questions I will
sorry for being late.
Thank you very much we
appreciate it okay next we have
excel energy and we have Mister
David Hanson and Mr bill
requests
One is the president of Xcel
energy and one is the regional
vice president welcome.
Good morning madam chair
Senators on baby hats and
hopefully you can see New York
yes we can okay.
I also have a couple slides I
would like to show you just from
a mac because I think it really
conveys some information I am
going to talk a little bit about
what happened to us last week
but I think it'll give you the
description of the planned
outages that occur for our
customers and how the system
works it's largely set up under
federal law we are required
under federal law to belong to a
reliability the in our
reliability into to test the
southwestern.
So let me see if I can find.
The power point madam chair
there it is okay the state yes
we do okay it's not coming up on
Monday at
But you see that alignment out
there working on a frozen face
yes okay great yes.
So I'll just quickly go through
this Xcel energy is an electric
utility and we actually have a
hope is a holding company we for
different utilities and the one
that I'm president of this one
in New Mexico and Texas and
southwestern public service
company that we go under the
brand name effects on.
You can see here in the red wire
service areas are basically were
in eastern and southeastern New
Mexico it's one integrated
system this is a really
important map just to understand
the situation Mr Hawkins was
talking about how el Paso is
part of the western
interconnection.
Is there out there in far
western most of New Mexico is in
the western Center.
Our system which is bounded by
the black is actually in the
eastern interconnection so we're
connected all of our generators
are spending at the same
frequency as the whole east
coast and everything in between
it's one giant electromagnetic
machine Senator that but we.
Thank you one second so are you
if you move to the specific
slide would you tell us and then
cover are you managing the
slides or is destruction.
Mr.
If you see that SCPA Xcel energy
and caught madam chair.
Well what we're seeing is that
it's not on the full view it's
too we are having the.
We're having a split screen and
we are only still on the first
slide.
Okay let me try this and see if
that helps that well we start
with that helps but we're still
on a split screen.
Okay.
put into a slideshow.
The act are the
There are I'm sorry second so
much time.
Can you see yes we are caught at
yes we can okay so can you see
the you can see the westerner
connect and then you see the red
area and then you can see our
system is bounded by the black.
The black line yes okay so we're
part of the southwest parkway
basically comprises of fourteen
states.
And.
And then you have the yellow
area which is confidence solely
within the state of Texas that
is the HSD yellow behalf of
severe issues and and I'll show
you why in just a minute but the
real distinction is is our part
of New Mexico and Texas madam
chair Senators is that were part
of a whole different right whole
different reliability Institute
and we're required by federal
law to belong to the
reliability.
These are our resources I don't
know if you can see the
generation resources.
now can you see the whole our
map that I'm showing here the
weather.
And now.
So I.
There we go yes.
Okay I've got to learn how to
drive.
Reporter on sent.
You can see on the left side
maps so that a couple weeks ago
we were seeing the polar air
coming down it was really gonna
go through Oklahoma and fairly
such tests the week of the
actual storm it actually was
projected to go way past Texas
and into Mexico we're talking
about severely low temperatures
which cough region is not
designed to handle a lot of
their power plants and the four
years without.
The north side building shells
around them and they're exposed
to the elements of what happens
is the cold air just freeze some
of pneumatic tube lines and
stuff like that in the plant
shut down so that's what they
were seeing down and problem why
they just got into we is that.
Yeah on our system our plans are
designed to to handle subzero
weather
we were handling it just fine we
actually had two units in the
hops region that froze up other
than that we had plenty of
capacity on our system and we
were always able to meet our
boat obligations for ours
So what what we start to seek
out other plants within the
southwest power pool we're
dropping offered so Monday
morning the pool declared
emergency alerts and there's
different levels of alerts under
the federal air line you have
with our emergency alert level
zero.
Throughout for.
Yeah so we actually we want to
urgency level to where we start
asking for customers to conserve
energy.
The reliability goes to alert
level three we actually start
interrupting interruptible.
Once you get to our emergency
alert level four that's where
you have to have systems in
place to start cutting low so
the low in the total reliability
agency in our cases of fourteen
state region can match the
generation that's available in
the system and we were in the
and conscious what tremendously
efficient on that and they had a
lot of love in and for three
days when they have sub freezing
weather that they're not used.
our biggest concern that we had
in our system is we we by about
fifty percent of our guests on
the daily market.
Mainly because we have so many
renewables on our system and so
we don't want to buy gas on
dates when we have a lot of wind
and we have sunshine for our
solar facilities but on other
days when we don't have to where
we want to be able to I guess
with private forty percent of
our natural gas month ahead for
the whole month and got it taken
radically every day of the
month.
We have about ten percent that's
in gas storage what we started
to see if the gas situation
extremely.
Dire in the state of Texas and
elsewhere in the pricing of that
affected much of the whole
central and western United
States
so your first day before the
attack we saw a lot of going on
right reposition our crews we're
worried about distribution
transformers analysis going out
being overloaded we would
probably close to a hundred
those go out both in our New
Mexico and Texas area we replace
also very rapidly that was fine
you're worried about substation
over loans biggest concern was
that gas wells in the Permian
we're freezing at and we're not
able to supply gas in there was
tremendous the more for natural
gas temperatures being so low so
the high winds started to.
Pressure started to diminish
they actually start earning our
guests supplies my up to seventy
percent by Monday night of the
fifteenth.
That was a huge concern for us
but we were still able to get
through a
on some of the day's the way and
then blow it all in the front
center actually a lot of with
the day after is just call in
all.
So that was our biggest concern
what we saw was natural gas
prices actually going from about
three dollars.
The metric million the to use
servers thermal units all the
way up past two hundred dollars
in some other HSD order go up to
a thousand dollars so just
tremendous pride I it all has to
do with the scarcity of gas for
those particular dates
so that's the biggest concern
so.
In response to the ranchers your
director the real issue is what
you get to that emergency level
four and remember electricity
travels at the speed of light it
has to be produced instead of
the three demanded and used by
consumers so what happens here
to keep continue balance between
generation in love with the man
so what happened is the pool was
saying elsewhere not necessarily
in our elsewhere there were
deficiencies and so they start
calling for rotating outages
across the whole so Monday
morning the fifth J. we had
about thirty minutes of rotating
out of just not very long on
Tuesday morning we had about
three and a half hours so we
would rotate each block of
customers on a feeder that comes
out the substation this is all
pre planned and and depending on
how many megawatts we have to
cut as directed by the pool we
start rotating forty five
minutes by Sir and then we start
restoring once we get through
that morning the in this so
that's sort of how it works but
also let me point out is we are
also required to plan to meet
our peak demand enough twelve
percent reserves on an annual
basis so we're totally different
than the cough region downstate
that does not plan on that they
only have your need only market
and that that's that's part of
the issues that probably the
Texas legislature's center rest
now is a really doubt insure
that they have plenty of
capacity to meet these
extremists.
So I hope that wasn't.
Destructors you madam chair and
I'll be glad to answer any
questions when the time to from.
Thank you so thank you so much
and
you raise something I'm sure
will come up is the.
Cost increase and how that will
be handled so we will wait for
questions for that next we have
Tom Walgren the vice president
for PNM generation.
You madam chair yes we can now
welcome and good morning.
Okay very good thank.
Good morning.
It the positive news for PNM
system is that it remains stable
and we did not have any rolling
blackouts.
And I'm a modest make
clarification is yeah this was a
significant storm we did have
some I think I think others
explaining we had some localized
distribution outages that might
have been caused by a tree I
think our our largest outage was
actually caused by a balloon out
into the lines this during this
time period so maybe even I'm
related to that so you may have
seen some localized distribution
outages but they were not
associated with the events that
happened in Texas are associated
with again what happened in
California in last summer and
again what what happens in those
situations I think as
SPS explained very well is
there's just an overall.
lack of generation to serve the
overall electrical demands on
the system at the time.
And like we that and I think
because explained you know
there's there's various levels
of energy emergency alerts
developed by New York our our
regulator
and what we saw is that Texas
was an energy alert three which
is again one more severe alerts
work which involves rolling
blackouts.
Which is on the economic system
as we did not have that we we do
not have any elevated energy at
work so we didn't even enter and
energy alert one on the economic
system.
And that again what PNM is done
with Mexico is done we did take
the lessons learned from the
February twenty eleven advantage
there was extensive reports
developed by Nur by whack and
actually the New Mexico public
regulatory commission on how to
winterize our units and so we've
completed all those action items
so we did you know additional
insulation on our equipment.
Adequate medicinal equipment
protection we had additional
Keating you tracing establish
the protocols on how to monarchy
equipment additional staffing
during critical periods we also
establish firm gas
transportation contracts and
that important to have them from
multiple locations so we have
term contracts that come from
both the Permian and the stand
one gas basins just ensure that
diversity of gas resources for
particular cases like this and
obviously increase their
participation in our
communications with our guests
providers.
and just not sure yet I spent
most of my life in Minnesota
all generation can operating
cold weathers as long as we plan
and we maintain those
temperatures.
During the event what we did was
our actions are primarily to men
and mitigate the price affects
our customers which the.
and so what we did do is
minimize the use of all of our
guests plants re reserving the
table guests for the peak
periods like morning and late
evening.
We also do allies to do appeals
of fuel oil and are available
units we ended up deferring one
of our San Juan outages and then
we did end up purchasing power
off the western grid and again
those explain there's three
primary grades in the United
States one is caught one is
eastern grid one of the Western
grant and PNM is is connected to
the western grid so we were
buying power from California
during this event and those
actions that we took we
estimated that saves our
customers about fifteen million
dollars by taking those
compensatory actions that you
would.
But again a lot of even though I
think the New Mexico utility did
excellent job
we want to make sure that we're
learning our lessons learned I
think it to take away from both
California and Texas it is that
we want to be a have a
sustainable grid we also have to
have a reliable reliable grid so
we're gonna continue our path to
carbon free that obviously have
to have reliability and cost a
factor in their and just to be
very clear.
We do not seek either California
last summer North Texas event
caused by renewables I think it
is not caused by renewables I
think there are some other
lessons learned and I can talk
about
and a little bit more I guess.
I think one of the things sign
Texas.
And I think I was spoke to which
is probably.
Before and which is probably
more
the important maybe for this
committee is so there's a lot of
pressure.
In the market conditions in
Texas are such that it's an
energy only market and what that
means is that the market has
posted a small the the resource
needs
we have an example let's say and
that works that works pretty
well most of the time what
saying and so what happens let's
let's take the summer time in a
Texas it's hot and it's not
let's say five months were
better out of the year
temperatures are in elevated
energy uses elevated so the
price of energy's elevated in
the summertime
generators are extended by the
market price to take actions to
make sure the generators are
online during the summertime.
When we get to these extreme
events and again there were cold
weather similar call polar
vortex in the late nineteen
nineties want to twenty eleven
again twenty twenty two.
The thing is those those lasted
about a week and so what you're
seeing is a cold weather event
that last about seven days every
ten years and it's difficult for
the market to incense the
generators you know without an
obligation to serve
to be available during those
time periods and I think that's
what you see what you see
different in New Mexico probably
just test is normal for
vertically integrated utility
which has the obligation to
service basically you know the
Buck stops with us we've got a
generate we got a producer we
got to get your house all in one
but we have that obligation to
serve what.
I think.
Thanks as we look you know how
do we continue to learn from
this even though we don't have
really black which medication to
learn this and obviously
There are a lot of COVID lessons
I would say between this and the
California event that happened
last summer.
one of the things as resource
adequacy obviously is critical I
think what we're stand is you
know maybe some of the changes
from from climate change we're
seeing historical temperatures
that are extreme but also the
duration of those temperatures
and maybe the footprint of those
temperatures.
So again it's just maybe you
where we would in the past a
plan just for historical values.
It's important for resource
planning to consider beyond just
historical temperatures and and
widespread.
like cal AYSO as X. has come
forward with that
There is a reserve margin which
is the amount of excess capacity
or additional capacity have a
bunch what you expect your peak
to be.
we would look to.
Advocate to expand that reserve
margin again that's an oversight
by the New Mexico public
Regulatory Commission and will
will make a appeal to them to
to increase that planning
reserve margin force.
I think the other major
consideration for us is the
amount of leaning on the market
there's a concept that amendment
there's always power available
in the market and that works
most of the time like you saw in
Texas but in times where there's
extreme conditions are that's a
bad assumption that have again
to make sure that we fulfill
that obligation to serve our
customers.
I think the other few lessons
are fuel diversity open that
type of deal and also
geographical locations.
and then also the accuracy of
our forecasting of our demand
response.
Thanks thanks and in the New
Mexico as well is
Get em has a what's called a
power purchase cost adjustment
clause.
what that does is it that it
essentially we don't make or
lose money on the fuel that's
passed through.
And one of the provisions of
that however though is there's a
five percent cap.
What what changes can happen for
our customers and so our
customers that that will be.
We will be within that less than
that five percent cap as
customers you will do that reset
in April.
Us our customers won't see any
more than that five percent
change.
In April the other thing I think
it's important to consider is
that.
We also have what's called a
hedging twenty in.
That is approved by the New
Mexico public Regulatory
Commission which was just tires
was just recently approved this
last summer.
And then that hedging plan is in
the months ahead
we have to have eighty five
percent of our energy needs
basically from a firm price kind
of contract.
She
we stopped there and see if
there's questions.
So Mr Paul green I forwarded a
letter to some of your staff and
hopefully they'll get it to you
before you get to questions and
answers.
In
It is written by William or bill
good.
Representing about fourteen
hundred.
Customers the PNM about the
rolling blackouts all year long.
And the power outages.
so I hope you'll be able to
enter and I happen to live in
that area but I didn't write the
letter.
So I hope you'll be able to
address that since you're
claiming there's no power
outages or rolling blackouts.
We're moving on now to the
southwest power pool.
And I have Lanny Nickell the
chief operating officer.
Thank you Mr nickel for joining
us.
And perhaps you could tell what
what happened and what the plans
are going forward.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair for the opportunity to of.
I guess inform you and and and
help you understand what we saw
I appreciate Mr Hudson actually
providing a little bit of that
information already.
It was quite an experience it's
one we don't want to ever have
to experience again.
and you know I think we actually
did.
We we made was a really bad
situation about as as good as we
could we don't like to have to
direct our utilities should load
that's a last resort.
it's something we just don't
want to do but unfortunately
that's the situation that
material laws required us to do
so.
Let me I would like to show a
few slides the puck who do I
have the ability to do that yes
you do.
Okay let me try that.
We also heard
Presenters we heard last week
from Dr Doug help explain to us
about the southwest power pool
in the grid so there is some
basic knowledge here as well
good.
Good that that helps a lot I
didn't know how far back I
needed to go in terms of who we
are but I saw all get real
quick.
We are a regional transmission
organization Lopez can you see
this yes we can.
Okay.
Perfect.
We are a regional transmission
organization and you can see
about this map but I think David
modest shown a similar Matt when
he what he spoke earlier
so I'm not going to elaborate a
whole lot.
Our main responsibility.
This is really to work with our
utility members to keep the lots
or that's that's job one for us
we we've used the analogy of
acting as air traffic
controller.
For the high voltage
transmission power grid.
And in doing that what we're
really responsible for is making
sure that the transmission grid
that we're responsible for
across all or parts of fourteen
states.
Can be reliably operated and is
reliably operated.
so that's that is one of two key
areas that that we are
responsible for to help keep the
locks on the second area which
is really the area that we we
experienced a little bit of a
challenge with during this
winter of that is the
responsibility to continuously
balance supply and demand.
Now as air traffic controller in
and use of that analogy I'll
continue to use that for a
little bit we don't own any of
the transmission lines we don't
own any of the generators we're
a nonprofit organization with
responsibilities delegated to us
by the federal energy regulatory
commission.
So we reliable on the generation
that's made available to us.
And we direct the amounts of
generation needed to meet demand
on a second by second basis.
We.
We do that in a way that
produces the least cost energy
wholesale energy.
For consumers across the
fourteen state region so while
we we we try to balance
economics and reliability
reliability is still job one.
and and as you heard already
some of the high gas prices
affected her ability to provide
low cost energy but we still
were able to do that in the
lowest cost possible way.
Well let me move on.
I want to just kind of give you
a sense of.
Why are fourteen state region
alternately did have to.
Direct load shedding on a
rotating basis.
I think this is pretty
pretty indicative of what we
were up against our region is as
is highlighted in the kind of
red blue shaded area was really
the coldest in America.
All of our state's six with the
little exception of southeast
Nebraska that we cover.
Experienced low temperatures
below zero and in many cases in
many areas well below zero so
that it was unprecedented in the
sense that.
That brought of an area in New
and in fact are nearly our
entire region experienced those
kinds of low temperatures.
We've been around for eighty
years this is the first time
we've ever had to direct load
shedding across an entire
fourteen state region.
Also so it's unprecedented in
that regard as well.
Let me give you just a little
bit Mr hooks and talked about
the Energy M. R. Arjun see a
large that we issued.
and I want to give you just a
little bit of a time line so you
can understand how this played
out for us.
We actually began you know we we
paid attention to the weather
forecast just like many of you
did.
Are we were made aware that
we're you know we're gonna have
some cold temperatures.
On Thursday February the fourth
we issued a cold weather alert
to our grid operators the
utility members such as
southwestern public service and
others.
On February the eight we issued
a resource alert and again
that's just more of a
heightening awareness of the
conditions that were expected in
to make sure that our utility
members were prepared for those
conditions.
On February the not
we we declared what we refer to
as conservative operations again
just another increasing state of
awareness so that our members
could be doing whatever they
need to do to prepare generation
resources.
on Thursday February the
eleventh now again remember this
all hit the hardest on paperwork
fifteen six thank.
So this was you know four days
in advance we began to commit.
All of bailable generating
resources that require longer
lead times to be able to start
up and be ready to run.
We did that through Friday
making sure that we had
resources available across the
weekend and into Monday and
Tuesday.
We issued public appeals the day
before we actually had to
interrupt load
What we were wanting to do with
that is if we get.
Sumer is to help reduce the
million we were we were
realizing at that point that we
were likely to establish what we
would refer to as a new winter
creek not just be pay as a
region as a summer peaking
region we experience our highest
demands during summer.
and and that runs around fifty
thousand megawatts.
For this winter of that before
we actually had to ask for
public appeals we were
projecting.
About forty six thousand five
hundred so it it was a pretty it
pretty high amount of load that
was expected and the early close
to what we would other Wauseon
Summertown.
That we believe the public to
build up bills actually helps we
saw about two thousand megawatts
a reduction and and maybe not
all of that can be attributed to
the officials that we think a
lot of the care.
And the and that was very
helpful would it reduce the
amount of actual curtailments
that we had to ask our utilities
to make so then we rolled
include Monday the fifteenth.
again continued with the public
appeal process for conservation
we declared an energy emergency
alert level one at five o'clock
in the morning.
which just simply indicates that
all resources are are committed
and we're expecting conditions
to be really tight.
The level was issued at seven
twenty two alternately at twelve
o'clock a little after twelve
was when we had to direct
interruptions of load.
On this day we interrupted about
six hundred and forty one
megawatts across again a forty
four thousand megawatt system.
that represents about one and a
half percent of of the
consumption that will.
Happening at the time it lasted
for about fifty minutes.
We were able to restore service
leader as a result of some
imported energy that we were a
lot of work from our neighbors
which by the way I'll point out
that the interconnected nature
of this P. P. system.
With significant transmission
connections help us help us make
a bad situation not as bad as it
would have otherwise been we
relied heavily on imports from
our neighbors to the east we
actually received a couple
hundred megawatts of imports
from the west across our DC Todd
in the Colorado that helped a
lot but those imports work
always available and and when we
lost him that's when we had to
generally speaking had to go
into the EA level curry's.
Again on Thursday this time it
was a little bit longer in terms
of the interruptions of the time
during which we had to ask for
those and a little bit more
drastic we had to ask for about
twenty seven hundred megawatts
of load within the S. P. P. put
current to be interrupted on a
rotating basis it lasted a
little over three hours and
Representative about six and a
half percent of the consumption
that was occurring at that time.
Alternately you say that we were
able to eventually get out of
these eighty eight levels to in
one and restore things to normal
later Thursday think about
Thursday afternoon as well we're
able to kind of get back to
normal.
So I wanted you to understand
kind of the sequence of events
that really to let you know that
the planning for this began a
week and a half prior we did
everything we could we committed
all available generating
resources we waited till the
last possible minute.
Without sacrificing reliability
for the entire grid before we
called for the rotating service
interruptions.
What are we going to do going
forward.
We are we've already established
our conversations with our board
of directors we've agreed that
we need to.
establish a stakeholder engaged
in a member engaged committee to
review actions while we think we
did a pretty good job and and
minimize the exposure.
We know we can do better we know
that there are improvements that
we can make we know that there
are decisions that our members
will need to be thinking about
making going forward so that we
can be better prepared to deal
with these kinds of events in
the future even if they're not
as extreme.
So what we will have a steering
committee that will focus our
stakeholder organization.
To have those discussions and to
make recommendations for
improvements needed in the
future we we expect that by July
of this year those
recommendations will be
finalized and presented to our
board for approval.
So I think I want to stop there
in the look forward to answering
any questions that you might
have.
Thank you very much that was
very informative and for
everybody who presented
materials if you are willing to
provide those to the secretary
of the committee we will make
those available everybody
watching our audience is very
large
When people when we are webcast
the entire role world can see it
and many people in New Mexico
and outside of New Mexico do
check into these so if you will
make your presentations
available to the secretary of
the committee Veronica Ortega
who contacted you we will make
them available to our committee
members and we will post them as
materials online.
So we're going to questions
comments from
committee members and I first
have Senator sold.
Thank you madam chair.
And I haven't most of my
questions are more geared
towards apostle electric that's
my local area but I've got some
that are a little bit more
general and I was gonna ask
questions that I'm glad you
brought it up about at el Paso
electric in the the generating
at Montana it has dual fuel
capacity gas and fuel oil.
What triggers or at what point
does is the decision made to
change from gas to fuel oil.
Thank you senator souls so in in
this instance and and let me
first say.
The first Monday that we saw
natural gas bikes we were still
running on natural gas it
Montana in converting over to
the oil that day so in this case
it's
it was reliability we were
attempting to schedule we were
we were getting cuts on about
approximately fifteen to twenty
percent on the natural gas that
we needed
and although we saw market
prices quoted it was we were
unsure as to whether or not we
could take delivery so that
consideration primarily was made
on.
Bility issues although it turned
out to be economically
beneficial as well.
Thank you and madam chair with a
Paso electric our natural gas
contracted or is it bought on an
active daily spot market.
So for us the way we manage it
is we typically go into the
month looking at our lowest gas
burn that we typically have so.
I think someone else mention if
you buy it you have to burn it
so we we looked at at and I I
believe we wanted to the month
with roughly seventy percent of
the needs that we needed on
during the streets which would
have been typically outside of
this these type of events we
have a fairly stable requirement
as far as gas needs so whether
it's the weekend or weekday
there's not much variance in the
summer we can get a lot more
variance in minimum gas
requirements and maximum gas
requirements so like I said we
went in with probably seventy
thousand and maybe if you under
contract for the month and are
in need to requirements I think
this has about a hundred five
hundred six thousand four for
that the freezer won't last
week.
So madam chair and and Mr Hudson
that this storm well it was a
freak storm was we thought
coming we knew it weaker why had
a time of was all past electric
actively trying to increase the
natural gas supply prior to the
storm coming you indicated you
had contracted for seventy
percent but it wasn't like
suddenly this storm showed up
with twelve hours notice was
there a move to actively
increase the natural gas supply.
I'm sorry I think I heard Mr
Hudson but up directed towards
me they I I'm sorry I look at
wrong wrong name on my list Mr.
You may have had a great answer
I was going.
But no so we did see this storm
coming and we did make
operational appropriation what
what I was mentioning
The first part is when we saw
the storm coming in what we do
is we have a we have a load
forecasting software through a
third party and and look at our
temperatures and and sometimes
the history doesn't match up
with what you you will see so in
this case it's a little unusual
court call temperatures are
typically at night and you will
warm up in the afternoon in this
case we had our warmest
temperatures in the morning on
that Sunday on the fourteenth we
were I believe in the mid
forties in the morning and
temperatures dropped
into us we got as low as
fourteen degrees I believe on
that Sunday so when we we
forecast I mentioned that we
were meeting our low
requirements for Sunday for
Monday based on our forecasts.
As the temperatures dropped in
the afternoon the load picked up
higher than we had forecast
previously three days before so
natural gas supply was not an
issue for us that first day on
Sunday
we we had we had storage we have
some no notice flexibility in
some of our contracts
to to pull and gas so supply was
not so much an issue that first
day
Monday also that was that was a
holiday that we we plan for that
on Friday again three days in
advance so that is when we began
our conversion over to the fuel
oil burn on Montana to make up
for those in and be to use we
had to procure some spot gas
That Monday that conversion
didn't take place until later in
the afternoon Monday so we were
hit with some spot natural gas
prices over three hundred
dollars on that date we
by going to fuel oil we did not
have to to acquire additional
natural gas for the women's.
Okay I'm you made a comment I
thought I'd try to write it down
here
If the the gas is contracted and
then you made a comment
something that they gave no
notice contracts what what does
that mean I'm not we have the
ability in in some of our our to
flex up our guests schedules
it's not necessarily no notice
but it can be same day.
gas different than electricity
You know I've I've heard it
takes eight hours to flow from
the base in to where we are now
pass so so there are some same
day opportunities you may not
have planned
the day before and and then
arises.
A name you can put in schedules
for natural gas not all of our
our guests that we had
contracted for was flowing to us
yeah and and those were just I
think some of the freeze events
at the gas well has that maybe
been mentioned.
We also have a gas storage
facility or to gas storage
facilities both of those are in
Texas I believe there were some
operational issues
force majeure events as well due
to the freeze on those
facilities so
Yes it's not it's not like
electricity where if we lose
something someone else can can
ramp up the generator within in
minutes or an hour in the gas
markets it's a little bit there
is no hourly market that we can
take advantage of just due to
the physics of gas.
And madam chair and and I guess
and I'm trying to understand but
if you got contracted gas or gas
in your tank somewhere else and
it's not available.
Mexico is going to pay the extra
cost what we have to buy on the
spot market gas at three hundred
dollars does that get passed on
to the consumer or that go back
to the gas company that was
supposed to be delivering
contracted gas but wasn't able
to.
So it really depends on the
event and we'd have to check
that there are force majeure
provisions and and electricity
contracts and natural gas
contracts
that that really leave the.
Provider are of the source of of
some of that response but I'll
I'll have to look into the
specifics I know it in let let
Tricity market when when they're
interruptions there there are
make whole provisions liquidated
damages provisions in those
contracts I would have to
research the natural gas
contracts with a parallel the
electricity markets as well but
the each each have their own
specific force majeure clauses
in contracts so that's what we
would have to determine what can
now as far as how gets passed on
I'm sorry Senator.
Okay go ahead just gonna COVID
some of the questions when we
get to appropriations Senator
asset a Lopez who's more on the
legal side can help explain what
those contracts are or who's
responsible for for ups those
extra costs.
Okay go ahead yes so and and so
how are fuel costs we we do in
is part of our ongoing right K.
are not ongoing but it's to be.
Gentleman we do have a few all
purpose power charger judgment
flaws and in those passed
through to customers are
determined by that clause and
and I think if there there's
something significant maybe this
event that's part of what we're
are looking at whether we were
pressed to variants and how that
that is determined help
customers are impacted but I
think it's too late for process
we would have to seek a variance
from.
What we have currently.
Thank you madam chair and there
was a comment made I don't know
if it was by you or someone else
about a five percent cap on fuel
costs.
How does that get passed through
I mean before this of that even
started I was getting calls from
constituents that their electric
bills had gone way up because of
the added fuel costs this winter
how is this going to now affect
them or they now going to be
seeing Mr additional several
hundred dollars on their elector
bills similar to what they were
seeing for fuel costs prior to
that.
I will have to look into how how
that flows through and how
immediate that is on customers
bills as part of our our fuel
clause I don't have that answer
for you at this moment.
I am very quick question kind of
along the same thing when using
fuel oil compared to natural gas
on a normal market I think
somebody indicated natural gas
which is typically somewhere to
to maybe three dollars per
million be to you how does that
compare to fuel oil what with
the cost per million BTU
equivalent be for fuel oil on a.
I understand
So the the fuel that we had in
in our storage tank in in it is
a daily storage tank so we
needed to replenish
as each day went on but the
numbers I've seen were roughly
eleven to twelve dollars and
will be to compare to the gas
market of two to three hundred
thousand BTU.
And madam chair I'm not sure I'm
talking about the spot market
when I went up to.
Donor center so we have three
more people to yes ma'am I I I'm
just about done thank you the
normal day it's about two
dollars the house what market
you said this went to three
hundred on a normal day what is
it worth your while.
Yes so we we are not active in a
spot fuel oil market like I said
we it is is there for
reliability emerge let's.
Emergency maybe a strong word
but I think it it's appropriate
in this case so typically if if
we burn fuel oil is just for
testing of equipment prior to
the winter and it it's it's
minimal and we have I we have
not exercise this amount of the
fuel oil burn in that I can
remember since I've been in the
past electric so we have longer
term agreements that are are
based on probably be the amount
of the prices that which they
can acquire for the time we stop
our storage tanks but the prices
are seeing even on those days
were relatively stable at
between eleven twelve dollars
and ninety two.
Okay so it's about six times
with normal gas costs up just a
couple of a very brief comment
you'd started often indicated
that you miscalculated what the
load was by about twenty percent
twenty percent is a huge
miscalculation we knew days
ahead of time the storm was
coming M. one of the last ones
as this whole of that nationwide
was taking place we heard of.
Elected officials locally state
level national level that
immediately we blaming
renewables and I wonder of Mr
Fallon PNM said renewables did
not cause this problem out and I
think we need to make sure that
we don't jump to conclusions
like that when there's an event
and we look at what actually get
it and I think a past electric
also indicated that they are
renewable the folder were part
of what helped stabilize them
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much I have the
Senator Gallegos Senator von
case and Senator Sedillo Lopez
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair thank you and have
been having troubles getting
wifi your capital but
Ask you if you wouldn't mind
madam chair if I talked to.
Mr Nichols from southwest power
pool he has a service in the
southeast part of the state I
had a follow up questions
within.
Mr.
Mr Nichols Senator David Davis I
live in Lee County and as
wandering I know we didn't have
near the problems that the Texas
caught had the but I did have it
and let me just give you a
little bit of.
Beeper right background I live
in your house and that's under
SPS
but I the constituents I have
mourned Lovington and and now
the rural areas but I I had some
rolling blackouts in years one
or two hours one day same day an
hour later in a separate in the
day and I was wondering how
things work for you all in
southeast New Mexico in any of
the issues you would have their.
It was senator gaggles thanks
for the question
you know we were looking at
things across the region.
And I'm not aware of any
specific issues in southeastern
New Mexico which is part of this
be please press.
other than just the fact that
temperatures will little warmer
there than the rest but
certainly still cold
I think if I could I'd like to
defer your question to either Mr
wholesaler Mr grant they they
probably are a lot more familiar
with what specifically was going
oh one.
in their they're part of our
footprint the that you know
again in terms of supply.
yeah I think Mr Hudson mentioned
a couple of units were offline
in that area not available but
generally speaking.
we didn't it we experienced
anything with in the the SP
creek corporate that we could
attribute directly to problems
in your part of the press.
Thank you.
This
is a service is called bars.
Respond to the question about
what was happening and other.
Thank you one of.
The.
I would madam chair two to the
west farmers group and see what
they're doing also okay so if
you're going to respond please
identify yourself by name and
affiliation.
Representative chief executive
officer Russian bombers and we
stronger the forty Siah.
Worker coops Lea County results
in providing farmers we are a
member of the southwest power
pool and while there was much
activity going on in that area
as a member of the southwest
power pool when they issue more
options includes a whole will
return southwestern pool so it
was for co ops.
We're asking.
by this we actually goes longer
transmissions as well as part of
the request funds are in
southwest our own each of those
four boss reduced one of that
action on those which are cool.
But you were part of the
entirety of the southwest
terrible in that particular area
there were no particular
interruptions weather wise or
anything else it was it was just
a the grant deed almost
all that is to be instruction.
What are and I appreciate that
and and just try to understand
some of this thank you you are
you guys part of the tri state.
Well we're.
We're the less June the wiring
just for those for offices
appropriations Mexico.
Okay and I appreciate that and I
guess my my question was my
consideration if you guys didn't
have the issues I know we've got
a lot of wind.
In our area and were they not
affected due to the cold.
Along reflected in the Cold War.
Was actually generating.
Well.
We have some solar in New Mexico
about forty or fifty megawatts
of solar.
Problems of course is based on
all of summer breaks.
from seven in the morning and I
think land use of the Jews
interruptions or early in the
morning so when you see water
breaks her morning and seven
five eight million one of the so
we're.
Ginning.
Us this.
Most of the state's library most
industry
also fuel are clear and are the
more traditional resources.
Madam chair this is what with
excel energy SPS it's David
Hanson yes we we do serve here
just and Hopsin
and so I think to directly
answer Senator this is question
We did experience brief outages
on Monday morning I expect
you're probably talking more
about Tuesday morning where we
had a much deeper or you know we
had a larger loan obligation to
cut from the SP three so to do
that we had to hit several
circuits a couple of times and I
think that must be that must be
what some of your constituents
are talking about or yourself I
mean my personally in my house I
saw an hour and a half this is
the first time we've ever had to
do something like this there's
gonna be a lot of our lessons
learned something that happens
very quickly because we have to
get the demand down to or this
work LCS cascading hours which
is worse we don't want that
that.
Thank you for that madam chair
in restriction thanks use during
our committee I had to my wife I
would go out no power and I'd
have to go outside and try to
get why I from just outside
sources in so I've missed part
of this committee because of
that but I appreciate that I
know that they were some of the
areas were asked like the
schools curtailed there was no
one there so I know you guys get
your do deal district keep the
residents are at and I know who
you know.
Listening to Texas caught and
you guys had know where the
problem stated and I appreciate
that because it's all about
trying to keep our our people in
our communities our homes warm
so I and lights on so thank you
for that I did have just one
follow up question for western
farmers if you wouldn't mind
madam chair.
In the this is very yes Mr let
the state would just gonna ask
so I know how we can electric
kit done a project to make a
natural gas fired
generator in Lee County could
get to the right sorry also they
did in Texas which is just right
across state lines do you know
how that was still the operated
and they having issues
that we can solve the is is our
in loving memory of the state
forty seven megawatt natural gas
some of the and operate the
operator that about forty five
megawatts all through the
end of the call actually through
the whole homeowners as directed
by the very that operators
operator well.
And I appreciate that I just
know that you know with some
other opportunities I I I fear
that if we get away from that
vast completely that a year from
now ten years actually pro now
we'll have bigger problem but
with that I yield madam chair
thank you for all the
information detail thank you for
what you did.
Thank you very much Senator
Montes.
Senator Mondays are you ready.
We'll go on to Senator Sedillo
Lopez and will come back to
Senator Montes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you madam chair
Just in think I've learned so
much I really appreciate these
presentations that you've
arranged for us madam chair and
and thank you to all the
presenters
I'm really impressed with the
the power grid and how because
it's so it's so big that it can
help each other and it and it
does you know all the spot
markets and everything that
you've described but I was
thinking about the transition
we're trying to accomplish we're
we're we're moving
in that direction for the
greeted but we've also got a
strategy of convert there's also
the the strategy proposed about
community solar and about did
even increasing solar in homes
and also batteries and I was
just wondering how do you
envision those strategies
fitting in to this massive grid
because they're obviously
localized strategies and and I
will just share with you the my
neighbors and I were stockpiling
wood for wood stoves and and
taking individual actions for
for our homes and the people
were solar very had solar very
happy as I I just have a
question then about how you see.
Those kinds of smaller actions
fitting in to this massive
This massive granite that that
is excellent because we can we
can help each other.
Across the country and across
the state.
But how what the smaller things
going to help.
In this trend well at all in
this transition how do you see
them sitting in.
Madam chair
Senator this is David Hanson
with excel and SPSS
we think it's in all of the
above strategy our experience
was we're in
first the snow Opper I
simple way to get a little bit
covering medic does come off
that right after the front comes
through it's so still there is
no wind generation now we also
know that also it's sunshine
great in the day and not and not
but also when you have a heavy
blizzard going on you're not
getting much solar even during
the day so you've got to have
other backups.
Are are running we are full
plants at full run at the plant
ran right through this is that
for all our guests where it's
rated five and so we got to
really work at the gas pipelines
could not get enough supplies
out of the yes feels because
everything was freezing up and
gas fields so it's going to take
me our goal at Xcel energy is to
reduce carbon.
By fifty six percent by or I'm
sorry about eighty percent from
the year twenty third we're also
well on track of that we think
with our latest wind project.
will be in line have almost
forty eight percent of our
energy from where but we know
it's internet resource we can't
count on it during the severe
issues so why Senator crackers
well we got the half of it back
up resource it's a huge press
reports but I think you
individually customers can do
things on their own it comes
down to economics what makes the
best on economics.
But how does yours the grid
react to the smaller projects
like the community solar
projects and the.
If
you will solar projects and the
batteries because that's that's
of interest to me for for what
you're describing the back up.
So battery seem very critical to
me for this transition.
Miss madam chair.
Madam chair and services David
Hanson F. basically we see those
as negative love they're taking
about off of the system so it is
a system
because it's reducing the amount
of demand that we must serve
instantaneous.
so our policy should include
supporting storage.
individually or massive how.
How should we think about
batteries and storage.
You madam chair.
Insisted Senator.
What we do think it's
appropriate to have that we're
just we're concerned about
processes the action in other
words by the non participants
that don't have the battery
subsidizing the people that have
the batteries and so that's our
big concern we don't have a
subsidization.
I am sorry could you madam chair
that that my last thing is could
you explain that I'm not sure I
understood it well that you're
creating so many incentives for
batteries or rooftop solar that
other customers that are helping
create those seats in there
basically subsidizing those that
are participants with with
rooftop solar providers that's.
That's our concern and it is
this in the pricing I I I
understand but how does how does
that happen that's right in the
in the pricing.
Thank you madam chair of the
yield.
Thank you very much and on the
battery storage we might think
in terms of utility.
batteries versus.
Homeowners or individuals
Senator von K. are you there.
Senator von case madam chair to
hear me yes now I can hear you
thank you please go ahead with
your questions or comments thank
you madam chair chair I just
want to thank you for scheduling
this hearing today you know we
it seems like whenever we come
to Santa Fe the goal for
everyone is to pass our bills
and and not enough time spent
learning the complexities of the
policy that underlies our bill
so I think this is a great
presentation I very much
appreciated today I'm amazed by
the amount of work I
of power the minds software
everything that goes into making
these decisions and it sounds
like they're maybe not day by
day month by month but our by
our in the moment of crisis so
my kudos to everyone I got to
subject to questions really one
is we've all seen the the.
Outrageous fees that are being
charged customers in taxes for a
spikes in their a utility usage.
In the thousand dollars in some
cases might bite the a I think
thousand dollars a day or so
okay can you can anyone tell me
that you Mexico already have
assurances in our laws and our
protections that something like
that cannot happen to anyone in
the state of New Mexico so using
not just PNM not just apostle FY
I'm from but continueing it is
everyone in New Mexico protected
from seeing those kind of rate
charges passed on to them in a
crisis situation.
I would like to answer.
Community.
Yes Mr Boller.
This system for me yes okay can
you still hear me now yes.
Okay very good yeah that that's
a good question one of one of
the market differences you see
between the New Mexico and Texas
is again it's a it's a free
market energy only market in
Texas and so what if you live in
Dallas you could have up to a
hundred twenty different
providers of electricity you
know provide you your generation
and you have the option to do it
either on a fixed basis or you
can have it basically a floating
price based on the market price
and when you're seeing people
that all have ten thousand
dollar bills on their you and
you know I in a month those are
those that chose to take the
The market based price and again
I think it comes back to maybe a
conversation we're having for
which is there's always this
Balance that we need in our
policies between
the other cost obviously crosses
important for customers but also
that obligation to server I
think that's just the a ballots
are going to have in that so in
in New Mexico you don't have not
have the same provision
that they can that they have the
option to do and again those are
you know that's essentially you
know some people would call
wholesale market somebody call
it you know retail willing some
people call it retail choice
again that's that's kind of some
of the policy that that that
resulted in those extreme bills
that he would.
I'm here to pick it up a little
bit on the batteries I think
import.
Well.
Your fall grantees are critical.
And as senator should Montes has
the floor and we can come back
to the batteries later but
Senator bonding is has the floor
thank you thank you madam chair
madam chair use you said that
you had a pot on my question is
asking you would share it with.
Well right now
Matt constituents in the PNM
area and I cover six county so I
have co ops and I have a.
PNM.
Primarily and in particular some
of the constituents have had
bills that have been about eight
hundred percent higher.
Than the previous month.
And even though.
He NM indicated they didn't have
rolling blackouts.
These customers did have rolling
cut off and they in fact had
long power outages of six hours
at one time or twelve hours at
another time.
And.
There are no protections for
these individuals and if we
start talking and I'm gonna get
on a soapbox in a minute but if
we start talking about low
income and moderate income
individuals.
Being saddled with a bill that
they cannot pay.
We don't have any protections
here the low income heating and
energy assistance program is
minimal it's a couple hundred
dollars for the entire season
it's not thousands of dollars
per person so this is I sure
coming in our statutes.
I'm sorry go head Senator mantis
thank you madam chair again a
fascinating discussion about
some very important implications
to are the people we represent a
different subject I can and then
missed Mentzer alert let it go
to other members of the this is
really for anyone on the panel
on I might can guess and they'll
probably have an opinion
increasingly here in the
legislature over the last two or
three years I have seen the
initiative to be greater
diversification and lesser
reliance on investor owned
utilities we're doing this by
increasing legislation and
incentives for individuals to
have self contained self
sufficient solar systems on
their homes or to community
solar systems which may be a
neighborhood or a dozen homes or
maybe even several dozen homes
and even legislation to and then
what cities and counties or or
other local governments get into
the production generation and
distribution systems all all of
these seem to be the direction
we're gonna which is set of one
big massive network consider
related interconnected rather
more of a standalone small
systems and so forth and and and
I I this this entire discussion
of this experience is a lot of
pause because I'm listening to
all the redundancies all the
interconnections the fact we're
getting power in a crisis in
California so with so I just
wonder the panel could help me
understand.
It is that is the direction that
we're moving as a state
legislature which is breaking up
the the monolithic single
investor owned monopoly system
and going to everybody and their
community has our own system it
is the it they are all the
redundancies and all the
inner connections and and things
that they were done here are
those in the mail will also be
available more kind of all on
our own.
Senator this is David how does
the system come fall like at if
I could respond first.
I think that I think the
important thing to consider.
I think that comport training
considers yes some or all the
same path and we're all eager to
get our percent carbon pretty I
think the manner in which we
find it is critical and I'd go
back to that obligation to serve
right as we look at the
different generation providing
opportunities you know it is it
just a low cost option that's
available when it's available or
it is or does it also have the
obligation to serve when these
critical time periods come I
think it again I think if you
look over the history of the
electrical grid we've always
been making that trade off of in
that cost verses that obligation
to certain which I think is
really you know one of the
emphasis of any of the creation
of the co ops and in the United
States was was an important part
of it is where is that
obligation to serve I guess
would be the primary concern
question.
Dave Dave Hopkins here I'll pass
electors and I certainly agree.
What what Mr Paul green said.
And my thoughts on that is is is
I'm a liability issue as well as
if you have pockets for various
reasons deciding to to
Implement their plans for what's
best for their community.
They may discover that they need
to rely on other communities to
support them during times of
storms during times when there's
no way and
during transmission outages for
whatever reason and and what is
actually have was used you'll
start pulling together for
liability purposes to to our
help offset some of the issues
that that arise from from
certain resources
what we found in in last week
was we benefited from from all
of our resources whether was
solar nuclear natural gas or
fuel oil but my point being is
is when we start thinking about
reliability to start pulling
together the needs of
communities use actually get a
service territory are bouncing
Authority which is how we view
ourselves and and it is
something that we you know we
think about quite frequently is
is as we're adding our warbles
and and and certainly we have
room to add more on our system
but how do you maintain that
reliable.
Thank you madam chair of answers
my questions thank you.
Thank you senator Mr Paul green
you started talking about
battery storage to you and
finish your thought.
Thank you and I apologize for
any India inappropriateness that
I I just want to emphasize that
that we see batteries is an
important part of you know our
path to carpentry and providing
reliable service the building we
have to keep in mind as the
existing lithium ion batteries
which are prominent are really
limited to forty six hours
so we've seen in these cases is
that no the the vents are
lasting three four five six
dates right so we've also you
why batteries are critically
port and we've also got to
consider the much longer term
storage options which likely
could increase include like
hydrogen you know in a in a
carbon create environment the
hydrogen could be an awesome
absolute solution you know for
our combustion turbines
in that process so we've got to
continue to look at the longer
term storage I think as well
thank you madam chair thank you
at.
Have a question before I go back
to Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos your hand is
up.
Sure thank you I just had a
question are gonna apologize
because I was having a hard time
get all is anyone from tri state
on the call.
Yes this is Brad never all
missing present of energy
management tristate we can
barely hear you Mr never Galle
can you adjust your volume.
That's better thank you Mr.
Madam chair I was trying to find
out from the tri state if they
had any kind of problems I know
I understand you guys too parts
of Oklahoma maybe Texas and New
Mexico is that correct.
Not exactly know we reduce our a
little bit of loading eastern
interconnect and the SBP but
that is in western Nebraska
everything else that we have is
in the western interconnect that
would be Wyoming Colorado and
New Mexico.
Okay well madam chair and and.
I was trying to find out on can
you tell me and then one more
time please yes sure it's Brad
never Galle.
At right that down so missionary
appropriations I was trying to
find out we're talking about
fixed bases in and cost
associated to this cold spell.
How do you guys operate that in
the the reason I ask and it goes
back to the chairman stating
that you know the faster for
residents is going to be really
hard if we go up currently in
Lee County were on that of the
gasoline that I purchased for my
truck it's gone up fifty cents
cents fifty cents a gallon since
January third and I'm just
wondering what this cost basis
is going to do for the rural
communities can in the co op
areas and I know you've got a
broader area than just how New
Mexico I wondered if you guys
are looking at it from a
different point of view per se
PNM that's just here in our
state.
Are you talking about the
incremental costs that we
incurred during this this severe
weather incident.
And how that goes to the right
pair.
Yes so we're a not for profit so
you know that are right there's
a whatever it is that that you
know the costs that we incur in
course we manage this process
carefully as we can we did
anchor just a little bit of
incremental cost through this
event my team is still working
on gathering that information
but I'm guessing that is
probably in the five to ten
million dollar range so you're
it we're a we have revenues of
over a billion dollars so it
will not have a right impact on
on tri state we will not have to
go raise rates because of this
incident.
We we were able to manage
through we we did some very
similar to what el Paso talk
about almost all of our peaking
units have the ability to burn
fuel oil or natural gas and we
saw the exact same economics
that el Paso did and we made the
decision early on in the event
to switch over fuel that saved
us a.
About thirteen or fourteen
million dollars relative to what
we would have incurred from
natural gas.
Thank you for that and I was
just wondering and all fish with
as fast Madam chair is did you
have any blackouts to in your
servicers.
We had absolutely no outages in
the western interconnect so
we're we serve in the west in
New Mexico Colorado and Wyoming
we had no outages I indicated
earlier that we do serve just a
little bit of load in in the
eastern interconnect which is
located in western Nebraska and
so when S. P. P. R. on Monday
morning and Tuesday morning
allocated curtailments to yes
yes and and and all of the
transmission operators and in
the S. PPE they called us and
required us to ship some load as
well but it was very small
amounts I think less than.
Three megawatts at any at any
one time and it was for less
than an hour in the on Monday in
and a couple of hours a few
hours maybe three hours in on
Tuesday so very very small
impact in the tri state.
I appreciate that madam chair I
think I'm gonna give your name
just people of Texas because
I've got families are really
really disrupted so thank you
for your time manager all you.
Thank you very much
This I have a general question
if we're at our time because we
are having legislation but I'd
like
Any of you to comment on what
happens to the consumer.
When we have events like this in
your.
Project your charges your
services.
Go up.
You have a price to pay you pass
it on how is that handled with
all the consumers from the
different companies that have
been talking today I'd like to
hear from you all.
Madam chair this is David Hudson
with Xcel energy yes.
we have done our preliminary
analysis of basically
calculating ourselves where gas
bills will be yes we were by
about.
The.
During those days from forty to
fifty percent of our guests
Office spot market for the spot
market with way out from States
so we calculated that for our
total company New Mexico and
Texas is about two hundred
million now we're also long
capacity so we were selling
energy to the rest of the pool
so we'll get some profits back
on that and we get those back to
our customers so when I
calculate that down to
residential customer in New
Mexico it's about a hundred and
twenty dollars what we are
looking at we still need to get
all of our counting down this we
would not flow that all through
the fuel loss at one time the
price spread out between twelve
to twenty four months so it
probably be about seven dollars
or so per month but we would
have to go to the New Mexico the
R. C..
Right thank you very much for
that Mr had sent and what about
Mr Hopkins in Mr Paul green.
Yes thank you senator in in much
longer lines that Mr Hudson
spoke of our our process is
guided by our fuel clause.
which again is is currently part
of our right K.
so anything that anything out
outside of that we understood I
understand we would go to the
commission and asked for some
some variants of that fuel
clauses in order to to making
adjustments we are still
analyzing the impact to our
customers
what I will say also on in I
haven't heard today I understand
that for because also
investigating the natural gas
price spikes as well so I think
that will eventually have some
impact in into the prices were
talking about.
I'm sorry center I think you're
on mute I don't know if you for
the question to me or not
Congress.
Thank you and please respond to
the same question.
About the passing on of costs.
When.
When any of the co ops like to
respond.
This is here another question
farmers
Are looking at some fairly
significant also in were
basically the same plan we're
going to accumulate those costs
and ask them all over twelve to
twenty four to sixty months the
longer time so consumers will
are.
We just wonder.
Okay thank you I think that
From what I'm hearing from you
all and you understand the
impact on the consumer I know
you have a business to run you
we all want our energy but we do
need to make sure that we are
doing it taking care of our
expenses in a humane way and I
appreciate those responses I
would like to thank everyone of
you
el Paso Electric excel the NM
and southwest power pool and the
co ops for being here this
morning and presenting some
information to us also that we
can learn and also have some
discussion thank you very much
and committee members we're
going to go on to the bill that
we have scheduled for today.
Senator Campos are you here.
Yes I am thank you very much
madam chair members of the
Senate conservation committee of
before you today you have Senate
bill three forty seven I'm gonna
make my presentation very short
we do have some experts that
will provide data some
additional testimony and then of
course we'll continue with your
procedure as we move forward so
madam chair members of the
conservation committee
essentially Senate bill three
forty seven with create the
confinement of a laying hands
act requiring New Mexico
commercial farm operators with
more than three thousand hands
use cage free housing for a lane
hands and prohibiting businesses
from selling or transporting a
is the business knows came from
a producer that did not meet in
New Mexico standards for housing
a lane hands in essence madam
chair members of the Senate
conservation committee of this
is the trend and what's
happening across the country as
we continue to see what's
occurring in New Mexico many
companies like Dennis Kellogg
Smith's Walmart Cisco and others
are going to a hundred percent
Cage free hens lay next so as we
move forward there's a two or
three things this bill really
does number one over a period of
time it's going to be happening
across the country we want to
prepare so that with the
standards in place will ensure
that we continue to have a good
healthy safe product number two
in terms of the expenses were
very concerned about the cost of
to people as it moves forward
but we don't see this as a
significant increase and then
number three and moving forward
by preparing and having
standards in place we will be
prepared so that from an
economic development standpoint
people who decide to go into
this business our will have a
structure in the standards in
place for them to do so so madam
chair members of the Senate
conservation committee with that
in mind if I may I'd like to
call on a couple of experts that
are willing to provide a few
minutes in privative of our with
this bill that I just and then
of course were available for
those are the responses that you
would require.
Madam chair if I may I'd like to
call on Jerry Wilkins and all
when Hickman.
Okay Jerry Wilkins and Glenn.
Thank you very much.
The Mr Wilkins yes good morning
madam chair wants to fax and
committee members my name's
Jerry Wilkins and I'm those
cells marking director for
cooperative family Act funds
doing business in the western U.
US response include morning
fresh farms in Colorado and As
You Like farms bring trip Act
armature projects in Utah the
families are all multi
generation farmers and that
supply fresh selects New Mexico
in the southwest for decades I'd
like to think Senator Campos
we're sponsoring us three forty
seven his leadership in helping
us find common ground is
sincerely appreciated.
Committee.
You may ask why so called out of
state interests are supporting
this bill to be clear there are
no commercial egg producers in
the state so New Mexico
businesses must source text for
many regional farm sector these
I represent your day we are your
local expires in them a vested
interest in making sure New
Mexico will continue to enjoy
farm fresh eggs from the area
that are humane safe and
affordable.
Over two hundred grocers and
food companies many of which are
doing business in New Mexico
today such as Walmart sprouts
Smith's Albertsons dollar tree
McDonald's subway and more are
requiring cage free eggs from
their exploiters by twenty
twenty five and sooner in some
cases moreover New Mexico
consumers are demanding cage
free just five years ago for
cage free production was only
six percent today cage free is
nearly thirty percent of all X.
produced in the U. S. and that
number is rising quickly
although our family farms
believe in free markets there
are multiple reasons why SB
three forty seven is necessary
as cage free becomes the norm
and here they are.
To create more stable affordable
explained this legislation
creates one statewide standard
in fact this will help create a
level playing field with one
regional standard for
unrestricted interstate
distribution in the southwest
will keep production costs in
line and consumer prices
actually affordable it takes
millions of dollars to convert
to cage free in fact a million
bird complex costs over filled
fit forty million to construct
with a clear timeline towards
standardized regulatory
framework set now producers can
make capital investments with
confidence this bill will
demonstrate that New Mexico's
business friendly as it gives
farmers certainty to build their
this could offer real economic
boost to New Mexico's rural
economy building to meet this
cage free to mail require both
construction and service sector
jobs once built farmers will
need employees and animal Care
Act production packing trucking
maintenance accounting and
management and more.
Some things I'd like to clear
up.
Cage free standards laid out in
this bill are the industry's own
science based here reviewed best
practices and the standards will
ensure that hands have the
ability to perform their natural
behaviors including roaming
perching scratching and nesting
in a controlled indoor
environment this is not extreme
standards such as free range and
pasture raised which are very
expensive to produce and expose
the birds to disease and
predators the state of the art
cage free housing of today is
not be set up that great Grampa
wants that
we produce cage free eggs are
safe eggs will not be laid on
the ground but in private nest
boxes and convey to a processing
area to be cleaned sanitized and
packaged through advancements in
lighting technology are cage
free hens are not skittish or
aggressive the content and
docile to quality ventilation
systems clean fresh air is
always available in a cage free
house because of this dust
levels are no greater than in a
cage Environment this is
important for both worker and
bird Health the cost difference
to produce cage free is nominal
I just a few cents more neck
verses a caged egg New Mexico's
cage free egg costs will not be
any greater under this bill than
the cage free quote costs when
these two hundred plus companies
move to cage free because
similar laws with the same
animal care standards will exist
in other states across the
region this will provide for
economies of scale in production
and transportation which will
again keep prices in check over
the next several years cage free
eggs will no longer be deemed a
specialty or a bow teak Ag.
Excuse me we are about to get
but of the commodity and will
reflect commodity values at the
shelf consumer choice will not
be taken away but will remain in
the good grocers at Case with
access to brown white medium
large twelve eighteen or sixty
compacts in cage free organic
free range pasture and
nutritionally enhanced exemption
New Mexico smaller producers in
hatcheries from any burden of
compliance enforcement will be
seamless with the department's
already already existing dealer
inspection procedures and third
party cage free verification
certifications commercial
producers are already following
this will mean little impact
fiscally to the state.
In an eggshell if you don't mind
this bill offers a balance
between prudent science based
animal husbandry and fresh safe
at production at scale this is
why our family farm support SB
three forty seven and
respectfully ask that the Senate
conservation committee do the
same thank you madam chair
woman's to fax in the committee.
Before we go on Mr Wilkins what
do you have a specific
affiliation.
I have an affiliation with the
four producers that are
supporting this I am their souls
director us through this
cooperative called Rocky Mount
next.
Thank you very much Mr Hickman
please.
Good morning madam chairwoman
and and members of the committee
my name is quite yet then I am
the president CEO of a requests
our principal offices are I
think yours on.
We have a history of delivering
dates to the state of New Mexico
for over twenty years we have
farms not only Arizona and
Colorado and we've been able to
make sure that we deliver next
day fresh and aids since we
started there.
We've been able to maintain an
uninterrupted supply regardless
of whether challenges we've
never had a delivery that we
messed and even through COVID we
were able to scale up with the
unprecedented demand that COVID
presented to keep your stores in
and angst.
We need a modular standard
across the west we need to have
a and ability to produce dates
works most cost efficient to
produce the items can be able to
deliver them in proximity to our
parts this bill if passed in in
New Mexico allows that act still
without without this bill
passing I do feel like we're
getting supper supply challenges
you know you may reject the jury
had on a just a briefly but the
last commercial a farm last New
Mexico about fifteen years ago
and it was just out on high
twenty five in that that far
without assistance and
the subsequently relocated so
far well Texas
we need to we need to look at
how we how we planned for June
supply and future I listened
very interesting to see how you
guys were talking about your
energy supply through supply is
also something that has to be
acknowledged we didn't run out
of banks during the COVID we can
close and thank you and chat we
had supply lines that were
thousands of miles away I feel
that out we could have been
different it Gerry said all of
these chickens are kept inside
we're not talking about
wrangling chickens outside we
shortly get forced that's not
what we're doing we're still
gonna have chickens inside the
barn where they can be cap say
we can keep on warm in the
winter time will the summertime
and bill produce dates as the
person responsible.
Jerry had on the he had a little
bit on the crease costs that
might be a committee or two and
eight and with the per capita
consumption you're talking about
if the retailer chooses the pass
it on you're talking about
somewhere between two to four
dollars per person annually for
their aid supplies that's not
much of a burden in a society
where we we need we by copy for
five dollars so I think that you
know we would we'd love to see
this bill pass I think it rules
budget for the citizens of New
Mexico as as we can be able to
keep short supply lines to your
state and we look forward to you
know going forward in a be happy
to answer any questions from
committee I do want to make
maybe maybe one statement
We've we've been involved in
these in these.
The legislation and some trying
times ballot initiatives before
and I hear we're we're our
families always be conservative
we believe in free market
it you know in some you know on
a larger scale but there's no
free market in our section of
agriculture we received in the
egg industry not one single
subsidy and staff we were in the
poultry business the US
government would puts inspectors
in our plants at no cost in the
industry we actually pay for
those inspectors and they help
to offset the pre inspectors in
the meat and poultry industry we
also.
You might you guys were talking
about energy previously.
It may surprise you guys you
might you might know that forty
percent of the corn crop
reducing United States annually
is diverted to making us all
yeah rather than fossil fuels
and so that's forty percent of
the available crop we go through
our tail pipes and not nerve
agents that puts an artificial
or in the price of corn which
makes it very difficult to
really Madam the cost so this
you know the free market
principles are are great but we
can't get that worse back in the
barn and right now we're you
know we're we're just asking for
some level level playing field
so that we can Madam business we
have predictability and
certainty when we deploy our
cap.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I really appreciate the the
the responses in the information
on the possible mass of both Mr
Wilkins and Mister Hickman as
they move forward with some of
their responses and and and
again I would just say it this
way that we're not only
available for questions but as
we see across the country the
way that
the movie is is going we
definitely want to ensure that
we have standards here in New
Mexico I also understand that
Jeff what is available and maybe
others in case they're going to
be some of the more technical
questions regarding how this
would be enforced in our state
so madam chair were available
for the rest of the procedure
that you go through with the
conservation committee regarding
bills like this thank you.
It's great to have you here is
there anybody before we go to
the opponents and the proponents
is there anybody on from the.
New Mexico department of
agriculture.
Madam chair of Raymond Johnson
with the New Mexico department
agriculture standards and
consumer services division I'm
here Mister Johnson did you have
a part in any of the comments
that went into the fiscal impact
report are committee analysis
yes.
And do you have a position on
this bill.
No.
Okay thank you very much so
let's now go to the opponents
Trevor.
And there's about ten opponents
so let's say about a minute and
a half feet.
First we have more in Paterson.
Thank you chair Stefan ex
members of the committee and
sponsor Campos lord Patterson on
behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers association our
membership stands in opposition
to Senate bill three forty seven
currently there is no commercial
poultry operations in our state
exceeding the production
parameter stated in the bill all
this bill will do is limit the
consumers choice and government
would dictate what's citizens
consent instead of the power of
the almighty dollar it is our
associations opinions that panic
runs our grocery stores is part
of the reality of today as
exhibited by the COVID nineteen
and the risks recent winter
storm Senate bill three forty
seven would hinder access to an
affordable wholesome protein to
our citizens with no less than
eighteen bills in the current
legislative session dealing with
food excess ability and food
insecurities Senate bill three
forty seven works in opposition
to those bills and their
sponsors thank you chair said
products in the committee for
consideration of our opposition
thank you.
Thank you next.
The show for us.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee
Michelle frost on behalf of New
Mexico will gore's we stand in
opposition to Senate bill three
forty seven.
The parameters of Senate bill
three forty seven do not apply
to any business in New Mexico as
there is currently no commercial
property culturally operations
in the state currently we import
more than four billion dollars
in food products annually by
increasing burdensome
regulations and rules New Mexico
business suffers and our state
will continue to import more
food rather than buying from the
local businesses.
There has been multiple pieces
of legislation introduced this
session that addresses buying
and marketing food that is
locally grown in the state we
feel that Senate bill three
forty seven takes a step in the
wrong direction and would
dictate our citizens consumer
choice currently there are sixty
two dealers that import X. into
New Mexico under Senate bill
three forty seven the Steelers
would have to obtain a
certificate from their sources
to verify they are cage free if
they are not cage free the
dealer has to make the decision
either to find a cage free
source and increase the cost of
his product or cease business is
Senate bill three forty seven it
also creates an unfunded mandate
to the New Mexico department of
agriculture at a minimum cost of
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars per year this mandate
would be to track dealers to
ensure their compliance with the
cage free egg for these reasons
we stand in opposition to Senate
bill three forty seven.
Thank you next.
The Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity common this morning
my name is Tiffany Rivera and
I'm the registered lobbyists for
New Mexico formalized doctor
wrote I stand before you in
strong opposition to Senate bill
three forty seven confinement of
A. Lange had.
With legislation set an
extremely dangerous precedent.
This bill allows our government
to mandate an admirable
reduction method and that method
has no basis in science or
economics.
Cage free practices lead to
increased bird mortality rate
increase poultry red mites and
spotty liver disease this bill
is a direct attack by out of
state interests and companies to
control a authorize on the New
Mexico at market and limit our
consumer choice.
This bill will lead to a direct
increase in the cost of eggs in
a state where fifteen percent of
our population faces food
insecurity eighteen percent live
below the poverty line this bill
will create further food
inequity in our.
We and lastly this legislation
is unnecessary as there are over
two hundred major chains and
companies nationwide who are
already voluntarily adapting to
this production method based on
market demand cage free is not
all it's cracked up to be please
well in opposition of Senate
bill three forty seven.
Thank you Max.
Haram rops.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee jorn
robs a consumer from an
accounting respectfully ask you
to oppose Senate bill two forty
seven this bill increase the
cost of aids greatly at time of
students secured in our state
now is not the time to take away
people's choices in what they
consume.
This legislation will affect
rural New Mexico a lot more than
urban areas for consumers have
the ability to choose where to
shot respectfully ask you to
oppose this legislation.
Thank you next Trevor.
Caitlyn Hart.
Good morning chairman Stefan
except members of the committee
and key on hard representing
line over a coalition a group of
farmers and ranchers to manage
land watering cattle in New
Mexico totaling one point five
million acres a C. in the slant
and roughly twenty five thousand
head of cattle SB thirty three
forty seven is attempting to
make a market mandate based upon
emotional factors not economic
or scientific this is a
dangerous precedent to set the
free market should be a primary
factor for producers and not
over reaching statute in
addition this will exponentially
drive up the cost of eggs and
make them unaffordable for a
significant portion of New
Mexican citizens as producers
our primary concern is the
health of the animals and
animals not healthy then there's
no production and our investment
is lost this is that many
opponents of the animal
production industry do not
taking consideration we think
Senator Campos reinforce this
legislation but we cannot
support at this time and
respectfully stand in
opposition.
Thank you I'm next.
Caitlyn Hart.
Sorry Beverly signify.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Beverly it's
Cinco with dairy producers of
New Mexico we respectfully
oppose Senate bill three forty
seven believe it will create an
unfunded mandate for the New
Mexico department of agriculture
and will be in and do burden on
farmers and also create added
cost to consumers thank you.
Thank you next Craig Ogden.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee I thank you for
allowing me to speak to you
today in opposition of Senate
bill three forty seven an act
prohibiting the sale of bags
from confined hands.
This bill does not promote food
safety or promote the health and
welfare of consumers.
The this legislation needs to be
re evaluated where the end
consumer should have the choice
in a reliable supply at a
reasonable cost.
We've got three convenience
stores and leading in which will
now be required to get written
certification I this pliers that
the eggs came from hens that
didn't conflict with standards
set forth in subsection stay in
B. of section four or they'll be
fined.
We don't even have any big
producers and producers in the
state so why are we even
considering this bill.
I want to add on my enchilada in
USDA inspected and graded eggs
they're going to work just fine
for me I thank you for your
consideration and hope you'll
consider opposing this bill.
Thank you next and lastly tenor
Anderson.
Good morning madam chair
semantics members of the
committee and Senator Campos my
name is Tanner Anderson I am a
proud citizen of the state of
New Mexico and I stand in
opposition to Senate bill three
forty seven.
This legislation will increase
prices at the grocery store
especially for low income
citizens and families in our
state we all know we're not a
wealthy state many of the
citizens of the state especially
as we've seen over the last year
really do their best to stretch
their dollar to feed their
families and in terms of
affordability cage free eggs are
significantly higher price on
average about sixty three cents
to two dollars more per dozen
and conventionally produced eggs
and that's according to USDA.
To some that might not be such a
significant difference but it
certainly is to those who are
struggling in the state and I
think it's also important to
recognize that nutritionally
there's no difference between a
cage free eggs and
conventionally produced at it
just seems counter intuitive to
force consumers to pay a higher
price for a product that
provides.
Really no benefit to them and so
essentially this bill just
prohibits New Mexicans to choose
what is best for their families
and best for their budget a so
for those reasons madam chair
and senator as I stand in strong
opposition to this bill and
would respectfully ask that you
oppose it as well thank you.
Thank you
Trevor is there anybody else.
No that was a management up up.
Madam chairman yes.
This is Karen Callanan I've been
in the waiting room since well
since you started this morning
and I wondered if I might be
able to speak.
And we're hearing from
opponents.
I'm an opponent okay and your
name tell me your name again.
Yes Madam chairman members of
the committee my name is Karen
Kallen C. O. W. A. and.
Making member of the protect
Americans now The New Mexico
federal land council and the
Grant County categories I
support everything that has been
said so far a new point that I
can bring out is that one of the
proponents noted that there was
no set federal subsidy Aid
producers yet it appears to me
that the bank producers are now
sitting in front of us us and
Mexican the subsidized cage free
eggs at this point New Mexico
consumers have the right to
choose and there is a free
market where they can choose
eight three eight or or other
eight and as the proponents
noted less than fifty percent of
the state provide cage free eggs
at this point so for these and
all the other reasons that were
previously stated I respectfully
That's a great the committee to
vote no on this bill with all
due respect to the chairman when
we greatly appreciate I mean I
apologize the sponsor when we
greatly appreciate thank you.
Thank you.
Are there any other opponents.
Okay let's go to the proponents
please.
When Hickman.
We heard from and and Mr Wilkins
already okay.
J. self an honest.
Okay good morning madam
chairwoman members of the
committee my name is Jerry
Santiago is registered lobbyist
for five large big producers
fossil egg farm Hickman's egg
ranch morning fresh farms Rick
trip a quorum shepherd poultry
farms the legislative show X. to
New Mexico's large and small
retail stores and food
businesses we ask for your
support of Senate bill three
forty seven the confinement of
egg laying hens Act the urban
and rural businesses and stores
that sell eggs have committed to
selling one hundred percent cage
free eggs by twenty twenty five.
So that is a major point this
legislation is important to
establish the standards of
producing cage free eggs with
this legislation are producers
know the rules on how other
facilities need to be design
will have time to repair and
retrofit the facilities to meet
the twenty twenty five time what
the cost to retrofit or in the
millions.
There was standardized
regulatory framework for chicken
eggs new producers would have
the confidence to locate and
invest in a farming in New
Mexico.
A facility like this would
create construction jobs in
agriculture employment
throughout supporting the rural
economy we would like to think
Senator Campos for bringing this
bill forward and I again asked
that you both to support Senate
bill three forty seven thank you
for your time.
Thank you next.
Bill mid cap.
Thank you Senator Stefanics and
the committee for allowing me
the opportunity to speak in
favor of SB three forty seven
today my name is bill recapped
and I'm here today representing
rocky mountain farmers union.
We have members in Wyoming
Colorado and New Mexico I've
seen legislation very similar to
this in our neighborhood States.
We believe page create markets
are driven by consumer
preference eight producers must
have the assurance of what the
rules are today and how the
rules may or may not change in
the future.
You've heard that this will
drive the cost of aids.
Cage free systems report.
The penny per a system affect
any current producers in the
state I'm not sure how this bill
increased costs.
Retailers such as Smith's whole
foods Walmart and McDonald's
plus a couple hundred other
retailers remaining cage free
eight X. look at the guidelines
in the in the bill for cage free
systems their once perfect for
birds in aviary systems and one
half square feet and for
systems.
Lines have been written and
accepted by a producers working
alongside animal scientists.
This is good policy it seems
like it's good for the
stakeholders and it's certainly
good for animals thank you
Senator Campos for bringing this
important issue for for.
Thank you next please.
Yes Representative Johnson.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters and with seven the eight
chickens here at home and we
commend Senator Campos for
bringing this common ground
legislation forward consumers
care more than ever about where
their food comes from and modern
cage free facilities as defined
in this bill will allow Ag
laying hands to stretch their
wings walk dust rate perch and
lay eggs and nesting boxes all
really important natural
behaviors and with laws passed
in other western states and
pledges by huge companies like
Walmart and McDonald's and
hundreds more the cage free egg
as the minimum standard is
already the future and we're
glad for it
many producers already have a
cage free secretary of their
farms I believe the leading ag
suppliers of of New Mexico when
they say that this bill will
give them a steady path forward
better economic and market
certainty and a clear standard
to promote food safety animal
welfare customer transparency
and affordable prices so for
these reasons we respectfully
urge the committee to vote yes
on this excellent sale thank
you.
Thank you.
Next.
The checker of Thomas.
Good morning chairman Stefan X.
and members of the committee I
am just take us on be honest
registered lobbyist for the
following five family owned
eight farmers doing business in
western and southwest United
States to commence a grant
morning fresh farms rig truck
ache Farm shepherd poultry farms
and five zero eight four who all
are strongly supporting Senate
bill three forty seven.
Understanding that major grocers
and food companies doing
business in Mexico are requiring
cage free eggs from suppliers by
twenty twenty five.
And sooner in some cases and
with that.
Eight producers and I would hope
New Mexicans support a policy
that includes regulatory
certainty a stable affordable a
supply and one statewide
standard that ensures reduction
of disease and proper animal
husbandry Senate bill three
forty seven does this.
The bill demonstrates that New
Mexico is business friendly and
it gives farmers certainty to
build here the bill has the
potential to offer an economic
boost to New Mexico to rural
economy we want to thank Senator
Campos for sponsoring the bill
Madam chairwoman and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
today and I ask for your
favorable vote on Senate bill
three forty seven.
Thank you next please.
Thomas Campbell.
Why why and I are here to
support SB three forty seven why
why is ten years old easily one
of the oldest chickens in New
Mexico
she's here to speak for all the
chickens are being held in
captivity for the production of
the eggs
we think that
We we asked to Senator Campos to
the two of
It introduce an amendment the Y.
Y. amendment which would be the
only increase the amount of
floor space from one square foot
to two square feet.
why why is eighteen inches long
how would check you can live in
a one square foot space.
Is a is not can not
understandable
we think that the chickens need
compassion and that they need
more space we also would like to
reduce the number of chicken of
chickens required to under this
from three thousand to three
hundred smaller well it forms of
you find it even easier to
comply with this and we would
also like to remove section five
for which is an exception form
for H. and and state fair we
think that people should learn
compassion for other animals
especially for each people why
why thank you for your support
of this bill and if we can to
increase the amount of space
this time around let's think
about it next time around
chickens deserve our compassion
they're held in captivity in
their gots.
Well innocent creatures and have
a right to a good life thank
you.
And lastly JD Bollington.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
Humane Society of the United
States I would first like for
the members to know that my
services were just retained
about three weeks ago by society
way way after this bill was
developed by the Ag producing
farmers and the agricultural
sector this is an industry bill
but there this budget will
issues here that affect animals
in a positive way.
There was a recent op ed
published by the New Mexico
former livestock bureau that
stated case forty X. posed a
higher risk of salmonella
because the eggs are laid on the
ground.
That statement completely
validates why Senate bill three
forty seven as necessary this
bill sets Ag production
standards that prohibit text
from being laid on the ground
and so the New Mexico three
standards and this bill require
the chickens lay eggs in nesting
boxes which are by the way above
compare belts there safely
transport the eggs to a Patrick
packaging area this is a big
reason why the Utah farm bureau
supports that nearly identical
cage free bill that's before the
Utah legislature so here is the
reality of the situation.
It's free access without
question are going to be the
entry level standard for ag in
New Mexico with or without this
bill you can buy Hickman's
family farms eggs right now at
Costco in New Mexico for the
same price or lower than expects
Taco Bell has been cage free one
hundred percent for for awhile
now Jack in the box is that
eighty five percent McDonald's
is a fifty percent and as
already announced are going a
hundred percent cage free with
no price increases Walmart
sprouts in the grocery stores
they don't want to sell Kate
more than simply not going to
produce some so this bill is it
works do you want cage free eggs
produced and sold in New Mexico
that can be laid on the ground
or do you want cage free eggs
standards place that protect
consumers producers retailers
and the birds without any
noticeable price increases the
Humane Society of the U. S. is
your support for this bill.
Sorry I see a hand for Patrick
block are you proponent.
Thank you madam chair yes I had
signed up and are communicated
with the analyst but I guess I
dropped off the list somehow
Good Morning madam chair members
of the committee and at walk
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico retail association as you
heard many of our members have
committed to going cage free by
twenty twenty five and
so we don't oppose the bill but
we do have a couple of concerns
I've been working with the
lobbyist for the proponents and
have spoken to the sponsor about
it I'm glad Mr Billington
mentioned Utah Utah there does
have some language.
It tries to take into account
or find a little bit of a safety
net in case the projections of
wants to cent per acre are not
realized and it allows for up to
ten percent of the shelf space
to have.
Eggs are not certified cage free
eggs are one of the lowest cost
if not the lowest cost proteins
are available to the public in
the store and so some of our
members have expressed concerns
about folks of lesser means
still be able to access that
protein source there is also a
little bit of a disparity
between the effective dates in
New Mexico as well and in the
legislation the other states
that you heard
Mention this morning I am in
contact with the sponsored with
the proponents I don't want to
hold the bill up today if it is
going to pass but we will
continue to determine whether or
not this language is appropriate
for work well in New Mexico with
I thank you for your time.
Thank you so
Else apart.
That's it for everyone who
signed up okay so we're going to
go to committee members and I
have some hands up Senator von
case and senator bill but before
we go there and Center gate
goes.
in the F. I. R..
It indicates.
That it would prohibit
businesses from selling or
transporting a and that there
are some concerns from the
department of agriculture
Senator Campos could you comment
on those.
Thank you very much madam chair.
And I would like to do I believe
that Jeff Whitty is online and
and I would like him to respond
because these are some of the
concerns that have come from
within agencies and I believe he
may have a response and then and
then I'd like to to respond
after if possible.
My secretary would you are you
here.
So Mister Johnson are you
representing the secretary.
Yes okay so could you respond to
the issue of prohibiting
businesses to sell aches in our
state.
Currently and the concerns that
you all have
put into the FIR about
The implementation.
Currently the way the the birds
of the bill what what we would
see this as a challenge to
to the dealers that bring agent
in the state
I would require documentation
that documentation and we would
see it would have to follow that
product all the way to the
retailer so that business would
have to upon request from us if
we did an inspection provide
that documentation or
certification of that was they
were in compliance with the
SEC's so
that would be a challenge just
because that business but then
be held accountable
for for that product and knowing
that that company was actually.
So and then.
Complies with an axe so make it
a challenge
said it would be
Difficult to
basically covered all that
retail location
Just a basic documentation that
they have to have.
What the way it reads in the
bill
Thank you very much Senator
Campos anything questions yes
thank you very much madam chair
in terms of the.
Certification the bottom line
with it is what we do want to do
is to have state of food
products.
Here in New Mexico and so with
the certification that is the
way to identify the product is.
so within many industries that's
uh part of the protocol that is
used so that would be part of my
response as well thank you madam
chair.
Thank you okay I have five
committee members who would like
to talk about this so Senator
bond issuer first.
Thank you madam chairman
checking hear me yes we can I
thank you madam chair circle
closing bells I note that this
bill goes to your insurer intact
so I believe it or not won't go
into much detail with that but I
would like to identify a few
things for you and your
opponents of the gets by this
committee you should expect in
Judiciary first of all we would
strike in Judiciary section two
we don't put purposes are
provided declarations in our
laws our segment exception and
identified some definitions and
one of the definitions as the
board the board of regents for
animation to the second one is
the department department of
act.
It escapes me that with all of
agricultural groups who are
concerned about this bill the
very produces formalized Pueblo
catalogs will growers
etcetera that the New Mexico
department of agriculture has no
position on this bill and and
I've seen that as a recurring
pattern this session which
perplexes me because as a
legislator not not Nestle is a
farming agro provided but just
as a as a legislator I want to
be able to rely upon the
agencies of state government to
advise us to to help us with
their expertise in this case the
department of ag is the one
who's going to be responsible
for doing the inspections
because the certificate is only
good for one year according this
bill they're gonna have to go to
an inspection every year.
And while I've heard the
testimony that none of the
businesses in New Mexico are
large enough to come under this
act the fact is that anybody
selling eggs under this law even
if they're not big enough to
have to comply with this that
they're still going to have to
go certification from the
department of ag for their eggs
to be sold anybody because a
business find the eggs has to
have that certification under
this law so gonna pretty big
burden on department of ag and
and I'll note that under the
bill it's the department of
Agnes is under the direction and
supervision says actually word
say under the guidance and
control the board of regents at
MSU so the fact the border
regions aren't involved in don't
have an opinion Department of
actors and have an opinion
escapes me and and I'd like to
be able to rely upon the
agencies that are responsible
for all this have an opinion and
to give us some kind of guys I'd
like to be able to do that in
the future.
the.
Couple of other thoughts and
I'll just I'll just Montrusco
through all of that okay with
you I'll let Senator Campos
responded others but most of
this is just the things they
should expect in the next
committee if up to the bill
advances
The
all know that
That the.
Let's have a look at page six.
One eleven subsection Iglesias
on or after July of next year I
know business owner operator
shall knowingly sell or
transport for sale any eggs or
egg products that were not
produced in in accordance with
the act I know there's an
exception in here so if we look
for this if you look on page
seven subsection B. of section
five online eleven it says the
act shall not apply to the sale
or transport of eggs.
From fewer than three thousand
egg laying hens.
If all eggs sold or in New
Mexico transporting New Mexico
so I'm I'm assuming that that
language there center Campos is
intended to make this act
inapplicable anybody who's
Sellin in New Mexico now.
But but I think it does apply to
anybody who's out of state and
has that large of an operation
so that that so effectively you
couldn't be a large producer
from out of state and sell
anything in New Mexico anybody
unless you're in compliance with
this act I'm understanding that
right.
been all Alaska and maybe come
back to me on that one section
six just re all of we would
strike that need we we would
strike that probably Judiciary
we don't you usually put
affirmative defenses in a bill
we would strike section seven
you don't need to put into a law
that a person can get an
injunction you can always get an
injunction.
Section eight has provides for a
civil penalty it says a person
who violates maybe assessed a
civil penalty not to exceed five
thousand dollars I'm I'm curious
to things the who is going to
enforce this in and collect the
penalty and what what the
penalty is going to be what they
gonna do with it.
Of that section eight.
Section nine is part of
different earlier says the
department under the guidance of
the of the board that's the
department of ag and of the
board of regents is responsible
for it and forcing administering
it here this is an area that's
probably very problematic should
be very problematic to any any
business owner in section nine
Hey on page eight line fifteen
says a farm owner important
operator shall mandatory shall
out the department access to a
regular business hours to the
farm vehicles and records
pertinent activities so by this
language apartment back in the
century walk into a pharmacy I
want to see your files your
records in your documents that's
usually very problematic to most
a private business owners to
have somebody walk in state I
want you to open your files to
me I want you to give me your
password your computer I want to
take your computer with me for a
few days to go look at so I
would expect that to be
problematic.
And
madam chair this is the second
time was the area I referred to
earlier which says that you've
got to get an annual certificate
from the department of ag.
Bennett and here's what it says
it says the the.
The department should give a
certificate and talk about the
service circumstances under
which the the parchment shall
certify so we look on page nine
subsection B. it says the
department shall certify certain
things that that there's
compliance with the law but but
I'm hearing the testimony there
are no businesses New Mexico
that would be required to comply
with this law so so nevertheless
Department should would still
have to certify as compliant and
it says here the department
shall certify as long as in
closures are inspected and and
appropriate so we look at page
nine subsection B. it says the
department gives a certificate
when it finds the enclosures are
appropriate and they've gone
through inspection but but
remember that that we're being
told most businesses are
required to comply with the
slower none in New Mexico so
then the question is what is the
department to go to Texas or
California or wherever the big
producers are at to evaluate
their their production to give a
certificate to those businesses
because that certificate is
going to be necessary for
anybody who buys those ads in
New Mexico so you're Albertsons
or or any Department Sariñana
grocery store you're going to
have to have a certificate.
From the department of ag
and and then the question is
house apartment at getting it
was certificate at the edge of
produced out of state I'm a
little unclear about that
Senator Campos too so those are
those are grants and general
observations madam chair I know
there was a lot there I really
want to give Senator Campos
earliest pops possible
opportunity along with his
support for the bill before They
Might see themselves in
Judiciary and the I will I won't
belabor answers that is unless
you all want to go through them
then I'll be happy to thank you
madam chair.
Thank you senator serve on the
Senator the bill.
Thank you madam chair.
In my life I've had a few
chickens around
never been able to talk too much
but I can understand the
emotional
Connection with a lot of the the
animal rights groups and so
forth and that this might be a
place for chickens would be
happier and all that but I do
want to get in that to I don't
think a chicken necessarily
cares whether it's on a one by
one cager.
Crammed into the bunch of
chickens in a barn but probably
free range chicken wanted to be
happy probably he'd be happiest
in the free range setting of
some kind but to.
My concern was a bill is that it
seeks to legislative market and.
These out of state companies and
and I certainly respect of the
concept if they can mandate the
other out of state companies
that are doing caged chickens
can't operate here then they've
got a a bigger market a stronger
market and I don't think that's
the purpose of the Legislature
we've got economics that to get
are dictating already that
Walmart only once a cage free
eggs that's fine the mention
Taco Bell McDonald's on on on
and I think that's a good thing
if that's if that's where the
market is going that's great but
for us to pass a law that says
this other segment of the
industry is not allowed to
participate and they have been
allowed to participate until now
and also we said no we don't
want you anymore that's not the
juror of the the.
The purview of the legislature I
don't think we ought to be doing
that kind of a that kind of the
legislation and I have to oppose
the bill just on that grounds I
don't have any problem with the
chicken being happier out on
free range sitting around in or
out of the cage whatever but
that's not what the
legislature's posted we've got
businesses that we need to
regulate and businesses we don't
need to regulate and the I think
this is a case where we leave
well enough alone let free
market take care that's my
comments chair.
Thank you senator Neville
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you so much madam chair
and Senator Campos for in this
and I think I can now mark off
that a chicken has shown up in
my zoom meeting on my zoom bingo
card so thank you very much for
that I am much closer now to
getting bingo of mine is
actually been so thank you why
why for joining us money is more
actually a COVID about the bill
my wife shar and I are very
fortunate to have access to free
range cage free eggs because of
our generous and wonderful
neighbors we have one night we
have star junior named after my
wife and chicken noodle and soup
they are happy chickens and we
know where our food is coming
from and I understand that our
situation is very special
however I feel this bill would
be beneficial to providing
healthy food from humanely
treated chickens I support the
bill but I also think it needs
to consider some opportunities
for for the resources and
support for small farmers and
entrepreneurs who also want to
provide cage free eggs I think
providing those incentives for
those businesses that move to
cage free rather than having a
fine line for businesses to
qualify might be a consideration
Senator Campos and you know we
have opportunity economic
opportunities with this bill and
we know that bigger companies
are going to have the
infrastructure and
infrastructure to switch if they
haven't already to cage free
chickens I would encourage
Senator Campos if you would
think of like different operate
economic opportunities this bill
could offer well we move to a
more age free supply system so I
thank you for bringing this
forward I thank you for having
why why on this soon and it
makes me miss our chickens next
door at that I get to see
tomorrow so thank you madam
chair and thank you senator
compass thank you very much.
Thank you I believe in Senator
Gallegos was next.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Campos up I had last Sunday
really good discussion with one
of the
producers in Arizona had a
really good.
is with the and I got back here
to Santa Fe and started getting
a lot of negative comments from
other people but.
Go back to center Hamlin's
comments with chickens are
raised on a ranch in Colorado so
we've always had and what I was
telling gentleman the other.
On Sunday that also like fresh
milk in one year I decided I was
going to buy the count that took
a lot of work so.
Not always is a good to to be
your own owner of of your
produce or your your animals but
so I I did want to ask a
question.
The vice chairman and senator
Campos of I think it's J.
Wilkins he was talking about the
cost of the facilities that one
and see if I got that correct
that photos of forty million
dollar facility.
Is there a chance to respond
letter too much more information
Matt madam chair I man thank you
very much senator I goes for
that question as well so if Mr
Wilkins will respond in terms of
what the investment would be for
the facility and then and to
verify further information
regarding costs if.
If center guy has those related
questions thank you madam chair.
Madam chair woman Stefanics and
Senator Campos thank you for
allowing me to speak this is
Jerry Wilkins in regards to
construction of a mid sized Act
production facility million bird
complex would be considered a
mid size commercial egg producer
to construct that facility from
brought up would be
approximately at minimum up to a
forty million dollar investment
to make that that capital
investment.
Thank you.
Chair members chairman Senator
and this will consent I I guess
I bring to my question I
understand that there's the
spires out of state
I would construction work for a
construction company I know that
cost know what their costs are
how long it takes for recover
that cost on your investment but
with a million for facility of.
how long would it take to break
even on that what what is the
market value of an egg
I was so we should get one a
day.
Madam chair a woman and Senator
if you don't mind may I deferred
Glenn Hickman he is actually
closer to production capital
expenditures if I may differ to
the other expert witness.
Asian.
The questions are directed to
Senator Campos and Senator
Campos will direct the.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I really appreciate that so
at this point in terms of Mr
Wilkins said deferring the
question to Mister Hickman and
I'd appreciate if the manager
would allow that to happen
please.
Mr Dickman.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Campos
the
the entire state of of New
Mexico consumes about
One one one chickens worth of
production a year.
And so the total amount of of.
Investment would be around a
hundred million dollars.
But that's not taking into
account is that there's probably
forty to fifty percent of the
state that is already cage free
we supply customers in your
state that are one hundred
percent cage free so the
necessary investment is about
probably we're Mr Wilkins they
get it you know maybe another
forty to sixty million dollars
that investment our family is
willing to take on as long as we
have certainty there's a just a
kind of a statement in free
enterprise capital craze
certainty and this would give us
that level of certainty to make
that investment we've been in
the business seventy years
seventy seven this year actually
so prior to my being in charge
we made investments and we are
working towards those paying pay
those off today and will will
continue to work towards that
and then we do expect to return
on our money and and you know
the market is willing we'll get
there.
For more vice chair center I
appreciate that I I guess that
brings me to my concern I don't
know how they're again trying to
figure out how so would make
that investment in New Mexico to
be in New Mexico business I
would say that it would be
really beneficial for the
Arizona Carl Colorado that
already have the facilities to
get extractions over there but
Mr madam chair and vice chair
and Sir Campos.
I had some people call me that
hello for questioning the you
know what this is going to the
farmer's markets in light of
Senator Hamblen its stated
earlier about the local.
You know just the the family
farms have you had very many
a contact from you know just
local producers they're not in
it for a quantity traditional
some dozen here does more.
I thank you very much of Madam
vice chair and of course Senator
a Los I have had
Right a few individuals who have
raise age if you will within
small areas like what the staff
and of some of the smaller
communities particularly in the
northeastern part of the state
this does not directly affect
them
when it comes to the the state
daily sale of of there a.
and of course
Once they find that out they
continue to go ahead and be if
you will advocates for the cage
creates that's been the
communication that I've had with
the some of the rural area
people that the the Q. race
hands and and check.
And then also if you will our
our produce Selig's on regular
basis.
I think that Madam vice chairman
Senator sort on same lines have
you determined what of the costs
will do in has your legislation
a bill go up or down I know that
you know we're always worried
about you know people on staff
and guests are lower income
individuals at I keep bringing
up the gasoline top fifty cents
a gallon where I live and that's
huge I just want to make sure
we're not doing anything that
will cost that kind of the fact
in our food markets for our
lower income level our share and
Mexico yes I think a research on
that.
Thank you very much settlement
vice chairman of course senator
Gaydos in terms of that in
today's market currently as we
deal with the cage free eggs in
the courts are the cards to
indicate that one of the things
that we are finding is that the
faster as in it is very
comparable to if you will the
the regular doesn't makes I have
not seen anyone who is on staff
or receiving any level of of
public assistance who has
brought the cage free eggs.
And I'm always being very
observant with that but I have
not done the research to see
what the data analytics would
indicate when it comes to
the direct are.
Interest and the complete and
Sumer purchased if you will of
the cage free raised eight thank
you.
Madam vice chair and senator I
appreciate that I think that's
always going to be in our.
Find to make sure we're not
doing anything so adversely did
community I'm gonna have to.
Oh wait for the rest the
discussion I I have a lot of in
in talking to you know just
different people lot of negative
of thanks that they believe are
gonna happen and Representative
founded on more vice chair and
senator that the bank department
didn't have been able to FIR has
one natives and explain exactly
why the eight others in the a
hard for them but with that you
madam chair my vice chair thank
you.
Thank you senator guy goes
Senators maybe he's.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Senator
Campos.
Madam chair and senator I as I
listen this discussion really
what I'm hearing is.
As these
out of the out of state egg
producers are saying it's it's
kind of about uniformity and
that's going to make basically
business kind of.
You know easier for them to do
easier for them to supply a
cemex because that is is that
the the gist there.
Thank you very much madam vice
chairman Chris Senators
committee the that's the primary
just of this piece of
legislation to provide the
standard.
as we move forward particularly
now that we see so many
companies that are moving
towards the cage free.
And so that that way the state
thank you madam vice chair.
Thank you senator and then vice
chair and senator I just have
one question that that stuck out
since and some not in Judiciary
Committee.
I I would like to just ask if I
could steal and plagiarize one
of us Senator von says is a
dispute professionals section
ten and I'm just wondering how
this is going to work with
people that are out of state so
kind of lines twelve through
fifteen you know the the farm
operator farm owner they have to
obtain the certificate from our
ag department and so how does
that work I mean are they just
going to get to that department
just say kind of well send us
Senators proper.
Photos you know digital photos
of your facility and then they
can email at any is that kind of
how that would work in
practicality.
Thank you very much of Madam
vice chair Senators committee in
terms of that there would be the
inspection to validate that the
operation is in compliance the
certificate would be issued and
then of course that would follow
if you will the the eight
production that being said I
would also like to ask if I may
madam vice chair Mister Hickman
to.
Further elaborate in regards to
that since he is dealing
directly not only in the
industry but with the level of
certification in other states.
Mr.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee
I don't think that you're are
you every state operates a
little bit differently I don't
think that you started the rules
process yet to to enable
legislation and and such but the
written certification the that.
Could you could just be the
affirmative statement on the
package cage free as they are
right now and that would be a
written if affirmation that they
met the standard with regards to
out of state inspection we have
of craft in this legislation
that the inspection of of the
burden would be at the out of
state plant with the inspectors
in that plan that would make
sure that the affirmation that
is on the packaging is met with
aches that are proper for that
and so I again we're very early
on in the rules process I'm I'm
not familiar with how that works
in your state but I think I
think it's it's going to be very
very simple for your department
of agriculture to to kind of
make meet those rules that will
make it very easy for a consumer
or a retailer anyone in the
supply chain to be able to just
look at the packaging and see
that is cage free.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
of Senate Centers maintenance
and I want to mention to you if
you cite your sources not
plagiarism.
Thank you.
yeah great point madam vice
chair want to lease yeah give
give him credit there no I'm
just madam chair and and
etcetera I I'm I'm trying to
what is the point what what I
understand is is the business
owner you know McDonald's
whatever yeah they just they
just get the indifferent
statement that the city that
part makes sense to me I just
wanna make sure we're not
putting in statute something
that will be impossible to
perform in a rural I don't think
it's going to be impossible by
any means but I I just you know
I don't know if someone from
that department like it like
inspector would would be answer
question but I just how do our
inspectors that are employed by
the state I mean did they
physically leave the New Mexico
in other parts of inspection or
are we just gonna let a farm
owner make the affirmative
statements say yes their cage
free and it's more an honor
system I I just I'm I'm not
distrustful the farms at all I'm
just saying how how is this
going to actually work I mean
who how do we actually have
someone in New Mexico with the
Department make the inspection
that's out of state that's
really what I'm getting.
And so if I may madam vice chair
and the Senators please just
began again going back to it Mr
Hickman was talking about with
the rulemaking that would be to
work in close consultation with
the Department and then come up
if you well with with those
rules with indicate but if I may
I'd also like to add to for a
madam vice chair enforcers needs
to Mr Johnson to see if he
wishes to opt for the comment in
regard to what that may look
like in terms of their research
and what occurs in of the
state's.
Yes advice here
On to that so basically Center
species that we would we have no
authority outside the state of
New Mexico so in that present
a challenge like I talked about
earlier with documentation of
that certification so we have no
way of knowing other than third
party inspectors
or.
Third party inspectors or third
party companies doing those
inspections in that state that
would be a significant challenge
also you know this is our our
positions not order opposed the
bill basically just point out
the difficulties and challenges
at the department and for staff
I mean in the RFI there is you
know it's.
Basically an unfunded mandate so
it would it would cost us quite
a bit to to be able to implement
this so we we try act for
tracking purposes and to ensure
that state companies not just a
dealers but also a good product
manufactures or also in
compliance with this so it's I
think that is the point out that
it's not just a eggs shell eggs
that we expect with if there was
a product that's also something
that we don't
tract so it does present some
big challenges for selected for
Banthin to mandate and being
able to
we can do know inspections
outside of the state boundaries
so we do rely on another source.
Thank you Mr Johnson Senator
Schmedes we've really got to go
to vote because we're going to
the house in attendance
department okay I'll just I
think maybe you know someone
that's going to be discussed
later I I I just consume some
concern for the US state let me
just make my final point of why
I I do oppose the bill and I
like to just ask you a question
you know has had any of you has
anybody on this committee ever
have a starving or malnourished
child into their home have you
ever invited someone in your
home for dinner
I have.
And
Thank you Tom bill makes an
exception for poor people or
people buy one dozen medium X.
and the Utah bill exams that.
I have great great respect for
the sponsor this bill and anyone
watching this broadcast would be
blessed to know him and he's a
good man.
And I hope he will consider
Following what what Utah has
done to consider that.
And also a very restoring or
short on time.
But
What I remember.
If you had an experience with a
child like this.
When we finish dinner.
All of my children still had
food left over on their plates.
His plate was completely clean.
This is a boy with a lamp that
walked with a crutch that had
rheumatic fever when he was
younger.
His name was god love.
We have to protect as much as we
can our food supply are protein
sources New Mexico is not
Colorado with the highest median
income per capita in the
country.
I really hope we can if this
bill is for which I think it
will.
I really hope we can pay
attention to that issue.
One three one X. two nine nine a
dozen regular and three line on
a dozen for cage free.
Eighteen thousand dollars
seventy nine for the regular and
three ninety nine for the
eighteen count.
For cage free.
Two dollars and twenty cents I I
have seven children when I make
scrambled eggs at my house I
make all eighteen it once.
So please.
Please let's consider.
Protecting our our poor people
in New Mexico and for that
reason I cannot support the bill
thank you.
Thank you senator smitteez what
is a pleasure the committee.
And senator would you lower your
hand please.
We would do passed.
One more question I'm sorry I
thought your hand was just to
let yes Senator Gallegos.
Sure Senator I understand that
we do have a special for they
already have
forty to fifty percent of the
market the currently knowing
that why do we need to have this
legislation could we not
continue without this piece of
legislation.
Vice chairman of course Senator
gave us as we move forward.
In order as we consider this the
consider the humanity and if you
will the
economic appointment of what
this can bring to New Mexico
standards are going to be
important and so it's time to
create those standards in order
for us to move forward for
stability purposes there's a lot
of other points that I could get
into that right now I respect
the committee and and not so
much for the poor thank you very
much madam chair.
Percent of Americans thank you
Senator Campos did I hear of did
I hear Senator schools with the
most to do tasks yes ma'am you
are here in the past.
Thank you madam chair second by
Senator Hamblen of.
ms wrong Mr Ortega would you
call the roll please.
Just
yes.
Senator Gallegos.
No matter what I provided my
vote.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville no.
Yes and I like to explain my
vote.
Senator Schmedes no.
Senator souls yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Intimates to FedEx.
Yes schooling my vote is all.
For the
next to explain her vocal once
the deal you want to do yours
first so you can get on the on
the road okay and senator pope
actually was first so how okay
so Senator what the because I
don't.
I I'm going to now that the vote
is gone I'm just going to get in
my car leave and I'm so happy
that you're back madam chair.
Okay so first on the explaining
the vote I don't care center guy
eagles over.
Can I leave sorry I should
explain before Lee I think.
I apologize to everyone but I've
got to get to the to my car
I'm supporting the vote but I I
the idea but I think the bill
has a lot of problems I think
senators about this I just
touched the tip of the iceberg I
I also very concerned that it
doesn't actually apply to anyone
in India.
Anyone any of.
And former New Mexico so it
makes you wonder why we need it
but with that I'm sorry I've got
to get in my car and go to the
hearing thank you madam chair
you
and senator I hope one who else
wanted to explain.
So madam chair.
Okay.
Just go ahead.
Madam chair thank you my
consideration on this was really
about the opportunity for this
bill to drive local producers
out of the business and and that
bothers me I I understand it's
going to go to Sir serve on this
committee
but at some point time I'd like
to make sure that it's resolved
disincentive house for because I
think we need to make sure The
New Mexicans have the
opportunity I would love to that
eight million dollar.
Facility here our state but we
don't do that I'm gonna have to
yield and those those reason for
my book thank you madam chair
thank you Center post.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you sponsor for bringing this
bill I voted yes but I also have
concerns I think we need to
transition to this this is where
we're we're we're we're going
you know with with the cage free
chickens but I also have the
concerns that we need to just
make sure that we're insuring
that we're taking care of our
lower income folks me growing up
the single mom I kids sometimes
I was lucky to get eggs at all
and we did get that eighteen
Packer co pack it was used at
all all at one time so I just
want you to consider that going
forward and see what we can do
to just make sure that these
families are priced out thank
you.
Thank you senator souls you
have.
Okay.
Well my comment is is along the
lines of others I don't want any
aid producers here in our state
her I don't want to four people
hurt
we had eggs once a week when I
was growing up that was the
extent of the finances are not
my home and we do see a vast.
Array of prices for age right
now and I am shocked and that
people have to make decisions
about what they're going to eat
and if it's going to be
courteous and white bread.
And not aches and so that really
concerns me and I want to
support to new industries I
don't want to hurt poor people
and I don't want to hurt our
current eight years here in the
state thank you and we wish you
well Senator Campos in your next
committee.
Appreciate all thank you all
very much for your time take
care thank you okay I think
somebody had a motion that they
wanted to bring up or
reconsideration.
Yes madam chair like a motion to
bring Senate bill three twelve
off the table.
Is there a second for that
motion thank you madam chair.
Okay SO three twelve was the
department of game and fish we
will put that item on our
Saturday morning agenda.
So that if there is anything to
consider at that time we will
take a vote on the
reconsideration then go back to
the bill if the reconsideration
vote passes thank.
Yes this question are we can be
able to hear any testimony on
Saturday on this bill
Senator I believe we are we are
going to have an amendment so if
that is correct then we will
hear testimony on the amendment.
Thank you madam chair just one
free for the public that's
correct.
Why am noticing it now that we
would he we would have a vote on
the reconsideration.
On Saturday if the
reconsideration vote passes then
we would go on to the bill and
the sponsor has been told that
if there's any amendments and
needs to come in before for
twenty four hours so that it can
be analyzed for the committee
Senate Bill number is going to
say I hope it's more of a of
instead of an amendment it would
be a substitute because it needs
repairs needs to be a lot of
changes in the bill I would
think to make the.
Make most of us happy so okay I
think our we will pass that on
to the sponsor on the floor this
morning that we would like to
see it.
Not comeback is imminent but as
a committee set up so thank you
members very much and we will do
this we will have fun again
together on Saturday morning at
nine nine AM we are now recess
thank you.
