Senator Townsend is present, the
Lopez here.
We do have a corner.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. OK,
our first bill is um
Is HB 140.
Madam Chair, are you ready to
proceed? Um, yes, I am, Madam
Chair. um, good to see all of
you this morning.
House Bill 40 is a bill designed
to address.
Foss that was in foam. The bill
um is intended to support the
department when it is attempting
to resolve issues largely
emitting from Air Force bases.
There may be other opportunities
to rely on this particular bill,
but it adds to the definition of
hazardous waste.
Phos that is contained in what
is essentially firefighting
foam, and the bill has developed
over time through negotiations
with various stakeholders, and I
believe I think it's fair to say
that this is a consensus that
Just about everyone who's been
involved in the discussions can
support, Madam Chair, so, um.
With that, we will stand for
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Last
time there was confusion about
a, a re amendment in the house
and, and we finally got that
clarified. So can we explain
that um confusion, uh, just so
that all the committee members
and for the record, so we can
understand, we rolled it because
of the confusion.
So, Madam Chair and members as,
as I mentioned, this has, this
bill has evolved and so it
started with a definition of
hazardous material and it to
contain hazardous constituent,
um, people found that, I think
to some degree a little
confusing some interpreted as
being excessively broad. We did
not agree with that
interpretation, but nonetheless,
we worked with the appropriate
people and over time we.
n ar row ed it a little bit more
and then on the floor, we worked
with, you know, frankly, on a
bipartisan basis to to come to a
resolution, soresentative Reeb
offered an amendment that got us
to the place where we have
narrowed the definition to
firefighting foam, um, that
contains POS, so I hope that
helps illuminate where we've
gotten to, Madam Chair, and, and
there was confusion about the
amendment and I believe it's
particularly uh uh 2 on the
amendment.
Is that correct? Uh, maybe your
expert can clarify, um,
The, uh, Senator Cervantes
thought that the amendment um
wasn't comprehensive enough if
you could explain if maybe your
expert could explain that,
Madam Chair, thank you, um, and
thank you to the members of the
committee for um hearing us on
Saturday and and working with us
on this, uh, but essentially,
Madam Chair, the, the Senator
Cervantes was asking
specifically about the
definition of hazardous waste
constituent and not seeing it in
the amendment sheet.
And you won't see those words,
Madam Chair, and senators in the
amendment because we struck the
entirety of that page that
captured that word hazardous
waste constituent. So the
amendments, Madam Chair, we've
triple checked, uh, spoke with
LCS worked with them, and
everybody is now of the mindset
that the amendments were proper
and complete.
Thank you. And last time we um
we already have gone to the, to
the public, so we're ready for
committee discussion. Does
anybody have any questions or um
Or comments on the bill.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, madam chair.
Um
Good morning.
for you.
What is the intent?
piece of legislation, I mean.
I think
The amendments
was me
A little concerned based on what
I've told was intent, but
Let's start over if you would,
and tell me.
Exactly what you're trying to
do.
I think it's important for the
record.
So let me take a stab and then
I'll ask the secretary to to
weigh in, um, Madam Chair and um
Senator, the intent when I was
When I was approached by the
department to work on this bill
was the explanation that we are
having difficulty working with
the Department of Defense in
terms of us ensuring that they
honor their responsibility to
clean up PFOS in the frankly, in
the Clovis area where you, you,
as you know, there's a
significant issue um with
contamination of the, of the
water and that has impacted, as
you know, the cattle.
And the dairy farms out there,
um, the department has been.
has taken the position that the
secretary and the department do
not have regulatory authority
over POs and as a result, they
have been reluctant to come to
the table to resolve that issue,
so we are developing that
authority for them so that they
may then have greater leverage
perhaps, Madam Chair and Senator
and attempting to resolve that
on behalf of the citizens in
that area as well as the state,
um, Madam Chair, and, and if the
secretary wishes to add
anything.
I'm happy to share the floor
with him. The men cheered um.
Representatives for secretary.
How does this put you in a
position?
Yeah.
Will allow you to have that
leverage.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
thank you, uh.
I, I agree with our sponsor and
I appreciate her being so
knowledgeable about this topic,
um.
And, and specifically, uh, we
wouldn't be bringing this bill.
Had the Department of Defense
not sue the state of New Mexico
saying you don't have the
authority.
tell us to clean up discarded
firefighting foams and and Madam
Charan senator.
You know, while that sounds
confrontational. There are many
things that the Department of
Defense is cleaning up that they
admit the state of New Mexico
has authority for this is just
one that we're uh differing over
now for six years, um, that
other states have taken lead in
a similar way and clarified that
for DOD and they are cleaning up
those spaces. The men of senator
is specific to your question,
um, if you look at the bill,
And you look at um let me just
find it for you.
Uh
It's under the definition of
hazardous waste.
Man
Senator, and that would be
Um, here.
Thank you. Uh, page 4 starts
with line 7,
sorry, page 4, line 13, no page
4 line 18, 3rd time is the jar
of senator, uh, Leonard K
hazardous waste.
Um, if you'll see there that we
are specifically calling out for
um
Uh, firefighting foams,
discarding firefighting bombs
containing intentionally added
pepods.
Uh, that those are specifically
now listed under state law as a
hazardous waste.
Oh
I'm chair secretary.
And the
As this give you, I mean, you
have the authority to clean up.
Fox today.
This
I believe, don't you? Madam
Chair and, and Senator, um,
We
Uh, that is a questionable
statement and it depends on
whether or not you uh are asking
me in the context of the
Department of Defense.
But, but Madam Chair and
senator, would effectively, you
know, there's a shadow program
going on here, which is the
federal hazardous waste program,
which we as state of New Mexico
have received primacy from the
the federal EPA back in the 80s.
Um, that federal program allows
us as a state to
To indicate that we can require
cleanup of all sorts of hazards
and using that term very
non-regulatory, but all sorts of
hazards that occur in the state
of New Mexico.
Um, it wasn't until Madam Chair
and Senator
Uh, 2019 when we asked the
Department of Defense to clean
up.
keep us from discarded
firefighting foams that they
sued us in federal court and
said you don't have the
authority for that. And it's the
first time in the history of
that federal statute and
certainly in New Mexico, that
the Department of Defense has
taken issue with states
asserting that something could
be hazardous, which is why we're
where we are today, 6 years
later.
So Madam Cha any,
are they?
13 that PFO.
Not hazardous or are they just
saying?
You do not specifically have the
right to enforce a Pox clean the
standard.
Because you have not
Set one specifically for people.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
it's a great question and a good
nuance and you are correct in
your second proposition there
that it's because we have the
legislature hasn't given us the
authority to do this. We haven't
set a specific standard under
rule. Um, now, Madam Chair and
senator to, to your first point,
When the Department of Defense
removes any PAs from New Mexico,
they send it to a hazardous
waste landfill.
So there is an admission if, if
by practice that they perceive
it to be hazardous for all the
reasons they are it it is
carcinogenic.
persistent in the environment,
etc. but nonetheless, Madam Char
and Senator, your point is
exactly right.
We haven't set this out in law
or rule.
Well
I'm chair and secretary.
Under the current statutes.
That is being proposed.
What do you do with that?
Bebo and constituent legally.
Um, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator. So if this was not the
Department of Defense, and it
was any other entity that we
said you, you are required to
clean up PAs to a background
level, and those are set by EPA,
the military has their own
background level which they
clean up to, etc. um, that that
material would be managed as a
hazardous waste.
and sent to a hazardous waste
landfill which is largely the
only place that you can send uh
discarded PAs, whether it be a
foam firefighting foam or
something else at this point.
and
Madam Chair, Secretary to
consider that a background.
Standard for cleaning.
Um, Madam chair and Senator, so
uh there are cleanup standards
that EPA has said that are
risk-based standards for soil or
drinking water depending upon
what it is.
Um
And those would be the standards
we would require clean up to.
So madam chair and secretary.
Is it your intent to make sure
that those
it
What you're saying today is
those standards will be no more
stringent than what.
Pedro
Um
A has that for cleanup
standards.
Madam Chair and Senator, those
standards would be.
Based on EPA standards and, and
I, I
There are a lot of standards in
my mind, both hazardous waste
and water and other things, but
effectively no more stringent,
yes.
Um, and
Machely
And Secretary, when you say
was the term he used as far as
being known.
Practically no more stringent,
is that what you said?
Yeah, Madam Chair, and Senator,
we typically as a state,
Typically
Broadly
Speaking, um, adopt federal
standards for most of our
airwater waste programs. Um,
occasionally,
Uh, other programs give us the
authority to set more stringent
standards.
But under the hazardous waste
act manager and Senator, we
don't adopt more stringent
standards.
And
The fence.
And that
Madam Carolyn, secretariat, what
I'm trying to.
One of the points I'm trying to
make sure of that.
and with this piece of
legislation.
is to follow EPA standards and
not make them any more.
And.
That
My paraphrasing.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Senator
Senator, you're paraphrasing
that correctly, um.
We since Man chair and senator
if this bill were to pass, and
we hope it does, then uh we
would be naming a discarded
firefighting foams as a
hazardous waste, and we would
look to the feds to say what the
right management is of that and
in the absence of them having a
management practice, we would
then fill in those gaps.
Uh, but the standard to your
point.
Madam Char Senator, the easiest
way to explain this is there's
not a destruction standard set
right now. There's cleanup
standards set by EPA.
So we would
They clean up to the EPA
standards and the disposal and
destruction of that would be to
put it in a hazardous waste
landfill until EPA establishes a
disposal or destruction
standard.
And Madam Chair,
thank you for that. Um,
We kind of
Burdened and issues that I guess
we're just gonna have to jump
into, and that is
When I read the
The
language and the
com m it ment s and contexts.
Finding
The of this piece of legislation
to.
dress
Ehos coming from.
Firefighting foam.
In the very next
Statement
There he is.
language that
I would say
Broadens
That Pox.
Um, definition, it says
something to effect until
It becomes classified by
EPA guidelines, I don't have it
on top of my head. I read it on
page 4.
Madam, page 4
amendments and context or
committee of. OK.
That, that's a.
Medisa.
and it
What I'm talking about.
Specifically,
Um
talks about the definition.
on page 5.
Yeah,
I.
1 through 10.
Oh, Billy.
1 through 16.
It talks about
Until the board determines that
they were subject to some kind
of the Federal Reso.
Every
1976 as amended.
42 USC 6.
So, uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
I, I'm remiss. I didn't
introduce you to uh JB um Nance.
uh
I, I always have to pause, Madam
chair, and uh send introducing
him now, uh, but he's our
hazardous waste bureau chief
came to us from the private
sector has, uh, you know,
decades of experience dealing
with hazardous waste, and we're
really glad he's here with us at
the Environment department.
Um
So, uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
you're pointing out something
that is a procedural process.
So, uh, once the EPA establishes
the establishes something is a
hazardous waste. We don't
automatically incorporate that
by reference, we have to go
through a rulemaking in order to
do that. So the board is
convening to adopt those
federal.
Decisions, if you will, in the
state of New Mexico
administrative code and the
statute is what facilitates that
happening.
Madam Chair and um
Thank
From, from the get go of of this
bill.
Um
Convers conversations.
About addressing what has
happened at Cannon and maybe
some other places.
Um
of on board with.
I, I, I'm not taking.
the
On
Yeah.
But I wanna make sure of.
Is that when the camel gets his
nose under the tin. I know where
he's going.
And, and that language tells me
that the camel's gonna get his.
body under the tent and gonna
be.
Difficult to
control. Do you understand?
concerned
Madam Chair and uh Senator, I
don't think this bill deals with
camels. I'm just kidding. Uh,
Madam chair and Senator, uh, I
have other animals. I just.
I, I do understand your concern,
and Madam Chair and Senator, let
me just assure you that um the
bill started a lot broader.
Yeah. Um, it, it narrowed in
with intention, uh, and
stakeholders came to the table
to help us express their
concerns that the camel was
getting too far under the 10.
Um, and that they didn't know
where it was going to go either.
I think everything you just
pointed out is existing state
law.
Uh, that basically says if EPA
were to promulgate a new
hazardous waste, we have to go
through a stakeholder
rulemaking, which Madam Chair
and senators is appropriate.
That's the right thing to do.
How, how else do we get all
stakeholders to the table and
inform them.
What we will do, Madam Chair and
Senator, if this bill passes and
lists discarded AFLF as a
hazardous waste to go through
similar processes where it will
be a hazardous waste just as if
EPA had declared it, we will go
through our rulemaking process
to establish any other
additionalities, if you will, on
how it should be managed, um,
you know, DOD can come to the
table as can HF Sinclair and
anyone else in the state of New
Mexico, NGOs, etc. and shape
that rulemaking, but
Madam Chair and Senator, you
know, just today we have one of
our, our, our only PA attorney
in Denver arguing the 10th
Circuit case, which is the um
Uh, which is basically the, the
the DODs uh lawsuit against the
state of New Mexico. So 6 years
in, we're still fighting. We're
still in federal court, um.
And I think
You know, this, the clarity that
you give us as a department will
be the clarity by which DOD
comes to the table as they have
in other states, and, and I, I
hope that that is enough to get
on the right track for cleanup
and in Clovis and Alamogordo,
etc.
Well, you know, Madam Chair,
and.
representative, you know as well
as I do that POs is all around
us.
The carpet.
Quite sure.
Probably on the
I mean, that's everywhere.
And if we don't
And, and I don't know that we'll
ever eliminate all of that. I
don't know.
But, but
Opening it up.
Um
causes me some concern because
you and I may have an agreement.
exactly what our intent is, but
The fella or the, the, the
person that follows you and I
may see this.
completely different. I think
that's um
That's something that
Trouble for me. I, I appreciate
your
here
A.
Helping to find that.
Oh
Madam chair, I think I'll
have some other questions, but I
know there's.
for you.
So I.
Right to come back to find you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Anyone else? Senator Scott?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
There appears to be
I have both the amendments in
context and the committee sub.
up here on my little gizmo.
Oh
Mr. Secretary,
And I'm looking on
Hey.
Hi
15 of the committee.
And there's some language that's
struck in there.
That in the
Commitments and context.
Appears to have been
reinsert it.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary,
can you?
Help me with that.
state of confusion.
Yeah, Madam Cha Senator, thank
you for that, uh, question. Um,
so you are correct that that
language was initially taken
out, so we could be more
stringent than.
Which is the conversation that
the stakeholders came to us
wanting to engage on.
And then
We found a different way.
To approach the bill.
Added the definition, as we've
talked about in hazardous ways
of the discarded AFLF.
us
And once we solve that problem.
naming what we needed to name as
opposed to opening a wider door.
We reinstated that language.
So we are as stringent as the
federal government, but not more
stringent than the federal
government. So, Madam Chair, Mr.
Secretary, this language has in
fact
Be reinstated.
But not reflected in the
committee, so.
Madame Chair and Senator
correct, and if you look at the
amendment, uh, the 0.5 version.
This is Amendment number 6.
Uh, page 10 lines 15 through 21,
remove the brackets in the line
through an online 21, you know,
so we, we reinstated that
language there.
A chair and Mr. Secretary, it'd
be really helpful to have the
latest versions of these posted
on the internet because they are
not.
Um, you don't have it in your
in your book.
I, I have it and it came out of
my book.
come out
Yes, this is the yellow.
You recall this is a little bit
of a confusion on Saturday.
Oh
Madam Chair, let me defer for
now.
I get a chance to look at this
0.5 version.
And
work
Let me read that.
Very well, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to confirm this quick
question. This is just dealing
with the false firefighting
films.
Correct, that, that's all.
All right, just wanted to
confirm that, I think.
Folks are already trying to
debate the upcoming bill.
Thank you, madam.
Anyone else?
All right, I have a motion for
Du pass. Do I have a second?
OK, we have a motion for two
pass from Senator Charlie, a
second from Senator Hamlin.
Madam Chair, we still have
questions.
So I really want you to hold off
on that.
promotion for a while, please
will give you a couple of
minutes to, um,
To get oriented to the
amendment.
Well, while they're waiting, I
guess I'll go ahead and speak.
I'm actually disappointed by the
amendment, um, in the house
because it really does narrow
our ability, I understand this
is written just to deal with
this lawsuit, which is another
unfortunate thing. It's really
disappointing that the
Department of Defense, which
should be about protecting us is
fighting a cleanup of PAS
contamination that they caused,
and it's also disappointing that
they are not litigating this in
other states, but seem to be
using us a little bit as a
s ac r ific e them, so I was
very disappointed by the Ree
Amendment. I, of course, I'm
still going to support this
bill.
Because at least it's a step in
cleaning up that mess, but I,
um,
I'm really disappointed with the
Reap Amendment.
We'll just leave it there.
Senator Townsend.
Madam Chair, that
I I had questions.
beginning as
It has such different
perspective.
On
That's right.
What's the best.
It's when you
When you go through the list of
of
Products that have POs.
In them today, it
It touches every one of our
lives.
Sorry
And it
I think it's the, the issue is
going to be how do you separate?
Which Phos you want to.
Um, the side is, is not good and
which one you want.
Yeah.
Turn your head to
And it's, it's going to be a
difficult process.
Um, I can see that the
foxes in
Many, I mean, I go through the
list there's a whole list of
Personal hygiene items, things
that
Yeah.
Probably need that.
But at the same time,
Um, whose ox is being gored.
Um, makes them, makes a big
difference, so.
I, I
Um
I don't think anybody opposes
addressing the AFLF.
Ehos issue.
And I'm not here saying that.
I am saying that.
I mean
We've had
Probably have had foam dropped.
All over.
the United States.
By firefighters.
For years
That we, I mean, we, nobody said
don't drop that firefighting
film on this because it might
have a little ethos when the
fires burning.
Uh, at the house. I mean,
But at the same time,
Private property, probably has
been impacted over the years all
across the United States by a
peat bos chemical.
that
was allowed.
And, and supported.
A taxpayer dollars all across.
America, including all over New
Mexico.
I don't know whether that
firefighting foam that they use
today.
I mean, I'm pretty familiar
about the industrial.
A triple F and when that change
occurred.
1520 years ago, but I, I do
believe that um
I do believe that there's
There was inventories that were
consumed, used all over the.
Counting the
potential that we have.
All over the
So, I appreciate your comments
today.
Right
I understand what.
You and I have talked about and
others have talked about. I just
hope that.
That lives
Go forward in this angs by.
I, uh
Madam Chairman, who has a whole
different perspective.
So, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend, uh,
would that I could, Senator, uh,
Senator Azel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Thank you for letting us
have the time to look this up
and make, making sure that
everything is the way that it
was just explained to us. I do
have to say something in regard
to Mr. Nance. It's very nice,
nice to meet you. I know you
stopped by my office to visit
about this bill and what y'all
were seeing, but I do have to
tell you something funny
whenever I first did go in,
there was a message there.
And I read it as I thought I
needed to address you as the
vice president.
Because it said JD Vance
So I, I needed to brighten up
everybody's day a little bit.
Oh, right now it seems like the
feds are gonna move, move ahead
on this PAS.
Oh
All the regulations and
everything. So why are we trying
to do this right now? Are we
seeking, as you stated earlier,
Mister Secretary, that you want
to
Go a step further in this. Can
you tell me why you want to make
this more stringent than.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you,
Senator, for your question.
Uh, the, the feds are not moving
on discarded firefighting foams
at all at the moment, and
whether or not and and this this
started in the last
administration federally, we
were optimistic that EPA would
do something they did not. Um,
we, I remain optimistic and will
be in DC next week, meeting with
the administrator, uh, asking
them to move ahead.
Uh, EPA administrator asking
them to move ahead on what.
On, on
Trying to list firefighting
films as well.
Um, but at this moment, Madam
Jar and Senator, uh, if we don't
take action.
We can't rely on the federal
government to do it under either
administration, they're not
planning on it, to my knowledge,
and we need to continue to work
with them to try to leverage it,
but, uh, and Madam chair, just
one more point about this.
Um, and Senator.
You know, it is not uncommon and
in fact 21 other states have
gone to their legislature and
said, hey, we have a problem
with this type of incinerator
ash we have a problem with this
type of munitions waste. We have
a problem with this, and they
are themselves going to their
legislature and saying, can we
get greater authority on this
particular issue, just as I'm
here and our team is here today
to ask you for this particular
issue.
So, um, it's not uncommon for
states to do this, Madam chair,
and and senator, and it just so
happens ours is POS.
OK, thank you very much for that
response. I understand the need
to get something done up there
in the Clovis area in
particular.
And Miss Madam Chair members of
the.
Handle appeared the
There is lots of this stored at
the airport.
What do they call that?
Eastby Walker for Base Airport
down by Rossville.
And Roswell International.
That's what it is.
And whenever there is a forest
fire, those planes fly over my
ranch unstop.
So whenever we are trying to
combat the forest fires that
have been.
My either cause I'll be nice
either by human or by nature,
whenever those
Fires have been started.
What is the long lasting result
of that whenever that stuff was
sprayed on these flames. I, I'm,
I've always been curious about
that.
So, Madam Chair and senator,
thank you again for that
question. Um,
Just uh firefighting foams that
containing PAs are a class B
firefighting film, meaning that
they're used in with intention
for uh diesel jet fuels and
things like that. They're not
used for things like wildfires.
However, Madame Chair and
Senator, we've gone out and
tested because we don't believe,
uh, we, we want to make sure and
the signs from our testing of
those wildfire.
OK
Virus suppression, uh, chemicals
is, is that they do not contain
PFO.
OK.
Madam Chair, I appreciate that.
Definition right there, um.
Uh, I'm just really I, I'm
liking it that you took out.
The language that we were having
problems and to me that was
very, very important.
Uh, because whenever it was in
there, I was.
I was being led to believe that
y'all were targeting a a certain
industry within our state, and I
was not going to stand for that,
but whenever you did remove this
language whenever you cleaned
the bill up.
It makes more sense now. My
concern though is
Are we trying to get ahead of
what the federal government does
and have our our laws more.
Rougher than, a little more
stringent than what the feds are
coming out with, so I, I'm not
really following why we want to
do that at this point,
especially in light of what you
just said about going to
Washington next week to have a,
a good discussion up there,
voice concerns, so Madam chair,
that's what I have. I thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator Azel. Anyone
else?
OK, we already have a motion,
uh, do pass motion from Senator
Charlie. We have a second from
Senator Hamblin, Madam
Secretary, will you call the
vote?
San of Cervantes.
Senator Charity.
And Charlie, yes, Sanel. I'm
gonna pass for now.
Senator Hamlet, and Hamblin,
yes, Senator Pope. Yes. And our
Pope, yes, and our scholar.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
The Townsend know.
Santel
I'm going to have to go now,
Madam Chair, thank you.
There's no no Saneria Lopez,
yes, Sanlous, yes.
On a vote of 5 yes, 2 no, 1
excused, you have a do pass.
Our next bill is HB 212, and
poly.
lyrical, is that I would say.
and Polly
OK
Laura alco
OK
Laura alcoalco.
floral outl Protection Act.
Um, and Representative Ferrari,
welcome.
And I'm sure those are the
actual chemical names.
I, I knew that. That's why I
like Pfas better, um, but
I should have had Senator uh
Pope who has, who has a
background in this stuff,
pronounce it. Um.
So this is, this is the PAST
bill, I think that.
Um
We were sort of discussing
already. So we've had some
discussion, but um
Madam Chair Ferrari, would you,
um,
Again. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee
members. Um, House Bill 212
focuses on the risks to New
Mexicans from the most toxic
forms of phos in products we use
every day. And while it's true
that many manufacturers have
removed toxic phos chemicals
from retail goods. Um, there are
products on the shelves today
that contain these chemicals.
And while 13 other states have
enacted laws like House Bill
212. Um this bill addresses the
risks we are facing in New
Mexico.
And
This little bottle of fabric
protector contains POs,
chemicals that were last
manufactured 25 years ago.
And products like these can
enter our homes, causing health
issues for our families, and
they pollute our water treatment
plants and our septic systems,
and while this bottle costs
about $10.
It, um, can cost 18 million to
remove and destroy a pound of
POs from drinking water and
wastewater treatment plants.
And HB 12 starts us down the
path of sunsetting harmful
products and um chair I would,
um, madam chair, I would like to
um introduce Secretary Kenny,
um, who will briefly walk us
through the bill.
Uh, thanks, Madam Jaron. Thank
you, senators again. Uh, so this
is that bill, Senator Townsend,
that, that starts to get at the
rugs and the carpets and things
like that that you're mentioning
earlier. Um, Madam Chair
Senator, I'll just be brief
about how the bill works, I
think, you know, the, the
The unfortunate part of starting
with the House bill is that we
don't have as much time on the
Senate side to educate you all
and talk to you about the bill.
But if I could just take a
moment to run through how the
bill works, and I think that
would be helpful and then we can
get into the details.
Um, so, Madam Chair, and
senators, I think the first
really important part of this
bill is that if a product does
not have PFOS of any kind, it is
not subject to this bill.
So I just want to state that
that there is no inclusivity if
PAS is
He's not used in the product.
Um
From there, madam chair, if PAs
is used in a product.
Whether that be cell phones, um.
Or whether that be uh um
microchips or the manufacturing
thereof, uh, there are
exemptions, and there are 16
exemptions found in uh house
Bill 212, these exemptions
mirror what multiple other
states have done, but they also
tailor them uniquely to New
Mexico to make sure that our
economy is reflected in these
exemptions. Um, if, if a product
does have POS in it, uh, then
He would look to the 16 broad
exemptions to see if it's if the
product is exempted from House
Bill 212.
Um, if it's not exempted, then
you would look further to see if
it's in one of three categories.
Uh, the first category of
products would begin to phase
out and be prohibited in 2027.
Those products include cookware,
food packaging, dental floss,
juvenile products, and
firefighting foam.
Um, the second tier of products
would begin to phase out again.
These have PAs in them and
they're not otherwise exempted.
Uh, these would be things in
2028 like carpets and rugs,
cleaning products, cosmetic,
fabric treatment, feminine
hygiene products, textiles.
upholstered furniture and ski
wax.
And then finally, Madam Chair
and senators, uh, in 2032.
All other products with
intentionally added PAs that are
not exempt from.
That that that they're not need
an exemption would be um
prohibited in New Mexico.
There is a escape clause if we
got something wrong, for
example, if there was, let's say
POS in a type of cookware that
was necessary but not a medical
device but necessary for, let's
say uh chemotherapy patients or
something like that, then, then
we can exempt that as well.
So there are options, even
though there are categorical
exemptions that begin to phase
in in 27, 28, and 32. There are
options if we got something
broadly wrong to excuse, if you
will, a certain product.
Um
Madam chair and, and senators,
that's effectively the bill. So
do you have PAs? Do you need an
exemption?
You fit one of these categories,
and then we begin to phase out.
Um, and then prohibit those pro
the prohibitions that I
mentioned are the ones in which
uh are largely using what I'll
call older generation PFA, and
there are some newer generation
POs, uh, those older generation
P5s as you see in this fabric
bottle, uh, that, that if you
read the side of this bottle,
it'll say water based and
non-hazardous. It's completely
hazardous. Um, it contains, as
you heard, products that were
met.
last manufactured 25 years ago,
and Madam Chair, just one little
story that's very quick before I
wrap up here is that
Um, we went to, you know, as, as
all of us do buy home
furnishings, and we went to a
furnishing stores and store in
Albuquerque, they offered us the
option to protect our the piece
of furniture we are buying. I
asked them, does it contain POs?
Again, I'm there in my personal
capacity. They said it
absolutely does it and save for
you, your family, your children,
your pets. And I said, I would
like to see the material safety
data sheet before I agree to.
Um,
They showed us the material
safety data sheet, it completely
contained the old school Pfas
manufactured 25 years ago is not
safe for anybody in my.
Professional opinion.
Um, and then they said, but we
apply it locally.
So you can go pick up your
furniture if you get this
applied after we apply it, we
went in Albuquerque over to
where they apply it. We didn't
get it, by the way, uh, but
Madam Jerry went over to where
they apply it, uh, we see high
school and college kids with no
personal protective equipment,
um, opening up pails, mixing up
the chemicals, spraying the
furniture, uh,
Do with, with these kinds of
chemicals that the containers
once spent are thrown in the
regular trash.
And the
Uh, shop floor.
I washed down to the Albuquerque
Bero wastewater Treatment
Authority, where these
concentrated PA chemicals wind
up in our water plan costing
them to come back to this
department and you asking for,
and again, I'm not saying them
specifically. I'm not calling
them out in a negative way, but
come back to us asking for help
to get PA out of their system.
So, Madam Ja and senators like
this is a real problem happening
today.
Uh, and this is happening both
in a way that is exposing
workers.
Uh, families.
Our water system.
Um, and, and this is something
that other states have have
begun to sunset, and I think
Madam Chair, we could be there
as well considering.
Water is even more precious here
than other states that have
begun to sunset these, these
chemicals. So thank you for
indulging on that story, Madam
chair and senators, and with
that we're.
Is there any one in the audience
in favor of this bill?
Is there, how many people in the
audience are opposed to this
bill?
When
And online
So
OK, because we're, we are in a
time crunch. If you could
self-select 5 supporters, and
then we'll have the opponents
speak.
Oh, the only self-selected one.
I self-selected. I'm Camilla
Fielman, director of the Sierra
Club's Rio Grande chapter, HB
212 takes good first steps to
protect human health and our
drinking water. There's more to
do though. Industries are very
good at finding alternatives,
but only when they have to.
These chemicals never break
down, and all industries must
take urgent steps to find
alternatives. The idea is that
somehow we need polluting PIA
chemicals to move the renewable
future forward is just incorrect
and easily solvable with good
regulation. Thank you.
Uh
OK.
Chair, committee members, my
name's Athena Christodoulou, and
I'm an energy and environmental
engineer, this law puts in place
a good uh idea, a good barrier
and a boundary that needs to be
put in. We've gone through this
before with um mercury with
lead, with other constituents
and it's time that we get this
put in place for PFAST. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Um, with that, we'll go to
opponents.
I'm sure, uh, members of the
committee, Charlie Marcus,
registered lobbyist for the
Alliance of Automotive
Innovation. Uh, these are the
auto manufacturers.
Uh, we appreciate, first off,
the sponsor and, and, and of
course Secretary Kenny, I
enjoyed working with him, um,
but in this bill, what it does
is it does exempt automobiles,
but it then it's uh does not
exempt the textiles, which are
used in the making of the
products.
And so we feel that there's a
conflict and and to modify this
would not be an outlier with any
other state, uh, it can be found
on page 8.
Uh, for the automobile, uh, is
exempted.
And then I believe it's on page
11 where the textiles are then
Um, uh, included in, uh in the
uh POS inclusions. So for those
reasons we stand opposed. Thank
you.
Thank you.
OK. Um, there's still no one
online, so with that, we'll move
to the committee.
Senator Townsend
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Secretary.
And
Can you tell me about the
differences in these two
chemicals that are itemized
bill.
Awesome.
You know what I'm
Um, Madam chair, just as a point
of clarification, um,
Senator Townsend, are you asking
between
He and polyfluorinated, OK,
um, so Madam Chair, and Senator,
um,
I was thinking about how would I
explain some of the chemistry
here today. Uh, but, but
effectively, um,
Perfluorinated is, is the single
fluorinated, uh, if you have a
car in with it's for, uh,
Uh
Uh
Attachments or places for
attachments, uh, you would have
a fluorine on that
perfluorinated uh chemical, and
then if you start to link those
together, you would have a
polyfluorinated.
Um, so, so the singular and the
and the macro.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I
thought about this and really
hard and this may not show, but
if you were to, if you've ever
baked a cookie.
You know, you can think about is
that single cookie is the perp,
but if they all melt together,
maybe that's the poly on the
tray, tried to think about it
something that's relatable.
If you're baking stones are like
mine.
Like both of those cookies.
So
I appreciate that.
Um
This Madam Chair and secretary
of the well I have been
concerned about as we go down
this list.
Will we be a leader in our
surrounding states, adopting
this type of legislation, will
we be
Is, is this the same as
Oklahoma, Arizona, Texas, Utah.
Do they all have this exact same
type of budgets.
Your knowledge.
So, so.
Madam chair and Senator, um,
Most states have either passed a
law rule or have some kind of
policy, you know, maybe the
weakest part there.
Um
They're so madam Chair and
senator, the reason the
Department of Defense is
cleaning up PIAs at in Texas
because they have
A lot, it's not the consumer
products law, but they are
addressing PAS.
Um
Colorado, Madam Chair and
senator has had multiple
iterations of PA's bills.
Uh, and, and continue to refine
them, so, uh, uh, I have a list,
Madam Chair and senator, but
there's effectively about
Half the states that have gone
down a path like this in law or
rule, and about 8 other states
that have
Something very similar to 212,
but not
Madam Chair and Senator, Arizona
or Texas.
And I appreciate that, um.
I chair and
Secretary
I got to thinking about how we
You as an individual, the other
day when you were looking at
furniture had the
Osh them
And the knowledge.
To say, no, I don't want that.
But we're carving out.
Um
Exemptions and exception that.
You probably wouldn't go use.
That.
Whit
so
And how, how do we
How do we get our heads around
that mean as legislators.
Um, we make, we make stand.
That we're not going to.
Then we allow it.
And
And we have to come to grips
with that because
As we go into reclamation and
clean up areas, we, we.
I, I just definition we're
allowing something that we know
we're gonna address it, or we
may have to address it at some
point in time.
How do we get our arms around
that?
So Madame Chair and Senator,
thank you again for that
question.
Um
I think there's sort of two
forces in effect. One is by New
Mexico passing a bill like this.
Uh, we're joining other states
and saying,
manufacturers.
That we, there are certain
products and types of PAs that
we.
We, as New Mexico are joining
other states and saying no to.
Um, so I think that's one maybe
indirect but important message.
I think the other piece Madam
Chair and Senator, and the
debate was even in my house.
They they wouldn't offer
something with befas, this they
will.
Um
Because that that.
The retailer doesn't even know
what's in their product and I'm
not blaming the retailer for
that. I'm just saying they don't
know.
Um, so, Madam Chair and Senator,
I think to that point, uh, we
have in section 4.
Of 212.
That the board may
Uh, adopt rules.
Um
The labeling of products in
English and Spanish, with the
idea that educating the
consumer.
On those products that will
still contain P5s. We'll give
them a fair chance at
understanding what are they
bringing into their home and
they can make that decision.
Um, between now and the phase
out or even after the phase out,
if it's an exempted product,
they would have that ability to
do that. So that's an option
that we gave the board to be
able to do that because I think
you're right, a product like
this that says that I'm holding
up, it says water based and
non-hazardous, and you look at
the ingredients and you would
need a little bit of chemistry
knowledge to know that.
Uh, AC 6 lorinated cat iron
surfactin is a hos, but
You know, not everybody will
know that.
So I think those are the
indirect and direct ways which
212 will both help.
a bit of a movement, but also
give New Mexicans a chance to
know what they're buying.
So
That chair, secretary.
When I read this the first time,
I thought, we're going down the
same.
Pathway is we are currently.
Go on other products.
The outlaw the.
that we
Um
entity to succeed.
At the cost of the consumer.
Do you think
Not
Letting the federal government.
That was the
awesome.
Set the standards for the use of
peak loss.
night
be the level playing field that
all stakes.
how do we get to the point that
we're not
We're not taken on.
An issue that
All of the surrounding states
are
You're ignoring or have a
different perspective, I mean,
The chairwoman and I could go to
the same store and have
Or you, I mean, we, in 2 or 3
people can have a totally
different perspective, and
they're very probably is going
to be a price.
Differential that comes up
sooner or later because we
disallowed the use of something.
There'll be less opportunity for
a product to be available to
consumers in New Mexico or the
vice versa, there'll be a cost
deference.
And how do we
Um
It just seems like we're
We're setting ourselves up.
In a manner that we'd really
have thought through yet.
The
Do you agree? Uh, Madam Chair,
and, and Senator, I, I
respectfully don't agree in the
in the sense that
Um
You know, there's voluntary
phase out of PAs, for example,
when I went to pick up a bottle
like this, um, I went to Home
Depot first and could not find
it, and I thought, why can I not
find a POS product in Home
Depot, and I'm standing there
and I googled Home Depot PAs and
they've outlawed it. They,
they've voluntarily stopped
using PAs in their carpets,
their cleaning supplies, etc. So
New Mexicans, if they're
shopping certain stores have are
are are not seeing these
products.
Which is good. That is good. Um,
so, and I have a list of, of uh
stores that we all shop at,
they're in all parts of our
state, um, everything from
Dollar Tree and Dollar general
to, to, uh, Trader Joe's, Whole
Foods, Albertsons, Target, uh,
HomeGoods, uh, you know, so you
won't be able to buy POS
products there, which is great
news, and that's all voluntary,
and I appreciate that they're
doing that.
Um
These products that you can find
in other stores are still
showing up 25 years later, which
means the chemical was, you
know, stopped being made and is
still being compounded into
these products and shipped to
New Mexico. It's not being
shipped to those other states,
so that we're going to get more
of it or we're gonna get it sold
here, but if you arguably go to
a big box furniture store in
Minnesota or in Maine or uh
Colorado, you wouldn't be able
to see this product, but you
would hear.
And I think that's a problem for
us and to your point about the
cause, there are
safer
And better alternatives.
Um
But, but I think the cost is
also reflected on the other
side, meaning that we received
about $18 million from the
federal government, uh, to deal
with POS in
Uh, our wastewater and, and
drinking water treatment plants.
We received a grant for that and
our and those grants were handed
out based on population. So, in
other words,
a bigger state with a higher
population got more money, we
got less money.
So
We still have to meet the same
standard.
And we're and we, so we're going
to have a disproportionate
amount of money to invest
outside of the federal grants to
get this out of our wastewater.
And then finally, Madam Chair
and senator, you know, when we
see the small incremental
amounts and I don't mean to
trivialize that. It's, it's
compared to what I see at the
Air Force, but when I see the
small incremental amounts coming
into private well water.
You know
We as a state don't have an
option for them, but to say you
have to clean this up on your
own if you want safe water.
And that amount that we're
seeing in La Cienega and La Ciea
Guia is, is likely from
products, not from
firefighting poems.
And if they want cleaner, safer
water.
That we all want.
And that caused is borne by
them. So like, like the
question, I understand your
point about cause, but the, the
question here is, do we want to
help our communities and meet
these these manufacturers where
they voluntarily are.
And go a little bit further.
Or do we want to come back as
the environment department and
work with the legislature and
and start figuring out how to
put millions of dollars into
clean up and
I think that's, I mean, that's
obviously a policy question. I
don't.
I appreciate that and I'm sure
and the secretary,
so how do we a reminder to go
through the chair.
So I just said that here.
Oh
If I didn't, I'll do it twice,
madam chair.
Uh, Secretary, how do, how do we
How do we educate the public?
So
They have this knowledge because
what's gonna happen is that that
product
is on sale. If I'm looking for a
waterproofing product that a lot
of them have POs them. If I go
in and that one's on for 299 and
the other one's on for 499.
have
The vast majority of people are
going to grab that 299 product.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Senator, I
think, you know, one of the
things about this bill, which,
you know, is green. It's not
perfect, but it's great. One of
the things about this bill is
that it gets us to the point
that we're having this
conversation here, but it gets
us to the point that we're
having a conversation should it
pass, then I have now can devote
staff time to the education to
the stakeholder engagement to
thinking about labeling to
picking up the phone and calling
my, my friends in Colorado and
saying,
Why is it, why is something
manufactured in Denver, not
allowed to be used in Colorado
coming to New Mexico.
Um, so I think those are all
options that we can, we, we
begin a conversation, make no
mistake, we'll be back if this
passes because no state has
passed a single bill and called
it today and said we did it
great. They've all been back.
Um, but I think that it gives us
the ability to begin that
education and conversation with
the manufacturers and the NGOs
coming to the table because we
have a lot, and we have rules
coming.
And I think those are important
aspects of you can't codify
engagement.
But you, but you can't
precipitate it.
And Madam Chair, um.
Secretary
I think that's the thing that we
have.
I
like this as we have learned
over the years and
Industry and life and, and
In me
ing
We used to do things with the
best of intention.
That we learned at a later
They sometimes sanctioned by
By the state and federal
government that we decided
later.
was
But, um, maybe not proper.
And how we
I'll be
Exposed the
general public to the cost of
those.
Significant.
Madam chair.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Scott and then Senator
Rezo.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Scott
Uh, Welcome, Senator Steinborn,
but I think we need to be quiet
so that we can hear the
question. Senator Scott is
waiting, uh, for you to, Madam
Chair, I'm just waiting for them
to finish their conversation I
was trying to hurry that along.
Oh, I care, Mr. Secretary.
This stuff looks like you in
In the liquid forms is
Designed for waterproofing make
things shiny.
Armor all maybe I don't know.
And I guess my concern is
When this comes to pass, we're
gonna empty the shelves of the
Auto supply stores.
Because that's more
A lot of this stuff, yes.
So
Are we
Are there federal regulations.
With regard to this material are
we carving out new territory.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
thanks for your question. Again,
many of these, uh,
A menu aftermarket part kind of
uh stores have have committed to
reducing, if not eliminating POs
from the products and the
packaging.
Um
But um
In terms of federal
Laws with respect to consumer
products, the FDA started down
that path in a voluntary basis
with food packaging and some
other products, but I am not
aware of any law other than what
the states themselves are
passing.
And Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary,
is there?
Any consensus among the states
about how these
initial efforts should look.
Or, or each of us.
Pretty much charting our own
courses.
Great question, Madam Chair and
senator, so, uh, there's,
there's some consensus.
But
In each state, there are also
tailoring a little bit of this
to the population that they
have.
Um, while consumer products are
widespread and there's a Home
Depot everywhere, etc. um, they
are tailoring some of this to
the to the highest risk products
that they have. And for example,
Madam Chair and Senator, you
know, our focus has been where
Are we at most risk?
In terms of these products,
which is why we set out the way
we did in the time frames we did
with the exemptions we have.
Um
And our industry is different,
our consumer, you know, our
rural versus urban is different,
that those kinds of things play
into people's think or state's
thinking, but um.
In general, these are the types
of consumer products that most
states are addressing.
OK, I guess the next obvious
question would be,
Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary,
where do we fall on the spectrum
of
Between anything goes.
And the store shelves are empty.
Yeah, so Madam Ja and Senator,
um, you know, maybe the sign of
a good bills, nobody's happy.
Uh, but, um,
I, I, I would say here that we
have a good bill that manage
that chases the risk, but is
moderate in terms of it's not
the most aggressive, uh, version
of 212 or POS and, uh, but it is
not the least aggressive either.
So is that, madam chair, what
you're asking, Senator? Yes, uh,
Madam Chair.
The secretary, I was hoping
you'd tell me we're about in the
middle of the pack.
Somewhere between Texas and
California, for example.
Um,
You have any estimate.
Madam Chair, Miss Secretary of.
What this will do.
To the cost of living.
For consumers in New Mexico.
If this bill
Yeah,
madam chair,
and um.
So to, to your last point, we're
standing on the, the, the, the
backs of other states that have
gone before us. So we're looking
at litigation that's happening
in other states. We're looking
at amendments to more aggressive
bills that have gotten more to
center, and we're looking at,
you know, some, uh, center bills
that are getting more aggressive
and so to your point, we're,
we're homogenizing that into a
middle ground where we can start
here in New Mexico and not
precipitate a lot of lawsuits,
but precipitate more discussion.
just wanted to see that. Um,
with respect to the economic
cost, Mr. Madam Charing and
Senator, uh, you know, as I've
already indicated that there is
a whole host of stores in New
Mexico, uh, that have already
Address this issue on a
voluntary basis. So this log
would allow us to make sure
there's no backsliding, but so I
think your point of the Mexicans
have been facing this, this
economic, uh, whatever the
economics are of not being able
to buy Scotch guarded Home Depot
anymore. It's like that's
they've already felt that cause.
I think on the flip side, Madam
Chair and Senator, what I'm
constantly dealing with in our
department and my team is, is
test our water, come out and
Remediate this so that I think
the cost to New Mexicans is
greater on the viability side
than it is on the consumer side.
The consumer side is saving the
money in the long term, and
possibly very much the short
term, to be quite honest with
you, but
The, the, the cost is just
astronomical and growing on the.
On the cleanup side.
And
Madam Chair was secretary with
respect to that cause.
I believe I heard you say that
we got $18 million.
Address water cleanup issues in
the state.
And that's
Not much at all.
Is there more forthcoming or
Was that to
Uh, mitigate one specific
Instant of
uh, damage or
Explain to me how that
$18 million fits into the big.
So, um, Madam Chair and senator,
that $18 million was one time we
expect that there might be more
coming, depending on what
Congress does and what the
federal government does, uh, but
that's, that's, you know, not,
that's one.
And
Not
2400 drinking water plants if,
if those are all turned in, you
know, found to have POs in them.
So our, our expenses I expect
over the next 5 years are going
to increase astronomically as uh
drinking water standards come
into effect for PAS, which the
federal government has set a a
about a 4-year implementation
time frame. So we're gonna see
more and more sampling, which is
going to identify more and more
problems, and that doesn't even
start to address the private
well issues.
OK, and Madam Chair, Mr.
Secretary, you.
Have identified already
commercial.
You that's water systems have
Ethos issues.
Yeah, I met him and uh Senator,
uh, there's about a dozen that
we've tested and have had POS
issues above the EPA health
advisory levels which have
become standards here in another
few years.
So this is their time to start
working on investments to remove
that POS.
And Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary,
is technology available to do
that?
So Madaer Senator, yes, to
remove it. Um, and then once you
remove it from the water system,
uh, the, the disposal and
destruction is, is growing, but
there are options for that.
Thank you.
For the answer. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Aisel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
I too have close.
Quite a few questions.
Oh
I, I one stop, I wanna.
A start on one of the analysis,
and it says,
Test can be found everywhere. Is
that true?
Found in our water soil air food
as well as materials found in
our homes and workplaces. I
mean, it just goes on and on all
of this. Yes, Madam Jarrod,
Senator, yes.
OK, well, Madam Chair.
And that Mr. Secretary.
How are we supposed to discard
these products.
So Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
right now, you know, once you're
done with this bottle, you wash
it out in your sink and probably
throw it in the trash. Both of
those create liability for the
Water treatment plan as well as
the landfill, um, and Madam
chair and Senator, if we don't
get this under control by some
degree of eliminating these
products, then we're going to
pay for it on that side of the
house and utility costs and
Monitoring, etc.
Madam Chair and representative
and senator and Mr. Secretary.
Is there a program right now
that manages these discarded
products?
Uh, Madam Chairman, Senator, no,
uh.
No.
OK.
I understand that we have a
problem.
Portland Air Force Base have
even at White Sands.
For Wingate.
Lower San Fe watershed. We've
got them all over the place.
Clovis is the last one that
comes to mind that's the most
important because of the facts
that had on the water there.
And yes there might be a, there
is a problem there, but I'm also
looking back, uh, and I did have
to state something that I found
kind of amusing on one of the
analysis here in the House
Judiciary Committee, they subst
made a substitution, and they
removed adult mattresses from
the list of definitions.
And then it also adds to the
definition of juvenile products,
and I had to laugh about that,
madam chair, because the other
day in the house education.
Committing some of the younger
members that do work for PED.
They referred to those.
People that were born last
century and I really took
offense to that, OK?
So I guess what I'm needing here
is an explanation of juvenile
products.
So I, I'm assuming it means
These children, these youths,
these younger adults.
And it does have the definition
for it which includes personal
computer audio and video
equipment, calculators, wireless
phones, gaming consoles,
handheld devices, uh video
screen or any stuff.
Peripheal devices such as a
mouse keyboard power supply unit
or power cord.
OK, so I guess that does leave
me out of that one, OK?
Yeah
Madam Chair.
Representative Ferrari.
Senator Stein born.
reading, the committee
substitute for the past
judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 212.
It is talking about food
packaging.
So my concern there is.
What
I guess I need to ask the
secretary, Madam Chair.
What would be the intention of
removing
He fells from all sorts of food
packaging because it does
include
Container and I hope that
doesn't mean
Maybe the cow.
Or the pig
But food food packaging
container unit pack intermediate
packaging, or shipping
container, um, means getting it
to market, protecting, handled,
deliver, serve, container store
food or beverage, including
individualsy part of the food
package.
So how are people supposed to
eat?
Uh, Madam chair and Senator,
good question. Um, this will
help to keep us free because
there are uh food packaging
containers that do not contain
intentionally added PA, so, um,
like Domino's Pizza, for
example, if you buy, it used to
be that if you bought a Domino's
pizza or any pizza box would
contain pi box. It would help
keep the grease from sticking to
the box, um, but Domino's has
already removed all pepas from
their food packaging from their
pizza boxes. So you won't even
notice.
Some of these changes because
manufacturers are doing that
behind the scenes, but to the
extent that there are food
packaging materials that are uh
fabricated or sold in New Mexico
or brought into the state. This
would address them and say that
those are no longer available or
that you don't have that ability
any longer.
Madam chair and secretary that
gives me concern.
Because we are now telling
manufacturers of our food
products that we rely on every
day for sustainability of bodies
use, I'll put it that way.
Be able to eat.
Should everybody go out and buy
a cow right now a milk cow right
now.
I'm, I'm real serious about
this.
I understand the concern that's
out there. I really do.
But whenever people go to the
grocery store, they expect their
meat to be packaged in something
that they could see through so
they could see well, is it well
marbled? Is it too much fat in
it, whatever the case may be.
Same way with bacon, same way
with vegetables.
The list goes on and on. Our
salads, our bag salads that we
buy at the grocery.
I understand what we're trying
to do here.
But then I go to look on page 10
of your bill.
is starting on line 13 through.
Under Bless section is that,
uh.
I marked it and I can't.
Yeah.
Section 3, page 10.
Beginning in January of '07, the
manufacturers shall not sell off
for sale distributor or
distribute for sale in this
state.
Cookware food packaging, dental
floss, juvenile products, and
firefighting.
That's
pretty major right there with
the exception of maybe dental
floss.
Under C in page 10 except as
provided beginning January 1st,
2028, manufacture shall not
offer.
shall not sail up for sale
distribute or distribute for
sale in this state directly or
indirectly or through
intermediate intermediaries.
the following products carpets
or rugs, cleaning products,
cosmetics, fabric treatments,
feminine and hygiene products,
textile, textile furnishing, ski
wax and upholstered furniture.
And that's very disturbing to me
too.
So now,
It seems to me because we've
added.
Textiles in there.
upholstered furnitures were
going to end up sleeping on a
wood floor covered up in a
Tosk
Uh, and
Our furniture is going to be
made out of wood.
We can't use glue, so we're
gonna have to make wooden pigs.
You can't use nail because we
know those are going to be
outlawed.
And I'm very, very concerned
that what we're trying to do is
cut in New Mexico off.
To prevent any goods and
services from coming in here and
any products that's going to be
purchased by our consumers that
do live in the state of New
Mexico are going to have to go
out of state.
get what they need.
So there's a concern there.
And that really didn't need a an
answer, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to point that out of
what.
This bill might be if it's
enforced.
What people are gonna be up
against.
I still use my grandmother's.
Cast iron skillets and pots.
So
Is there gonna be a problem
there and if I'm supposed to do
away with them, what's going to
happen to him?
It's also stating and on page
19, section 7.
And it's talking about the
manufacture that violates the
provision of the FIFAS Act.
She the assist.
A civil penalty not to exceed
$15,000 for each day during
which any portion of the
violation occurred, and then it
goes on down to
Uh, page 20 on line 7 under B.
Manufacture that fails to comply
with an administrative order
will be assessed. I'm skipping
on down here.
She, uh, pursuit to a court
order of civil penalty of not
more than $25,000 for each day
of noncompliance.
Oh my goodness, we might as well
get our slingshots out, folks.
I'm real serious about this.
This is very troublesome to me.
As far as what our analysis is
saying.
We could also
Get in trouble.
Of taking this stuff that is now
going to be banned.
We can be fined for illegal
dumping of this product. These
products, madam Chair, is that
correct, Representative and
senator?
Madam Chair and Representative
Wiesel, um,
The
products.
Um, that contain POs are the
only things that are going to be
um.
Discouraged by this bill for
Being used in our state. It's
not going to ban all of those
products on their own. It's just
going to make it so that
consumers will be able to um
have um
Protections for their health and
for um, you know, also for their
um use of.
Uh
Water that won't have these
products, you know,
contaminating our water system.
And treatment plants, but um,
Also to um.
Um
Uh, just concerned that, you
know, this is something that,
you know, manufacturers already
is explained by Secretary Kenny
as um they've already uh
adjusted and are going away.
Fast in their products, and this
is a really um
Common sense way to face.
Keos out of those products
doesn't mean that we won't still
have packaging and um things for
food, food will still be able to
be distributed and used, but we
won't have the direct contact
with PFOS of our food and then
ingesting it, and that is the
protection that we're looking
for in so many of these
products, um, and I'd like to
refer to Secretary Kenny to
answer your last um.
Yeah, and, um, Madam Chair and
Senator, I see where you're
pointing out the recycling and
illegal dumping line page 20
lines 22 and 23 is where the a
penalty would be deposited into
that fund and back to Madam
Chair and Senator, uh Scott or
Townsend's points that fund, it
can be used to educate, um,
consumers and and give grants to
communities for things like
waste and, and we thought that
was a good nexus.
that if there is an enforcement
penalty, it goes back into
helping educate and uh
Give grants to communities to
fight PAS type issues amongst
other things, but it's really
important, Madam Chair and
senators to make the last point
that enforcement applies to the
manufacturer, not the consumer,
uh, not the retailer, but the
manufacturer of the product.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative and senator and
Secretary Kenney, can you tell
me how much money is in that
fund right now.
Madame Chair and Senator, the
raid fund or recycling and
illegal dumping fund is about
2.5, 2.2 million.
OK.
And
Where does that money come from?
That
Madam Jain, Senator largely that
money comes from when you renew
your uh driver's, uh, your
registration for your vehicle.
There's uh money that comes into
the recycling and illegal
dumping fund.
Bob can't stand by that. I had
no idea that's where that might.
Madam Chair, I guess my
I'd like to go back to what the
representative was talking
about, it says that there.
New exemptions.
certain products.
And uh
There's a detailed definition of
medical devices.
But the new exemptions include.
HVAC system veterinary products
and secticides, fungicides, and
rodent sides.
Testing products, motor
vehicles, equipment, watercraft,
seaplanes, semiconductors,
non-consumer products currently
unavoidable uses.
Firefighting film has been added
to the prohibited product.
Whenever we're talking about
water, Mister, uh, Madam Chair.
And representative and senator
and Secretary Kinney.
Tell me about bottled water.
The those bott does bottled
water right now, does it have
any defenses in the
manufacturing of those bottles
or in the arrows systems or
whatever device is going to be
used to purify this water.
Um, so, Madam Chair, and
Senator, uh,
Some types of plastics can have
uh POs added to them.
Uh, and think of the function
you generally want and cause to
be added to repel Greece or to
keep things shiny and slick and
etc. but the uh largely
Madam chair.
Senator, it would be more likely
probably from uh if, if the
waters are out, it would remove
POS, reverse osmosis would
remove POS chemicals.
Um
So I wouldn't expect your
bottled water to have an
To to largely have, um, you
know, measurable amounts of, of
POs unless the source water had
it and it wasn't properly
treated, or the bottle, the
packaging contained it.
Um, but I don't see a reason why
you would put POS in a
Plastic bottle, right? It's not
repelling grease or
Might be in the packaging, the
label.
And that's a good idea, why we
should recycle, is that correct?
Yeah, Madam Ja senator, yes, I
mean, by boxed and canned water
over a bottle of plastic bottled
water maybe.
Madam Chair, it seems to me like
we.
And don't get me wrong.
Representative and Mister
Secretary and people especially
listening at home.
I'm wanting our steak to be
safe. Don't get me wrong on
that.
I am concerned about some of the
chemicals that are already here
in our state that have not been
cleaned up over years.
But
It seems to me like we are.
Placing our
Manufacturers.
Having to make a whole separate
product list for the state of
New Mexico even though I was
reading that California is doing
this and California is doing
that and California is doing
this, and you know what, we're
not freaking California.
All boils down to that.
So why are we making up this
particular list where our
manufacturers on any products
that are going to be coming into
New Mexico.
They're gonna have to pass that
added cost on to the consumer,
but now the consumer can't buy
anything because it all contains
these contaminants.
So like I said earlier, I would
encourage everybody right now go
out and buy a cow, buy a few
chickens, uh, start harvesting
trees that have burned up in our
forests that the Forest Service
has not taken care of.
Oh, catch your rainwater if it
ever does rain because that's
where we're heading, folks. I
don't know how you're gonna
store that right water. I know
they used to store water in old
cow hides that made wine and
stored it in cowhide, so I guess
it worked back then. You're
gonna have to start growing your
own food, but don't fertilize
it, OK? Do not fertilize it
unless you get it fresh out of
the cow before it comes
contaminated.
I am being silly in this aspect,
but the point I'm trying to make
here.
Player
We're putting in the Mexico.
In a position where
manufacturers are going, we're
not sending any more stuff into
New Mexico because we can't
abide until there is something
that is going to be spread out.
Throughout the United States
that doesn't affect just New
Mexico or California.
We have manufacturers that are
gonna be going, we're not going
to contribute more. Our citizens
of the state of New Mexico will
be going out of state.
To do this, so effectively we
will shut down our businesses in
our state. We will shut down our
food supply in our state. We
will shut down.
Farming and ranching in our
state.
Madam Cheer, Secretary Kenny,
you know what a surfactant is,
that is used in agricultural use
as well.
And that surfactant in with what
we're trying to keep.
A healthy food product out
there.
Helps what we're trying to do,
stick to that plant.
Because right now we are farming
less and less acreage, but yet
at the same time we are
producing more of it just
because of.
Ingenuity on the parts of those
people that are trying to feed
the world.
Madam Chair, I could keep going
on and on about this, but.
We really do need to consider
what we are putting on the backs
of the citizens of the state,
and Madame Cheer, I, I, there's
still lots of concerns in this.
Interest of time here. I know
we're supposed to be on the
house at 11:30 even though I've
been told that we can stay here
all day long and if that's the
case, I will talk all day long
if that's the will of the
committee, Madam Chair. So,
I just, uh,
I might want to be able to hold
my
expressed my comments for future
if any of the other members
would like to discuss this bill,
but right now, thank you all
very much. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator Azel, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, um.
Secretary
Um, will there be a public
education campaign as a part of
this.
So Madam Chair and Senator,
thank you for that question.
Yes, the, uh, the EIB requires
us to do that, but again, we
will do that as we've been doing
in Clovis with multiple visits
down there educating that
community on the impacts of
peoples.
So
Short answer is yes, longer
answer is we can get into the
details.
Very good. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um,
Representative and secretary on
page 10, starting on line 13,
section B.
Um
Really particularly on line 17
if that product contains an
intentionally added PA
substance.
How do we determine what
Substance
Or what products have had
intentionally added.
And how will that be regulated,
Medicare?
Madame Chair and Senator, it's a
great question. Uh, the first
rule that the environmental
Improvement Board will need to
establish and it's a, it's a
shell, not a may, is just that
question that they will
establish what is acceptable
levels of PFOS in uh the
products that would be
regulated, um.
I'm trying to find the section
for you.
That section by page 14, um.
So that they would that they
would take that on and establish
whether POS is in the product or
not, and simply stated you can
do a fluorine test to see if
there's working in a product,
and if there is, that's a good
indicator that.
It was intentionally added PAs.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
that clarification because as I
read,
Um
Age 14, section B.
2 starting line 13. I understood
it to be not that that was just
intentionally added, but that
those were unavoidable in some
of what we determined earlier
are the unavoidable.
That list that we have. So,
thank you for that.
Um
Madam Cha representative
Secretary back to page 11, line
15, when we're talking.
Under exemptions we have here,
except as provided in Section A
of the section of the board may
adopt rules. Why not?
shall adopt rules to prohibit
customer products.
Me
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, it
just clue me back into where you
are on that, that's page.
1115.
OK, Madam Chair, and uh Senator,
thank you again for that
question. Uh,
Yes, so this allows us to um so
the the the exception here is
that they may uh effectively
adopt rules that would give a
currently unavoidable use to a
certain product. So back to my
example, that if like a cookware
not a medical device, but was
needed for, you know, a certain
type of let's say, hospice
patient or something like that,
that we could, we could
promulgate rules that would give
an exception to allow that to
enter in and continue to
function.
For, for the good in health and
welfare of society. Um, that,
that's why it's a May as opposed
to a, a shell, uh, because not
everything will qualify that is
that it is, it's necessary if
you will.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you. Um,
moving on to page 12.
Uh, starting on line 7, section
E of this talks about
Um, unavoidable uses of POS.
But there's nothing in here that
I could find that said
Manufacturers would have to
label.
Like, am I, well, one, is that
correct and to why wouldn't we
label that.
OK. So, Madam Cha, so, uh, Madam
Chair and Senator, first point,
you are correct. Second point
is, uh, we gave the board the
authority um to adopt rules that
would um establish labeling
requirements under rule not law.
Uh, and that's where we would
exercise that authority is
through the environmental
improvement board to to
establish those rules.
Terror, um, represented and the
secretary. Thank you. I think
that should be.
Not roll, but in law because of
the intention of this entire
bill, right? We're trying to
educate consumers.
And a simple label.
I think it's the easiest way.
Um, and probably most cost
effective way for us.
educate consumers about
intentionally added or
unavoidable.
Um, use of POS in a product.
Um, Madam Chair.
Also on page 12 section F
starting line 18, the department
shall consult with the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
before petitioning the board.
Pursuant to subsection D and E.
Um
Why does courtesy for
agriculture, but no other
exemptions.
On behalf of the board.
So, Madam Chair, uh, and
Senator, uh, great question. Um,
we, we have obligations that
live outside of this bill for
coordination, however,
oftentimes we get specific
requests from stakeholders to
include uh more affirmative and,
and extra levels of
coordination, uh, this was one
that came to us from the ag
sector and asked that we include
something about consultation. I
think given the the impact
We're seeing on our dairy farms
in rural Clovis, uh, it was a
friendly
Uh, addition, but again, I want
to assure you that before we do
anything under this act, we have
uh requirements that live in the
environmental improvement Act,
separate and apart from the
House Bill T12 that also require
coordination and consultation.
Um, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. I, I also
Interpreted this as working with
the agriculture department for
all of the reasons that were
mentioned earlier, um,
In, in the committee, really
working with that sector to
ensure that their voices are at
the table.
Um, OK, moving on to page 14,
Madam Chair, line 13, which is B
subsection 2, determine that a
product containing intentionally
added POs are currently
unavoidable. Is there
Uh, um,
looking at other states, is
there just not a better way to
track this, Madam Chair
Representative to the secretary.
So Madam and um senator, there
is not necessarily a better way
to do it, but as I indicated,
multiple states are going
through the, these kinds of laws
and rulemakings, and we wanted
to be able to have some degree,
um,
Of reciprocity and not put a
manufacturer through that if
they got an exemption.
as currently unavoidable in,
let's say Minnesota or Maine,
that that we had to request that
same information from them that
we could relied uh to some
degree on the products on the
shelf by that manufacturer are
effectively.
Uh, exempt.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you.
Those are all my questions.
Anyone else? Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you.
Secretary, I I talk about page
10 starting on.
8
Um, I have a question on that, I
think the exemption.
I just want to understand a
little bit why we're
Exempting the laurel polymers.
And
The concern I have there, those
are still considered POs,
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, or they could
be.
And correct.
So is there a reason why we're
doing that?
So Madam Chair and Senator, it's
a good question. This is one of
those topics that I think we'll
be back on if this bill were to
pass, um, and Madam Chair and
Senator, uh, specifically, uh,
you know, let's, let me point
out a couple things. So
California is recent as this
month has passed a lot of a
floral Palmers back into their
like they previously exempted
the uh banned them and then
they're adding them back to
cookware, um, 3 other states are
considering the same thing, uh,
flora polymer.
are a class of PAs that um are
still in, uh, I'll say they're
not as risky as what I, what you
see here, um.
But those are the, the types of
chemicals that are considered
the next generation of PAs, um,
they're in everything from colla
cable that we're using to, you
know, bring New Mexico together,
uh, broadband wise, um, to solar
panels and things like that, as
you heard from testimony from
Sierra Club, there may be reason
why we come back and sort of
nuance this out a little bit in
a future session, but for now
the greatest risk is what this
bill is going after and the floo
polymers are not at that level
in New Mexico.
ago and specifically Madam Chair
and Senator.
If, if we were in North Carolina
or Delaware or another state
that had the
synthesis of fluro polymers,
you'd be hearing something very
different from me, but we don't
have those chemical plants or
compounding here. We just have
the commercial products with
them in there, so I think it
merits a little bit more study
and a little bit more revision
in a future session.
So, Madam Chair, uh
representative secretary.
I think you mentioned these are
it could work, correct?
Uh, that chair and Senator,
correct.
So I, I, I just have concerns
with what we're talking about
here, you know, we're talking
about.
Products that are coming in
close contact.
talking about our concern with
dental floss, so I
have
Thank.
Is that
Something you'd be amenable to,
or is that something?
We
I think, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator
We at this stage of, of
negotiations with various
stakeholders, we'd prefer to
wait and come back and discuss
that over the interim.
Um, we're also, I'm very
interested to see how the
lawsuit on cookware in Minnesota
for floral polymers plays out
before we delve into yet another
lawsuit on POS.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. I
Don't want to.
Sabotages build or stop.
What we're doing in here, I
think.
For the most part, attacking the
issue.
So I'm not gonna press that, but
I think that's something we need
to work on. It's really talking
about POs.
We're talking about it being
everywhere.
That's gonna be an area that we
have to.
same way.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
um,
So, um
I love this subject, it makes me
go back to
and
chemistry and
carbon chlorine bonding and just
how strong that is and why these
are forever chemicals.
Stay around
You know, the conversations
about there everywhere.
Um, but that's not an excuse to
say we do nothing.
Army
These are substances that
And cause cancer in folks.
You know,
Asthma cause reproductive issues
developmentally.
And it's everywhere.
So
Um, I just want to thank you and
and share and the sponsors for.
You know, bringing this forward.
There's also talk of costs.
And how much is this going to
cost?
industry.
Now it's gonna cost, you know.
consumers.
Once again, like I always do.
What is the cost to our
environment.
the cost to our health.
People that are dealing with the
health problems.
Substance housing.
And once again, just because
There might be some in this
plastic bottle.
Doesn't mean that we laughed and
choke it off.
It's an issue.
Serious.
And so
We'll continue to work on this.
Thank you for what you're doing
here. I, I think I'd like it a
little stronger, but I'm, I'm
going to do.
So after what is mostly good in
this bill.
I understand the concerns from
folks, but once again, I want to
ask everyone.
What is the livelihood in the
life of your family and friends.
What we're trying to do here.
Without people in our community.
No one can buy the products. No
one can support the industry.
I think folks really need to.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Senator Pope. Senator
Hamblin, I'm moving to.
Do I hear a second?
Hey, um, do pass motion from
Senator Hamlin, uh, second from
Senator Charlie, um, Madam
Secretary, what do you call the
role?
Senor Cervantes, excuse Senator
Charlie.
And Charlie, yes, and a cell.
Andenator Hamblin.
And Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. And our Pope, yes, and
Scott.
Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
Townsend no, since the phonics
is excused, Senator Di Lopez.
Yes.
And still,
excuse me, Senator.
I know.
True
Senator, I'll go ahead and
explain your vote.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, but we're trying to do
here, I know, is for the
protection of people of the
state of New Mexico.
I think in light of everything
that was discussed during.
time that we had to talk about
this particular bill, I think
it's a little bit premature
until the rest of the United
States is on board. I think that
this is going to be a hardship
on every consumer and the state
of the.
Man
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Reel with a
vote of 4 guests, 3 no, 2
excused, you have a do pass on
your, on your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee for the
Great conversation. Thank you.
Thank you.
So next we have um water law
violation penalty HB 348 as
amended, and that is uh
Representative Vorte Ortiz and
McQueen.
Representative Ortiz.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh,
I'm here to present House Bill
348, um, which strengthens our
laws, our water laws by
increasing penalties for
violations. Um, right now, the
penalty is $100 a day for
stealing water that um was uh
set up in 2007 and has not
changed. Uh, we
are proposing to increase that
to $2000 a day. Um, we're also,
uh, changing, um,
At their accrual time, so um the
penalties will begin accruing
from the time the officer the
engineer provides notice of the
violation, um, Madam Chair, we,
um, I know that this bill was
heard in this committee the
companion bill and we made some
amendments on the House side
which reflects some of the
concerns that the committee
members uh brought up, uh,
including with regard to notice
and certified mail, um.
Hands also about paying back.
Came back, um,
The inadvertent stealing of
water with water. Um, so I'd
like to introduce my witnesses,
Madam Chair, we've got the state
engineer, Elizabeth Anderson,
and general counsel, uh,
Nathaniel Jaris.
Would you like to say anything
or?
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I want
to thank our sponsor. I think
she did an excellent job of
introducing this. I don't want
to take too much of your time,
um, but I do want to say that
this is our num oh and my name
is Elizabeth Anderson, state
engineer. Um, I want to say this
is our most important bill for
the agency. Um, we
clearly can't enforce against
illegal water use with the
current penalties established.
So, um, modifying that to
modernize our, our
administrative structure is
really critical and we've seen a
lot of support for this bill.
Um, it's passed generally
unanimously through all of its
committees and the floor
yesterday. Thank you.
I now want to say something.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Sanders.
I won't, uh,
Take too much time. I just uh
wanted to add um.
The, the $2000 a day is for
general violations of the water
code, but this bill also
includes the provision that was
in Senate Bill 210, um.
It was formulated by Senator
Townsend, it includes a per
barrel penalty for illegal water
sales of of $25
per barrel or double the
economic benefit, whichever is
greater, which uh is, is much
needed in terms of some of the
most acute instances of water
theft that we're seeing both uh
whether it be for cannabis, for
oil and gas, for whatever the
other purpose. So this includes
that provision that this
committee already uh considered
and placed in the Senate
companion bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anybody in the audience
in favor of this bill?
Is there anybody in the audience
opposed to this bill?
In the interest of time, which,
um, with 3 self-selected members
come and speak in support of
this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, John
Thompson registered lobbyist for
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District, you can
hear me, OK, sorry, uh,
appreciate the, the time to
speak.er want to appreciate the
state engineer's Office,
Representative Ortiz, uh, Chair
Ortiz, my apologies, and
Chairman McQueen, uh, for
bringing the bill. Waters left
in the middle valley is, is a
challenge. We have over 1200
miles of irrigation facilities
and, and this gives us uh a tool
to really begin to manage and to
dissuade those who might be
tempted to do this with such a
low fee.
uh, as, as the sponsor
indicated, this fee was
established before we were a
state. So it's probably time for
us to, to give a little update
to that number. So thank you,
Madam chair. I appreciate the
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Aaron Bali. I'm the
superintendent of the Pecos
Valley Artesian Conservancy
District, uh, representing about
110,000 irrigated acres, and I
think the, the, the strongest
thing we can take away from this
is this addresses an issue where
an entity would just rather pay
the fine and steal the water
rather than abide by the rules
and with the payback feature of
it, um.
then that's not possible. if
you're gonna have to pay it back
times 2, well then it.
It doesn't work. And in those
cases where that's not possible,
well then there's a substantial
financial uh risk you'd be
taking there so we stand in
strong support and I just wanted
to thank the state engineer's
office and the sponsor for
addressing some of the issues
that we had in the earlier
version of this bill. So thank
you for your support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, sponsors and
experts, Camila with the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club. It's no secret that New
Mexico is in a water crisis and
unfortunately our best available
science tells us our challenges
related to water quantity will
only get more challenging as we
move forward. This makes it
imperative that we ensure that
our agencies have the needed
authority to enforce our
existing water laws, updating
water law violation penalties.
That haven't been updated in
over 100. Thank you, and we have
3 individuals online, um, if you
could online not repeat what's
already been stated, but I'll go
ahead and let uh Oscar Simpson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Oscar Simpson
with Rio Grande Indivisible. We
need a modern water law
violation legislation such as
this legislation proposes in
order to curtail illegal use of
water withdrawal because we got
a water crisis and huge drought
due to climate change. We need
to have this legislation to have
an effective tool to control and
and protect our limited water
resources. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Simpson. Um,
Marla Schultz.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist for the
Albuquerque-Bernalio County
Water Utility Authority. We
support House Bill 348 and would
like to thank the sponsors and
the state engineer's office. Um,
and the state engineer, uh, we
stand in support for all the
reasons previously stated. Thank
you.
Thank you, Ms. Schultz, um, and
Anna Hansen.
Um, thank you, madam, Madam
Chair and uh committee members,
um, I'm speaking, uh, on my own
behalf as a former county
commissioner and somebody who
worked on the Emmet lawsuit, I
believe, and served as uh on the
Buckman director version board.
This is a really important law,
please pass this so that we have
an updated water.
Law, thank you very much.
Thank you, Ms. Hanson.
So we didn't have any opponents,
so I'll go ahead and turn it
over to the committee.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I've said before, this is a
strange session.
Miller and I are on the same
side of a piece of legislation.
I'm not for sure whether she
moved or I moved, but.
There has been movement to us
occurred, so.
We uh
I guess it's a a brighter day,
but
Madam chair, I um.
I want to just
To
health station engineer that I
appreciated.
Um, and that working with
All of the parties.
To address the issues of
protecting
Um
Water.
Um, that is um
That is something that has gone
um
on on
To long
And the effect of that has
Basically, um,
Yeah
engineer's ability to do their
job.
I um
I think
This is the beginning. I don't
think it's the end. I think it's
the beginning.
Um
All across New Mexico, no.
Specifically
In oil and gas business.
However, it occurs in that
general area, and, and I
Completely admit to that.
But all over New Mexico.
Yeah, um, for various reasons,
water law is ignored because the
value of water.
Exceeded the risk of penalty.
And it certainly exceeded the
risk of even
Be detected.
So it really wasn't anybody
looking.
for it to occur.
There's um too much.
Um
That is
Ignored
Um, we, in the, in the
Valley region years ago.
We
meters on everything.
And there are meter readings
that are required.
Um, periodically.
To ascertain and to verify.
Um, reporting.
And I know on many occasions,
those are just completely
ignored.
I know in other areas where
there have been construction
projects going on.
Um, uh, livestock water.
As immediately in
used
facilitate construction
projects.
With no regard to the penalty
because somebody offered them a
buck.5 or 2 bucks a barrel, and
they had
They
They thought the penalties that
you might, um,
Impose was just the cost of
doing business.
That, quite frankly, is kind of
what's going on in Albuquerque
with many of the crimes that
Not that big a deal, you know,
we're gonna get caught and
turned loose, and so
But the hat. We'll just do it
anyway.
So
I um, I became, um, I, I, I
messaged on a bill early on,
185, that had a
Um
Significant penalty imposed to
because
I wanted people that uh followed
me.
on social media and other places
what I was doing that
I was sending out a message that
you better get right because
I'm going to uh do my best.
To stop
Some of this from occurring.
It devalues.
When we allow this to occur.
Those people
That own water or inherited
water.
Um, the values that because the
the value of that water ride is
no good if the water ride.
Right
So
I would probably catch oh Billy
heck when I get home.
Because of this, but so be it.
Right, right, and wrongs wrong.
Thank you, Senator.
No, I'm not. I, I thought you
were sorry, no, so I, I applaud
that. I helped the committee
passes it out and hopes stay on
the floor in short order because
that's what needs. Thank you.
Man.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Hamlet, I thought.
OK, Senator Scott, I had you on
my list first. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Mr. Ortiz Henderson or
representative of Ortiz
Sanderson.
It'll, it'll happen at some
point.
I've been gone for a year.
Uh
Representative Orton.
Miss Anderson
Uh, I would like to ask about
The enforcement provisions.
And what is either in place
today.
Or what is proposed going
forward.
With respect to enforcing.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
looks like they're, uh,
deferring, deferring to me on
that answer. So today what we
have, we have, uh, office of the
Engineer staff who are called
assistant Water masters.
When they receive report, they
go out and they do, uh, you
know, meter checks and, and, and
they also respond to uh concerns
and, and reports of potential
violations. And if it's someone
who is over diverting on.
valid water rate that they have,
we have a pretty good mechanism
for, for dealing with that. We
say, OK, if it was an
intentional over diversion, they
have to double repay the water,
but if it's something where it's
just out and out theft of water
or uh an illegal drilled well.
All we have is that $100 a day
penalty, so we can enjoy them.
We can get orders stopping them
to do what they're doing, but we
can't really deter people from
trying to do that and, and not
get caught. So, so we have I I
hope that answered your
question. We have staff, the
Watermaster.
Staff we're going to go out and
and respond to reports and also,
you know, we, we'd love to be,
we're we're trying to staff up
to get more people out in the
field to just uh be present and
see more and, and, and, and
ensure that people don't think
they can get away with it.
And Madam Chair.
Miss Anderson, an expert.
For these uniformed officers,
were they
Do they or or they.
something else.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
they're not, uh, law enforcement
officers. They do typically have
office of the state engineer
markings clothing, uh, they, we
do not want any sort of
misunderstanding that they, you
know, they have had might have a
jacket. We don't want, we don't
want any sort of
misunderstanding that they're,
they're not officials, but
they're not law enforcement
officers.
OK. And now with respect to
Understand.
From other sources that
A lot of these uh
metering facility.
Or either disrepair, completely
non-functional.
Or haven't been proven.
Accurate
And
Forever
Are there
But, you know, now $25 a barrel.
The accuracy of the meter.
becomes
Crucial
Are there plans in place to
Modify current practices.
Require these meters to be
brought up to speed, or they
Or they
Are they?
Proven
Accurate
By some mechanism.
Or what
Going forward are we planning to
do there.
Madam Chair, Senator, we have,
we do have plans to increase the
checking of meters, so we have
haven't approved, uh, meter list
that every meter must be from,
and those are, those tend to be
accurate meters, and they, they
do.
You know, go out on occasion.
Another big thing that we're
pushing for is uh telemetry or
other remote uh collection of
data from meters so that we
don't have to have people
manually send in their meter
reports every month. We just get
it and that will help identify
sort of inaccuracies, but if
somebody has a meter that is um
That is that is on our meter
list. We don't have any
requirements for continued
calibration. Uh, we do, if we
identify what looked like, um,
Curio, you know, curious
readings, we will, we will
follow up at that point and you
know, you can do sort of flu
tests if you, if you run your,
your pump for a certain amount
of time, the meter is not
showing the right number, we
can, we can identify that at
that point.
And um in addition to that, we
really are expanding metering
around the state. There's been
funding that's been been
provided from um capital outlay,
I believe, and um so when there
is meters that are found to be
Um, didn't just repair there
would certainly be required to
replace them, um.
If that were to occur, um, but
in terms of metering, it's, it's
something, it's a condition that
goes into a permit and it's, um,
and it's something that we
really are expanding in terms of
water administration, water
management.
Madam Chair.
Miss Anderson, with respect,
now.
To
That takes River valley.
How many meters are in place and
how many people do we have?
Looking over that program.
So, my apologies, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator, which uh part of
the state were you asking about?
Well, I was asking about ecos
Valley, but I same question my
next question is gonna be middle
real ground. Yeah, so the Piccos
Valley, um, I, frankly, the
Conservacing District
superintendent may correct me.
My understanding is that uh uh.
We're in the low 1000s in terms
of the number of farmers.
I can't read lips, so I don't.
1600
members farmer members in
Pecosalio teaching Conservancy
District, um, so there's some
number of water rates that are
sort of irrigation water rates
in there, so it's we're in,
we're in the low thousands in
the pick valueian Conservancy
District.
and relaying from John Merry
here, Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, um, we have about 6 staff
assigned to specifically to the
Pecos Valley Artesian
Conservancy District.
OK, and how many people looking
after those?
So that would be about 6 people.
Within the office of the state
engineer.
Is that, I'm sorry, maybe I'm
not answering the right
question.
6 people seems like a pretty
lightly populated with
enforcement officers
is that, is there a plan to
change that?
They're, um, there's always
recurring funding requests um
within our budget, um, and there
is a need are currently our, our
uh vacancy rates about 25% and
we
We, we don't, um, return any of
that.
You know, country.
Just a reminder to go to the
chair. Sorry about that, madam
Chair. Senator Scott, thank you.
OK, and out of chair Miss
Anderson, that same question.
stay along the middle and lower
re ground.
Irrigation.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, in the
lower Rio Grande, we have a
metering order in place like we
do in the Roswell artesian
Basin, and it is the, the number
of farms there is the same order
of magnitude. It's in the low
1000s, uh, and the amount of
Watermaster staff is in the same
order. It's, you know, on the,
you know, half dozen staff.
Is that
Right, so both, both of those
offices, we have approximately 2
dozen staff in in those offices.
The water masters are the ones
who are specifically devoted to
the uh
Um, to, you know, checking uh
diversions, um.
Other staff can help out if, if
we have additional needs, but
yes, we're always looking to
expand in the middle Rio Grande,
we do not have a metering order
in place yet, um, and that is
likely coming uh soon.
The uh the number of farms again
is
Similar order of magnitude in
the low 1000s, and our water
master staff is a little
Our office staff is similar in
the middle, I'd say. They're all
kind of same order of magnitude.
And Madam Chair, no metering
order in the Middle Rio Grande.
Uh
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that's
correct, but like I said, that's
Stay tuned, uh, likely in the
next year that will be coming.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
One last comment if we
Water is life, we probably ought
to start.
Right
Uh, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Hamley
Do I hear a second? OK.
So a do pass motion from Senator
Hamblin, a second from Senator
Pope.
With that, Madam Secretary, we
call it the vote.
Sam Cervantes his excuse Senator
Charley.
Uh, Charlie, yes, and.
And, yes, Senator Hamblin. Yes,
Senator Hamlin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. And our Pope, yes,
and her sco.
So Scott, yes, Senator Townsend.
Townsend, yes, Senator Stefani
is excused and to Lopez.
Yes, says Lopez, yes.
So I don't need to count the
votes to tell you that you have
a unanimous due pass from this
committee.
So, it's a 7.
Thank you also a first, two of
us being on the legislation
together. Thank you very much.
Hopefully not the last.
Progress is being made.
Thank you. Next we have a House
Bill 219, I believe we have uh
And uh we have represented small
here.
Hi, Madam Chair, committee, uh,
House Bill 219. Great to see
everybody would, uh, designate
the slot canyon Riverland State
Park on state-owned land in
Donana County, um, the funding
is in our capital uh package and
uh the bill is um
Uh, builds on, uh, work that's
been done by the state parks
under legislative uh.
Support and with legislative
funding to develop the best
option to support recreation,
tourism, uh, in the community.
Thank you.
How do we, how many people in
the audience support this bill?
How many people in the audience
oppose it?
OK, can we get about 2 or 3
supporters, please.
Thank you. Hello, my name is
Kyla Navarro, and I work with
the friends of the Oregon
Mountains Desert peaks. I
traveled all the way from Las
Cruces, and I just want to
highlight three things for the
committee on why they should
pass this bill. This property
was acquired through LWCF,
meaning it should already be
open to the public, opening the
state park would provide easier
and safer access for us in
Donana County to access our
public lands, and lastly this um
wetland State Park would
contribute to the health of our
river down.
in southern New Mexico. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Zoe Barker. I'm the
conservation director with CBNM
and Kyla did a really good job
explaining some of the benefits
of this state park in Don Anna
County, um, I'll just add that
state parks have a lot of
economic and other health
benefits to communities that
they are in, so we urge the
committee to support this bill.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Camilla Feibelman with the
Sierra Club also in support of
the bill, our members and
supporters are inspired to
protect nature by visiting it,
so we have dozens and dozens of
volunteer excursions, leaders
and participants in southern New
Mexico who like to go out on
outings and see um what our
public lands have to offer us,
but
Thank you. We have Oscar
Simpson, um, but I'm just gonna
announce that he is on online to
support this bill and move to um
committee discussion, and I have
Senator Hamblin on first.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the sponsor. Um,
we've worked on public lands
projects together for over 12
years now, um, and I'm very
happy to see, uh, Slot Canyon,
uh, being proposed as a state
park, and I want to remind my
colleagues, we had a bill, uh,
debate.
Last night it's all kind of
blending together, but when we
started talking about free
passes for veterans in our state
parks and how important that is,
um, veterans have actually led
the way in terms of that uh in
terms of arguing for the
importance of preserving these
public lands for solace for
peace, uh, for, uh, comfort and
also for mental health. And so,
and, and just being from my
community, um, understanding how
important slot canyon is, uh, to
our area, but also how important
it is to protect.
it as a park.
Um, so that others can continue
to enjoy it, uh, and benefit
from it as well. So I'm very
grateful for the sponsor to
bring this forward and uh and
I'm looking forward to
supporting this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Anyone else?
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, chair.
Um
Good to see you.
And
Um
There are canyons.
You know, other areas like Utah.
But you
And
In my
time, but I spent in Utah.
There was more than one
occasion.
alarms that went off because the
blast flooding capacity of
these.
Keys is really significant.
How do you, how do you protect
that? Well,
People that are in those narrow,
sometimes, I mean, really narrow
canyons that can
have 25 ft of water rushing
through.
And that's not a great
exaggeration. I mean, it, it
really can be.
How do you, how do we protect
them? Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, and Senator Townsend
Me chair, Senator, I think
that'll be part of what state
parks, uh, is doing through the
buildout of this state park is
to make sure that uh access.
Uh, is safe to get into the park
right now there's a state road
that sort of runs in between a
couple of that with some of the
main features and one of the big
things is to make it safer, your
same point, which I think is
very well taken to make sure
that there's ample signage
posting and a way to sort of
monitor upstream, um.
It makes a great deal of sense,
uh, Madam Chair and senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
This area is part of
That I think it's called Broad
Canyon, the
The
The area that feeds the water
into it is is.
Is that also an area that is
protected as
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
this area is a little bit south
of of the actual Broad Canyon
itself. It's in that area, um,
Madam Chair, Senator, back to
your other points I think again
it's very important. Elephant
Butte Irrigation District has
extensive monitoring equipment
in sort of the higher up
portions of this area, uh, going
back to floods, I believe in
2006, so the monitoring
equipment that's been put in
there.
Uh, but this area is itself a
little bit south of where Broad
Canyon is.
And Madam Chair, Senator, the
main State Park designation and
development is on the east side
of Highway 185 of of North
Valley Drive, and it's very much
connected to the Rio Grande
right there. So correct me if
I'm wrong, I'm sure
representative isn't there, is
there a reservoir isn't there
some
Some flood control in that area
that feeds into this area.
Don't they work together, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, great
question. Um, there is a a large
uh impound a large uh earthen
dam there at the the mouth of
Broad Canyon itself and that
does hold back water, which then
feeds into the Rio Grande. That
area is just um.
North of sort of the main uh
state park proposed state park
site, but it absolutely does
feed into there, um, the slot
Miss Madam Chair, Senator, the
slot canyon that we were talking
about earlier, that one is a
little bit south of of.
Me of chair that water that
we're describing that is that a
pulmonary, it does not flow
through Slot Canyon, Madam
Chair, Senator, great question
again. It does not. OK.
That's the
That solves that.
Um
You know, I think it was.
2014 or 15 we started, we had
quite a debate. I think you
might.
I don't know if you were
involved in that or not. I think
uh it was uh
Representative Steinborn at the
time, Senator Steinborn today,
we started the um
What did we call it Rio Grande
Trail.
Oh, and I've noticed that over
the years.
These part formations.
kind of
Connecting the dots on the Rio
Grande trail, is that kind of
the
Is, is that an effort to enhance
that outdoor activity and
your area by doing that is, do
they go together, Madam chair
Senator, I think in this case,
absolutely they, this is because
it's right there along the
river, uh, it very much connects
him.
I um
The only reason I think about
that is I have the opportunity
to go through a uh
Homeland security briefing.
3 months ago now, I guess.
when you're having fun, but
I am one of the things that
those guys mentioned in passing
was.
That, that
corridor trail and these parts
are kind of like becoming a
Or were or probably aren't
today, but they were.
In a mess because they
had been used by that migrant
flow as um staging areas. Were
you aware of that?
At all, Madam Chair Senator Ian
in the Slo Canyon Riverlands
area. I'm not aware of that.
This, Madam Chair Senator, this
is, um,
Uh, south of a border patrol
checkpoint that's on that state
highway.
I don't know the exact distance,
but it's got to be less than 5
miles. It's quite close to it
and the Madam Chair senator, the
distance between the river.
Uh, and the state highway 185.
It's less than 1 mile.
From the from the river to the
highway there. Yeah, that.
Representative, that was the
only thing that I, uh,
had from
Um
People that are big parking
enthusiasts.
that news.
Or
elders or something up there.
Everybody likes to go to and
they, and I asked him about
this, and they said,
It's uh
Beautiful area.
Yeah
You know,
Never been through it, it's
worth going through, but you
have to be really cognizant of
the water and the weather,
because if you can get into that
so far.
Yeah
You might not even know that
you're gonna get in trouble till
you see water.
coming down to Kenya, so you're
gonna have to work on that and
we're gonna have to make sure
that the
Um, state park is cognizant of
that issue and I, I don't know
how we do it with.
I'm sure they do. I'm sure they
do it in other areas and, and
they'll figure it out, but
It is something that you're
gonna have to be cognizant of
and and uh.
that long.
I, um
I think it's a pretty area and
um
I think yeah, so.
will be utilized by.
many over there in the process
so.
I don't care of them.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Azel.
Madam chair, thank you very
much. Good to see you.
I do have some questions
regarding the public safety that
drug and told that whenever
there is an event, we've seen
it.
Cabinet out there west of
Roswell.
There is a public safety concern
whenever there is an event, all
of a sudden that can come down
and it can wash them like I
can't believe so my concern
there is, and I've been
contacted by a few people.
In regard to this, do you not
see that being a problem as far
as the flooding of that
particular area and the
potential loss of lives on them
not being able to escape.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Great to see
you as well. Um,
You know, rain and water, I
think we always have to be, uh
have a very healthy respect for
her, no doubt about it, Madam
Chair, Senator, the slot canyon
in this case is um is not nearly
as long as many that you would
see in uh in other parts or say
like in Arizona or Utah or maybe
in other parts of northern New
Mexico.
Senator, um, I think that as we
go through the development, I
know Mr. Velasquez is here from
State Parks. It'll be a, a
couple of year deal, the focus
for getting people is gonna be
on the east side of Highway 185,
the um swat Canyon itself is on
the west side of the highway
there.
Um, the all of the sort of the
development will be there on the
east side, uh, which is.
pretty close to the river where
there's uh levees and a bunch of
other stuff, so I don't worry
too much about the flooding at
the river itself, and I think
you're concerned and Senator
Townsend concerned really making
sure there's a robust way that
folks are notified and have
awareness, um.
I, I think that can be built in
right now, Madam Chair, Senator
Eel, there's a number of folks
who are using that area from
both nearby and also that come
from from.
Farther away
And so I think we're only going
to make the situation safer with
this development.
OK, Madam Chair and
Representative small chairman
Small sorry to be right.
small
whenever you said that people
would be warned, how do you
anticipate on the morning being
put out to people that might be
down in this area for the
potential for flooding would
take place, especially in this
particular area, you're talking
about where it is straight side.
Yeah, because whenever that
water runs, you know as well as
I do that the effects of it are.
And beat any
That, that's right, Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, I, I would look to
state parks to develop that
system, um, in this area, the
drainage system.
is going back to the west, um.
You know, a little ways, not
nearly as far again as you have
some of these places. I know
I'm, I've actually watched some
of those flood videos from some
of the places in Utah and in
those cases, you know, it's
draining.
30, 40, 50, 60 plus miles of
area and so you you really can
be in a place where it's sunny,
it's raining 60 miles away and
then sending water down in this
area, um, it's that the drainage
isn't going that back that far
to the west.
But again, I think that's a
place where the state parks
working with the monitoring
system that EBID is set up that
measures rainfall in the higher
parts uh where it drains.
can be a very good way to make
everything safer.
Madam chair.
Chairman Small
I've always heard the term a
wall of water is coming down,
and I had the
I had that experience one day we
were.
Moving cattle in from our north
pasture back into headquarters.
We had about over 180 head of
cattle that we were moving via
horseback.
And
Of course we had the lead horse
out there, the cattle were
following. We had our other two
cowboys.
And I was riding dragged and
Oh
We started crossing the river we
were bringing in calves as well
with those mammas.
And beautiful day.
Blue sky, the whole nine yards,
and as I'm starting to bring up
the last stragglers pushing
those little calves through
trying to get them on across to
get with their mamas.
One of them turned back. I had
to ride back a little ways, push
it back closer to the river, and
I kept hearing this noise and
it's like.
What in the heck is that? I
couldn't figure out what it was.
I was thinking, well, is there a
plane flying low? What, what's
the deal?
And I glanced upstream of the
Hondo River cause that's what
runs through our ranch on the
north side.
And Madame Chair, no light. It
was a wall of water. It was
probably 12 ft high, it was
roared down through there and
I'm like,
Cause I'm either gonna
End up in that wall of water or
my horse is going to throw me
off and I'm gonna be laying
there or me, the horse, and the
calf frog got to be there.
Thank God this that mama cow
turned around and started
calling her baby. He ran up and
we, we bolted out into there
right before we hit.
So the time frame of being able
to notify people that might be
exploring this.
Particular area is troublesome
to me. I guess I would need more
information from the park
service on what they intend to
do because I do see this as
being a safety fact.
As far as what a rep a senator
Townsend, sorry about that,
Senator Townsend brought up.
About
place of long this trail that
has been developed that gives me
concern too if this is going to
be a park.
Where people are able to camp.
Is that the intent of this where
they would be able to camp out
maybe ride bicycles, hike.
Do all sorts of fun stuff there,
Madam Chairent, yes.
That gives me concern that this
is going to be a stopping area
along this trail for.
Illegals coming in.
I see that as a safety concern
as well.
As far as our park service gives
how many full-time employees
will they have to have to
maintain its work.
Uh, Madam chair, Senator, I
think is there sort of staffing
up, it's gonna be probably 4 to
6, but that's uh a few years in
the future before they get it
developed and I understand that,
Madam Chair and Chairman Small.
Uh, whenever we are talking
about before they do get geared
up where people can start using
this this bill passes.
Kind of fill me in on what all
you see or maybe through the
guidance of the parks.
Oh, what do you see being
established?
At Ma chair and Senator, I'm
pulling up my little thing here.
Um, yeah, I'm going, this is uh
the alternate alternate 3 that's
sort of listed in the state
parks in their master plan
study, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, it goes through parking
and roadway improvements, which
is uh a great deal of the
funding, um, tent camping as
well as RV camping, both of
those coming in close to about
$400,000.
Uh, trails, this would be trails
Man Chair Center, I think
they're sort of in that um next
to the river and connected to
the river, uh,
a million dollars for
infrastructure and utilities,
and then um
Yeah
Yeah, and then the site
furnishings and equipment. So
Madam Chairsson, a lot of it is
just sort of the uh parking um
basic infrastructure there, the
tent and the RV camping Me
center, I think one of the
things if this gets the use that
it's expected to get because
it's already a very popular area
where a lot of folks uh from the
region and elsewhere go to.
There's just gonna be a lot more
presence combined with the state
parks law enforcement presence.
That's gonna make it thinking
when it in many ways, Madam
Chair and Senator, probably a
lot.
Just uh very safe.
And um
And very publicly used.
Me cheered and chairman small.
Whenever you're talking about uh
the RV camping, the tent camping
and everything. I'm assuming
there's going to be electricity
there.
So.
Uh, it's
Bringing up another issue I
probably shouldn't, so this is
going against the bill that we
heard earlier about dark skies.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, I wouldn't weigh in
on that. I think all of the
development would be done in, so
you're going to have to have
waste station. You're going to
have to have water available. Is
there availability of water
there will a well have to be
drilled.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
there is a, a former residence
there, uh, on the, on the
property that will be developed,
so I don't know if they'd
utilize the existing well, but
there, there is a uh uh uh
residence there.
OK, Madam Chair.
And German small, there will be
restrain facilities as well, I'm
assuming, will there be
Oh, will this include showers?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I, I
think that'll go through the
state parks. Our bill just says
in a manner consistent, but uh,
the third alternative I think
proposes a higher level of sort
of infrastructure consistent
with sort of a really good
experience that people are
enjoying. OK.
Mature, this is just a curious
question cause I don't know.
Do all part personnel do they
carry sidearms?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
don't, uh, my understanding is
that you have some state parks
law enforcement officials who go
through the law enforcement
course and the certification. I
don't think that all part of
person all state parks employees
have gone through that, but um I
couldn't say it was 100%
authority.
OK.
Oh.
Madame chair and Chairman Small,
whenever you're talking about
how many.
Personnel that was
that might be
Me
my recollection is 4 to 64 to 6.
OK, thank you for that.
And
Other than our veterans because
we did just pass that bill and
I'm really glad that we did.
What do you have any anticipated
Charges that would be made to
these people that are coming in,
obviously they would be charged
they use, I'm assuming they
would be charged a fee for
overnight parking and water use
as well. Tell me what other
types of feed. Will there be any
sort of concessions?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think some of that will be
developed through sort of the
planning process, the the fees
consistent with camping and
other things, I think since
it'll be like you say, an
overnight camp will be sort of
consistent with the rest of our
state parks, OK.
Madam chair and Chairman Small.
I know that there's agriculture
around that particular area. Am
I remembering this right, Miss,
Miss Madam Chair and Chairman
Small, Madam Chair, Senator,
yes, it's, this is in Selden
Canyon, so it's a much more
narrow part where both north and
south of here, the valley widens
substantially, but there's
definitely agriculture in this
area.
OK, and Madam Chair, that brings
me to
My next question for the
representative and now the
senator.
I'm assuming with the
agriculture that is there
already established, it's been
in production for years and
years.
Uh, will this impact them in any
way, especially like watering
through their ditches and this
stuff.
Madam Chair, Senator, no, this,
this shouldn't impact them at
all. Uh, and if some of them
want to do more sort of
agritourism or sort of have
options for folks to stay in
private facilities. There's a
private RV park a little bit
south of here.
Um, it should open up other new
opportunities, but it won't
impact their water rights at
all.
No, not their water rights.
That's not where I was going,
Madam Chair. The chairman small
and.
Senator Steinborne, uh, I was
talking about let's say that
there is.
People get off the beaten trail,
you know how people
Curiosity in human beings, they
want to see what's on the other
side of this hill, and they do
stumble into a farmer's field.
Hey, let's go over there and
See what's going on and
something does happen, is the,
what about the liability towards
these farmers or even ranchers
in that area.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think.
I don't know the answer to that.
However, Madam Chair, Senator, I
think development of the state
park and really clear boundary
markings, folks knowing exactly
where they are and where they
are is actually gonna be really
helpful. You have a lot of
people who go to the area now
and more signage, more clarity
about, uh, where people are and
where they're allowed to be
where they're not allowed to be,
I think it's gonna probably
help, if anything, Madam chair,
chairman.
all the reason I'm smiling
signage that and make it damn,
you know what, if a person wants
to trespass, they'll they will
trespass. I experienced that
every hunting season comes
about. I have cut fences. I have
trash thrown all over private
property. There's usually no
regard for private property
anymore. People need to
understand that's my backyard.
I don't go into your backyard
and make a mess and cut fences
and let your animals out.
But people will do that, so the
concern is there, I think, uh
even with signage up.
Because we do, we are required
to have signed it up
private property this hosted, no
hunting, no, but the whole list
goes off.
Madam Chair,
I understand what y'all are
trying to do. My concern is
whenever there is an event like
you said 20 miles away, 30 miles
away, and water comes down that
canyon.
I don't want there to be a
fatality at this park if y'all
are trying to create something
for the general public can go
out and spend some time
outdoors.
That is not where I'm going. I
am concerned about the safety of
whenever.
I wish, is anybody here from the
park service that might be able
to answer my question regarding
notification whenever there is
an event to evacuate that that
particular area.
Madam Chair and uh Senator
Hazel. My name is Toby
Velasquez. I'm the director of
the New Mexico State Parks
division. We managed 35 state
parks found in 25 or 33 counties
across the state. These are all
natural landscapes. We have a
lot of experience dealing with
flooding, fire, etc. across uh
the high mountains in the
southern Rocky Mountains all the
way to the upper Chihuahuan
Desert in southern New Mexico,
and I, I agree signage is only
one strategy, uh, senator and,
and Madam Chair, however, people
on the ground are rangers, our
law enforcement rangers.
on the ground as well as using
technology. We do text push
where we have um uh the services
in order to be able to do that
so that anyone in that area will
get a text that there's uh uh
flash flooding fire, thunder,
whatever that may be, we do that
with boating as well and many of
our large lakes. Um, so it's,
it's what we do and um we, we
really have not had any
situations that have led people
to be stranded in a bad
situation where they did not
have the information available,
um, Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
to make the right
decision, but we also have staff
that go out and rescue people on
trails, on the water, in the
mountains and wherever else they
may be hiding or uh trying to
get away from everybody else.
Um, so, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, this is what we do, our
staff are important in
delivering this safety, um, and
that 35 state parks, we serve
5.3 million visitors every year,
and I'd like to think that we're
professionals that being able to
provide the service.
chair, I just want to make one
point about slack Canyon, which
is right now, people have to
jump a fence, park on the side
of the road to go to Slot
Canyon. The good thing about
this park is we're gonna
actually be managing um access
safety much better and I think
we're managing it now, which is
kind of ad hoc.
So, I think that's another
positive of this proposal is
safety.
And so Madam Chair, and I
appreciate that Mr. Velasquez.
Whenever you are talking about.
And just side born whenever
you're talking about.
People are right now are
Basically trespassing, OK, they
are, they're basically
trespassing, but you will have
signage and everything on where
people are supposed to pull in
with their campers, whatever the
case may be, is that correct?
And there will be a station
there where they can either.
Check in there or
Would they be able to make.
a reservations.
The uh
The juvenile apparatuses that
are now being used that have TS
in them. OK, I'm being silly
there, but can they make
reservations in advance. Madam
Chair and Senator, uh, that's
correct. We do have a
reservation system process. Um
we also have a check-in process
at a visitor checkpoint where
people can uh file their trip
plans so that we can monitor
whether or not they're getting
back at the time that they let
us know that they had planned to
get back on so we could do
checks out on trails in water.
Um, and so we, we, we monitor
that and help.
support, uh, the public
experience while they're out in
the state park.
OK, Mr. Director Velasquez.
I appreciate that information.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Mr. Blaska, you said you
operated how many state parks in
New Mexico?
Madam Chair and Senator, 35.
35.
And how many of them are below.
The interstate that runs
east-west.
Madam Chair, Senator, I missed
that question.
South of 5:40. How many state
parks are there in the state of
New Mexican south by 40.
Um, Madam Chair, without being
able to counting my mind, about
half.
OK.
And Madam chair, do you want me
to go in and tell you what those
are because I do know. No, I'm
not gonna do that, madam chair
and chairman small and Senator
Steinborn.
I'm assuming that there would be
Madam Chair. I, I want to tie
this into a bill that Senator
Steinborn carried many years ago
whenever he was on the house.
The bike trail.
Is this going to be tied into
that bike trail that.
You, you got the funding for
many years ago and I can't
remember how long ago that's
been, Senator Steinborn, you
have it, Madam Chair. It's the
Rio Grande Trail, and yes, this
would be right along the Rio
Grande Trail.
Yeah, I think the destination on
the trail. OK, well, Madam
Chair, I guess that brings me to
my question for Senator
Steinborn originally this bill
was going to come from our
southern border going up through
Las Cruces followed the Rio
Grande, and where was it to end
and what is the status of that
trail right now
Senator, it's um it it's 500
plus mile trail goes all the way
to Colorado.
Texas to Colorado through New
Mexico, roughly along the Rio
Grande.
Um, and if the statuses are
about 100 miles, they've
designated about 100 miles and
now um we created a commission
as the modality and so the
commission has gone through
changes through the years.
They've got a great new
commission appointed. They've
got a meeting in TRC here in a
few months. We've got about 100
miles of trail ready to be
designated. So I think we're
about to see a surge of progress
on the Rio Grande Trail, which
is really great to see.
OK, and madam, to refresh my
memory, Senator Steinborg. What
was the cost of that? I, I can't
remember. Well, madam chair,
it's really no cost of it
outside of the management of the
commission itself, which was
costing us about $75,000 a year.
Now, we, you know, we've kind of
shifted that money into
planning, that planning dollars
has shifted to the outdoor
outdoor.
Recreation division, which we
didn't have at the time. And so
they're now doing the active
planning of it, which is really
where the work is. It's, it's in
the day to day coordination with
communities and planning of
trail segments.
Senator Isa, would you please
stay on the bill?
That is my point, ma'am.
Madame Chair and Senator
Steinberg whenever we're tying
this end to this park that is
proposed here today. There's my
in, madam chair.
Thank you
Whenever we're talking about
this piece of parcel that was
once the Broad Canyon Ranch.
This site was bought and correct
me if I'm wrong here, I'm
reading this to
State that the park service did
buy this piece, this parcel that
is.
May be going to be a state park
in 2008. Is that correct?
Can you tell me why this
particular site was selected by
the Parker.
Well, Madam chair, it's, it's a
ripe, it's a rich riparian area
of habitat with great water
resources and also connects to
public lands all around that
there's a rich archaeological
resources. I mean, it's, it's
really a very special piece of
um.
Nature outdoors kind of diverse
ecology.
History.
Madame cheer and chairman Small
and senator Steinborne, I guess
that brings me to a question
that you brought up. You said
this was a riparian area.
So I'm assuming that there are
trees along here and also salt
soup.
Is there going to be any push to
eradicate the salt cedar,
Senator, yes, that salt cedar
management eradication is in the
bill.
I am very glad to hear that,
Madam Chair. That is a very big
concern because it's
most people in the audience here
know people at home may not know
that salt cedars can suck up
about 100 gallons of water a
day.
And to me that's very important
that we do.
If that problem taken care of.
Madam Chair
Whenever we, you are discussing
what you are going to do, Mister
Velasquez.
And Senator
Mr. Chairman
Whenever everything is up and
running, once the money has been
appropriated to get this project
started, what do you see the
turnaround date on this being
completed?
Madam Chair, Senator, I believe
that we can have trail access
available in the next 2 years.
Alexis and then future
development within the next 3 to
5 years depending on the capital
funding availability and the
ability to work with the public
agencies in the area to get it
done.
Thank you very much for that
response.
Madam Chair, I guess my last
statement is.
House Bill 219 was it amended,
let me see.
Was the appropriation taken out
chairman Small.
Me, yes.
So Madam Cheers.
Very small,
it's now in the capital outlay
bill, is that correct, Madam,
and it's $9 million. That's
right.
And Madame Chair, I'd like to
know where this money came from.
Uh, ma'am chair, Senator, this
is from the general fund, uh,
$40 million going to state
parks.
Madam Chair, Senator, yeah, like
much of our general fund, it
comes from a number of places,
although the largest share is
from production, energy
production, oil and gas
production.
Madam Chair, that's what I want
the crowd to realize.
That is very important industry
in our state along with what Mr.
Velasquez is trying to outdoor
recreation.
And we have to take the oil and
gas and agriculture sectors for
providing this funding.
And I don't want people.
Especially in the legislature to
underappreciate as to its, Madam
Chair, thank you very much. I
appreciate your response.
Thank you
Thank you to Senator Hazel,
Senator Hamlin, I move would you
pass. I'll get mad, I'm sure.
All right, um, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
A note here on the internet that
this was a
Already a pretty well
established 2.5 mile loop.
Uh, is that the
That
His intended to be included in
the park.
And how many acres will this
New State Park and.
Uh,
I, I think uh the focus, the
state park will be developed on
the east side of the highway.
Uh, away from sort of where a
lot of the loop is. I'm sure, I
apologize. I have to head to
another deal. I'll, but I'll
turn over to the senator and to
Mr.
as well.
It will, it will connect in a
loop you're talking about. I and
provide safe access to it. And
then a new trails will be built
adjacent to it and on the other
side of the road.
down by the river.
And
Madam Chair and senator, all of
this appears to be on the west
side of the highway.
Right
explained how that.
Yeah, so, um,
Sorry,
not a present Senator Scott
didn't, didn't, um, uh,
represent a small answer that
for Senator Townsend.
There's a lot of detail about
where it's located.
I can briefly answer,
briefly, yeah, so it the slot,
the slot canyon is actually on
federal lands, but there's no
safe access to it, which this
part will be able to provide
that safe access. It is probably
the 2nd most popular destination
in Donana County next to the
Oregon mountains themselves.
Um, so, but just directly south
of it and west of the road is
part of the state park parcel,
so it joins on the west, but
also on the
East side of it, on the other
side of that highway.
is the other state parcel that
goes all the way down to the
river. So it's, it's kind of
they call it an upland parcel
and a riverland parcel. There's
actually two parcels connected
to this, and uh
So, and there will be trails on
both sides of it, the access to
the slot canyon and to the trail
will actually come from the
Riverland parcel. That's where
the safe axis will be from.
And Madame Chair, how many total
acres in it?
uh, Madam Char center it's about
900 acres in change.
OK. I understand this was a
consequence of
A recommendation out of a
feasibility study.
That have multiple options
considered.
to
Can you tell me why.
Just
was selected
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Scott, it was really a pragmatic
approach through the feasibility
to find that middle ground,
knowing that if there was uh the
support needed, we could go with
alternative 3, but alternative 2
or alternative 3 were in favor
from the division standpoint and
review the feasibility study.
So this was not the preferred.
Option or was to preferred
option, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott, the preferred
option as identified in the
feasibility study was
alternative to.
Because I've learned to be
cautious and pragmatic and what
uh we support uh without knowing
what the outcome may be.
Madam Chair and Mr. Velasquez,
could you explain a little bit?
What the advantages and
disadvantages of these.
Various Madam Senator Scott, the
advantages would be that it
comes with capital funding
operating budget and staff.
In order for us to be able to to
effectuate either alternative 2
or alternative 3.
And so whatever we get in that
level of support, uh, we'd be
happy to implement either of
those two alternatives.
OK. So that $9 million
appropriation, Madam Chair and
Mr. Velasquez. Is there any plan
acquisition included in there,
or is that strictly for
improvements to the.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
that is not, we are acquired all
the property that we own there
and no additional uh acquisition
is needed. That is all to
develop the state park.
OK.
And I noted that there weren't.
Yeah,
felt and be there and take care
of irritation, irrigation
district.
There weren't any water users
included.
In this, uh,
In this, uh
study group.
Was that intentional oversight.
Mr. Vasquez, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott, um, the
contractor who conducted the
feasibility.
Uh, a lot of outreach to
stakeholders and those reflected
are those that chose to respond.
And then I noted that
There were
Some species kind of.
Potentially endangered species
in the area.
Is adding people to that mix.
Concerned
you at all?
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
we take those biological,
natural and cultural resource uh
interest at every state park and
we manage for them
appropriately. This would just
be adding to the work that we
already do to make sure that we
balance the natural cultural uh
resources on this property.
So Madam Chair, adding people
into this mix, Mr. Plaska
doesn't bother you about.
Potential impacts on
He is a uh
He's the
species that are present for
the.
Um, my chair Senator thought we
would do it with sound resource
management, uh, strategies and
applications so that that
balance is, is good for the
wildlife, the species and the
people to have an outdoor
recreation.
OK, Madam Champ, this I guess
this close to my last question.
I understand that they are
required for additional people
to manage this part.
Is that accurate
Um, um, Madam Chair and Senator
Scott, the feasibility study for
alternative 3 recommended 4
full-time employees, one of
which would be law enforcement,
uh, if that was the alternative
that was going to be supported
and Madam Chair, Mr. Vasquez,
what is the staffing levels at
your parks currently? Are you
fully staffed, able to.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott
currently at the division level
across the system. We have a 23%
vacancy.
Yes.
OK, go ahead. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott. We
have a due pass motion from
Senator Hamblin with a second
from Senator Pope, um, Madam
Secretary, we call the vote.
Senator Cervantes, says
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
And then Charlie, yes, and
herself.
Inhaleen Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
I want to pass what you see.
Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
The Townsend know terms ofhoics
as excuse him to deal of this.
Well, um, who passed?
Oh, I'm sorry, center zone.
No,
Senatoria Lopez.
Yes.
Lous, yes.
Senator Steinborn with a a vote
of 5 yes, 3 no, 1 excused, you
have a do pass.
Our next bill is uh HB 427
real-time water quality
monitoring, Representative
Cadena.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee. Um, I'm
here to present House Bill 427
as amended, and if needed, we
also have Marquita Russell here
from the New Mexico Finance
Authority to serve as an expert.
Uh this bill amends the water
projects, um, your voice is kind
of low if you could, OK,
yeah.
Yes, I will try.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee. I'm here to
present House Bill 427 as once
amended, if needed, we also have
Marquita Russell here from the
New Mexico Finance Authority to
support as an expert. This bill
amends the Water Project Finance
Act, um, adding the monitoring
and protection of water quality
as a qualifying water project,
um, to the water trusts board.
With that we'll be ready for
questions, Madam Chair.
How many in the audience in
support of this bill?
How many in the audience in
opposition to this bill.
OK. Um, can we have about 2 or 3
people self-select to come and
speak on behalf of this bill,
since we have no opponents.
And just to inform the
committee, um,
We have asked to be excused from
the floor and we're going to
stay as long as we can to get
through this agenda.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Roberto
Ramirez with Borderflex, uh,
Currently, 40% of New Mexico
water systems.
But
And to protect public health.
The real-time water monitoring
Act offers real-time water
clothing, advanced sensors track
water quality 24/7, sending
instant alerts when problems
arise. Thank you.
Good
good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Sayera Yamada. I'm the
registered speak closer to the
mic, uh, uh, Senator Ael says
she's having trouble hearing.
OK.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee on
Sayuri Yamada and the lobbyist
for EPO Water, Epco is a
regulated public utility that
designs, builds, owns and
operates essential water and
wastewater systems in various
communities across New Mexico.
today to express our strong
support for House Bill 247. We
believe this bill is critical
because it provides smaller
communities which may lack the
resources to invest in advanced
water monitoring systems to have
the ability to track water
quality in real time. This is
essential for ensuring the
safety and the well-being of
residents, allowing these
communities to take the time,
the action to address potential
water quality issues, and we
stand in support of this. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Matthew Moos on
behalf of Santa Teresa
properties, and we stand in
support of this legislation as
well. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Simpson. I hate
to do this to you again, but um
this is uh Oscar Simpson is on
and I just want to note his
support.
And I believe he stands for
indivisible.
OK, with that, we'll go to the
committee.
Senator, Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
The Representative Cadena.
The uh
This is
Water quality monitoring.
Or
Wastewater treatment.
So
does that
accurate?
Madame Cha representative, this
is, um, adding a qualifying
expense so that the water
transport could approve
potential projects, projects
coming up from municipalities or
water authorities to um monitor
their water quality in real
time. So,
For me, my effort to introduce
this bill is around drinking
water and making sure our
municipalities and water
authorities have the means to
invest in technology that would
allow them to know in real time
what was in their water. So this
is not specific to any
particular contaminant, but just
um allowing them to potentially
go to the water trust board, um,
get the financial assistance
they may need and to be able to
purchase um equipment that would
allow them to monitor their
water quality in real time.
And importantly, Madam Chair
Representative, this does not,
um, interrupt the, the
compliance or regulatory
responsibilities of the New
Mexico Environment Department,
so they would still be coming
out as they do a couple times a
year doing the sampling, that's
important for our overall safety
and wellness, but just making
sure that communities would have
access to that kind of data in
real time.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. To
be clear, Madam Chair
Representative, this would be
The water quality inputs to
these various municipal systems.
Not water quality effluent from
the system.
Is that correct, Madam Chair
Representative. It would allow
them to invest in equipment to
measure water quality. So it is
not um about monitoring both
import inputs or flu, but more
that they could test and have
their own capacities to know
what their water quality is at
the local level.
Oh, OK.
Yeah, all right, let me, let me,
heck yeah.
The
The equipment needed.
For the front end or the back
end of these processes.
would be substantially.
Different
So
Well, what are we talking about,
Madam Chair, Representative is,
is the emphasis here.
The water quality coming into
these municipal systems or
leaving the system.
For me, madam chair and
representative, it would be the
water quality before it hits our
consumers. So the example that
we're facing in southern New
Mexico that you may have heard
of is um Crua, uh, which is a
system including, I believe in
the district that the senator
represents, uh, where there was
testing with high levels of
arsenic. So that community was
in crisis. Water deliveries,
water boiling, trying to figure
out how our New Mexico residents
could safely consume and use
water in real time in their
everyday life.
Um, so in a situation like that,
the water authority could come
to the water trusts board, where
they would follow all the other
processes already in place with
the Water Trust board, um, to
potentially seek financial
assistance to have their own um
equipment and technology to
monitor monitor water water
without waiting for the
environment department to show
up as they do.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair Representative, are these
issues that are facing at the
the example.
That you just made are these.
The consequence of mechanical
issues with the system or
Supply farther upstream.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
it could be either. It could be
both. This bill doesn't um
contemplate where the
contamination might be coming
from, it just, um, simply allows
local governments and
municipalities to go to the
water trust board for this kind
of equipment and technology.
OK. And
Is there a specific budget been
developed for.
of these activities, Madam Chair
Representative, um, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
if you turn to
Page 50, I'm looking at the bill
with amendments in context, uh,
but in section.
Um
Section 3 of the bill under
conditions for grants or loans.
We have, um, determined that uh
there would be a total cap for
the water transport projects of
31 million.
$500,000 with each project not
being awarded more than
$500,000. So, um, we came up
with that number after
conversations with the municipal
League, trying to get a sense of
how many governments out there
might be interested in something
like this, that doesn't mean
that the water trust board has
to spend up to the 31 million,
but if they'd hit that mark, um,
they would no longer have any
resources available towards this
kind of funding.
And Madame Chair Representative.
With respect to the installation
and operation of these systems
to a smaller operators have the
expertise required.
Or is there going to be a
training element.
Uh, to, to be able to
effectively utilize this
equipment or how will that work?
Thank you, Madam Chair. This
bill does not explicitly outline
a training element, and I'm not
sure whether or not local
governments in those contracts
or purchases for these kind of
systems would potentially
negotiate or write into those
contracts and expectation to
make sure they had training and
and um competency at the user
level to make sure that they
could effectively use these kind
of equipment and technology.
Thank you, Ma.
That's all for now. Thank you
and thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
I have read someplace that is
there some litigation ongoing
about water quality that
This might
Influence
Madam Chair Representative, I
imagine there's always some
litigation about water quality,
but none that I'm aware of or
I've been in conversation with
as it relates to this, Madam
Chair and Representative.
In this water quality.
Testing equipment, will it also
be volumetric? Will you, will
they also measure the volume.
Mr. uh, Madam chair, Mr.
Representative Representative
Thompson.
Um, the language in this bill
does not address um the purchase
of equipment to measure a volume
of water.
Most of the, well, not a lot of
the
Criteria that
You
Look at when you're looking at
contaminants
Has to do with volume.
And so I was just wondering how
we were going to quantitate the
the the issues that uh may be
addressed. Many of these, um
Many of these mutual domestics,
etc. don't have a lot of
Um
Class 2 and 3.
Operators on their
For
You know, when I'm talking
about.
How are, how are they going to
utilize, maintain, and.
And interpret.
The
Uh, information they get out.
This instrumentation
And what are they gonna do with
it? Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Townsend. I think
that's a really excellent
question. So, um, if there were
a local authority or government
that were able to secure assist
financial assistance, invest in
a technology or equipment like
this, it would not stand alone.
So this would be another tool
they have to get better
information, more accurate
information in real time in
order to call forward or request
different kinds of assistance,
whether it be from the
environment.
department or other agencies to
make sure that they do get to a
place where they had a full
scope of the understanding of
the issue, uh, the urgency of
the issue, and then of course,
resources, um, that would be
appropriate, um, to attend to
that issue. So this would not,
is not designed to stand alone,
but would just be another tool
so that local governments could
have more information in real
time.
Thank you thanks, Madam Chair,
that I've watched and
My district.
As many of these, um,
Mutual domestics, whatever they
are.
I mean I've been challenged even
with putting oration or some
type of sanitation.
System with these.
With this system also include.
Monitoring of that.
Those levels
for nice because they're pretty
important to water quality.
Uh, Madam Chair representative
of the language we've included
in this bill is pretty
straightforward. It just says,
um,
Right now there are 6 qualifying
water projects that the water
trust board is allowed to
authorize spend for. We're just
adding the 7th, the language we
have here says that it would be
allowed for the monitoring and
protection of water quality so
we don't go into that level of
detail.
Yeah
Yes I think it's important to
note because many of the
Issues that a lot of these
Uh, smaller
Distributions systems get into
is with dead legs that are in
the system where they have um
Um, bacterial growth in, in
areas and if you can ever get
them to
I am to some type of
Um
Sanitation system for.
Pouring or there's some others.
You can eliminate a lot of those
other issues that come hand in
hand with it. So I would, um,
I would not be surprised to see
uh someone tried to add that at
some point in time versus
subliminal message in that uh
representative, um.
The, the other thing that I have
noticed, especially in
And um across New Mexico.
Is the
Most of these.
Small mutual domestics have no
capacity to volumetrically.
balance their system.
And their water losses.
Our
Very high.
And that goes hand in hand with
With the um
The issues of sanitation when
you start thinking about those
systems not being tight and
contained.
So I don't, I'm not trying to
take you off into an area of
your bill that you don't intend
you're talking about water
quality and water quality
doesn't necessarily mean that
the water that they're pumping
out of the ground as an issue
sometimes we
We, uh, inherit, um, or we cause
a problem downstream with, with
the dead legs, etc. for water
quality, so I, I think that will
be an issue that you'll, you'll
get into sooner or later.
Um
You, uh, have made it through
committees and the floor pretty
well and scathed, and I think
that speaks um to the bill, so I
appreciate it, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Anyone else?
Senator Cervantes, and then
Senator Charlie.
Hello.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm glad
you're taking care of our part
of the state a little bit, um,
the one of the questions I had,
I'm looking at the house.
amendments.
Looks like one of them, they
provided for an oversight
Marquitas here.
kid and I used to work on these
projects quite a bit for many
years and put together the list
in the projects, uh.
The report here in paragraph 9
of the house a commitment, says
the board shall report.
to our oversight committee by
June of 29.
4 plus years, right? Why, why so
long? Why is it taking long to
get a report to us.
Um, Mr. uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, I believe that there
would be um annual reports as
there always are about the water
trusts board to the oversight
committee. Um, I think this is a
final report on the
implementation of the $31.5
million so I think they're two
different reports. We're
certainly happy to continue to
report in the interim on all the
activities of the Water Trust
Board.
In this.
Because we, we've always done
met I'm sure we've always been
pretty good about doing that.
Look for
the.
Yeah, it looks like that's where
that reference. This is, this is
really back to earlier questions
too, you know.
31.5 million. What is, what are
we spending this year? What are
we appropriating this year out
of the project.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
there's about $160 million in
severance tax bonds being made
available for the projects that
are listed on House Bill 206,
um, last we looked at House Bill
2, there was an additional
appropriation as we understand
it for projects being authorized
this year and next year, uh,
from the general fund and I
again last we looked it was
around $200 million.
In addition to the STB 116 yes.
changed a little bit over the
years, you know, I'm working on
this.
And, and I know you.
We were asked this question a
bit ago, but I'm still trying to
figure out how does that, how,
how did the 31.5 come up?
There's a number.
That we should pay a portion
from that fund for this
particular project or this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, so it doesn't say or put
aside a portion of the water
trust fund dollars, but just
says that if they had, if
through the water trust board
process that already exists and
is well vetted. If these
projects became prioritized,
became on the list that becomes
a legislative bill that we
finally authorized, um, that if
such projects had already hit
that cap, there would be no more
funding available, so it's not a
set aside. It doesn't keep that
money, um, in a different
pocket.
wouldn't be available towards
the other uses, uh, but that
number we came to after many
conversations with the municipal
leagues about what the needs of
their members would be, and
they, their sense, um, in
conversations with some members
about who would be interested in
financial assistance like this
and we go for a project like
this. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And my concern, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and
represented historically Marquis
and I worked on this for many
years. The water uh project fund
was hijacked from time to time
for any various needs even in
bad times when the economy comes
down, we'd go into there and
we'd use that for any number of
different projects and
originally I think when Joe Ste
was was was working on this, the
Project fund was your pri
primarily to major, really major
projects.
And so we were looking at Galla
McKinley and we were looking at
the the you right on the side
and during the time that I
chaired the interim committee
began working on this, the goal
was to really diffuse that the
notion that we're only going to
fund these really large projects
and be able to make this money
available to smaller communities
including my district, which
will be rural.
In which were not participating
in in those large projects.
So the concern I've got
representative, it's not gonna
cause me to, to vote against the
bill, but I think we should be
cautious about it is when
you're, you're saying that that
31.5 million is a cap, and I
appreciate that at the same
time, it's gonna be hard for the
board, um, to not see that
number and think, well, we put
some
Thinking that that number had
some basis and as you pointed
out, you, you relied a little
bit on the municipal league to
do that and so that by, by its
very nature seemed to suggest
that we're going to be using
some of this money with that as
a priority and, and with the
interests of the municipality
were those that kind of
monitoring gonna be available
and what that means in turn is
that that money is not available
for conveyances and for other
projects that
Some of us may think is, is a
greater or higher priority than
monitoring, particularly because
in my mind, when you're, when
you're putting money to
monitoring.
Forgive me, Marquita and others,
but you know, monitoring is
paying engineers and staff and
people, I, I guess there's some
hard equipment involved with
this, but it's nothing like
building conveyances and
And wells and other things like
that. And so I'm always
concerned when we see a lot of
money being used for.
Engineering and staffing and
personnel and so forth, not.
Concrete and
Things that are, you know, that
really, to my mind, be more of
the of of in line with what
we're thinking about for that
project, build things.
Create things as opposed to
Move things on the desk, right?
And and move paper around.
So I, I don't mean that to be
disparaging to anybody, but I'm
concerned when we start spending
something like $31 million to
monitor.
To help me to understand what,
what is the big cost that's
involved in terms of any kind of
equipment, technology, where do
you, where do you spend $31.5
billion other than
People.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, beyond the 31.5
million cap, there is also a
$500,000 cap per project, um,
and it's my understanding and
certainly it now seems that
there's new equipment and
technology that exists at local
authorities or municipalities
can purchase and then basically
put into the system themselves.
So it's really more of a a
capital purchase, they're
purchasing equipment and the
technology and system that um
Measures and reports what's in
the water in real time, so that
if there's something that
creates a flag, they then raise
that flag and ask for additional
support is needed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think. The other, the other
thing is I think, I think it was
uh Senator Scott was talking
about the fact that some of this
I think the focus in my if I
understand your question was the
focus on wastewater fluid.
Um
But it's also water, right? It's
Not limited to wastewater fluid
and um
And, and this is focused on
qualities and what is it focuses
on water quality as opposed to
volume.
Madam Cha Senator, yes.
Then the last question is the,
the language seems to be looking
at the
Amendments in howag which is
longer than the bill really, I
think, um, but it seems like
it's principally designed to
make the funding available for
loans as opposed to grants that
seems to be what I'm tracking
throughout the bill. Um, so I'm
looking at Mark Keter and you am
I understanding that right? And
if so, why, why are we putting
the emphasis now on
Loans as opposed to
With this, Madame Chair,
Senator, um, we had done our
best with legislative council to
make sure that, um, adding this
authorized qualifying expense
was in line with all of the
other procedures for seeking
financial assistance from the
Water Trust Board, um, once we
got our bill drafted, we had um
some very helpful and supportive
feedback from Marquita. So these
amendments were to address those
concerns and make sure that, um,
we were
Writing this bill appropriately
so that there wasn't any special
procedure or skipping over any
steps, but that projects like
this would go through the same
vetting process as any other
project and prioritization
project through the Water Trust
board, um, and the financial
assistance language was to make
sure we were matching what
otherwise was used in the water
trusts board statutes. Thank
you,
Madam Chair, just we shifting
from an emphasis on
Grants or the availability of
grants opposed to trying to put
this more into a.
Mr. uh, Madam Chair, I'm not, I
would not suggest that it's
shifting, um, the majority of
the funding that comes out of
the water trusts board is in the
form of a grant. This does
provide though the potentially
some could go in the form of a
loan. So right now, most of our
funding for municipal projects,
for instance, goes out in the
form of grant loan with a
preponderance being grant 85 to
90%. I think on average is a
grant across the all the project
types.
And Madam Cha again I'm trying
to read the amendments in
context, but I'm seeing, for
example, in paragraph.
5 of the amendment from the
House Act, you're striking the
language that says grants in
here, it says inserting blue of
their loans, so you're taking
out, at least by that amendment.
It seems the opportunity for
grants and they're replacing
that with loans misreading that.
I see that in paragraph 32,
well, paragraph 3 you're adding
loan after grant, but in
paragraph 5, you're striking.
And inserting in lieu thereof
loans.
I reading that right?
the intent of the um the
amendment was to have it be on
parity with all of the other
language which provides for
grants or loans, so I'm not, I,
I don't have that one in front
of me and I can't really speak
to it, but the intent is for it
to be consistent so that it's
grants for loans, which is what
all the other qualifying water
projects are, um, uh,
We're able to offer financial
assistance in those.
In grants or loans.
That was the intent of the
amendment.
Yeah, in Madam Chair, I, I
appreciate the intent, but at
the same time I'm looking at the
language, right? And the
language, you don't have it, I
can hand you mine.
Um I have to go from the
committee report itself or from
the amendment itself and.
it doesn't track with what
you're telling me that. That is,
in my kid of course, the intent
you're describing is what I've
always understood intent to be.
I just want, I'm trying to
figure out about misreading
that, but
Again, I'm, I'm focusing on that
change on page 4, line 21.
Rha
Madam chair, what I understand
the thing is that it it's based
on the cost of origination, um,
and there are
The feedback was that the, the,
the cost of originating loans is
greater than the cost of
originating grants because we're
monitoring the loan, we're
collecting the loan for up to 20
years, 25 years, where the grant
is just over the life of the
project, so the uh
The intent for the loan was an
administrative fee, for
instance. We didn't want that to
be captured as part of uh the,
the max amount of money that can
be that can go to the project,
so it really is the cost of
originating the loans, so, uh,
the financial assistance which
is earlier in the amendments
still includes grants and loans.
So the, the language that you're
calling out where loans is
inserted in lieu of grant does
not mean that grant dollars
won't be, won't be provided and
it just gets to the cost of
origination.
I appreciate that take that.
like too weird.
And then just, I think the last
question I had was
From the same amendment, you all
uh replaced or struck and
changed the requirement for um.
report.
So on page 4, line 24, it says
that the proposed new language,
there shall be required
reporting as a way way the bill
was originally written, but the
amendment changes that to Maine.
Why would we that we want that?
So that's um
That is your amendment paragraph
6.
I understand it in a man's page
4 like 24 which
Right, right now, the
requirement here, the way the
bill was originally introduced,
there shall be required
reporting.
The Department of Environment,
but you replaced that with me.
Why would we want to make that
permissive as opposed to me.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, this
was based on feedback from the
New Mexico Environment
Department, so they wanted to
make sure that we weren't
interrupting their regulatory
and compliance oversight and to
make clear that this um water
data will be collecting would
not supplant the real on the
ground, um, sampling that they
do in order to keep systems in
compliance.
But that was um feedback from
the NMED, Madam Chair.
Mm
Well, it seems really strange
that any agency or especially
Department of Environment would.
from the original bill which
said,
There shall be reporting to them
and they'd come in and say,
well,
Maybe not, yeah, they may do it
for me May is always a
Red flags, they may or they may
not, um, and so.
The fact that the environment
department say, yeah, you can
tell us, you report to us or you
may not report to us.
Kind of, kind of seems puzzling
to me.
But
If it's their wish to.
Make it optional, I guess.
Where it's at.
Thank you, man, that's it.
Thank you, Senator Cervante,
Senator Reza.
Madame chair, thank you very
much. Dang it, I had my chance
to adjourn and I lost it. OK, I,
I too am bothered by the change
that was made.
Using the word may instead of
shell.
If they are taking out a loan or
receiving a grant, I think that
they should be reporting.
So I too am bothered by that,
Madam Chair, I'm going to end
with that. I think that there
does need to be some changes
made there. I want it where they
do have to report, so I think
Shell is imperative.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Rael. Anyone
else? uh, Senator Charlie, you
had asked if, if you wanted, uh,
you had said that you may make a
motion.
I.
OK, that's a motion from Senator
Charlie, second by Senator Pope,
um, Madam Secretary, will you
call the role. Uh, well, Senator
Townsend. Yeah, just.
I
Did a little research. I did
find that lawsuit.
And it's a Camino Real.
water authority supplements down
in the Santa Teresa Basin.
And I had read it, and they
are being sued, I believe over
water water quality issues.
And so I would
The scuttlebutt I hear this is.
Some may be using this as an
effort to acquire the equipment.
So that they can have the
evidence base that they are,
they don't have today, so I, I'm
not saying that you know that,
I'm just saying that's
On the outside digging in,
that's what I find out. Thank
you.
Madam Secretary, will you call
the roll? Thank you, Senator
Townsend.
Someswati.
I want to, yes.
Senator Charlie
Charlie, yes, and herself.
Senator Hamblin. Senator
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope. Yes.
The Pope, yes, Senator Scott,
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend, Townsend, no, Senator
Eel.
And since the find his excuse,
Senator Lopez. Yes.
still, yes. Senator to explain
her vote.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I, if we are using
taxpayer dollars, which we are
to fund these projects.
I want there to be reporting and
so I really think that before we
see this bill again, that that
word may be replaceable with
hall. Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
With
With a vote of 6 yes 2 no, um,
and when excused, you have a due
pass.
Thank you.
OK, now we have HB 361 M nerd
conversion of certain wells
represented Romero.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Is it
mornings? Don't know. Good
afternoon, um.
And members of the committee,
um, this is House Bill 361, um,
what this bill does is allows us
to take um wells that have been
orphaned or no longer in
commission and convert them into
battery storage and geothermal
storage. Very interesting
technology that um is now being
used in a variety of states, um,
that we would like to
essentially allow for here with
me as my expert, Jennifer Brad,
um, to talk about.
some of the tech and any of the
technical questions that you may
have, but this is a really
exciting bill where we have both
environmentalists and um oil and
gas supporters coming to the
table. This really helps get
back to the grid, um, in those
areas that um are not yet uh
providing that or are no longer
providing energy sources, um,
and does a lot for, for both
monitoring and conversion of, of
wells into new technology.
And with that we'll stand for
questions.
Is there anyone in the audience
in favor of this bill?
Is there anyone in the audience
opposed to this bill?
OK, if I could get 2 members, 2
people to, uh, self-select and.
speak in favor of the bill?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. We
serve uh electricity to about
130,000 customers and the
eastern part of the state, uh,
we see this bill as providing
some optionality for uh energy
storage and enable us to and
others to provide what we call
dispatchable energy to our
customers, we have a identified
need of about 3200 megawatts of
accredited capacity by the year
2030, so any kind of energy
storage opportunities that may
present itself we think is
valuable to not only our
customers but to utilities and
other producer.
Thank you.
Good morning
uh good afternoon committee
chair and members. My name is
Athena Christodoulou, and I am
an energy and environmental
engineer and tech entrepreneur.
This, uh, this new technology
provides a way of utilizing old
wells, capping them and making
sure that it's no methane being
emitted as well as using them as
energy storage in um for
electric generation and that is
a win-win situation that
provides a way to
Stop a bad situation present a
good situation and help the
future with a renewable and
energy transition that we
desperately need.
Um, so I am thinking about,
well, I'd like to order lunch,
um, so I'm just thinking about a
pizza. Would that be fine with
everybody? Is there anybody who
has problems with that?
With the pizza.
Um, unfortunately, my, my little
credit card will only hold a
pizza. I think if we get 2 large
pizzas, 2 or 3 large pizzas,
would that be sufficient?
OK.
All right, then, when you have a
break, which point to
in
Delivery
Mm
When
Are, are there any flavors of
pizza that people just can't
handle?
All right. So when pepperoni and
one beef and green chili and um
And then the other one, whatever
you want, yeah.
These are the hard hitting
questions.
Pepperoni's 77 advantes is there
any kind of pizza you cannot
handle.
Uh, no, I'm, I'm using my, uh
No, I'm, I'm gonna use my uh
My credit card.
Yeah.
Do I have to report? No, I don't
think I have to.
Um
I, I apologize and online, do we
have anyone online in support or
OK, did you give them to me?
OK, we have a
Stephen structus.
On Zoom?
Yes.
Hello. Yes, I hear you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Stefan Streckfus. I'm the CTO
and co-founder of Renewable
Energy. I wanted to toss in that
our concept is poised to bring a
variety of benefits to the state
of New Mexico, including, as was
mentioned by a couple of
commenters earlier, low cost
remediation of wells, and the
deployment of uniquely low cost
flexible energy storage. This
energy storage brings much
needed resiliency to the grid,
that
that New Mexicans have access to
electricity when they need it at
the lowest cost possible. We
spent the last 6 years
developing this technology in
classrooms, machine shops, labs,
and oil fields in both
California and Texas.
And due to a variety of oil
field and electricity system
character characteristics,
including well depth and wind
power proliferation, New Mexico
is a state that stands to
benefit more than almost any
other from this technology.
I strongly support passage of
this legislation.
And then I appreciate the time.
Sorry we are ordering pizza,
which you're welcome to.
Yeah, and we're gonna be here a
while. Um,
So
We, we have the opponent, OK. So
now we're, we have no opponents,
right, in the audience and none.
Oh, there's one, I'm sorry, uh,
we have camp renewal online.
Hi, can everyone hear me?
Yes.
Great. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair and committee members. Uh,
my name is Kim Gregory, and I'm
the CEO and co-founder of
Renewable Energy. I worked as a
petroleum engineer in the
premium basin before going to
Stanford and starting this
company, um, and I wanted to
tell you a little bit more about
it. Renewal brings a new take on
a time-tested and simple
technology, moving masks up and
down to store energy for the
last 100 years or so, and still
today, the vast majority of all
electricity stored in the US is
pumped hydro, which simply
moves. Renewal uses the same
principles, we moved a steel
weight using a winch inside an
otherwise.
well. While renewal does not
currently have any wells in
operation in New Mexico right
now. We have a commercial scale
system operating in California
that moves a 30,000 pound weight
up and down within a 7000 ft
sealed idle well. We believe
this enabling legislation will
give us a path to invest in the
state, HB 361.
would create a regulatory
framework for technologies just
like ours to be installed on
thousands of oil and gas wells
in the state. On behalf of new,
I'd like to voice my strong
support for this legislation and
think Representative Romero for
sponsorship. That's all. Thank
you. Now that we've completed
the public comment. I'll now
turn it over to the committee.
Senator Townsend.
I'm sure I, I don't know how to
say this without me.
Right, but we have the
You know the
Founder of the company and CEO.
the company, I mean.
piece of legislation.
Um
answers their business.
That sounds like to me where.
Yeah.
pretty close to the edge of, of
That
Representative
and
you know what I'm talking about
this.
Just have an appropriation.
Madam chair of Senator, no, it
does not.
That the facilitate a business
plan of a single company. No, it
does not, uh, here.
Senator. We've had
numerous folks um talk about the
various um opportunities that
this bill presents for a variety
of different companies that also
includes geothermal in here, uh,
conversion as well.
And so, yes, there's a number of
folks wanting to do business in
the state that this would allow
for.
Sure.
I'm just, I don't know how to do
it, just come straight out and
ask the question because
It seems like you're a revolt.
Is that correct? or a contractor
for
Madam Chair representative. I
was engaged as a lobbyist slash
attorney for them as well.
Um, however, I will say that I
did have other companies reach
out to me as well about this
legislation and the language um
that created this legislation
was actually in House Bill 133
last year, um, and so it had
been like that was drafted by a
nerd in that bill, um.
So,
I do think it's fairly common
for a company to look for
enabling legislation that that
is needed for a whole industry
to start doing work with them a
state, especially for new energy
transition concepts.
OK.
OK, um.
And
Yeah.
much
How much power.
be created.
This.
well.
7000 ft wha whatever this give
me a.
Madam Chair, uh representative.
company that is interested in in
energy storage project has a
different type of technology,
um.
ology that I'm most familiar
with is a gravity-based storage
system, and it would have
between um
30.
Excuse me.
30 kilowatt hours to 150
gigawatt hours per well, um, the
idea would be to convert a lot.
of different wells within a
basin, um, so that you have the
benefits of a
stranger amount of energy
storage available.
So, let me
I don't care if I make for you
telling me that you're willing
to assume that
Plugging liability.
Um
Uh
the wha
that
Chair representative, yes, the
company that I'm working with
will pay the logging liability
costs for the wealth. Other
companies may come to other
financial arrangements with the
operator of the oil and gas
well, or there may be an RFP for
orders where there is a a
lugging order in place from them
or there's about.
I think so 800 wells where they
had plugging orders in place
last year at Ener and about 1600
to 1700 wells in total that they
thought could be applicable for
a collecting order. So RIP could
be issued by the government to
for a contractor to come in and
convert those ones.
And represented you.
You realize you're not talking
about this.
I would say the vast majority of
these.
All locations have no power
structures.
Uh
you understand that.
Care representative, um,
location needs to be looked into
individually, while there is a
lot of new wells and old wells
that don't have an electric line
running to them. There are many
that do, and so there are, you
know, there are
candidates that are applicable.
Also utility companies might be
interested in running utility
lights to some of these wells so
they can benefit from having the
energy storage.
Madam Chair and um.
you have any idea?
B.
I'm, I'm sorry.
Met Jeremy.
Do you have any idea?
many of these locations are
applicable today to this
technology that have electric.
Um
etc.
chair, senator,
uh, we did run a search in the
San Juan basin in particular to
see, um, we did not get an exact
number because you have to do a
physical verification as well
for many of these sites. Um, it,
it was somewhere.
you know,
Probably greater than 25% of the
whales that lit up on the search
tool um that we use looking at
where lines electric lights are
running to older vertical wells.
So
care
How you say that.
Yeah.
well with.
You know, I mean
Generic I mean.
Yeah, some sizes of war and all
that makes a difference. I get
it, but
generically, but.
can you
P
that chair, senator, I said
between 30 kilowatt hours to
150.
kilowatt hours per well
depending on the
That
And
But do you believe the
investment
company
and to get one of these wells on
the electric line or any of that
just.
the technology and the all of
them.
Chairs representative, um.
This is not coming from any
specific company's business
model. This is based on my
information I'm talking to
multiple companies and their
various technologies. I think
it's gonna range between
Um, 70 to $80,000 to equip the
wells.
To be.
The
Um
power source. I, I get it that
it's, itspatchable.
To start the
um.
systems that we have.
apparently we need more dispatch
on. I, I get that.
Um,
talked about on gas was for, you
know, you go into that a little
and tell me.
Somebody
it's gonna be involved.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
so in California, um California
Resources Corp is running a
trial project right now that I
am aware of that's been
successful in that state, um,
the oil and gas industry
supported similar legislation
along with um
Environal defense fund.
NDRC several different
environmental groups in
Colorado, um, in New Mexico, we
have socialized this concept
with the oil and gas trade
associations. They have not
student support of the bill and
instead we have found that um
excel the utility down in
southeastern New Mexico has been
in constant support of the bill,
which I think talks to the need
of having dispatchable energy,
especially given the energy
deficits that are projected for
that part of the state and
having some energy storage
solutions. OK.
chair.
That
Excel
Representative
said he was 3200.
Well sure.
many wells when it be required,
basically.
chair, senator, this obviously
would not be the answer to
excel's complete energy storage
problem, right? Um, it would be,
this is just one small piece of
the overall puzzle.
I would uh
He
with you that that you might.
Uh
Any
of the issue.
that
are being so.
But it the um
Covered by the PRC, um,
Madam Ches going, who's going to
decide what that power is.
with the consent.
chair represented of these
systems are are simply
dispatching system, so they,
they take energy off of the
grids that their energy takers,
um.
put it down into the storage
facility that they've equipped
through various.
And methods, and then they
upload that energy, you know,
when the sun is shining and the
wind isn't blowing, and you need
a little bit of offset for
energy cause there's a bigger
piece of demand, then they're
gonna dispatch that energy, uh,
the party that sells the energy
to consumers would be the
utility who's like the
electricity um travels upon and
they would be regulated by the
PRC.
So
Uh, Madam chair and uh Miss
Bradley this.
So
Yeah.
Whoever it may be.
food for such
a well location.
to make sure that it's.
capable and use
probably even before that, you
have to have a deal with a.
power.
beer.
To purchase and sale that.
To
Get it to the market.
That
Chair senator, yes, you're gonna
have agreements in place with
the oil and gas well operator
and you're gonna have agreements
in place with the utility
provider for this concept to
work.
I understood you right, I'm
sure.
here
Rome.
business plan would be to
purchase that well for.
Is that correct? Are you gonna
try to lease it?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
everybody's gonna have a
different business plan, which
is why this is, you know,
enabling legislation, so it does
not say that that one gas
operator has to sell the well
work and nerd may want to sell
and enter into a sale or a
contract to equip in the orchan
wells and New Mexico.
I'm not saying that they have
offered that cause they're not
able to, they don't have
enabling legislation to convert
those wells today, um.
An oil and gas operator may want
to enter into a lease agreement
to use the well more, um, the,
the hydrocarbon bearing zones
are gonna be capped off similar
to a temporary abandonment
operation, um, if there is later
technology, similar, similar to
a temporary abandament
situation, you may see an oil
and gas operator want to hang on
to the well board, um, to, to
see like on those reserves could
be obtained.
OK,
um.
How many of these units are in
service in the United States
today.
chair or senator, I apologize, I
don't know. I don't have the
answer in total to that
question.
I.
Representative other than the
one that you talked about in
California. Are you aware of any
Madam Chap representative, um,
we have had a couple, um,
of heat-based charging systems
that have reached out, and I
think they also have trial
projects in other states that
they have been undertaking, um,
but I don't have a concrete
location to tell you that.
Madam chair, um,
One other question, are you
aware or does your business
plan.
on
any.
the deans.
days
exemptions.
any other federal subsistence in
order to make this business
plan.
liable.
Chair representative, I am not
currently aware. Um, I did after
we talked yesterday, I could ask
my client, um, and they are not
to my knowledge, um,
I have any subsidies. I will say
they are a startup business that
has been meeting with economic
development, um,
Secretary Black here in New
Mexico.
Um, but currently they're not
subject to subsidies that I'm
aware of.
Excuse me, uh, we got a notice
that the audio on the webcast is
very distort distorted and hard
to understand. We work on that.
So we'll just stand in place.
Thank you just for people here
because they can't hear on the
webcast. Senator Azel just said
um that they've just closed the
Santa Fe schools because of the
wind.
Yeah
Madam chair and senator they
have closed the relief route in
285 on.
just south of Ross.
Looks like a breeze.
Yeah.
instead of a snow day, it's a
blow day. OK, um,
The operator says that our sound
is better, and if we could just
speak clearly into the
microphones, um, thank you, and
I'm sure I'll get a text if it's
not better.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I um
This proposal
See.
Long shot
To ever be live.
I, I understand the
Oh
Process, whether you're running
away or running.
And down. I get it, but
The investment
seems to be
Without any subsidies.
Mo.
Small chance big but.
So I
Yes.
That I
I can't imagine.
I
power cost has to be
significantly more than what
customers are.
are
Um
Used to today, in order to make
this viable.
Project, but I'll uh I'll
continue to listen. I appreciate
it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Good thing we're
not asking you for investment
today, so.
It's our pitch failed.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Senator Scott.
tank
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
and uh.
sitting here trying to do the
math on this gizmo.
Still doing the math thing,
Senator.
Right.
Uh, and it does look like.
30 KWH should be.
relatively reasonable.
What would be the uh madam
chair.
Representative expert, what
would be the
capital of investment.
One of these gizmos.
Um
Madam Chair, representative,
it's gonna vary by company cause
all the different companies, you
know, there is a heat-based
system that some of the the um
thermal energy companies want to
pursue, um, you have different
systems that renewal system is a
weight-based system, um, and so,
I do not have their capital
expenditure, but I did get that
in general kind of cost estimate
which I testified to earlier,
um, so I think you can extract,
extrapolate from that.
OK, what was that?
That was between 700 and 80,000.
The charge for the conversion.
OK, and basically what that
conversion amounts to is
is plugging off
This at all of the hydrocarbon
bearing zones, evacuating the
world get it dry.
And then bringing up here.
Wa.
packing.
Putting the energy storage,
yeah, and getting the service
and then um there are methane
monitors that are also put in
place. They're working with some
of the most sensitive that they
monitoring companies in the
United States.
OK.
Madam Chair and
Representative and expert that's
really like.
Because
I'm signing AFCs to change up on
an oil well.
OK
Oh
I guess what I was trying to get
to with this.
Was
What kind of
cents per kWH.
If this system put on the grid.
With all the expenses operating
expenses.
Consider
are we looking at?
A nickel or are we looking at
506?
As far as you know, testifying
to a company's operating margin,
um, I, I can't even imagine that
be admissible in a court of law,
and I wouldn't want to speculate
in front of a committee as to
that, um, but I do think you can
talk about the number of
kilowatt hours that could be put
on the grid, um, you, you know,
it's 30 kilowatt hours to 150
kilowatt hours per well, um, and
then you can multiply that.
Let's take the, the lugging
order wells that Emner has 1600.
Um, wells, and then you can do
that math, um, if there are a
number of wells in New Mexico
that are just chugging along
with a little bit of production
and a part that is due to oil,
the oil conservation divisions
in active well rule operators
only allowed to have between 2
or 3 to 10 inactive wells at a
time, which does incentivize an
operator to keep low producing
wells online and in production.
Um, and so you got a lot of low
producers out there where
operators might find it.
more economically advantageous
to convert them over to energy
storage, and we believe based on
a study that there could be up
to 15,000 of those types of
wells in the permanent basin
portion of of the New Mexico
side of the basin.
Um, and that could create over,
yeah, almost 5000 megawatt hours
of energy. Uh again, not enough
to quite fill the gap and
shortages that every utility
fields, but looking for
companies that are interested
with helping with the energy
transition and providing energy
storage, especially as we look
at the expense of battery
storage in the United States,
and is that is that solution
gets up to speed.
Madam chair.
Representative and expert.
Some speculate.
The cost of the equipment and
conversion of one of these, it's
gonna run.
At least
2
Madam Cha an expert, I have not
received any kind of estimate
like that that from, from the
companies that I've talked to.
OK
Well, you
My, my experience with the
10,000 ft oil well is
I, if I'm gonna pull a pump and
change it.
With the
The appropriate equipment, trash
trailers.
units.
well-controlled equipment.
to spend $50,000 just to change
it.
to convert this well to energy
storage.
is a substantially
more robust endeavor.
And that is, I have to plug off.
All of the producing interval.
was seen them
Then I have to evacuate that
well.
Well, all of the production
equipment outlay it down, put it
to the side.
Pick up the
The tower and the winch gizmo
that runs this.
Wait.
up and down the well bore.
Buy the equipment.
do that at the surface.
Hook it up to the electrical
power grid.
And, and do all that for
300 more than the cost of a pump
change is just very simply.
Not realistic.
So
I mean, if, if you look at these
1500 wells.
And the power that they will
generate in the
Capital investment required.
I just don't think that's gonna
pencil out to be economic.
The
You're halfway toward getting
well plugged in abandoned.
When you get the productive
interval.
went off.
And the, and the world more
filled with an inert fluid.
And then
I see no
No component of geothermal in
this.
Can you explain how that term
Has come into play.
chair and representative.
Madam Chair, senator, members of
the committee, so, uh, when
Inert contained a version of
this language and House Bill 133
last year, they included
geothermal in there, there are
companies that are interested.
There's a little bit of overlap
with some geothermal potential
and some vertical wells in the
San Juan Basin, not a lot, um,
but throughout my career I've
had companies approach me about
the conversion process for a
couple of wells in that region.
Um, we did not want to exclude
any stakeholder going back to
Senator Townsend's comments at
the beginning of the hearing.
wanted to make sure that this
was broad and would apply to
various types, uh, technologies
that are available right now
cause it isn't emerging um
business industry in the United
States.
chair and
Representative again.
someone who's looked at
1000 well logs.
And those that
Temperature gradient in
southeast New Mexico.
7/10 of 3 per 100 ft.
10,000 ft gets you at 140
degrees, starting with the.
surface temperature of 70
degrees.
It takes a 20,000 ft well to
get.
At least there.
In order to get
The formation warm enough to
boil water.
So
Yeah.
There aren't many of those
around.
But Madam Cha expert, did you?
Could, could you
Discuss those concerns.
Madam Chair, Senator, so, um, in
part, um, the geothermal
companies that have reached out,
have um a geothermal patented
battery process, uh, again, I'm
not talked extensively with
these companies, um, but they
have a borehole battery process
that uses thermal energy
storage. So it is a heating
element that is put down into
the well War to create
geothermal light energy, it
heats, um
water in the well bore to the
geothermal temperatures that are
outlined in our statutory
definitions, but that is not
naturally bound geothermal,
that's one technology that we've
heard about, um, geothermal
plays and reservoirs, you know,
just like you have a mineral um
survey that you complete, you,
you have to look at the geology
of where the geothermal energy
might be and my experience has
been that I've had some
inquiries in the San Juan Basin.
Uh
Thank you for your answer. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Scott. Anyone
else?
Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, uh, as far as your expert
witness goes, Representative.
He said that there was a little
bit of geothermal activity up in
the four corners here. Did I
understand that right?
Um
Mocha senator.
Interest. I don't know if
there's any actual activity that
we've seen in New Mexico with
geothermal wells there. Most of
our stage geothermal potential
is actually located um more in
the southern part of the state
and does not overlap with our
oil and gas producing cells
that's what I was just going to
say, Madam Chair, I, I know it's
found along the Rio Grande Qu
corridor down in the boot hill,
and it doesn't.
Overlap in the oil and gas
industry.
Um, Madam Chair, senator in the
what we call the drilling and
the patch down in the southern
part of the state. Um, there is
some geothermal in the San Juan
basin. It's been a little bit
more on the Colorado side of the
border than on the New Mexico
side of the border, but I think
that's what pulls those
inquiries down into New Mexico
and Madam Chair, I guess my
concern here is
Whenever you said that
15,000 low producing well in
state in New Mexico.
Are we actually
going to tell these
Independence, and that's who
owns these 15,000 low-producing
whales.
Sorry, we're gonna put you out
of business. OCD is, OK, you're
shaking your head no already.
Talk to me about this, madam
chair, Senator, so there's
nothing compulsory about this
bill. So this bill would require
an applicant to go to Mnerd and
say we would like to apply to
convert a well, um, that's
gonna, that is gonna require
consent from the oil and gas
operator that's operating the
well bore and and they have a
real property interest in that
well born in those minerals in
the well bo.
So this just provides an option
for using that infrastructure
and what we have found from
talking to oil and gas operators
is that this could be a really
nice option, um, when you have a
well that's not a lease holding
well, and you want to use that
well bore for an alternative
purpose, um, it may offer
another income stream versus
going through the full plugging
and abandonment costs as we
heard from Senator Scott, um, I
believe, you know, he was
indicating it could be up to
$200,000.
So if you wanted to equip the
well with energy storage and
seal off the hydrocarbon bearing
zones and reuse the
infrastructure that's out there,
this could become a nice
alternative for some oil and gas
operators.
OK, Madam Chair, I guess my
concern here is in represent
expert witness.
I've, I've first bill 3 times
now.
Is there any specific language
regarding the treatment of
produced geothermal water.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
no, this is not a bill related
to produced water or geothermal
water, um, there are already
existing geothermal statutes.
There was a geothermal Act
passed in 2016, which governs
geothermal waste and then um
ECAM, the um energy conservation
and management, um, division.
It's got a D um at the end of
it. They actually have extensive
regulations regarding um the,
the byproducts and how
Was treated in the geothermal
process. So we don't need laws
dictating geothermal water or
waste those already exist. This
just gives the permission for
Imner to take an existing well
bore and authorize it for a
different use.
OK, Madam Chair, whenever you
bringing up the energy
conservation management
division.
I'm assuming that they would
need extra personnel to be able
to work on this particular bill
if it passes. Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
we have the analysis from M nerd
and I wanna say that they did
not put in any needed
appropriation in their analysis
that they gave for the FIR.
Madam Chair, they might not put
it in an appropriation that they
might need, but in what I'm
reading, they would need 3 to 5
extra personnel to be able to do
the duties that this bill is
going to be bringing forward.
And not.
We don't see, I will, I will
read it to you then, uh.
Let's see, it's talking about
the
ECMD and the oil Conservation
division, needing to collaborate
on regulation and entities,
regulations of 170 new energy
sources or storage centers. Due
to this, the bill likely would
require ECMD to need an
additional 3 to 5 personnel. The
physical impact table shoes,
ECMD's average personnel cost,
but I'm like you, I'm not seeing
where that cost is unless I have
missed it over here in this I
did. OK. I
See it.
So that is something else we
need to be looking at too, but
I, I would like for y'all to be
able to point out to the
difference, the difference
between
Produced water.
And the difference
Through oil and gas exploration
as opposed to produce geothermal
water because there is a big
difference, Madam Chair and
senator. Well, I would just say,
Madam Chair, that that's again,
the governance of that water is
in a separate statute that
already currently exists.
Our bill doesn't touch any of
the, the ways in which we manage
that water.
Made of chair, there might be
some people at home that don't
know what that is and if we
still have signal outside, I
hope so. Oh, I would like to
that to be the.
Yeah
Have the madam chair, Senator,
I'm happy to discuss the
differences. Um, at produced
water is defined as the water
that comes up with the
hydrocarbons when you're
producing oil and gas, and so
you've got enshrined old salty
seawater that's sitting in the
formation with the carbonate and
when an oil and gas company
produces carbonate the water
because it's enshrined with the
oil, goes into the into the well
boring and comes up with the
oil. So that is produced water.
Um,
um, geothermal water is you do
have geothermal wells produce
geothermal energy through a
variety of different ways.
They're not always wet. You can
have dry steam traps as well,
but typically you do have some,
some formation water that is
sitting in there and you've got
these hot lava molten zones, and
you have steam that is coming up
which produces energy um in the
geothermal process, um, under
ECAMs and ECMD's um regulations,
they
they have an option and it seems
like a preference for closed
loop systems for geothermal
development within the state,
which I think would then help
capture some of that steam.
OK, Madam Chair, uh, uh, in the
correct me if I'm wrong here,
expert witness, but it also can
have varying levels of heavy
salts.
And radioactive chemicals, isn't
that correct as far as the
produced geothermal water goes,
um.
Madam Chair, Senator, I am not
an expert on geothermal water,
so, um,
In any deep zone within the
earth, you're gonna have
different minerals in there, um,
but
ECAD's regulations are very
strict on how waters are
handled, um, and, and I, we're
not asking for any deviation.
OK, madam Chair, I, I guess I'm
gonna move on to that because
it, it is.
There is radioactive chemicals
and real heavy salt and.
The uh produced geothermal
water.
Um
Well, right now, the
Well Conservation division
currently controls.
The jurisdiction over oil and
gas wells.
Will they be
With what you're proposing to do
in this bill representative.
I'm assuming that Emmer would
also be working in conjunction
with OCD to.
Because there will be some
overlap, that's correct but I
don't see anybody from
Looking grounds if there's
anybody here.
E
They're not,
but we had to.
I, I maybe I'd like to hear from
them, Madam Chair, if that would
be permissible on what they see
happening in the future of this
Bill passes. Then would you like
to sit at the table?
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um.
We need this bill effectively to
manage that handoff.
Most CBOCD has plenary
jurisdiction over all things oil
and gas, but the minute you are
not doing oil and gas activity.
We need the authority to move
that border around.
OK.
This is
I don't
I'm just really concerned about
this bill, madam chair.
I think I understand.
What you're wanting to do, but,
but what I'm seeing here, what
I've heard from
Mr. Mathematician said to my
right, right here.
Is OCD an inward going to be
able to
Come up with the total cost that
it's gonna be to get all these
whales, these low producing
whales refurbished.
That's a lot, that's a chunk of
change.
Madam
Um, just to her point of
clarification, there's an
appropriation here because we're
not asking the regulators to do
any sort of investing in this
process. We're just providing a
process for which these
conversions can take place.
We're not requesting any funding
for the conversion, um.
Anything like that here, Madam
Chair, I do understand that, but
there will be a cost incurred
whenever this does happen, so
I'm wondering if
The means is going to be there.
Oh, I look at it as kind of a
Going towards the oil and gas
industry. That's the way I kind
of see it in my opinion, it's
going to be putting
Right now we're I don't know the
price of oil, I didn't have a
chance to look at it this
morning before I came into work.
It's been running about $60.
Just a rough estimate, that's
the last I've heard.
As far as what
Oil prices were.
But even those low producing
wheels is still providing a job
to somebody and to steal paying
bills some.
So Madam Chair, I guess that's
all the question I have. I do
appreciate the answers you've
given me.
Um, but whenever I'm looking at
a $50,000 plus.
Paused to plug will that's.
That's a little out there too.
Have a place to store.
Thermal thermal energy, Madam
Chair, thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Reel. Anyone
else?
I, I have a few questions. Um,
One of the issues that you
discussed was the, the transfer
of liability for for capping the
well from the oil and gas
operator to the
Um, to the new operator, whoever
that's going to be geo thermal
or whatever, in the absence of
clarity in the statute because
it doesn't say liability will be
transferred, um, is it a, is it
a matter of contract negotiation
and that will em oversee that
contract negotiation to ensure
that there's clarity. Um, Madam
Chair, senators, there, there
are two things that I think
still exist, so as long as the
oil and gas operator is still
the registered operator of the
well, liability will remain with
the oil and gas operator. They
don't.
Completely dispose of that
liability. The other thing is in
this bill we are asking for Iner
to have authority to issue
financial assurance for the
energy storage project as well.
That will leave many of these
wells double bonded with two
bonds to go after at the end of
the day, um, if the oil and gas
operator still stays as the
registered operator, which may
be the best um arrangement for
that operator of the well, and
there is financial assurance
that is posted with the energy
storage operation, it could
better
equip the state to handle a
transition of those well bores,
um, and to better cover
liability.
Thank you. And I know at this
point, you know, the tra
traversing a bill across the
whole measure. This is not a
good time to uh to amend it, but
on page 3, it says uh when
authorizing such a conversion,
the department may establish
fees and financial assurance
requirements specific to the
energy storage or geothermal
development uses that continues
on, um, on, um.
If this were the first
committee.
Well, and I'll ask you, do you
think it would be unfriendly to
establish to say may establish
fees, comma, environmental.
Coma and financial insurance,
um, I don't know if that would
make an occurrence difficult or,
or if that would be a problem.
And the reason is, um,
They're always environmental
issues that pop up with this,
with the
These wells, and I would just
hate for
Of an environmentable an
environmental mess to be left,
and Emner could, could ease that
if, if they, in, in connection
with this, um, on the other end,
well, I'll just ask, would that
be friendly, uh, Madam Chair, so
if we wanted to close that loop
originally. So if you look at
the bottom of, or as you
continue to read through page 31
of the essential pieces is how
it um how these wells are
decommissioned already. So
already has a a decommissioning,
um,
Protocol for monitoring for um
essentially ensuring that
whatever happens when it is not
being used, that that's part of
it. So when we look at any sort
of conversion and even the life
cycle of what would be converted
for this technology, there is
that decommissioning process in
there. Um, so, again, going back
to monitoring and, and use of,
of what happens to that space.
We think that the language
covers it, um, as far as what we
would need to do, um.
To to keep exactly what you're
talking about, um, as part of
the essential components of what
is being done with the will.
Does cover it?
Well, is OCD, I mean, I think
that what this does is it
clarifies jurisdiction, which is
a great thing.
Um, but I, I guess, will there
be confusion about who's
responsible for ensuring that
there is not environmental
damage through this process. Um,
Madam Chair, senators, no, I
don't believe so, so, Inert is
the parent agency over the oil
conservation division over ECAD,
um, and so you have the right
agency there overseeing the
conversion of the well bore, but
I think because this could fit
into various divisions within
them. You want the parent to
say.
Yes, this is where it fits. But
each one of those agencies has
its own environmental powers
too, so then they look and
they've got extensive
regulations that you're gonna
comply with. Excellent. OK,
thank you. So with that, um, I
don't see any other questions,
uh, madam, uh, do I hear a
motion?
OK, well, I move uh to table has
precedent.
Um, Madam Secretary, we call the
roll?
Sam Cervantes.
No,
no. Senator Charlie.
And Charlie No, Saint hersel.
Cenel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Excuse, Senator Pope.
No. Senator Pope, no, Senator
Scott.
Senator Scott, yeah, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend yes sent theonest his
excuse, Senator Lopez, not to
table, nurse on, I mean, set of
steel, no.
on a vote to 4 of 4 to 3, the
motion to table fails, so, um,
do I hear another motion?
OK, Senator Charlie, uh, move
for a due pass. I'll go ahead
and we'll uh Senator Pope to
second.
OK, uh, Madam Secretary, would
you call the roll?
San Cervantes Cervantes, yes,
Senator Charlie.
Charney, yes, and herself.
And I know San Hamlin excuse,
Senator Pope.
Yes. And the pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
As God know, Senator Townsend.
That tells him no, that's the
boxes excuse and de Lopez. Yes.
There's still this, yes.
OK, on a vote of 4 to 3, um, you
have a due pass.
Just curious how far is the
pizza?
OK.
Um
OK, the next bill is HB 457, and
that's Senator Scherer and
Senator Dixon.
Oh, Representative Dixon, sorry.
And uh just to, we may have to
take a little bit of a break
because we've got pizza on the
way.
And I, I want to thank um Eddie
Vihill for uh taking my credit
card away and, and he's paying
for the pizza. Thank you.
If you buy the beer.
OK, um,
Who's going to present the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would like to begin.
Go ahead. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'd like to make some
introductory, uh, remarks, um,
to sort of set the
Parameters are the stage for
this piece of legislation.
Uh, before we, uh, go to public
comment and take questions.
So, House Bill 457 clarifies the
legal and regulatory framework
needed to support New Mexico's
effort to seek primacy for Class
6, carbon dioxide storage wells.
I'm joined by Doctor Robert
Balch, who's an expert in
underground injection wells uh
from New Mexico Tech. Deputy
Secretary Ben Shelton from
Energy Minerals Natural
Resources and my esteemed
co-sponsor.
Leadership.
Today Class 6 permitting for
classic swells is administ is
administered by the Federal EPA.
Although states can apply for
primacy.
Currently, 4 states have
received primacy, 8 more have
submitted applications and
another 23 as well as the Navajo
Nation have stated their intent
to pursue primacy.
Primacy allows the legislature.
To put in place stricter
state-led guidelines.
It also allows nerd, our state
agency to administer, monitor,
and regulate this process rather
than leaving it to the EPA in
Dallas or Washington DC.
Plastic wells are already
subject to strict rules and
regulations, including site
evaluations that include
geologic capacity, porosity,
permeability, and natural
geologic barriers.
Financial assurance
requirements.
Approved monitoring, reporting,
and verification procedures.
Emergency response plans and
protections for public health
and underground sources of
drinking water.
House Bill 457 offers
legislative guidance to energy,
minerals and natural resources
that will provide additional
requirements.
For rulemaking that include
tribal consultation, community
engagement, and community
benefit agreements, and I want
to note those are not.
Currently required by the
federal administration.
So those would be additional
requirements that the state of
New Mexico can impose.
Finally, Madam Chair, um,
I know that there are
Those who would
Argue that uh this is a false
solution and unnecessary. And so
I would like to preemptively
address some of those plans.
First, the International Energy
Agency, which is an autonomous
intergovernmental organization
established in 1974. Um, has
said reaching net zero will be
virtually impossible without
carbon capture utilization and
storage.
In the same report, the IEA
concluded that CCUS technologies
will over the next 5 decades
help avoid emissions from
existing power and industrial
plants totaling 600 billion tons
of CO2.
Importantly, CCUS will help
reduce emissions now as New
Mexico, the US, and other
countries in the world develop
and deploy clean energy
technologies.
Speaking of clean energy
technologies.
Analysis shows that um in order
for the US to reach 75% or to
reach its net zero goals, we
will need 75% increase in
transmission capacity.
And uh to do that,
Um, that's gonna require 360,000
new transmission towers.
By 2030. That's 5 years.
These towers are made of steel
and aluminum, along with other
metals such as copper.
We need to build out our
transmission to electrify
buildings and transportation,
but aluminum and steel.
Our high carbon emitters and
require high heat.
Aluminum requires 657 °C and
forge welding of steel requires
approximately 1100 °C. The 2nd
phase of making a wind turbine
blade.
Made with plastic and carbon
fiber requires 1790 °C, and the
third phase requires 2800 °C.
Well there are technologies and
development to get to 1000 °C
from electricity, Electricity
currently tops out at providing
heat at 400 °C, and no
electrification technologies,
including those not yet deployed
provide temperatures higher than
1000 degrees.
Another example.
In the United States.
Approximately 87% of the energy
used to make glass needed for
solar panels is natural gas, not
including the electricity used
in the process. Approximately
47% of the energy used to make
aluminum is natural gas, and
approximately 30% of the energy
used for the heat needed to make
iron and steel is natural gas.
Even for industrial processes
that can be electrified.
Electricity is 513% more
expensive than natural gas.
That that raises competitiveness
issues for US products. From a
climate perspective, we need to
dramatically reduce CO2
emissions now.
That's why CCU is so important.
Uh, it's important for the rapid
clean energy technology
deployment and increased
electricity demand.
Uh, with that, Madam Chair, I
don't know if my esteemed
co-sponsor would like to add any
um additional words before we go
to.
take comments.
So just very quickly, Madam
Chair and committee.
What we know is that this
technology is not new. It's 100
years old.
Uh, it's used successfully in
the North Sea for many decades.
Uh, and while people say, oh, we
don't have a big one here. No,
we don't have a big one here,
but we got plenty of them here.
And so it's not new.
It's not
Bizarre, this is mature
technology that we can use in
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, we
would stand for questions.
How many in the audience, um,
are in favor of this
legislation.
How many are opposed?
OK, um, since there are 3
opponents, why don't we have
the, the, um,
Wait, there are only 3.
Opponents
No, 3 proponents, um, let's go
ahead and have 5 opponents and
all three opponents.
So we'll get the
Yeah, the opponents first, I
guess that's like.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and the
sponsors, um, this bill really
governs how carbon is
sequestered, but it lacks
sufficient health and safety
analysis before injection and
doesn't have provisions to
compensate landowners if CO2
migrates under their land and
fails, also fails to prohibit
injection near existing oil and
gas wells risking leakage
points. It has had some
improvement.
improvement on tribal
consultation, although community
benefit plans are not community
benefits agreements. But for us
at the Sierra Club, the
underlying issue is when carbon
capture and sequestration is
used to keep fossil fuel
combustion online or bring it
back online. So let's look at
the four corners area where
enchant induced us to spend
millions of dollars on technical
and economic feasibility.
that just didn't prove out.
single working power plant in
the country using this
technology successfully, and we
see New Mexico Tech building out
a four corners scheme to keep
the 4.
Corner's power plant online
looking at pipelines of concern.
So while we understand and share
the reasons behind bringing the
bill, we have concerns and
appreciate your consideration of
them.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Annedy Lopez, and I'm
here speaking on behalf of
Yucca. We strongly stand in
opposition of House Bill 457 in
New Mexico, CCS projects will be
disastrous for our communities
as they will extend the life of
the oil and gas industry,
because CCS does not reduce as
much as missions as they claim.
This technology is
counterproductive to
comprehensive climate action,
for example, if all coal plants
use CCS
technology to mitigate their
emissions, it would be as if
they were burning 30 39% more
natural gas and 43% more coal.
New Mexico is currently in a
drought, experiencing a higher
frequency and intensity in
wildfires, hotter days, windy
days as today, and exacerbating
pressures on already
marginalized low-income
frontline youth and indigenous
communities across the state. As
a prospective infrastructure for
CCS projects, they're looking at
classics.
Injection wheels, which poses
the risk of polluting our
groundwater and our air.
This can have long standing
effects on human and ecological
health and agriculture. This is
not sustainable for our futures.
This is expensive and
energy-intensive technology, and
it will not curb greenhouse gas
emissions as it, as it's
claimed. Additionally, there had
been more tribal consultation
within these discussions because
the infrastructure for this
technology is on native land.
It is a responsible to invest
our time, money, and resources
into technology with such a high
cost when there are other more
reliable options to address the
climate crisis and diversify our
economy. Please vote no on House
Bill 457. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Marion Lanai on
behalf of new energy economy.
Carbon capture's role has been
rejigged as a climate solution,
and this has to be rejected. I
urge you to vote no on House
Bill 457. It is a greenwash to
extend the life of fossil fuel.
They failed underperforming
projects that have happened in
the United States at the cost
for taxpayers of billions.
Of dollars. There is one the
Kemper, um, project costs $7
billion and get, guess who
footed the bill for that?
Taxpayers. There was another one
in um Petra Nova, uh, and that
it was after the United States
government spent $391 million.
Also an absolute failure,
mothballed in 2020 using caption
carbon captures as a green light
to extend the life of fossil
fuel power plants is a
significant financial and
technical risks. History
confirms this.
CCS is not cost competitive with
renewables and storage as a
climate change mitigation option
for the power sector. Please
vote no. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Kevin Silly,
and I'm a green builder. I build
homes, renovate homes, and
perform historic renovations to
be as energy efficient as
possible. We use recycled
materials whenever possible
install solar whenever possible.
I have 12 employees, employed 25
subcontractors and procure from
50 vendors. I have operated a
thriving business in northern
New Mexico for 23 years. I seek
to marry my client's needs with
the most sustainable.
practice with integrity and
honesty at its core.
Why do I tell you all this?
Because this bill before you
today is the absolute opposite
of honesty and integrity. It's a
false solution that will
accomplish nothing but a
permission structure for
polluting industries to continue
operating as usual without any
requirements to reduce their
carbon emissions.
We are facing a host of lies
from the executive in the White
House. We are facing a climate
crisis. You know this, even if
carbon capture and sequestration
or hydrogen met all the promises
it espouses, which it definitely
will not because it never has.
It would only address 1 to 2% of
carbon emissions.
This bill is so Trump-like.
Avoid the real problem of
runaway carbon emissions, which
will mean that my grandson and
granddaughter will have an
extremely tough and shortened
life.
This false sense, this false
solution is just a shiny object
to deflect from what is needed.
Mandatory carbon reductions now.
I implore you on behalf of my
grandchildren to oppose this
bill because it is a giveaway to
ONG proponents. It will not
result in any carbon emissions,
reductions, and is likely to
increase carbon emissions at a
time when real climate action is
sorely needed. It's a dangerous
distraction and will result in
economic boondoggles. It's a
hoax on New Mexicans. Thank you.
Committee chair.
Members, my name's Athena
Christodoulou, Energy and
Environmental Engineer. I sent
you an email that has details on
this um particular bill and, and
my opposition to it, the only
current industry in New Mexico
that should be considered for
this technology is cement
production, which emits 0.6% of
the carbon dioxide problem in
New Mexico. Any other industry
can be addressed with renewable
energy. Right now we need to be
going all out to get the oil and
gas industry to stop their
methane emissions. They think
they're
Fine at 1.9%, and they have some
fine sounding goals, but for
decades, there's been an
underreporting by 50% to 400% of
those emissions, and EPA has
been passing along an
under-impact, saying that we
should only take 27 times um the
impact of carbon dioxide over
100 years, which it isn't in the
atmosphere for that long. It's
only there for about 1210 to 12
years. So we've been under
recording the impact by 1,000%.
We need to make sure we realize
that methane sat, which is
newly uh launched as of last
year is now showing that we in
that the premium basin is now
emitting 250 tons per hour.
So we need to make sure we focus
on that rather than allowing
this uh industry to continue
operating and keeping us from
doing renewables. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argent Bright. I
am a nurse, masters of Science
prepared. What are the proposed
benefits to a community,
especially those families, homes
located just outside the
proposed half mile radius limit.
What are the proponents looking
at regarding evaluating for
potential harmful effects. How
do you know injecting acid will
not contaminate fresh water.
The bill specifies injection
sites will not interfere with
existing injection of produced
water, carbon dioxide, or other
fluids from ongoing oil and gas
or mineral operations. Why does
proposed legislation not locate
all proposed injection sites in
the oil field where oil and gas
operations currently occur.
They've proposed legislation is
passed, will the sites be marked
in any way as Superfund cleanup
sites because of the acid
injected, unlike how properties
surrounding other Superfund
sites across the United States
were sold to unsuspecting
buyers. Please vote no on HB
457. Thank you.
Thanks.
OK, before we go to the the
proponents, let's go ahead and
um I guess we have 2 people
online, um.
And if you could please uh state
your support without repeating
uh remarks that have already
been made, Zach Public, Mr.
Public.
Yes, um, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
without repeating a lot of
what's already been said, um, my
name is Zach Pavli, and I'm an
attorney with the Center for
Biological Diversity. We also
have concerns about OCD's
capacity to regulate this
industry, um, when it already
faces significant challenges in
forcing plugin and abandonment
obligations in the oil and gas
context. Uh, we appreciate the
positive amendments to the bill
that have been made so far and
um earlier committees, but do
not think that
go far enough to protect New
Mexican public, uh, northern
environment, and for that
reason, we urge you to vote, do
not pass on this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Pavlik. Eleanor
Smith.
Hi, um, my name is Eleanor
Smith. Uh, good afternoon,
chairwoman and senators. I am a
community organizer with
Tonejona Ene, which is sacred
water speaks a nonprofit
environmental organization on
Navajo. Uh, we oppose carbon
capture, um, sequestration
technology. Um, I live in the
Four Corners area and I raised
my family here in Shiprock, New
Mexico. Um, I have children,
grandchildren that still live
here.
and I have concern for their
futures, and um I'm asking uh
the senators to vote no on this
experimental technology. Um, it
delays transition to truly clean
energy, uh, for our Navajos, um,
needs in this area. We have been
under um you know, since the
1920s, a fossil fuel explosion
on our Navajo nation. Everything
from uranium to oil and gas and
we
Constantly live with the
detrimental effects of all of
that, um, who will enforce if uh
there's leaks, um, and then also
I wanna know uh who's gonna
ensure that the companies pay if
there are leaks, and who's gonna
make sure that there's a safety
plan with trained responders
here on Navajo, we don't have
that. Um, who will pay for water
monitoring and who will pay if
our water is contaminated once
more.
So, uh, those are my questions,
my comments, um, please vote no
to HB 457. Thank you.
Thank you, Miss Smith. Um, I
believe there were 3 proponents,
if you could all come and um get
your support for the bill.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Sayeri Yamada, a registered
lobbyist for clean air task
Force, a fact-based
environmental organization that
that takes a pragmatic approach
to achieving zero emissions.
Clean air task force supports
policy that will help
decarbonize the economy, while
keeping up with our growing
energy demand. House 457
clarifies the ownership of poor
space used to store carbon
dioxide.
It requires developers to gather
a high approval percentage of
poor space owners incentivizing
consensus as a solution to
challenges that inevitably
arises when trying to coordinate
diverse landowners' interests.
We believe that establishing a
robust framework for CO2
sequestration is a vital step
towards reducing emissions and
closing this bill provides a
framework for attracting new
advanced energy technologies and
investments in New Mexico.
Mexico, all while helping to
decarbonize the state's economy,
and we appreciate the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Sheror
with P&M, uh, carbon capture and
storage technology still quite a
ways off into the future.
However, should CCS become a
reality and with this bill, New
Mexico would be in a better
position to be able to sequester
carbon deep underground. Also
given the complexity of the
energy transition, the increased
electricity demand statewide and
the all above approach needed
with.
back to energy generation. CCS
could be a viable option in the
future for managing carbon
emissions from CO2 generating
facilities should CCS become
viable and cost-effective. For
these reasons, PNM Stants in
support of HB 457.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers supports HB 457.
The sponsor came to us at the
beginning of this session and
asked us to review and comment
on early draft of what became HB
457.
We did
We then met with her and her
expert. We wanted to make sure
this bill confirms that the
surface owner owns the poor
space. It does. Section 3A. We
wanted to make sure that the
percentage of landowners who had
to agree to be unitized is
relatively high. It is 85%
section 6 B 12.
We wanted to protect surface
owners from operators who might
otherwise run roughshod over
their land with roads, electric
lines, pipelines. The sponsor
listened. No surface activity
may occur without a separate
surface owner agreement, Section
7A.
And we wanted to make sure that
everyone within a unit receives
a pro rata share of the payments
regardless of whether they
agreed to be in the unit or not.
The sponsor did that Section 7C.
This bill has the potential to
provide our surface owners with
an alternative source of revenue
and because the sponsor
listened, it does so with
protections they need. Cattle
growers urges you to pass HB
457.
Thank you, um, online we have uh
Mr. Mark Pedrati.
Mr. Pedroti, can you hear me
now? Sorry.
Yes.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I am Mark
Pedrotti from CO2 Rescue LLC
based in Albuquerque. I'm a
consultant in global warming
mitigation.
I would like to thank the
sponsors and Doctor Bulch for
improving this bill by taking
into consideration the concerns
of this committee, HP 457
provides regulation of safe CO2
storage and class 6 wells.
Carbon dioxide removal is an
essential component to avoid
exceeding 3.6 °F, global
warming. Right now we're at 1.5
°C, um,
and is projected to be a
multibillion dollar industry and
New Mexico has the necessary
resources to take advantage of
the demand for CO2 storage over
the next 50 to 100 years or
more.
Misinformation and fears need to
be clarified with sound data to
understand the essential option
of CCUS and how desperately it's
needed to maintain a future
survival. Without it, we won't,
we will not be able to stay
under 2 °C warming.
There are several classic swells
and several CO2 sequestration
projects in the planning stages
and several companies that are
interested in building
facilities and selling carbon
credits here in New Mexico.
Other states are moving forward
in developing this industry.
This bill supports the safe
application of carbon
sequestration and storage in New
Mexico, and I urge you all to
support this bill. Thank you for
the opportunity to support the
bill.
Thank you, um, Matthew Gonzalez.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, my name is Matthew Gonzalez,
executive director of the
Consumer Energy Alliance, and I
also have the privilege of
serving as vice chairman of the
National Hispanic Energy
Council. I'm here to express my
strong support for House Bill
457, and I thank the sponsors
for bringing this legislation
forward. This is about real
solutions, not just more
discussions. Um, I, I actually
think back to my first
legislative session in 2010 and
we were having the same
conversation. Uh, there was
legislation then introduced by,
by, um, then.
Senator Clint Hardin around the
issue of poor space. And so
while this legislation has come
a long way, and, and I think
it's really takes into effect
all or into consideration all of
the issues um that need to be
considered when we're adopting
legislation like this, um, it,
it just reminds me that New
Mexico has been slow to act.
This is, this is gonna be a
driver for rural New Mexico.
This is going to create jobs.
This is going to allow
communities to pivot towards new
industries. Um, this is even
gonna allow communities like
mine in north northeast New
Mexico. We have uh the geology
to store
carbon. And so it it creates new
opportunities for parts of the
state that hadn't previously
thought about it. So if we're
serious about reducing
emissions, creating good jobs
and keeping energy costs
manageable. Um, carbon capture
and sequestration must be a part
of the solution. It isn't just
about theory, this is real
science backed technology, um,
that industries are already
using to cut emissions, um, and
with the right policies in place
in New Mexico can actually be a
leader in this. Um, so at the
end of the day, it's about
putting action behind all the
conversations we've had about
economic development, rural
investment, environmental
responsibility.
House Bill 457 is a bipartisan
common sense step forward and
will bring investment,
strengthen our, our energy
economy and ensure that we don't
miss another opportunity. So
again, I thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward, and I
urge the committee's support.
Thank you.
So now that we have uh finished
public comments, um, do you have
anything? Did the sponsors have
anything to respond?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
the um
Couple of things, most of the
concerns raised are addressed in
the bill in terms of um safety,
um,
Classics these wells are already
happening. The issue is, does
New Mexico want to be in charge
of
Permitting and regulating these
wells, adding additional
parameters on, um, or do we want
to uh leave this with the
federal government. Thank you.
Thank you. Senator, do you have
anything to add?
Madam Chair.
It was the US Department of
Energy that came up with a a
All of the above strategy which
included CCS.
US Department of Energy under
the Obama administration. All
right. Thank you.
So with that, we'll turn it over
to the committee. Are there any
questions?
I, I don't know who I saw first,
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Small representative Dixon.
It's been a while.
Doctor Balch, good to see you
again.
I see 3 issues with carbon
capture.
I'd like to address them one at
a time.
Uh, number one, who owns a poor
space and does this
Bill
Address that conclusive.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott, very nice to see
you, uh, fellow, uh, Henri
Member from
Um, this bill does conclusively
um state that the surface owner
um owns the poor space unless it
has an otherwise um
discovered or in other use.
OK.
Um
Doctor Balch, would you like to
add anything?
Man,
senator.
Yeah, I mean it's pretty simple
statement or space is owned by
the service owner unless
And pretty simple statement.
You go deeper into the bill,
there's some places where you
specifically call out that it
doesn't interfere with mineral
state doesn't interfere with
other surface rides.
activities and in fact as uh
cattle growers now.
Mechanic
this without having a separate
service.
It was just for the for space.
OK
second issue.
Chris wore boundaries.
Seldom.
will adhere to surface boundary.
Could you explain to the body
how that
Circumstance
has been resolved in this
legislate.
Senator Scott.
Uh, I think you're talking
about.
You know, pool in the oil field.
That's a fairly defined unit
here, the EPA in their classics
policy. They've got a buffer
zone around the maximum extent
of the CO2 plant.
As modeled out into the end of
the.
Um, operational period of the
project and then also for
another 50 years past that
point.
From there, they apply a half
mile buffer.
have, you would have to include
into your area. This bill
actually adds another half mile
beyond that.
Classics requirement. If you
were to trespass if your low or
to to be leaving where you,
where you think it's supposed to
be, not likely, but if it did,
you would have to incorporate
those owners if you didn't.
Uh, get them in, you would have
to, uh,
The seizure operation if you
didn't get them in, you have to
compensate them back to the
beginning of the project.
So I think it does give adequate
protection to the uh the.
mountain chair.
one of the provisions for
He forced unitization or.
Madam chair.
Uh, the nuria.
In oil and gas, it's 75%.
In New Mexico, that's pretty
much my statue, um, we brought
that up to 85%. The other thing
that we did with that was remove
the penalty provision that you
normally see in an oil and gas
pool.
Oil and gas pool, if you do not
voluntarily participate, you are
penalized.
Uh, your share of the profit
until the project catches up to
that.
I think that's a sore spot with
a lot of small.
small producers and
in the state.
Something that's never really
been set well with me. I think
in this what we've done in this
case is better. Uh, you're not
asking the service owners to
participate in the project
besides.
selling you their force base.
Uh, so there's no reason to
penalize anybody for not being
involved and in fact, as the
catorers mentioned.
Everybody's involved.
came in at 85% or not.
That would be uh compensating
exactly the same.
OK, so, Madam Chair, Doctor
Bolger.
For those folks of 15%
potentially.
that chose not to participate in
the project.
They will.
Participate in the revenue
stream with no expenses.
And
No risk penalty.
Is that what I believe I heard
you say.
Madsen, that's exactly right.
In fact, to clarify.
Anybody that's in the pool would
not.
liability only the operator
would have life.
Yeah
And the third question, and I
think this might have been the
elephant.
In the room was where.
Down the road
There's a liability reasons.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. That's a
wonderful question. Um, uh,
after the injection is complete
of a well, uh, which generally
is about 30 years, um, and
The monitoring um has passed at
least 5 years with no incident
and all of that is spelled out
um in House Bill 458, which is
the companion piece of
legislation. Um, the state would
assume.
Stewardship.
Legal liability remains with the
operator.
Adam chair
Representatives forever.
Madam chair Senator.
Um
There's a couple of things that
that go on there, but in the
federal regulation, you have to,
you're responsible for
monitoring 50 years post
injection.
Uh
What, 458 does, that's the
companion bill.
allows the state to take over
stewardship at a certain point
with an established plot.
I'm not sure how I'm doing that.
With an established partner that
is paid for by a fee on, on the
injected CO2 of 10 cents per
ton.
To
put the stewardship with the
state instead of with an
operator.
You think back 100 years or 50
years, how many companies can
you name?
But
state is very likely to be here
in 50 or 100 years. That's the
best place to.
Oh,
the monitoring.
And the uh mitigation of
anything that could come out of
it.
The second thing I think it's
really important is that physics
and chemistry are in play here.
Wire injecting, while it's 100%
the operator's responsibility.
That's the most likely.
Place where you could have an
issue.
blow out or will have blowouts,
whatever.
Once you stop injecting that
pressure begins to equalize.
Uh, pressures are going down,
you have chemistry.
Between the CO2 and the water in
the rocks that will absorb a lot
of that CO2 into a mobile pores
and then also eventually over
decades start to mineralize you.
the greatest point of risk is.
is during the injection.
Afterwards, the risk goes down
every year.
Madam Chair, Doctor Balcher.
It seemed like I recall.
I uh
is the best guess that this is
going to be.
Injected as a liquid.
Or
I
Senator
Uh
We've got.
People call it a supercritical
liquid, but it's more
appropriately uh dense phase,
you can press the C CO2 to a
point where it acts like a
liquid.
That gives her the uh the
highest density that you can
get.
seriously incompressible, um.
You can give it up to being a
super critical fluid, though
it's not correct to always call
it supercritical fluid.
for sure you want to be in a
dense phase.
And that's just for, uh,
Efficiency of putting the CO2
and if you try and put it as a
gas.
Thank you for the answer. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Senator Townsend. Thank you. um.
chair
And the horse face be severed
from.
title like minerals or water.
The way it's set up, uh, you're
creating a whole new right.
goes with the service. So in the
beginning, all of that is going
to be owned by the service. It
is severable. That means
somebody could sell their poor
space and keep their service and
their minerals, so there are 3
really 3 separate thingsurface,
mineral, and or.
each have their own set of
rights and their own set of.
Um
regulations.
with the rules being
that ring there.
Um
Same as water.
I
A man of Senator Johnson, uh,
I'm not an expert in that kind
of law in any way. I would
assume so, but it's just an
assumption.
Um,
That's an important.
forward.
Especially if you are.
that ring
For space
Um
Having
The
Although small, the the
potential on the liability
issue.
Mention upfront him, so I, I'll
continue to.
um, but I think that's very
important.
chair.
Yeah
Senator.
I will say that.
Severability is not necessary
for the bill.
But it's some of the cattle
growers really wanted.
Landowners in general are very
interested in having
severability. I think it's gonna
act exactly like a mineral.
Thank you, Senator Townsend, um,
Senator Rael.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
I have heard of
Just still many years ago it's
not the same. I will grant you
that.
But you're right, there are,
there will be.
There could be 3 separate things
that a title attorney will have
to be working through it. That
will be the surface rice, the
mineral rights, and the course.
And to me that
So overwhelming it's not even.
Minerals
can be severed the poor space
can be severed.
And right now you are exactly
right. The
Surfa sounder does own the
course spike that poor space
goes to the core of the earth,
isn't that correct?
So whenever we are talking about
things like that.
You actually owns
Injected carbon dioxide.
Any of y'all can answer it if
you want to.
And I'm getting angry, madam.
men's care.
I understand the pizza is on its
way.
I, I'm getting a little angry
too.
Angry, angry. I got it.
out of a chair and
10 years out.
I hope that uh pizza gets here
pretty quick.
be wise if it showed up right
now, OK, not good to have an
angry or angry uh or.
But
I think it's important to note
that, that there already is
established case law in New
Mexico and and in most of the
United States for
Or handling poor space.
And that it is does go with the
surface.
So it's not like people would be
starting out from scratch on
this. There's already that
established case law.
Ma, can you give me some
examples where this is already
taken.
Um,
And if you say California, I am
gonna get very angry
about, uh,
senators.
Um, close to home, actually, so.
As some of the research that New
Mexico Tech has done.
For developing storage sites and
San Juan Basin.
Created a force-based agreement
with a single landowner.
This is also done in the
southeast part of the state for
purposes of um acid gas disposal
wells, which, by the way, are
least CO2 storage wells.
They acquire surface area.
They, they figure out the
surface area that they're
they're, they're injected uh
waste is going to go into and
then they make deals with the
service owners, so these are
already happening right here.
I don't know about California.
Thank you for that response,
Madam Chair.
In turn represent an expert
witnesses and whoever else
wants.
participate in this.
I've noted in.
Like you said I'm angry.
Nature
Madam Chair
I have noticed in the bill and I
can't pull it up right now.
But there are certain areas that
this, that CO2 can only be
injected and it has to be a
certain, certain amount distance
away.
For that to be recaptured. I
understand what we're trying to
do here.
If there is a natural gas well
that has lost all of its
sometimes injecting this will
help that gas rise up. I do get
that.
But tell me how, if there's a
lease, let's call it down in the
patch. I'm more familiar with
that area than I am the the
northwestern part of.
So we're doing it down there and
there is the lease and we know
how those leases run. They could
be.
Smaller track all the way up to
thousands of acres, OK, that is
leased at one, at once.
And when to any entity.
So whenever they decide that
yes, this is what we want to do,
we do own the surface and we
have we are exploring our right
to
See what the minerals might lie
here below.
Tell me
Who makes the decision on where
this could be injected.
Uh, senator is gonna be the
service owner.
Because you have to have a
service agreement to be able to
place your will.
So, uh, you may have a, an area
the size of this room that is
your
That is your CC storage project
area.
And then where, where in that
area you're putting your
injection well, and you have to
have a separate landowner
agreement to to be able to
access that.
Oh I'm sorry, are you talking
about geology?
I'm sorry. Are you talking about
geology?
I am talking about the distant
way that you can inject one
tract of land and then you have
to.
So I've read somewhere in the
building like.
Why don't you hold that site and
we're going to stand in place
for a few minutes so people can
serve themselves. Um, we haven't
had lunch, um, and of course,
once I think there'll be extra
if you guys are hungry too, um,
and then I understand that the
floor has, um, the Senate floor,
I don't know what's going on
with the house with the Senate
floor has uh
It's been.
Uh, in recess until 6 until 6:30
this evening.
Madam Chair, if I may announce
the tax business and
Transportation Committee will be
meeting at 3 o'clock. At 3
o'clock? OK so I will have to
leave. Um, hopefully we'll be
And by then, but we'll, we'll
see.
So let's go ahead and and uh
stand in place for about 5
minutes so people can serve
themselves 5, 10 minutes.
Go ahead.
I
I
I'm sure you probably already
know, but the Republicans are
going to caucus at 6.
OK.
Hi.
