We also have rapidly rosa
and gary eslinger from the
elephant beautiful district I
also want to point out human
zamicana who is with full circle
mushrooms she's actually a
recipient of money from the
healthy food financing
initiative some very grateful
but she grows some amazing
mushrooms and sells those all
over but thank you off coming
all the way up from from las
crucials and thank you madame
chair for letting me recognize
them for what they're doing with
the elephant irrigation.
Thank you very much for joining
us this morning
okay so if we're going to get
started
we're going back to the secret
street bill center bill to
fifteen and I see that there is
an amendment here so who would
like to reset the amendment.
Okay madam chair I can present
it we had a.
An amendment when it was here
before.
But.
I would love to blame it on the
bill drafter making an error
so I just have to take credit
for.
Message but it's right now so
one of the big things here is.
A fund this this really built a
fine
sold it the people that are
injecting whatever they're
injecting or then paying per
time for what they stick in the
ground so that there's a fund to
deal with it in perpetuity I
know that was one of the
objections I already knew was an
objection before which is why
had the amendment before by well
in my brilliant screwed up so.
This fixes that.
You have an amendment for
discussion purposes their
emotion for discussion.
Thank you so.
Has the public head the
opportunity to look at the
amendment
madam cherry your committees had
it for.
Since friday I think okay well
we go to the audience for
comment is there anybody here in
the audience to support the
amendment.
The.
Is there anybody in the audience
to oppose the amendment.
The.
Okay so let's go to committee
members for discussion.
Senator city lovers.
Um we're not on the bill running
thank you manager is this three
dollars per metric tone is this
which the correlation with a
three dollars for me to with the
liability the potential
liability
had you come up with the money
that that amounts and is it
related to the potential
liability that this could cause
the state so
madam chair and senator
yes for a couple reasons why is
because this is what other
states are going so there's a
couple other states that have
this we essentially took
wyomings
excuse me took biomings law.
In.
With the help of our attorney
here tried to turn it into new
mexico.
Bill and this is what they're
charging now and it seems to be
doing well now the three dollars
may seem small but the ideas
were going to take millions of
tons of co two out of the year
so.
Now this is millions of dollars
time story.
And and madam chair that'll go
into a fund and i'll just be
sitting there in case something
bad happens yes madam cherson.
Thank you manager
is you can see on the back it is
non reverting so I just grows
and growth and growth.
Other questions comments on the
amendment.
Yeah.
So is there a motion on the
amendment to about one.
Senator in a bill has made the
motion is there a second.
And there is a second so could
the secretary police call the
vote on the amendment
seven six five point two
center surrounders excuse me
center day go.
Senator hambling.
Senator mccatchen.
Senator ville.
Center pope.
Yes.
Souls yes
there is a deal of us yes.
The.
Senators the finance size so
seller handled.
Senators to finance yes.
Okay you have a vote of eight
zero for the amendment now back
to the bill and we had committee
members center city a lot as you
had the floor when we ended and
then we had senator mccatching
on the list.
Yeah.
Think you could you come back I
had I had a bill turned it and I
haven't focused have been
reading a lot of the material
that has been provided
and I think the bottom line and
I guess I will I will do it the
bottom line for me is a
feasibility of this
there doesn't I use I understand
that wyoming is going all in his
you described.
What have they accomplished.
Uh
madame chair and senator spot
about since we're starting all
over it and we might have
different people in the audience
and watching could you introduce
yourself but with us today we
have representative marriages
dixon senator bill share and
senator great night so
doctor robert balt and wrote in
mexico attack in sacrament
twenty plus years and carbon
management research.
Thank you and if it's more
comfortable you can use the
handheld.
Is that better.
About that
I apologize chair and senator I
have a rough relationship with
microphones for whatever reason.
Senator the
in my own end in the next year
there planning on having about
three million tons go into the
ground you have to start
somewhere on these projects and
this is this is the place where.
They're legislation which was
put in the place about a year
and a half ago is now finally
starting to bear for a wishing
so these projects are our
happening in their real.
And they do have to to start
somewhere and then become big
later on as noted in the
responses ie says it can be as
much as thirty four percent of
the of the solution to the
problem by twenty fifty.
Although it only two point four
percent by twenty thirty so that
these things they have to grow
two thousand seven was the first
grid skill for electric uh.
The sword penalty scale.
And there were stranger fifty
put in place yesterday last year
so it's a growing process so the
answer is they haven't captured
anything in my own
I think they have captured some
in have injected some.
Not three maintenance that's
what they're playing on having
done by the end of the.
Up to date.
To today
cause will you describe their
plans and
I and I know I said this in my
speech work what
I know I said this last week but
would bothers me is in new
mexico we've tended to be a
sacrifice zone for unproven
technologies work what they did
with uranium in the mess that
was made and particularly that
it was particularly hard on
never hold people
look at the messes that have
been made that we're trying to
fix with regard to the the
abandoned wealth I meant she
worried about the windmills
what's going to happen when it
when they end their useful life
and this technology
and then look at the earthquakes
by dealing with the produce
water so I think we have to be
really cautious particularly as
as a state when we're talking
about new and proven
technologies that could and and
this is my concern about this
just continue.
Um for example the oil and gas
industry just you know keep it
going
when we've seen that the
emissions from the oil and gas's
cards severe health problems.
When you look at if you put up a
map of new mexico and you chart
where the extractive industries
are and then you just put three
things cancer.
Er.
Elsma and toxic
can you chart that there is
almost a perfect overlap and
then when you put where people
have color in our state live and
you chart that you see what's
happening in our state and
that's what worries me about
this unprevented technology and
particularly subsidising it with
liability and really if the
reason I supported the amendment
is if we're going to do this we
should not be subsidising it at
the rate we'd be subsidizing it
by providing liability
and so I I just
would I understand as they
haven't done it in my own they
set up all of the framework
and other than test wells they
have not actually accomplished
with what they're set out to
accomplish which tells me you're
asking us to do an unproven
thing here in new mexico just
cause we might have the geology
to deal with it
I I guess and I have always said
this we should be open for
business but not exploitation
madam chair actually have a
response manager I didn't ask a
question but
yeah my question was what have
they done yeah so I I think
actually the the mistake is that
we were looking to for out the
court as pipeline which goes
through new mexico from the for
the courtesy pipeline that goes
from the four corners region
down to the premium basin.
Carries twenty five million tons
of co two a year.
And that goes into for the last
forty five years into you and
has store recovery projects in
the permit
those projects are leaking this
is not new technology we also
have over twenty estimates
both of wells in new mexico
alone another twenty five in
texas these are well to take
gasted server separated from
natural gas production things
that are bad like h two s but
also see a two.
And take those and put them into
storage and see on awkward first
again you got to look out aside
new mexico to find examples of
these things working made a
million times a year in the
north sea for the slipner
project
there there's adequate evidence
I I oversaw in my own research
one point five million tons of
injection.
And nor texas these are these
are not new technology saver
being better round there's a
very well established regulatory
framework around them it can be
done safely a hundred percent
agree with you it should be paid
for by its own operation so I
support the amendment as well.
Thank you for indulging me.
Thank you very much
thank you center mcketchen you
were next on the list
madame.
The.
A couple things about their
some.
And I apologize about being a
little bit.
Behind from our rerate the other
evening but I don't see and hear
anything about produced water is
ringing in the bill about
produced water
madam current center to know
this is really about
okay acid gas injection.
Nothing in there as well as
specifically okay and and that
may be some of my issues with
the bill we are definitely in
innocence what poor space is the
value that correct.
Yes and
and for example I said gas
injection or produced water also
take up for space as well and so
in in my estimation we don't
have the
we don't have a comprehensive
bluetran here in order to be
able.
Did a fine what force bases this
takes.
A little bit of the poor space
question but for example right
now the the state land office
charges eleven cents a barrel to
inject on state land right and
so
you know with a
uh
and I just ransom I just ran
some quick numbers here.
But.
They are currently charging I
guess if we're going to use the
rationale and I guess is it is a
ton of carbon twenty seven by
twenty seven by twenty seven is
that is that the measurements I
moved on the pressures may
change but is that about r.
You mean my by volume center yes
venture up
I couldn't say for sure on that
I think it's about two point
three or two point four tons per
bear on barrels pretend of the
volume kind of approximately two
point three tons per barrel
barrels per time barrels per ton
and i'm i'm i'm remembering that
so it it could be off a little
bit but there's several barrels
per time
several barrels per time okay so
so my in my quick calculation
i'm coming up with with about
um.
Thirty five hundred barrels
pertain is that is that way more
that's way more okay okay so
it's not twenty seven by twenty
seven by twenty seven then i've
got some bad information now and
in fact if I can clarify matter
and senator.
The interesting thing about co
two is even a a large scale suit
who while putting a main tons
per year as roughly about ten
percent of the total volume of
a.
About standard studies well.
So that it's a much more volume
that you're putting in compared
to existing
okay.
Do we have any idea to measure
the the
of the carbon that it's only
there how much pressure we put
in and and the poor space how
far that bloom reaches and
things like that can you speak
to that matter chair center
yes the the epa class six
regulation that that regulates
co two injection wells for for
peer storage also the monitoring
reporting and verification
requirements that are necessary
also through epa to you access
the forty five k tax credits.
Having incredibly robust very
well studied and including work
that that we've done here in new
mexico and mexico tech that have
gone into those regulations so
there's a a very robust
monitoring strategy that also
includes modeling and size mic
data to verify and keep track of
where you're see a tv is in the
reservoir pressure of the
reservoir and any hazards that
may come out of.
Of operating that and then
there's a review on those
processes every every several
years at the pa and if you fail
to meet those benchmarks are
going to pull your permit okay
that's an important thing thank
you.
Madame chairman and said
representatives.
With these wells be under the
same guidelines as say other
injection wells tested yearly
and be working under the same
same parameters to ensure you
know safety and not leaking
everything like that better
senator
actually know there they're much
more stringent so
at a minimum you're looking at
annual or by annual mighty
testing you're looking for
active monitoring of the
pressure in the annually space
in the well you have surface
monitoring equipment to measure
car to
in the soil and whether that's
increasing or not you also have
to have seismic equipment
located at these wells in most
cases to determine if there is
any pressure both its causing.
Says make activity and you must
have mitigation plans in place
to respond to any problem that
you have with your world and the
wellhead in the well bore
whatever and if you fail those
will be closed.
So there the standards are very
protective they're creating and
conjunction with a grown water
protection council that operates
the uic that's under round
injection control program so
compared to a class too well
which are probably more familiar
with uh these wells are or
incredibly overdesigned you have
to stay in the steel pipes you
have crozen resistance you meant
you have monitoring of pressure
and regular testing of pressure
in the law board and so on okay
manager and centers here are
these wealth then constructed
for the specific purpose of
carbon capture or can there be
re injuries
manager and senator generally
speaking there they're built or
purpose so I would like to talk
a little bit about the acid gas
wells into mexico.
I did sit on the world
commission we permitted many of
those and they're still
preventing those today those
while
hard designed to a classic
standard and could be if ocd.
Gets classic premise be
converted over but it would be
very rare to convert say a class
to inject her at a seat to broad
you were our project to a class
six world the well would have
had to have been designed to a
standard that didn't exist when
they were created.
Okay
madame chairman and centers
representative.
I yeah
I do
agree this is something that we
should be that we should be
working on and it looks like you
guys have covered a lot of the
safety aspects of it right these
are newly constructed wells
we're not going to do reentries
with potentially
poor integrity in the well bore
anything like that
and we're injecting to depth
past ground water and things
like that with your monitoring
of gardener thing it seems good
it in my mind we don't this is a
really big conversation that we
need to have and so.
But it doesn't include the other
two factions that go into this
to the poor space argument we.
You know are not you know you
have the discussion what
produced water or the produced
water came out of the poor space
and now you're putting it back
into the poor space but it's
come from a different lease or
whatever it is I don't believe
it goes I don't believe it's
comprehensive enough for me to
get behind today just due to the
fact that it it it leaves out
some of the critical issues you
know I see your car about for
your hours and things like that
night I think those are I think
those are okay but I don't know
that were I don't know that were
there as far as the the
comprehensiveness that that i'm
looking for today manager and
senders I don't know if you have
a response to that but
madame chair then senator I
might but they might be a better
response from from a doing huge.
So he may add in on this but
basically the the existing
regulatory framework takes care
of that and the oil I guess act
says you that's preserved for
relative rights and comment
waste.
And that then also preserve
human help fresh water and all
those good things that we like
so I I don't see a conflict
between this bill and existing
operations these have they have
to work together and that's
really the the remain of the
ocd.
And operating and preventing
these wells okay thank you thank
you
thank you senator center hope
thank you matter of chair thank
you sponsored for bringing this
legislation forward
just one quick question you
might have mentioned in the
opening just so I understand
so what is really
the premise of what we're doing
here why in your view wise it's
important that we pass
legislation
so madam chair and senator.
This body and others have talked
about the the need for to reduce
co two in the atmosphere
so if you're gonna reduce it
you're going to do something
with it you can't burn it make
you go where you've got to put
it somewhere
so
what this is is an effort to do
that.
Co choose there today
so this this starts the process
of doing this this was
particularly direct air capture
but it brought this so in
whatever wherever the co two
comes from.
We can capture it we have the
technology to capture it we can
actually put it in the ground we
have the technology to put it in
the ground icelands putting a
lot of it in the ground right
now
so if we're interested truly
interested in reducing the co to
an ear then we have to have a
way
someplace to put it and so
that's that's all this is about
it's there if you want it out of
the sky we got to put it
somewhere and madam chair
senator pope I would add to that
that if you look at
really any
international modeling for
climate change we have already
exceeded the amount of co two in
the atmosphere and so any model
to get us to the one point five
or two degrees.
Limit of global warming
requires that we pull carbon
dockside out of the atmosphere
and that's not that's not up for
debate that is that is a fact
and there are two ways to do it
and direct your capture is a
viable option as senator share
mentioned there is a a project
in iceland that is currently
drawing
over four thousand metric tones
of carbon dioxide out of the
year or out of the air every
year and injecting it to
mineralise it.
Thank you sponsors for that I
appreciate that we're all
recognizing the issue and the
problem will we have.
And what's causing a lot of
climate change we're dealing
with it and here in here new
mexico were front and center
I guess for me a lot of the
concerns are with some of the
questions that have been asked
just understanding I guess here
in our country whose doing this
who's doing this well and if you
could talk about that element
because i'm not really i'm
hearing why women may be hearing
other parts of the world oh
where is this really being done
successf.
Thank you manager
madame shares under book.
Up
where's being done most
successfully is in the northest
but here by by norway they have
a bottom maintenance a year
since nineteen ninety six going
into the.
Into a sanitark for at the
bottom of the producing horizon
in the north sea you also have a
very robust program sponsored by
the us department of energy
going on for more than twenty
years in the united states and
these this programs have done
dozens of demonstration projects
several projects that have done
more than more than a million
tons cleaning one that I oversaw
that was one point five million
tons of injection one and the
online base of those three point
five million turns a couple of
projects and the south east part
of the US and those are just
pure sequestration research
projects and or commercial
projects.
Billions probably up probably
more than two billion tons of
cat who has gone into an assault
recovery project that's why I
say this isn't a new technology
we know how to to put it into
the ground.
And there is a a huge industry
that is developing right now
currently and mexico tech were
involved in over forty five
commercial projects in the
western united states that are
trying to get permits to do this
kind of operation so.
It's reached the point where the
sciences mature the research is
mature the regulations are
mature and now people are
starting to actually do them in
part because of a tax credits
that were brought up in the in
the last session but this tax
credits expire and when they
expire there's going to be a
regulatory stick instead that
tells people they have to do
that so people are preparing the
companies are preparing for
this.
I think it's a pretty necessary.
Step in the technology they look
forward to the day when we don't
need to do carbon capture in
storage because we've found
enough other solutions that we
can avoid it and then I can
retire.
But.
For now it's what we really have
that can really work.
And so
you can adam chair senator thank
you I wanted to add on to what
doctor said so a couple of years
ago there were eighteen direct
air capture plants around the
world just you know now they're
over two hundred projects that
have begun bite you asked where
some of these projects are
located and so the
director captured plants that
were an operation as the time of
the report from the ie the
international energy agency on
their director capture two were
in the united states one in
canada six in germany one in
italy when in iceland four in
switzerland and one in the
netherlands and those were all
operational.
Thank you
until you mention their
technology you mention kind of
where we are and so I guess the
next question is is this
something that could be done
with after text credits or is
that just right now an incentive
to do this
yeah manager senator pope up
some people are going to do it
some people are doing it anyway
in norway it's because of a tax
penalty not a tax credit so they
could find one hundred dollars
per time if they put the car to
you.
Into the atmosphere so in
different parts of the world
they have different records
right frameworks in the US the
current regular tory framework
is the carrot where you have a
tax credit which helps with the
infrastructure.
This will get done without that
tax credit long term that tax
credit like I said will expire
and turn into a stick in the
united states we've been
monitoring greenhouse gas
missions for a dozen years or so
and that and that's a tool that
will allow us to.
To do that so smart companies
when I advise them or are
looking very hard at it dealing
with their carbon now so they
don't get caught trying to deal
with it later.
Thank you and thank you madame
chair
and so I guess the next question
I have is
with this carbon capture in this
bill
has any of any conservation
groups environmental groups
signed on to this bill.
The.
Madame chair senator pope
I believe that it depends on the
perspective of whether or not
you believe that carbon capture
and.
Is part of the solution
there are internationally many
organizations that recognize
that carpent capture is part of
the solution however to my
knowledge none of the
organizations that spoke out
against this the other day are
supporting it alright.
Is has any anyone from the oil
and gas industry do they support
this legislation.
Madame chair and senator.
They are concerned.
But they are not here oppos.
They have questions.
So I think that this is a.
An issue that we definitely need
to talk about we need to
if we're going to decarbon the
carbon eyes or atmosphere then
then we've got to find a way to
do it we think that we've got a
an answer is it a utopian answer
of course not.
But does it move us in the right
direct.
Oiling s.
I have certainly talked to me
been concerned about it
environmental groups concerned
about it but nobody saying that.
That this is going to make the
world worse mostly what they're
saying is that they don't think
it makes it better.
So we're just going to sit here
and do nothing and I think
that's the wrong yet.
Menchair instead of help
actually and the in the last
year in here targeted come in
and and support the project they
are a midst midstream producer a
mystery of operator they take
produce gas from all companies
like sharon and other others
that operate into mexico
separate out the bad stuff and
then put the good stuff in the
sales line but the bad stuff in
the ground so they were very
close to this issue they already
operate numerous as a gas
disposal wells and as a gas co
two plus h to us so there have
been very familiar with it they
did come in and support it most
large companies have
sustainability programs and
that's a very big push in
industry in general
thank you yes madam chair of one
other
so i'd be forgot about this
there a delta are airlined
specifically but others are
looking for a carbon.
The offset sold you know there's
there's things that come out of
judy
so what they're looking for is
how do they take out an
equivalent amount of co two that
they put in the air and so
certainly
they've been supportive as as
other industries have been
caused we're trying to figure
out how to decarbonize by taking
out what they put you so in in
the delta airlines is certainly
one of those.
Thank you and thank you madame
chair
you know I recognize the issue
and I thank you for bringing
this forward you know sometimes
we hear about you know our small
state new mexico and.
You know how it's a global issue
in.
One thing I do like about this
ideas that were stepping up to
address the problem.
Not only just speakers were part
of the world but
we're actually contributing to
it but the permian basin but I
just have a lot of concerns with
this technology III just don't
know if we're there yet.
But I could see this possible in
the future being.
One of the tools but I think
we're not gonna really address
the issue unless you were
reduced really
the co two output
at argue too that we actually
have a carbon capture right now
it's called trees I mean we
always need more those right.
But I just think that this point
I I just can't support the bill
which is some wrist that we have
and I understand with the oil
and gas industry in some ways we
do a lot of this already
um.
But I have even had concerns
there so
at this point I I can't I can't
support this one that you all
know thank you thank you senator
I have senator new bill and then
center
thank you madame chair
thank you at this piece of paper
don't you desk
I want you to look at that chart
and it shows that renewables are
going to take a dramatic
increase.
But it's not.
All of it everything else takes
an increase as well which means
more carbon in the atmosphere
where the chair planes are chutu
trains or steamships not
steamshields but ships on the
ocean
the only way we're going to be
able to reduce those other the
carbon footprint of all those
other things besides the
renewable portion.
Is to come up with the system
either nuclear which isn't
showing any increase over the
next few years.
Or some other way of doing it we
talk about blue hydrogen and
green hydrogen all of those
things that the realities are
green hydrogen is just not fees
it just costs so much to do
because the renewables aren't
going to be able to do it.
So if we're going to convert to
hydrogen at some point blue how
did it's going to be one of the
only ways we can do it i've been
on many of you know that I was
very active in the energy
council I have been to a carbon
sequence ration facility in
canada they have one called
boundary damn they took one of
their units they sorted out all
of co two out of the flu gas and
they pumped it in the ground and
as far as I know they haven't
had any failure very expensive
it wasn't feasible from an
economic standpoint but it was
an experiment so that they could
start canada's actually getting
very aggressive and reducing
carbon that was one of their
first of approaches
wyoming he's going to step up
and this will happen now it'll
happen somewhere else or it'll
happen in new mexico but it is
an industry.
That will benefit the the state
of new mexico if we'll allow it
to happen.
If all we accomplish with this
bill is definitely who owns the
poor space that would be a big
deal because these companies are
wanting to come in right now
somebody put out this nice
little schedule to clever but it
shows you one thing it's very
true carbon sequestration
doesn't happen where the water
is coming from if there's water
there there's no room for the
court.
You gotta go down below that you
find some horse areas and you
pump the co to in there
depending on what the structure
is as I understand it and i'm
not in engineering the stuff
there's carbon I mean there's
calcium
deposits to america's things
solidify the co two eventually
and rock over time somebody some
engineer types can probably
explain it better and I do
but there's a lot of technology
there's a lot of you don't just
do it anywhere the geology has
to be just right forty five
program under the abident
administration was set up so
that we could establish carbon
capture in the country and
that's one of the things if
we're going to know whether this
is the ideal bill I don't know
but I can tell you that if we
don't start doing something.
It will happen it may or may not
happen here it's a great source
of economic jobs and it also
does a great deal to offset the
carbon footprint new mexico that
we get blamed for a lot of it
because we produce more oil and
gas and cole and all those kind
of things anybody else we at
least ought to participate in
trying to do something
to remediate the problem and
i'll support the bill because I
think at least it's attempt to
try to get some discussion going
and we can if we need to we can
amend and change so forth if you
if you really believe in climate
change it if you want to do some
about it this is a real tool
that might do something some the
seller stephen doing.
Thank you center circumstance.
Thank you manchester and remail
so we can start amending this
i'm worried because that this
goes to judiciary if it gets out
of this committee so we can
start doing that now but I
imagine everybody's eyes would
roll back pretty quickly I I
find the technology exciting I
appreciate what you're saying
and I know people the table
representative and centers you
you have been working during the
interim with a lot of admiration
from me really trying to get to
the forefront of of science with
the background and architecture
and always fascinated by their
latest greatest technology and
have a great deal of
confidence in our ability to
ask you in beings really
capitalised on that technology
and I think this is every with
the senate of elders this is I
think very promising a great
opportunity that I have quite a
few concerns and it's a very
complicated bill we're here in a
thirty day session i'll just let
you know that it did if the bill
was to get out of this committee
cribby hard time getting through
senator judiciary just because
of the time and the work that it
would be real the work that
would be required the one thing
that I would point you to with a
great deal of of trouble for me
is always going to be what you
have in section nine which are
limitations on liability so
you're as essentially if you
look at that the particularly
subsection be to the owner
operators and all persons who
generate transporter injected
release from any in all
liabilities and duties upon
completion of project that's
kind of in inconsistent with
where we're replacing ourselves
with a lot of other orphan wells
and other problems we have to be
any idea that we're going to
release people from liability at
some point I want to get to wash
their hands and walk away is
it's always going to be a non
starter thank you for me pretty
good it comes to the environment
that that that type of languages
throughout section night which
is we're going to do this and
we're not going to be
responsible for it when we deem
ourselves done with it and I I
don't think that should ever be
the case and that's inconsistent
with my practice where super fun
site and last crucials i've been
litigating the super fund
sighting on this cruises for the
parties there for decades.
Airplane fuels and so forth
contaminating the ground while
you have the problem in album so
we all know the issues
all of that would be a real
problem for me ultimately but I
get all i'll address it if it
comes through the committee and
judiciary but i'll tell you I
think this is overly ambitious
for a thirty day session where
we find herself at this point
time in the session but I
appreciate the interest that
it's drawing here today in the
discussion and you get in them
start on this way I think it's a
little unrealistic probably.
Thank you senator we have a
center gagas and then i'll make
a a closing remark.
Mancheron i'll try to be brief
thank you for that in a question
for a doctor so on page four
items see it talks about the
comprehensive sequence straight
in act does not imply to the
injection of carbon docks and
connection with enhancement
there's a sheet up here and i'm
just wanting to verify because
it's going to be low the oil
zone is that the area that were
just approaching on the
secretary was that correct
actually centers used to be who
provided this.
Okay so you
so did you do this
a bill share who is a very
famous artist from new mexico
I think it's very explicit but I
want to know did you have
assistance or did you make this
up
we did
madame madame chair I I drew
that based on many other things
that i've seen
throughout what's going on here
the ficker parts is it goes
through the water would of those
are casings to make sure that
things don't don't leak
any but it's not to scale this
way but yes that's based on
other stuff that I know and I
was trying to make it so that it
was simple to understand thank
you I just wanted to make sure
we knew who did it so sender you
stopped the floor thank you for
that man turned center thank you
for the drawing i'd like to put
this up on my wall in the office
of me to see it brought me the
question of so I understand so
like raval dome it's run by auxi
is used for her
or gas production so that's not
this doesn't affect that but I
just wanted to be able to see as
I also have problems with the
bill or again i'm different i'd
rather solve the problems here
than send a judiciary but
my my.
Reality after seen this is your
going to solve below gas so it's
on area of catchers that
correct.
Oh so madam chair and senator
not necessarily always below oil
and gas could you know they're
different
formations but it would not be
in the oils are not using it to
to extract the oil it would be
somewhere.
It would be it would be
trustpassing if it went into
some place.
Into somebody's oil formation or
into somebody else's land that
hadn't
wouldn't part of this and so
what we were trying to show
there is that it is sequestered
from everything else though it
see questioned from other
people's land it's questioned
from other peoples of mineral
rights and it's sequestered from
the air so far down
I am chair and then he brings up
another great question for me
then us so you're talking about
transparency earlier I think
doctribal
ceremony cuts and we're talking
about the plume so the plumbing
the modeling that you're going
to do are you do would be able
to tell us who the ownership of
the
property low ground longs is a
correct miss what am I doing
chair senator goes yes so
you know it will I mean the
model is as good as a model is
right so the the more dating of
going into it the better results
you're going to have.
The intensive of the epa when
you apply for a classic permit
whether you do it through a
state that has primacy or you do
it directly and for those plans
is that you have sufficiently
demonstrated to them that you
can isolate that co two
vertically.
From any other horizon of
interest usually because of a a
very impermable layer of rock
that's on top of the storage
researbor and also horse only
that you've delimited where
that's going to be and then and
then you will have to have had a
relationship formed with all of
those people to access their
poor space if you were to come
to a situation where you did
trust best the plan went
somewhere you didn't expect it
to you would identify that
relatively early you have to
update these models on a regular
basis and if you're co two is
not going the way you originally
predicted it you could lose your
license to inject which would
mitigate the the impact of
future trespass also if you were
trust passed upon there is a
ample case law new mexico for
for suing the heck out of
somebody that does that so you
know there's there's adequate
protections in there to make
sure that these projects don't
interfere with other things.
Well thank you for that district
comment and tear report close I
used yes energy information
administration child the mexico
had contributed one percent of
the total armed accident
missions in the us and twenty
twenty so the bill that we're
doing now is to have set one
percent nationally for
understandment
managers and senator guy goes
that's probably true we do about
forty five million tons per year
of co two in the us is around
four point five billion tons of
a year.
Or so last year to.
Um one thing that we don't
really account for is the full
life cycle of the products that
we produce where the second
largest producing a while
producing state in the country
and the country is the largest
oil producing country in the
world.
So the stuff that we send
outside of our borders also as
an impact so it doesn't hurt us
to try and mitigate some of
those other effects that happen
when when our.
Oil is burned somewhere else for
example or thank you for them
internet you keep bringing up
topics I want to channel
actually
represent their internet with my
want to try and they're looking
to use or natural gas lip fight
natural gas to drop their
emissions
we didn't we want the contract
the disadministration wouldn't
sign it they didn't want our
product there anywhere else so
it's sort of like what you're
saying you want to keep it on a
ground house didn't know it has
on dropping emissions worldwide
so with that on thank you.
Thank you any comments before I
make mine
okay so i'm going to give you a
chance to close as well but my
impression is that
this has this concept has come
up over the years and my concept
or my impression is that it
needs to be.
Much smaller in focus.
So that it is developed peace
mill and I know lots of times we
like to develop the whole
concept but.
I don't think that is some
comments have been made that we
have all the understanding and
knowledge that assist people in
taking the stepped to the final
project so I would suggest if
this does not go through that
the effort is to.
Separated and pieces but that's
my comment
is there emotion.
Medical oh i'm sorry outlight
i'm sorry i'd offer that i've
offered the sponsors and opposed
to close yes please so madam
chair just just briefly and I
understand.
The carbon is there.
The.
We got to do something with.
It's going to happen this
technologies well it is h.
With this bill does is only two
things one it defines who owns
the poor space because that's
been a question for some time
who owns it.
Now.
My attorney will will say where
do you know who owns it whoever
owns everything to the center of
the earth I don't know how many
times he told me that.
But the problem is the people
that want to do this wants some
clarification.
In so.
This isn't this this is
clarifies.
What what most people already
think is so that's not any great
new revelation.
The second partisan the
liability part who does what.
So.
Two to senator savantes if if he
goes to the same section nine
but but paragraph d.
That's where it talks about
whose responsible and win so
instead of putting a time in
there ten years fifteen years of
thousand years.
Oh we actually listed one
through.
Six steps that must be taken by
the injector.
Before this before they are
relieved of their responsibility
so it could take a hundred years
to them to get that or it could
take them one year to get that
as long as all criteria are met.
So that I think it's the is the
important part so it goes past
the part you read you've got to
get down to that and in in
that's that's there for a
reason.
Because.
Nobody's going to do this if
they're liable for it for
million years right there's got
to be some time when when things
are settled but also if you do
all of these things.
Then.
We believe.
Now you have a safe storage that
you've done all of the right
things that need to be done.
One of them is.
Did you for all of the wars.
So you know is is we're talking
about building things out bits
and pieces well we said there's
more more default so this isn't
a grand scheme here this is who
owned it and who's responsible
for it and it's the injector.
Until they've reached all the
steps.
The art state government decides
needs to be done.
So that's the first thing.
Since it's going to be done it's
going to be done somewhere it is
being done somewhere.
We talk all the time about
Is in the oil and gas business
right now every one of us.
Because well get this is what's
paying for our budget.
The.
So if we want something else
then we ought to at least reach
out for something else.
In so one of the things that the
I clearly see is the deal to
airlines moral.
They're going to continue to put
the o two and here because
they're gonna continue to use
jet engines.
For the foreseeable future.
When they come to a point when
they're not using jet engines
and they're not putting any co
to end and this has no value but
today it has value.
It has economic development
value.
Here.
Because somebody in george is
going to pay us to take co two
out of the air.
That is an economic development
opportunity that's real.
That's real.
So.
As I look at this we can step up
and become world leaders.
The.
Or we can be left behind.
All this does is define who owns
and whose responsible and the
responsibility part I think was
clarified not by a time but by
action and I think that's
better.
So.
The.
You and so anything from any of
the other sponsors.
Okay thank you very much is
there a motion center city locus
I think you started.
Tabling is a non debatable
motion
so with the secretary please
call the boat.
Center surprises.
Sarage goes.
Center hamburg.
My cution.
So novel.
Senator pope yes center source
yes seller to deal up us yes
searched upon.
So buy a boat of eight to one
your bill has been tabled but we
really appreciated the
discussion today thank you.
Sorry there are few
announcements members before
anybody peels off the democratic
conference will meet a level am
today and the floor will meet at
noon
on thirty we will have breakfast
here in the committee room at
eight thirty starting at eight
thirty it's a western resources
and the new mexico wildlife
federation providing it so thank
you very much for that then will
move on to the next bill oil and
gas fund accounting senate bill
two forty nine saturday night
and center shortest and there is
a committee sub.
Yes
unless the senator needs back up
down there.
Yeah.
Okay so senator he cannot okay
so let's have the introductions
first and then we will go to the
committee sub introductions
don't mean introduction of the
bill just introductions of
yourselves for the public.
Please.
Thank you madame chair center
regniber districts twenty seven
and to my right is my expert
mrperiod kyle arm strong and oil
and gas producer with armstrong
energy and rosal new mexico.
Thank you and senator survantes
is also listed on this bill so
sinner savantest you want to
make a motion about the
committee
yes madame chair I moved that
the committee do not pass in
about two forty nine but do pass
and it conservation committee
substitute for senate bill to
forty nine.
Okay for discussion purposes is
there any objection to that
motion first discussion purposes
okay so let's please proceed
thank you madame chair.
The committee serve as a result
of some discussions that we had
with the director of the old
conservation division we
determined or he impressed upon
us that number one the federal
side of things should be
stripped out of the bill and so
we took that out and then the
director also advised us that
with respect to the uh
dollars that would revert to the
state that he would like to see
eighty million dollars retained
in that fund so that they would
have adequate resources over the
end of a fiscal year so so those
of the two major differences
between the original bill and
the committee so okay so
committee members we're looking
at a point two committee sub
does everybody have a point two.
Point two two eight zero five
six point two.
So our committee analysts do you
have.
Okay so I think you're going to
need to detail the differences
between the point one and the
point two cents are analysts did
not receive it in time for their
work and believe that the
committee served the difference
between the point one in the
point two is the dollar for your
of eighty million dollars if
I recall correctly we made a
within it over and we we thought
we had a good number but uh in
subscript conversation with the
director he would like to see
eighty million dollars and we're
meanable to that so we change
the
h two.
Whined twenty we changed it from
I believe thirty million are
fifty million to eighty million
at the request of the
conservation division director.
Okay so
I think that the oil canceration
division director should sit
right up here
and since we'll be asking you
can't comment for
questions and verification etc
okay so
there's only change in the bill
from point.
So
anything would your expert like
to speak senator.
Do you.
So we'll go to the audience is
there anybody here in support of
the spill would you please show
your hands
okay which has a few anybody
opposed to this bill.
Okay so let's have about three
proponents come up and introduce
yourself and speak was start
with miss wagner.
Let's get her use to her new
job.
Thank you madame chair and
members of the committee I am
ashley wagner the vice president
of government affairs for the
new mexico oil and gas
association I am standing up on
standing up on behalf of our
partner trade associations as
well
the mobile has been in
discussions with ocd and other
stake holders since august
twenty twenty three regarding
issues that may affect our state
and the oil and gas industry in
those conversations ocd has
shown concern that the state
does not have the appropriate
funds to plug abandoned wells
that are not already remediated
by oil and gas companies this
bill would better utilize funds
already paid by the industry
through the conservation tax for
reclamation efforts to achieve
and maintain a sustainable
balance in the oil and gas
reclamation fund in twenty
twenty two the industry plugged
four hundred and fifty one wells
and ocd plugged forty nine ocd
estimates that there are
seventeen hundred abandoned
wells in the state.
The continuous funding proposed
in this bill would be a
sufficient for the plugging and
remediation of at least two
hundred wells per year by the
ocd.
The proper funding of the oil
and gas reclamation fund will
insure there is no burden to the
new mexico taxpayer and allow
industry and ocd to return well
sites to their native states as
quickly and efficiently as
possible I urge you to please
support this bill thank you.
Thank you next please
sure thank you madame chair
members of the committee i'm
coming fiblemen representing the
real grandday chapter of this
year a club you won't be
surprised to learn that I view
this and our support quite
differently than my colleague
ashley which is that this is a
good idea having more money in
the reclamation fund is
important and helps protect
against oil and gas operators
who are wildly underfunded in
their bonding but can not be a
replacement for HB one thirty
three and the work that we've
done together to insure that the
state has not exposed from
operators who cannot afford to
clean up their own futurely
orphaned well so while we
support the concept it can not
be a replacement for oil and gas
operators ensuring themselves
against their own risk to the
state and to our kids and
families thank you thank you.
Mannet madam chair members of
the committee my name is chelsea
canada and i'm the director of
public policy at the new mexico
chamber of commerce the state
chamber supports speed forty
nine the redistribute.
Patient of revenue and this
proposal is sound public policy
by using revenue from certain
activities to support the
impacts of those activities
while we have high revenues we
think this is a good business
practice to increase funding
leveled from the production and
extraction of oil and natural
gas resources in new mexico to
help return new mexico lands to
their native state at the end of
a will well life cycle without
raising taxes thank you.
Thank you very much now was
their opposition in the room.
Okay we have an opponent online
carlos on tag can you get her so
she can make her statement
please.
Thank you very members the
committee on carlos and
presidents the other mexico
business coalition we support
senate bill to forty nine I i'm
not sure if that's what you take
you right now online but we are
in strong support of this
weekend that it resolves a lot
of issues for the state and for
the oil and gas industry and we
encourage you to support this
bill as well thank you thank you
for some reason I was given a
note that you were in opponent
but thank you very much for your
comment
and support committee members
commands questions.
Sender sauls thinking madam
chair.
I'm looking at this chart that
was handed out with this
and as I look at what the cost
to remediate her well as gone up
by three and a half times since
twenty twenty one so in three
years it's gone up three and a
half times per well.
The.
Currently as I do some quick
calculations you'd be about
twenty five million to do two
hundred wells a year.
But the sixty million that would
be raised by this per year if we
continue with that rate of
increase.
We don't have enough to do that
in less than four years.
Out but we have how are we going
to manage that going into the
future if the cost per well is
going up that rapidly in order
to remediate and my guess is we
of the orphan wells we have
probably done the easiest ones
first.
Thank you madam chair senator.
I would respond.
To two issues there that you
have raised and then i'll let my
experts
oh i'm sorry madam chair.
Worried about these microphones
I would matter and senator soles
I would I would say two things
number one.
Everything in the wall patch has
gone up it's no doubt that the
cost of growing while and
likewise the cost of plugging
wells have gone up
quite a bit over the last few
years.
But number two I think that some
of the plugging cause of we've
seen.
Are probably beyond uh the cost
of operator's experience in the
field so there may be some
disconnect fair but all that uh
my experts may be a director of
huge would like to to comment on
the cost as well
mountain chair senator
he is correct that the price of
plugging wells were there for a
private industry or by the state
hat has gone up significantly
and there's a number of factors
that that are driving that.
In my view this is an attempt to
ask how we're going to
ultimately deal with the orphan
well problem down the road this
is an additional tool a
mechanism that was put in place
back in nineteen fifty nine it
was initially intended for the
entire willing gas conservation
tax to go to the the predecessor
to the to the recommendation
fund over time we got away from
that.
And funds were diverted for
other purposes so i've heard
they have listened to the
debates over orphan wells
extensively.
And i've heard it asked why is
the industry not willing to
clean up after itself why are we
not willing to be good neighbors
is indicated with the industry
plugged for fifty one wells in
twenty twenty two out of five
hundred total that were plugged
we are continuously plugging
wells we are trying to clean up
after ourselves the good out the
good operators are as to the
the bad actors or those that
happen to go out of business and
leave orphan wells this was a
mechanism that was put into
place two deal with that into
whether or not the future
plugging liability might be in
excessive of what you're
describing.
That may be the case but we are
not funding that as a currently
stands only a very small portion
of the old gas conservation tax
goes into the recommendation
fund this is simply an attempt
to make sure that it is better
funded so that companies like
mine and my company's been in
business for
forty seven years and we've been
an operator for forty two years
and then that entire time we
have not orphaned a single
wealth in fact we have on
occasion had to plug others
wells for for video reasons but
in that forty seven years but we
have been paying into this tax
every year.
To ensure against others
liability
but only very small portion of
what we have paid has gone to
that so if we believe that the
orphan well problem is a
legitimate real problem I do and
I think both industry
conservation groups environments
i'll believe it's a illegitimate
issue that needs to be addressed
this of the mechanism this is a
mechanism that will help address
that problem problem and ensure
that the ocd has the funds
necessary to earth plug in our
mediates in a timely manner and
and to how the resources to do
that.
Madam chairs senator I would
I would agree with those con
concepts
financial assurance.
And the oil and gas context
unlike some others has never
been a full cost of reclamation
for all facilities components
it's always been sort of a
bonded insurance policy demanded
some downside risks so as a
result we've had tools like the
reclamation fund to cover those
pieces and it is the ocd's
position that that
that tool I should be robustly
funded I can say in the hundred
and forty plug wells that ocd
plugged in twenty twenty three
we've not been plugging all the
easy ones we've got a pretty
representative sample set and
you actually can't tell on the
surface what's going to be easy
what's going to be hard and
we're undertaking a lot of three
very large and expensive
remediations this year and
having robust funding allows us
to commit to those large central
tank battery projects.
Thank you and and madam chair as
as I look at this the five
million per quarter or per
month.
Increases the amount of funding
over what's currently there my
concern is as you have this
chart indicates the rapidly
increasing cost of plugging
wells that within a few years
that amount of money is going to
be insufficient and i've seen
many times in state bob when we
put a specific number in that
inflation eats that away and for
five years from now it is going
to be insufficient and we're
going to have to.
But a different number in there
I much persper when there are
things that have an automatic
escalator based on inflation for
what that amount is to ensure
that there's always going to be
enough or the prior as I did the
calculations it was not
generating as much when we had
the multipliers of point zero
zero one nine in there that that
was insufficient and maybe that
multiplier but then it
continually updates with
inflation in other amounts based
on how much is sold where when
you put a specific number which
is good today but it could be.
Insolvent or not enough in four
years that we're gonna have come
back and put in a different
number because it's won't be
enough to plug the same number
of wells when they're that many
anyone wants to respond but
that's my biggest concern
because it's a species specific
number that it's good today but
in three or four years without
an escalator inflation's going
to eat it away and it will be
insufficient
madame chair and center of souls
that let me take a cracked out
of the director fuse face
you have more specific
information but first of all
this is only a portion of the
money that goes into the
reclamation so this is not all
of the money that's going to
have the recommendation.
I think above.
It says it.
They estimate that this tax will
collect parts a hundred and
fifteen million dollars this
year so that's what's going on
all work doing is diverting five
million a month to go into this
fine that will actually see
results on the ground.
The remember the whole tax was
supposed to go to this we're
only for a part the rest goes
into the general funds so so
that's the first thing the
second thing is
if you look at if if you divide
what the state uh.
Is responsible for the state and
fee wells.
That's three hundred and fifty
six wells on paragraph were
there.
If each one cost four hundred
and fifty seven billion dollars
to plug.
That's a hundred and sixty two
million six hundred ninety two
thousand dollars which is about.
Three years of the fund and
you're not going to plug all of
those wells in any one year so
so I think you're concerned that
the money is going to run out.
It is an accurate I think that
the money will continue to come
into the find.
This makes it available directly
to the uh all conservation
division to deploy the specific
dollars two plugging actually
plugging wells and doing the
remediation and i'll turn it
over to direct your fuse.
As a madam chair.
Senator there are a couple of
factors in terms of spend rate
and other components with money
coming in one is sort of reagan
crew availability we've been
able to build our capacity up to
about five or six.
Rights available for time
are working on it one well
parage per week is the rough
math and so a feeling at the
sixty million dollars levels
assuming it was matched by an
appropriation in HB two
authorizing us to spend it is
probably realistically how we
could churn through the work one
a number clarification there are
seventeen hundred known state
and fee orphan wells we have
plugging orders for somewhere in
about the neighborhood of three
hundred fifty there's an
administrative process there
will get plugging orders for the
remainder that will sort of go
up so this will chunk through it
this provides a nice compliment
alongside the hundred and thirty
million dollars in federal
funding that is that is also
coming in but.
But it will take.
A solid decade for us to work
through this but we think this
will provide funding in a past
to support that work
emotionally I think my main
point is I think it looks like
it's sufficient now but looking
at the history of the increased
costs it will be insufficient in
four five years thank you
manager
thank you senator goes and then
I think I have a
recommendation for your next
committee I am turning center
just want to clarify so what we
shall hear.
Um.
I've been plugged by
industry.
And forty nine for from ocd so
we're only looking roughly this
planning the fund about ten
percent is it just the ocd wells
are being paid for by the.
No insurance in her guy goes
that's correct this fund would
only pay the orphan wells we
hope as a car warm strong
indicated that the companies.
Are going to plug as well this
fund is used to capture those
where the operator no longer in
business bankrupt
for whatever reason is unable to
plug that well and that becomes
been a liability of the state
and this is an effort to show
the the industry has contributed
funds to take care of that
situation as mister arms.
The.
If I just make one quick point
of clarification
as operators we are charged the
one gas conservation tax on all
of our wells be they state
federal fee are into those funds
do go into a portion of them to
go into the reclamation fund
that being said the state does
not pay for the plugging and
recommendation of federal
wealthy do the work but those
come from from separate funds so
as it is already to mexico has
the benefit of this tax on
federal wells even though they
don't have the obligation
financial obligation to the plug
those while so there isn't all
extra added benefit that's
already built into it.
Thank you for them and chairman.
Center in the share truck and I
guess my thing is I just want to
clarify because it looks like a
lot of wells.
El that are being plugged but
basically if you look at the
numbers somewhere on a tenth
this would occur currently doing
a
just trying to make sure I got
my neighbors right reading
someone on sixty million
annually to the find is out but
your bills trying to do just a
back in it.
Madam chair and say our guy I
goes
it would make available yes
included in house bill to.
It make available the sixty
million dollars and heaven
eighty million dollars uh carry
over if you will that could also
be your lies so the phone
doesn't get depleted.
Thank you for that I just want
to clarify in and I understand
man churn.
Center you know the federal
wells are different animal
together some glad he took that
out here below sort of afraid
when we've not seen in my
analysis but III think that's
good clarifying that we're just
your just with state well so
what are you thank you.
State and fee private wells too
well thanks for that thank you
center my cution
thank you madame chairman and
centers.
So the the feds are taken care
of their own reclamation.
But the oc is overseen the
application of those federal
phones is that correct
madame chairs a senator i'm
purely federal well so fed
surface fed minerals the federal
government is solely responsible
sort of a more the mixed bag on
split state private surface
federal menorals but yes the
funding the funding sources
discrete we do not bond for
an operator's federal wells
because those are covered by the
federal government and pushing
them forward and it's an
entirely a separate pot so the
numbers I spoke to were all
state and fee wells okay thank
you madame chairman and senders.
Uhm and maybe this is more
question for.
Missed future but.
What will you be able to do with
the increase of this run we've
talked about you have it been
taken the low hanging fruit you
haven't that's not what you've
been doing you've been going
after the the
maybe the more complicated clean
ups in noted to send a results
point here but.
You were.
What what what are you gonna be
able to do with the money and
will those cost start to come
down seen as how you have been
working on the more
difficult cleanups but
a madam chair senator
an increased source of funding
like this I think builds
confidence among the plugging
cruise and the company in the
local companies that have
committed cruise to us so
they'll have certainty over a
long period of time it will
allow me to initiate more
surface clean ups when pokes
talk about plugging that is
literally just the well board it
is not necessarily reclamation
in other components and so
having knowing if it were in HB
two that sixty million dollars a
year we're coming I could say
instead of running two or three
tank battery reclamations I
could double that number because
I knew there were serious
resources coming in because
unfortunately the tank batteries
once you start digging you can
be pleasantly surprised but
you're often not.
Thank you very much for that
madame chairman center
you know i'm i'm gonna echoing
center souls here's I don't like
the government having to step in
and and clean up you know and
and and pay for what private
industry should be taken on
their own responsibility however
see him where this money comes
from and it is is a tax and the
state gets a great benefit you
know kind of a fringe benefit
from the excess of this phone
this is something that afraids
have paid into for for a long
time I believe I believe it's
you mister armstrong it said it
was since the fifty fifty four
or something like that i'm sure
madam chair senator
the initial
credit such as this was created
in nineteen fifty nine slightly
lower tax rate but the entirety
that did go into the
predecessor to recommend fund at
that time and it has since been
amended
through the years
madame chair centers by amended
do you mean
held at gunpoint news for many
other
thanks
madame chairman
occurred in
you might say that the
legislative body has uh
reappropriated that money to go
elsewhere in the general fund
okay.
Thank you matt of chairman and
centers
appreciate this
I know that unfortunately there
are there are bed operators but
it looks like it there's a very
small amount that falls back
under this month to
reclaim and happy to support the
the increase in this so that
sector future
complete his purpose is so to
appreciate you bring in this and
madam chair with their own dutch
thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Is there emotion
there there is a motion for a
due pass from senator gaye goes
second from sender said the low
pass with the secretary of
please call the vote.
Senator survantes.
Senator goes.
Sender hambling.
Senator recreation.
Santanaville.
Senator pope yes.
Senator souls no
senator deal up us yes
Many thank you.
So a members we have two more
bills to try to finish before we
need to end so next we have semi
regards.
And it is senate bill two sixty
six.
Face center.
Thank you all manager good
morning to the committee.
Another senate bill to sixty six
this is the assecure community
ditch fund
senate bill to two sixty six
request one point five million
for the security community dates
fund also known as the active
the purpose of the fund is to
assist the circus with the cost
of legal representation and
expert witnesses in water right
adjudications including
settlements negotiations and
implementation the administered
by the new medical department of
agriculture at new medical state
university through an annual
grand cycle eligible applicants
for the fund our regional asset
yes associations representing a
secure sim the basin were there
is an adjudication I have here
today with me my expert witness
you might suggest that yourself
paula garcia
executive director who will
share more information and
background significant issues
this bill will address without a
manager will have pollow so
misger see if you would be
really brief
absolutely commorting madame
chair members of the committee
my name is pologarcia executive
director of the new mexico and
second association and i'm here
to
speak in support of this
legislation to appropriate funds
to their second community ditch
fund this fun was established in
nineteen eighty eight and it's
administered by mmda and this is
what's created to make sure that
a second have the resources they
need for an effective legal
representation they dudication
process it has benefited
hundreds of assectors across the
state and the reason that more
funding is needed is that the
requests for funding in recent
years have exceeded the amount
available in the fund and the.
The cost of legal experts is
increasing over time and these
negotiations and why do I
settlements are very complicated
and the assicates do need legal
representation in order to be
effectively at the table so I
made him change here to answer
questions from the committee
thank you
thank you is there anyone in the
earliest to support this bill.
Is there anyone here to oppose
this bill.
Is there anybody online for this
bill.
Okay we're gonna take up there
the audience was a you know
almost everyone was supportive
so we're gonna take two comments
from the audience so two people
would come up to speak into the
mike please.
This.
Good morning madame chair good
morning senator system senators
my name is so your estimate
better data i'm a parciante on
the asset yeah they'll mattheal
and I fully support this bill I
am a
a prominent farmer in the valley
for over half century the imbudo
valley and I fully appreciate
what rsackers have done to bring
our community together and to
cherish and honor our water
thank you.
Thank you next please.
The.
Madame chair senators my name is
kimberly martin I am a parciante
only a secure they lamacia and a
board member of the real kind of
mother reaffree holidays real
and medio and santa cruz streams
community ditch association.
Representing more than sixty a
second in the adjudication for
abbett with saturday claire
pueblo and okay a wingay I
strongly support their spell.
It's not an us versus them it's
an assecure defense bill but let
me tell you is that in the
negotiations with our attorneys
and our experts.
We come to a better
understanding of.
How are water goes and and
better ways of using it and we
do need more money for our
experts and our attorneys to to
help bring our community
together so I strongly support
this bill
thank you very much okay
committee members questions
comments
okay before we take a do passed
I had senator gay goes and then
we might go to a motion there's
no bonus sender gay and chair
thank you center I just wanted
real quick question because I
know in the past the second hand
really hard time getting their
audits now I looked in there
fire and it didn't list audits
in that are is that still this
money would be able to be used
for the audits and do we still
have problems finding auditors
madam chair and center regard
goes thank you for the question
this plan is very specific to
the adjudication process for
water rates there is a separate
fund in the after the state
auditors office that helps small
political subdivisions without
it.
Thank you for that man chairman
center promise my last question
so in this part of money will we
be able to do
so come back to the property I
hadn't called around
I had tried to get the state of
call rattle to put a
um telemeter on the bleer to
actually be able to see the
amount of water going through is
there anything in this that will
provide that kind of technology
for a second and turn
out medium chair synerge
this this bill is specific to
the second can be ditchment for
a judiciation of water rates but
there is a line item in the
state engineers budget that
deals with metering and
telemetry
thank you sir that's all I need
clarification thank you thank
you senator mccatchen brooklyn
madame chair thank you so when
you say it's it's for the
adjudication of water rights can
you please explain that just a
little bit more because the
judiciation of water rights as a
senator goes with saying I mean
if we're going to judicate those
we have to measure them and and
those things like that can you
speak a little bit more to that
please
madame chair and senator
mccutting a bell means they the
adjudication process for a
second starts when there's
a
either of the state engineer or
some reason initiates it and
being individual parts youngest
become defendants in in the
adjudication so it's like a
quiet title suit.
And the this is a second
community was established so
that those are um a seconds
could organize at the watershoot
level to
provide for a common defence in
the education but results
usually as a negotiated
settlement and typically in
those negotiated settlements
there are requirements for
metering and measurement and and
that laced the groundwork for
administration of the water I
settlement after the final
degree
madam chairman centers thank you
a lot of times i've done a
little bit this accused a lot of
times people don't want water
measured and the reason that you
don't want water measured is
because you're stealing water
right and so when you come back
and and if this if the states
come in back so if i'm
understanding this appropriation
correctly is appropriation is
going to go to kind of a ditch
in corporation and we're gonna
say okay and we're working on
these adjudications and this
goes for legal fees and things
like that in order to get those
water rights adjudicated
correctly and allocated to the
correct parties downstream
question madam charon senator
mccatch and I think that's it
that's a fair characterization
of the process what happens is
that the um state engineerable
create hydrographic survey map
and that will identify all the
owners and and
approximately what what the
amount of firm you says and
through the education process
that that ownership in amount is
determined as well as the common
elements of a wider rate.
And to answer your question
the.
Bite by establishing ownership
and quantity of water rights
this helps with the
administration of water rates
which is the charge of the state
engineers office and it it
insured that
the wider rates can be managed
and typically when the water
right settlements there's also
some understanding of how water
will be shared in times of
drought and it make sure that
them priority dates are
established but also that
there's some kind of management
regime after the settlement okay
thank you madame jones centers I
only got probably four hundred
and fifty thousand emails on
this bill so you have a super
organized how you do that but
like you guys i'm sure got them
as well so that thank you very
much.
Thank you center city
is there a second
thank you center city a lot
person center gagas.
Okay so could the secretary
please call the boat.
Center circumstance.
Santa garas
sended her hambling
santa marketing
senator novel.
Senator report yes senator to
deal open center source yes.
There is a deal office yes there
is a finance yes
thank you you have a unanimous
due pass from this committee
thank you madame chair thank you
our last bill of the morning is
senator compost center senate
bill two sixty seven story lake
native acquatic species.
Please thank you very much
madame chair members of the
committee and heston senate bill
to sixty seven would go ahead
and seek an appropriation for
the construction of a native
equipment species restoration
facility at story lake in las
vegas new mexico with that
madame chair members of the
committee if I may i'd like to
also differ at this time too
michael sloane who is the
director of the new mexico game
and fish or further explanation.
Mr slum
and i'm chairman of the comma
thank you i'd like to thank the
sponsor for bringing forward
this bill into an opportunity I
think we can't hear you
so
so just don't touch the
microphone
it's working.
All right as that better i'd
like to thank the sponsored
bringing forward this important
town legislation it's an
opportunity for us to work on
approximately sixty percent of
the species of greatest
conservation need that
our
obligated a quarter of species
currently to restore specials
like this we were put the state
of colorado in their restoration
facility with nine governmental
organizations and with.
The federal government this
facility would offer us the
opportunity to go ahead and have
control over our own destiny
restore species that we
prioritise i'm make a difference
across the landscape also the
location is great because the
state owns the property the
commission already owns water
rights at the location so in all
kind of fits together really
well with university there as
well.
Amen with that I would stand for
any question thank you madame
chair were available for
questions thank you I will now
go to the audience is there
anyone here to support this bill
anybody here to oppose this
bill.
Anybody online okay so let's
hear from the speaker please.
Thank you madame chair committee
members john crench of the new
mexico while I federation
president of the board
long retired could be employed
with the department of game and
fish
this bill we very strongly
support I think it's actually
pretty visionary I will put to
work our some of the
newer money for instance will be
coming from the the legislation
land of enchantment legacy fund
and it will give out the
department of real good tools to
do some of the kind support that
was envisioned by that bill and
with the after we will strongly
stand in sport for this and I
will be recruiting other ngos to
do the same thank you.
Thank you
we'll now go to questions
comments from committee members
senator new bill thank you
madame chair of the director
could you come in would you be
able to use legacy fence for
this project as opposed to.
The general found appropriation.
Manager considered a bill yes
the legacy pound is we've
dedicated that towards specific
greatest conservation need and
this facility would actively
work on those so we could staff
it and and pay for the
operations to those funds okay
well.
Thank you any other questions or
comments.
What's the pleasure of the
committee
there is a motion by sender gay
goes and a second from sender to
him one.
Oh i'm sorry
you're setting a bill.
Sorry very much.
Could the sector please call the
boat
senator savantus
center hamburg.
Ceremony kitchen.
Set an avail
center pope yes senator sales
yes
center city locus yes
there's a phonics yes you have a
unanimous just passed thank you
very much senators coming thank
you very much madame chairman
members of the committee
committee members we are in
recess we will meet again
thursday morning if you would
like to our fist please come at
eight thirty.
