You so much Senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair Steve
novella Senator stricter which
is in northwest New Mexico all
within San Juan County thank
you.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
Okay Senators metes.
I know they'll be joining us
Senator von case.
Okay we do have a quorum of the
committee so we will get started
committee members today we are
going from nine AM to one PM so
of course if you leave your
seats we understand are we
really trying to accomplish the
first four bills Senate bill
eighty three Senate bill one
twelve Senate bill eighty six
Senate bill one eighteen.
Then we will go to the middle
which is eight consent grid that
Senator Gallegos and Senator
Sedillo Lopez worked on.
And then we will try to move on
if we cannot move on the
following bills will roll over
to to ski.
Next to C. will we will be
meeting from nine to one are
Our agenda our time for our
committee might be adjusted
later in the week and we should
count on next to sanity not this
week Saturday but next Saturday
in the morning.
So are we do have a little
different process that we're
using this morning for the
speaking are we have answers
doom authority.
To actually identify speakers to
speak I will give a time limit
and then he will actually cut
off people our time limit is
going to be about a minute and a
half for speakers but if we if
the speaker is wrapping up and
exceeds two minutes they're
going to be just cut off cold.
And we will hear the same number
of opponents and proponents on
each bill.
So any questions from committee
members before we get started.
Senator Stefanics you didn't
have you introduce yourself or
me I am so sorry Senator Sedillo
Lopez and yes I'm Antoinette
Sedillo Lopez I'm state senator
from district sixty thank you so
much I'm Senator list appendix
some district thirty nine which
is parts of six counties and
it's a pleasure to be with you
I'm sure everybody feels that
way.
Okay so we're gonna start with
Senate bill eighty three Senator
Steinborn for your presentation
and who is your expert as well
but go ahead.
And if everybody would stay on
mute.
While we're doing this.
Good morning madam chair
committee great to be with you
we have several expert witnesses
I mean expert witnesses German
name tied up House Bill who's an
energy energy attorney who's
done a lot of work on community
choice aggregation.
And then a city council or kill
sort I don't know if he is on
line the city of Los crucis is
in support and then last Ruben
who's the finance director for
the P. grease Pueblo and that
and I know that there is other
other Act officials and.
Like commissioner Hanson would
like to speak but those are my
three expert witnesses will keep
a very brief then check.
Excellent Committee Senate bill
eighty three involves a a a
concept a framework that's been
adopted by nine other states
called community choice
aggregation allows local
governments cities counties and
tribes the opportunity to
procure energy from whoever they
want rather than being given
only one choice as we have in
New Mexico.
some would call this local
choice
word the market economy but it's
basically allowing communities
to really be able to use the
purchasing power to try to get
the best deal they can on energy
where they have community choice
aggregation this competition has
resulted in lower price energy
and greener energy and I think
that's something that all New
Mexicans would really want I
want to be very clear that it
does not include only includes
the generation of energy it does
not include the transmission of
the energy or the distribution
of the energy so the power lines
would stay the power lines on
the distribution within a
community would still stay with
still not be affected we're
really talking about is just the
energy generation itself that
they could change.
Recognizing that local commit
local
utilities that provide energy
now to communities have made
investments there is in the
legislation what's called an
exit the that if the community
should decide to go to a new
provider then the regular PRC
working with utility would
determine what's the appropriate
cost recovery exit fee that
would be paid by the customer of
the municipality choosing to
make a new change to keep that
utility hole so to speak
financially for their
investments that they made to
service that area and that exit
fee would be done over ten years
and again it would be reasonable
cost I'm determined by the PRC
so with that madam chair there
there is an amendment very small
amendment that was provided a
week ago when we were first on
the agenda we're happy to talk
about that at the right time but
I that's all I have.
So Senator Steinborn let's move
your experts before we go to the
amendment get.
Mr Costello joined to go now.
Chair Senators sent everybody
hear me yes okay great thank you
members of the committee
Senators thank you for having me
today my name is titles on
attorney based in the San Diego
area in California I've been
working with community choice
prac programs throughout the
state for the last eight years
and work with a number of them
and I want to share some
information about the local
choice Energy act as understand
where mentioned the act
authorizes local government and
tries to buy own and sell power
to residents businesses
utilities continue to provide
the transmission and
distribution service for a fee
one that one LCD providers
launch I and in addition to that
utilities will be paid an exit
fee to compensate for generation
related costs that were incurred
for customers to leave until the
service for community or local
choice programs local choices
and authorize in nine states
California Illinois Ohio
Virginia New Jersey New York
Rhode Island New Hampshire and
Massachusetts.
But currently community service
programs in California serve a
loving million customers in one
hundred and eighty cities and
counties but a very popular
program.
the budget at there are a number
of benefits the major benefits
are that and the community
choice for local choice provides
consumers with the ability to
choose electricity providers
which is I think is a first for
consumers in New Mexico I'm sure
this bill pass as it was in
California and other states at
contributes to local economic
development by redirecting
excess revenue and spending
decisions to local decision
makers and it offers a cost
effective approach to reaching
environments on other bills.
This is an opportune time to
pursue this bill given that
passage of the Energy
transitioned Act there is a very
substantial transition to
renewable power under way and
that makes it a very convenient
and important time to move
forward with this particular
piece of legislation now
in order to align the cost
structure and to.
Move forward without.
Issues related to stranded
assets are stranded costs.
So that was my presentation and
I would be happy to take any
questions.
Madam chair I third witness I
understand is in the waiting
room councillor gill sort Los
crucis does in waiting or.
Your second witness please.
let's see from the picture is
Pueblo is less.
In the house yes yes I'm here
okay.
Madam chair Senators thank you
for the opportunity to speak I'm
speaking on behalf of degrees
Pueblo the governor Quantel in
the tribal council
the tribal council and and pick
a Reese very early on had a
mission and it was to secure a
better future for its people
protected sovereignty and
heritage learn from the past and
build a resilient healthy
economy and environment with
benefits of the tribe the region
in the planet.
the decrease pueblo is the
smallest pueblo is a less than
two hundred of tribal members on
the reservation and hundred
outside
they have the least resources in
regards to its economy and yet
picker Reese's of the one that
eighty five percent of all the
tribes in New Mexico if visited
in regards to how we did our
first sewer rate which was one
megawatt that went straight to
the grid and
a little less than four thousand
panels and it's been up now for
three for three years
the one of the major factors
that we were able to do that is
that kid Carson co op had had
extricated themselves from tri
state and they were going after
so we're and we wanted to be a
partner immediately up in the
pan Yasuko valley to do
something with that.
during the three year period
well we've been the additionally
we got a grant from the
department of energy and then we
have to do a matching
conventional loan but we were
able to get a subset of such
subsidy of surplus of funds
between the loan and between the
revenue stream we get from of
generating electricity and we
use that surplus to subsidize
all tribal members for their
electricity during the the
winter for seventy dollars and
seventy five dollars a month and
during the other eight months of
fifty dollars a month that comes
straight off their bill.
With that success the department
of energy has given us a second
grant with everybody watching us
of what we're doing and we're
about to go into that and we
just recently because of the
limited amount of Indian nations
that are doing this work with
this great interest we are
initial grant of million dollars
had a minimum of a hundred
percent match are we we're
matching it to a one million to
one point three million dollar
figure they they reached out to
us two months ago we gave them
the figures are Clemente and we
now have a match of only twenty
percent they've given us a grant
to close to a one point nine
million with only four hundred
thousand matching there's great
interest up for us to do this we
the reason we want to support
this is to let everyone know
you're committee that the the
the the kind of playing field
that's necessary and the kind of
obstacles that we hear from the
other tribes we were able to
because of our situation our
resolve those with other tribes
needs this kind of act that will
help them in regards to working
with the utility companies that
have that that playing field.
Thank you.
Thank you third expert with you.
It can also resort is in the
house in the same house
somewhere.
Cancel.
Councillor sorg.
You might be muted.
And if we can't hear counselor
so madam chair we can just at
include him in on some public
comment if he's able to work out
a second issues.
In the interest of time okay
thank you so Senator Steinborn
would you present.
Your amendments and then we'll
take a motion sure them chairs
and committee hopefully you
still have the amendment front
of you and we also adjustment
center of ours assistant can
actually put it up on the screen
okay we are go ahead right thank
you madam chair committee on
page two.
This amendment would strike
point thirteen through seventeen
and replace what you see there
that the the drafting
accidentally said that customers
within a municipality could
aggregate their energy and the
appropriate concept was
municipals municipalities and
local governments can aggregate
the customers it's a municipal
governmental level decision to
move to a new provider and so
this amendment makes that
change.
From there is there a motion
from the committee to accept the
amendment.
The amendment madam chair that
was Center Hamlin thank you is
there a second.
I thank you madam chair Senator
pope seconds okay is there
discussion on the amendment.
Okay could the secretary please
call the vote role on the
amendment and we're doing this
for the purposes of the public
we're putting an amendment on
Senate bill eighty three thank
you Veronica.
Wanted.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator how much.
Senator Neville yes.
The pope yes Senator song.
Yes.
Senator Smitty yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thanks yes.
It is seven two two seven yes to
excuse.
Thank you very much okay so we
will now go to
the opponents first of all I'd
like to refresh everybody's
memory that if you're asked to
raise your hand you go to the re
actions at the bottom of the
page to the right hand and then
there is a place to raise your
hand and then when you finish
speaking you put your hand down
but right now I'd like all the
opponents.
Please raise your hand.
So if you are an opponent.
And I know there are opponents
on here.
Please raise your hand.
I can't believe there's only one
of the standard Mike I'm trying
to think to find the right hand
this is JD I can't see it either
okay at the bottom of the
screen.
Where it says participants.
Share screen record reactions if
you hit the reactions there is a
place to put your hand up.
No reaction icon.
Okay.
Go to the full screen JD and you
can get it I think Code Cody of
full screen seconds you do
there.
Thank you.
Okay so let's try this one more
time.
Out everyone who is supposed
please go to the reactions and
raise your hand.
I see one clapping instead of
racing one.
And then.
Two three four five.
Okay I'm sure there's more thank
you can lower your hands now.
However let's go to the minute
and a half for all the opponents
please.
Okay.
We'll take up to ten speakers
yes it just well we're hearing
that with the amendment was that
emailed out.
Yes Senator days ago okay I'll
search for it I just want what
we're talking thank you
certainly thank you senator.
Okay Trevor let's go to the
opponents please.
First we have Matthew.
Okay and I believe Carlos is
replacing Matt Hermio.
Yes I will be replacing the
audio this is Carlos we start
with the public service company
in New Mexico good morning madam
madam chair members of the
committee.
We want to thank all those all
on thank the bill's sponsor
center Steinborn for the
conversation regarding this
legislation I believe we agree
that it's human nature to want
options but integrate
deregulated states providing
customers with energy options
was somewhat successful in New
Mexico all the same have the
number of years ago however the
scary reality of California's
rolling brown and black outs
this is a tale of the quick
deviation for New Mexico's
parallel out.
There are some concerns and
challenges within this bill by
need to be addressed.
Control the local energy choice
be it in the hands of local
governments who do not have the
expertise or experience in
managing a local energy company
maintaining energy supply and
reduce reliability like we have
seen in other states the
consequences of mismanagement
Committee too many challenges
social and.
Financial scenarios for
communities and all New Mexicans
we commend our political
leadership for establishing
goals to reduce our carbon
footprint footprint however with
legislation like local and your
choice where there's no cop
concert concerted effort to
follow the roadmap thoughtfully
and responsibly established the
historic energy transition at.
Local energy choice proponents
base or support on premise every
rerouting existing power three
new untested quasi government
agency will somehow reduce
prices increase green energy
content Frank banning then
energy supply chain doesn't
produce less expensive electric
power nor it can solve all
overall increase the supply of
it on green energy and provide
the core problem we have seen as
the short short of this
additional production sources
renewable energy which will not
be overcome by the.
You what okay currently she went
to
Over time thank you next we have
Vince Martinez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Vince Martinez
the tri state as you know try
state is not for profit
cooperative that provides
electric generation to forty two
not for profit rural electric
cooperatives and for state.
By twenty twenty for more than
fifty percent of the tristate
energy we provide to our members
will be fifty will be from
renewable sources six years
earlier than the ETA mandate by
the end of this decade will add
another thousand megawatts of
wind and solar utility scale
with great savings to our
members today with our eleven
New Mexico members in our New
Mexico real and I and the New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association we stand
in strong opposition is to see
Senate bill eighty three.
As a multi state provider of
electric generation and
transmission.
And I'm like independent power
producers and energy brokers we
are regulated by the federal
energy regulatory commission as
such we provide a multitude of
certain key services beyond just
sending electrons down the line
local state federal regulatory
and legal compliance
environmental compliance safety
and reliability.
Access to regional transmission
service and renewable services.
Such as the start of our
participation in the southwest
power pool in balance market on
Monday and perhaps our greatest
importance on going concern for
involvement with the communities
we serve because we are I think
because we are the communities
we serve tri state has the where
with all to serve New Mexico
consumers and unlike Energy
brokers who merely aggravate
market we own generation we
operate transmission and we
manage energy for our members we
know how to serve our load with
our resources we are accountable
to our members and provide them
with the real fixed costs in
support of our rates finally
this bill would serve to weaken
the viability of are firmly
established member cooperatives
in New Mexico by diluting the
local market without any
significant benefit to either
side thank you madam chair.
Thank you could we please let
Senator vontade and he's in the
waiting room and he's in the
meeting now okay we thank you
Senator about this and do we
have
See do we have Senator Gallegos
are not.
Okay we'll wait to hear from him
so go ahead cover for the next
one.
Next we have Kevin Greenwald.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's Kevin
grow mold on the CEO of the
rural electric coop association
here in New Mexico I membership
includes fourteen distribution
costs into generation
transmission cooperatives
we stand in opposition this bill
seventeen eighty years ago we
were created to be the rollback
of aggregators in many cases the
only way we became economically
viable was because we can
aggregate rural rural
communities if this bill now
allows the communities to
go to the local aggregators that
automatically pops in every
citizen in the community
unless they opt out that's gonna
be a great burden on the rest
the read the rural areas.
This strand.
Millions and millions of dollars
because while they say you can
get distribution charter
transition charge.
Members you have to pay for the
transfer the generation that
they already committed to the
contracts
the more rural areas of our
costs will not be soft
recordation.
We believe that park what
members need to have the ability
to choose for themselves.
We only about five miles or by
consumers for mild line now that
will greatly dilute that and we
be talking about the areas that
many view your members serve
like Moriarty Eckels loving ten
Sapporo requests
to name a few and the dilution
losing those communities I think
would be.
Next we have Michael d'antonio.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Mike d'antoni with
Xcel energy which serves the
eastern part of New Mexico and
West Texas of the committee I
want to make a point that local
choices not reduce carbon or or
increased renewables these folks
that come and usually procare
office the existing market
resources so this is not
contributing to our goals of
reducing carbon in New Mexico
I'm gonna send a couple of
examples to kind of cautionary
tales one from that
Massachusetts and one from the
light switch and it took a this
kind of the endeavor in
Massachusetts example from
twenty fifteen to twenty
nineteen.
Only a thousand complaints from
residential customers Attorney
General's office claiming
predatory practices to sign up
as to members.
the during that time for a.
Residents who switched from
their utility provider to local
twice provider rate.
The three hundred forty million
dollars more this is in
Massachusetts alone the.
The internet in general that
state also concluded that low
income customers are more likely
to be negatively impacted.
Is that a two hundred dollar per
year increase utility costs that
more than if they were to stay
with the chili provider at that
site chase is for that also the
example all the Illinois
commerce commission issued an
annual report.
The development of the retail
market in July.
Next we have a GED bowling I'm
Senator guy a goes is in the
waiting room.
Okay I'm sorry please go ahead
Getty.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me OK yes thank you madam
chair my name is JD pulling to
that and I am here today
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce the chamber is a strong
supporter of the Energy
transitioned Act and it believes
that the act is working well New
Mexico is now a national leader
in sustainable energy
development the chamber believes
that this progress should not be
deterred which could happen if
Senate bill eighty three is
enacted in New Mexico voters
recently passed a measure that
should heighten the experience
level on the PRC therefore the
chamber believes the state is on
the right course for future
energy development and that this
bill represents unnecessary side
path thank you.
Thank you.
However.
Next we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you chair members of the
committee I'm Ashley Wagner the
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce I represent businesses
all over New Mexico and in every
industry and I'm a voice for
smart business practices that
support small businesses and
local economies unfortunately
local choice does not support
our communities and that's
unfair complication and cost so
we oppose this bill now more
than ever local businesses need
energy reliability and
affordability when we read the
local energy choice bill a few
things jumped off the page and
had many of us more than a
little concerned here's a brief
rundown first of all local
choice would give energy
oversight to local governments
and city officials I'm no energy
energy expert I don't have a
specialized to green lost energy
regulation or engineering and
I'm certain that many smaller
communities also do not have the
in house expertise to diversity
complexities and energy
management I think we've all
heard about a recent water
metering and billing issue that
landed on our struggling
communities it's clear that
without appropriate expertise
costly mistakes are made.
Community choice programs are
unregulated many communities
would have no transparent
mechanism to keep their energy
bills competitive and affordable
local choice also savings
customers and depletes customer
base and business at the more
customers you have the lower you
can price your products
affordability is supported by
customer sales volume without
William our communities will
have higher bills finally at
many levels I'm sure many of us
have experienced what occurs
when people have overlapping
responsibilities I'm clear
jurisdictional boundaries and
I'm regulated business practices
individually these things re
habit but together is a cluster
of uncertainty challenges and
costly mistakes please go to
oppose this bill to ensure that
are vulnerable communities
maintain their access to
reliable and affordable power
that expertly managed thank you.
Thank you extra work.
Next we have William selling.
Next to do and not just in our.
However all these people on
screen William and then.
I'm not seeing that that is the
list of for all the bonus.
Okay and that was how many of
five six.
One six.
Okay is there any other
opponent.
Lauren Patterson are you an
opponent.
Yes ma'am.
Okay why don't you go ahead and
speak permanent half.
Thank you Senator Stefanics and
members of the committee my name
is Lauren Patterson I'm with New
Mexico cattle growers
association New Mexico cattle
growers opposes this bill as
many of you know we live on the
extremities of many of our power
grids we fear that the local
choice Energy would jeopardize
our co ops from providing those
rural areas a reasonable
regulated right we also fear
that they would not be able to
cover the cost of the
infrastructure that they put
into these rural areas.
And due to the unpredictability
of this local choice Energy at
the distribute distribution
should be hard to evaluate
chaotic and ultimately more
costly we also fear that the
elderly people of our rural
communities who rely on a
reliable energy source could be
affected thank you.
You are there any other
opponents.
So.
Okay so we've heard seven
opponents let's go to and Lauren
please take your hand down now
let's see how many by a hand to
first supporters there are.
You go down to your reaction at
the full screen are right and
raise your hand so we can see
supporters.
Okay I see one two three four
five.
So are you can take your hands
down now and Trevor let's
identify let's hear from seven
proponents.
First we have Anna Hansen.
Commissioner go ahead.
I'm good morning madam chair as
the phonics and
Can members of the committee I
am representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico for which Santa Fe County
is a member and I am the
commissioner from Santa Fe
County the local choice Act aims
to help local governments and
tribes have more energy and
economic independence it would
allow cities towns tribes
counties
to invest in their own
electrical electric utility and
distribute electricity to its
businesses and residents keeping
the profits local rather than
seeing our money leave town
every month participating
counties municipalities and
tribes could use those monies
for other essential service or
reduced rate.
And I am aware that in response
to the ETA investor owned
utilities are indeed moving to
our to move renewable energy
sources but we must move faster
the climate crisis demands that
we take advantage of every
possibility we support local
choice because it can accelerate
even more our shift to solar and
wind.
The citizens of Santa Fe County
want greener energy faster and
they want to decide how to make
this happen.
I ask you to please vote yes on
Senate bill eighty three and I
thank you for your time.
And to remember and to remind
you that it is time to move away
from outdated models of monopoly
power thank you very much.
Thank you extra work.
Next we have can still Aguilar.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
additional Aguilar I'm here is
a.
Post a spokesperson for yucca
youth United for climate crisis
action to stand in support of SB
eighty three.
As young New Mexicans we love
our state in home but we are
frightened and distressed by the
addiction we witness to oil and
gas revenue and dirty Energy.
We are frightened by the abusive
relationship we witness between
our state and S. and extractive
and predatory corporation
utilities and industries our
community is not clean energy
and we were opportunities to
pursue local economic
development the don't treat the
long term health and livability
of the place we love for short
term and short sighted revenue
that comes at the cost of human
life and the.
Our own energy futures and
supplies.
We'll be able to reinvest Energy
dollars back into our
communities hundreds of millions
of dollars that New Mexicans
spend on electricity will no
longer be exported out of the
state sorry out of state
shareholders but can be a
critical part of the puzzle as
we and our addiction make the
transition and do our part to
address both climate and
economic justice I think that's
why you've heard from so many
insurance industry interests
today the idea of transforming
our active economic development
into the hands of our
communities and creating
alternative sustainable sources
of revenue so we can break free
from corporate control is a real
threat.
We ask you to lead with courage
and embrace the transition to
energy democracy that is so
desperately needed please vote
in support of SB eighty three
thank you.
Next we have Neal Denton.
Madam chair members of the
committee I understand ability
planner for the city of Santa Fe
and I'm reading a letter written
by our mayor Alan Webber.
I see this measure is one step
toward greater innovation
flexibility resiliency and
energy independence.
Let me offer this analogy from
the evolution of computing
regionally computing was
organized around one large
powerful centralized computer
central computer was a single
enormous machine at all that
only a few specialist New had
operate it was powerful it
wasn't open innovation wasn't
resilient it wasn't user
friendly and it wasn't likely to
produce more flexible and less
expensive options centralized
computing was right for its time
but it had the changes needs
change and technology changed
the next step was desktop
computing which began the
evolution of computing for
technology that was distributed
adaptable resilient personalized
less costly and more powerful.
Evolution is headed inevitably
for technology that offers more
flexibility more innovation more
resiliency more utility and as
with this piece of legislation
more choice.
I believe that the same
evolution is inevitable when it
comes to energy we know this is
what some of the design
requirements are we wanted
energy system that is safe and
secure resilient and adaptable
flexible and localized we know
that there are solutions to our
energy needs that will be more
sustainable and economical than
system we currently depend on we
know there are solutions that
will be more environmentally
responsible and help fight
climate change we know there are
solutions that will allow
communities to make choices that
fit their own energy needs and
their own energy preferences
this measure will continue to
advance New Mexico opening our
state at the forefront of
reimagining our energy future so
much of what we've inherited
from the past all right for its
time is now obsolete when it
comes to energy generation
distribution of regulation one
piece.
Next man Paul Gibson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members especially
want to thank our bill Sanchez
for introducing this legislation
my name is Paul Gibson co
founder retake Our Democracy an
all volunteer organization with
twenty five hundred members
statewide we work with allies
across the state to identify
bills we will support each year
this year we identified twenty
the bills with we call
transformational built in today
you will hear three of those
bills starting with SB eighty
three you will hear from others
about the legal financial and
environmental reasons why local
choice Energy should be passed
through this committee you'll
hear how it will allow the local
community to determine its own
energy future based on its
unique values and priorities
instead of being forced to
accept the decisions of monopoly
utility companies so I want to
focus on something else today
you.
And what the New Mexico voters
are looking to you to do
Senators I've been attending
hearings for five years I so
appreciate all you do all you
must decide all you sacrifice to
serve the state and today you
face three critical voice votes
over the past year we have all
experienced the importance of
the role of government in our
lives we've experienced the
devastating deadly consequences
resulting from a government that
abdicates its responsibilities
we see in states compete with
each other for PPE COVID tests
and now vaccines we've seen what
happens when our lives are left
to the decisions made by big
business by the market the last
two weeks we've experienced a
glimmer of the difference when
leaders lead and government
governs in June and then again
in November New Mexicans made
their priorities clear.
They want bold decisive action
not complacency and delay they
want government to govern in the
people's interests not in the
interest of gas and.
Next Eleanor brother of.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the community of the
committee I'm Eleanor Bravo I am
chair of the board of directors
of new energy economy right now
it is illegal for city county
and sovereign nations to buy
electricity from independent
producers are owned and operated
elector city producing power
plants and sell that electricity
to residents we need to make
that it legal and local choice
Energy will do just that it is
market driven no one would be
forced to subscribe it's a
choice and the people of New
Mexico deserve to have this
choice it is a concept which
time has come.
We would still pay PNM to use
its electric poles and lines to
transmit and deliver renewable
energy but PNM energy resources
and prices would be in
competition with lower cost
independent power producers this
change in the law hurts no one
not even the monopoly utilities
but budget communities
throughout the state any kind of
change will require some
adjustment but this change must
and will go forward we all went
to our young people who have
spoken up here today to leave
them a legacy of clean energy
clean air and water this is a
step in the right direction
please vote yes thank you.
However how many has been.
That is five and then also gill
sorg Year expert witness is also
on okay so we're out we won't
count him as part of the expert
witnesses so we can take two
more proponents.
And I will allow him to speak
for Senator Steinborn madam
chair if I then I know
counselors or has another
meeting if I could allow him to
just speak now okay when you
jump in counselor is one of the
expert witnesses that can get
her yet thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you to the
centers of the conservation
committee I thank you for
letting me speak on local choice
Energy I believe and the Los
crucis city council believes
that The New Mexico should have
a choice where they get their
electrical energy from with
local choice New Mexicans
consumers may choose to say the
cost of their left entered
electrical energy numbers show
it's a competitive and in time
it will be even less expensive.
Are I'll use have been resistant
doing and going to seller our
renewables secondly New Mexicans
may want to choose to protect
against climate change by not
burning fossil fuels to obtain
their electrical energy this
bill gives that choice local
governments cities towns country
counties and our sovereign
indigenous nations will have
another choice to provide
electricity to operate their
governments and provide for the
residents.
Key our ambitious goals that Los
crucis has I want to be fifty
percent carbon free by twenty
thirty with an electric vehicle
fleet we can't do that without
I'll see you the rather
It will boost the local economy
and generates revenue makes
sense for use for our budget
solar energy resource in New
Mexico this is all about our
choice when we all want that
choice and I would like to note
that has been mentioned before
that the New Mexico relations
for sustainability which is Los
crucis member favors is to.
I'm all about the and equity of
our people and this L. C. E.
will help.
Let's get have the choice thank
you.
Thank you for joining us
counselors are.
So we are now back to the last
two proponents.
We have Lisa would grow.
Right.
Thank you hello madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Lisa rock and the
sustainability officer for the
city of Los crucis and I'm
responsible for tracking the
energy transition and assisting
the city with its adoption city
as a counselor sorg said is in
favor of SB eighty three when we
look at the current sources of
energy in the transportation
industry commercial and
residential sectors these
sectors only reliant electricity
for a little over a third of
their energy obviously
transportation relies on
gasoline and diesel buildings
use natural gas among other
fuels with the energy transition
the transportation and building
sectors will become electrified
the shift in electrification
mulut moves the electricity
monopolies control from one
third of the energy sector to
almost a hundred percent local
choice Energy allows more
entities to share in the
services needed with the energy
transition by generating and
expensive and clean energy well
current utilities can focus on
transmission and distribution
which will also be growing and
becoming more complex we urge
you to support S. B. R. eighty
three thank you.
The last proponent.
Madam chair I understand the
tact Tammy of fingerboard is
I'm a senator Trevor is
controlling the speakers now
okay.
However one last speaker.
We have Gail Evans as the last
speaker thank you very much
thank you members of the
committee my name is Gail Evans
on attorney with the New Mexico
environmental law center and the
New Mexico environmental law
center.
Strongly supports this bill this
is a critical step towards a
green sustainable economy in New
Mexico it's a way to open up the
market on energy production and
permits local governments to
produce their own energy.
It reminds me very much of when
we were all switching to cell
phones and they utilities like
eighteen T. R. were sounding the
alarms that this guy was going
to fall if the market opened up.
And in fact the sky didn't fall
but companies like eighteen T.
had to adjust to a new way of
doing business in in a New
World.
and the key point here is that
this is about choice it's not
saying anybody has to set up a
lot of local energy provider and
it's not even saying that anyone
who lives in a community where
local energy providers set up
has to participate will be
residents can opt out and no
local government has to do this
but it provides choice which
ends up opening up the market
driving down prices and creating
more green energy in our state
which is exactly what we need so
we ask you please to pass this
fall thank you.
Thank you we're not too of
questions and comments from
committee members.
No committee members have any
questions okay so we have zero
Senator pope then senator guy it
goes.
Then Senator souls and Senator
renewable.
Senator pope if you do it
yourself thank you madam chair
Senator Steinborn just just one
quick question and you know just
hearing in the dialogue and the
presentation I just want to
confirm that this doesn't
mandate that local
municipalities have to actually
You know choose these
alternative companies are routes
to get their energy that they
still have a choice in the
matter and also a choice and you
know purchasing our renewable
energy from these companies I
just want to make sure it's it's
happening at the local level and
it's not a mandate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator cope with the question
you are correct it is absolutely
one hundred percent the choice
of the local government.
Whether or not they choose to do
so and in fact the local
provider the current provider
can also bid for that business
so of course so provided they
really are the most affordable
option when all costs are
considered of then then they
will I'm sure when that business
because that's in the interests
of the government the citizens
so thank you for and of course I
I just want to point out because
I think someone mentioned that
running great path with the ETA
why we would want to deviate
from that path this legislation
mandates that any new provider
must at a minimum meet the
renewable energy threshold of
the current energy transition.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
centers by one that's all I have
thank you thank you I'm sorry
remember if I said Senator
nobilis Center and diagnose the
second.
Madam chair I think you said I
was but all you have to the
center developed if you'd like
okay let's go ahead.
madam chair Senators time more
Rep Paul does I was speaking to
our county commission and to be
getting the the
bill introduction but I do have
a few questions Senator
Steinborn are on in listening to
the proponents it seems like
it's all the larger communities
you know the Santa fe's world
Los crucis or world do you
perceive the small communities
would participate in your
option.
So Madam chair representative
guy goes good question it's
totally their choice and I think
you know where you live.
Well those are your Lea County
Senator built Lea County San
Juan they've got a different
situation note you know
communities can aggregate
together if they choose to do so
and so it's just completely it
creates a creative market place
a dynamic marketplace where they
can compete in for that matter
so could a circular rural co op
I mean the exact structure that
exists now.
Thank you madam chair that what
I appreciate that madam chair
and then chair center I guess my
goes to my next question in the
smaller areas we have a roll
call ups and I understand you
know if PNM can handle the cost
of the infrastructure a lot of
the smaller co ops do you see a
rate increase by doing this to
tell you a little background I
work for the guests come in New
Mexico PNM for thirty years and
there's always a rate of that we
have to pay for the
infrastructure in your bill all
the infrastructure costs go back
to the municipality as a
costs for using the facility's
is that how that would work
madam chair senator now actually
the cost recovery it's called
ecstasy in in the law and it
would actually go so so to the
extent that there's any cost
recovery actually all cost
recovery in the legislation on
page I believe fourteen to the
extent that there are any
stranded assets or cost of
investment cost of servicing
currently servicing a an area
that are lost when a
municipality or a county chooses
to accept that they're allowed
to try to work out a reasonable
fee based on reasonableness
standards that are defined in
the bill that would be worked
out with PRC and then they're
allowed to recover those costs
so but it's not the local
government is recovering that
cost it would be would be in
essence the new provider that
would then be passed on to the
to the former utility the
service here at.
Madam chair and senator I guess
that would bring up my next
question I understand a recently
California had raised its costs
on the committee
Association in and I was
wondering as far as the
community choice Association
wondering is is that due to the
increase in
The ex appear to cost recovery.
Madam chair senator I will defer
to tie who's the energy expert
out there in California tact US
senator Munoz ridge to respond
here questions or a guy goes
there was a methodological
changing how the exit fee was
calculated in California and it
did increase the the exit fee
and and and so that was simply a
done percentage there of you
whether the exit fee was
assessed properly.
Madam chair representative if I
could just make little comment
you it also asked about paying
more money for infrastructure I
just want to make a separate
little point which is that part
of the problem with the business
model we have right now in New
Mexico is that the PRC allows
utilities to make a right of
return on infrastructure we
incentivize the building of more
power infrastructure we do not
incentivize a reduction in
energy usage in conservation so
when we talk about fees that
customers of PNM or a passel
electric that our communities
are costly fighting it's the
building of excess energy
capacity because they're allowed
to recruit right of return under
this new model are quite frankly
you shift that model to a new
provider that hopefully you know
community may say Hey we want
eighty percent renewable energy
within ten years or twenty years
so it just completely gets rid
of that perverse incentives to
build more infrastructure which
is passed on to the customer
thank you.
One more point to respond to Mr
Draghi's earlier question if
that's alright.
Asked about whether there is a
separate ad Fiennes registrant
to transmission and distribution
fees.
And so yeah the the transmission
and distribution fees are
charged separately to community
or local choice customers and
those fees get paid directly to
the to the utility of the call.
Thank you for tides madam chair
center and I've got another
question as muted by the chair
someone in her organization has
just correcting that Senator
Gallegos but in in the same
discussion tiles wondering if
the changes in California.
Are those being currently looked
at so so they change the rates
are for the committee points are
those been looked at those
numbers in this bill I guess
someone not wanting to go back
in two years and have to see
that you guys were wrong in your
numbers and have to update do
you know if they're being
considered a current numbers.
The bill itself doesn't have
numbers and this contemplates a
process for the by the PRC would
assess the costs and Santa Fe.
Okay and that that madam chair
center brings me to my next
question then so this process
does fall under oversight of P.
Garcia is that correct.
Center there if if I may there
are the PRC does have oversight
over certain aspects of
community or local chose not not
it's not regulated in the same
exact manner as the utility but
there is PRC oversight over some
aspects of the program.
What relief.
And and and tie it to explain to
me some of those aspects are
different what PNM or any the co
ops to currently.
I certainly can't Senator the as
as you know the PRC has fairly
expansive regulatory authority
over utilities at the including
over right making and energy
generation procurement decisions
that is not the case with the
community your local service
providers they have the ability
to independently set rates and
they have the ability to make
independent procurement
decisions other aspects of their
operations would be regulated by
the PRC for example compliance
with energy transition act and
other laws.
Okay well thank you for that and
and I guess madam chair so that
might.
Last question
in.
They FIR talks about the PRC
work is going to increase but is
not cover.
Senator how are we going to
resolve that.
Option.
Yes so Madam chair
representative SO I I actually
have some communication with one
of our PRC commissioners and I I
don't think they're concerned
frankly about the workload of
this.
I realize the FY are says it
it's going to add some working
it might add some work if if
this gets engages completely
hypothetical but but at least
one of the PRC commissioners I
spoke with didn't think it was
an unmanageable addition.
Madam chair and senator I guess
to me a hundred seventy thousand
B.
a little bit of a a hick up to
their budget I appreciate that
now you'll my time.
Thank you so much what we have
done while you were speaking as
we put Senator in front of all
your names so that the public
knows and there is a way you can
do that each time you go on at
the public might not know which
of us are the committee members
so thank you very much for
allowing us to do that next we
have the Senators souls and then
Center Novell.
Thank you madam chair up and
Senators juggling good that year
in the country thank you.
Madam chair and senator.
What this bill presented to any
of the interim committees and
are vetted process discuss
their.
Madam chair Senators sold I
don't believe that was presented
to an interim committee that I'm
aware of any help with perhaps
a.
Tire Maryland of.
Not that I'm aware.
As I look through this list
committee a few
week or so ago was going through
community solar this looks like
this is the disparities that
kind of like a rural electric co
ops or community solar types of
things are for those of similar
kinds of programs where they're
buying energy on the open market
or.
You madam chair senator I don't
want to draw the corollary
without knowing what
implications you're referring to
other than to answer the
question this way they are they
can choose to become a provider
so they can create a new
framework for the municipality
themselves can become can become
an energy generator and Assens
and you know like they do in
Farmington Farmington's got a
misli owned
municipally owned utility and
some other cities around the
country.
So madam chair and senator up
this is apologies going out and
procuring contracts with various
providers for energy at a set
price for is the price of.
Subject to the spot market up
and down daily fluctuations.
Well great question Madam chair
representative so yes it in
essence they would be able to go
out to the marketing procure
energy so it it really creates
that it doesn't it doesn't this
bill doesn't say where that
energy comes from other that it
has to be those those energy
transition at targets at a
minimum and so I would certainly
hope that the local government
would negotiate the parameters
of what they can expect in their
utility costs before doing that
but it is really the power of
the local government feel the
negotiate that deal and put it
out to the market and see what
the market will bear including
the current utility provider
given the best the best
opportunities.
Thank you madam chair and
senator is it possible for
community solar to operate
within a local choice
municipality can they operate
side by side.
I would think so madam chair
senator by virtue of the local
government by virtual local
government really controlling
the.
Feel the play that they can
absolutely make provisions to
allow for that for a new
provider to work with local
choice programs in fact it might
be more hospitable towards a
quite frankly depending upon the
model.
Senator Stewart I'm coming from
with that is it's almost with
local choice and community solar
as a market competition with
each other to find out
have members as to who can give
both the lower rate based on
where they're buying or
procuring their energy is that
accurate so that they would not
be in conflict with each other
but with a big competition with
each other.
Madam chair representative it's
possible but it's also possible
that especially if you're if
both these bills were to pass
this session a really visionary
approach would be you would
actually create a new a new
model for a local government
that would work in harmony with
with community choice so that
again maybe you're actually
subordinating the whole profit
motive component here of our
current energy production
instead you're looking at what's
best for customers what's best
for citizens and you know inner
including cost containment so I
think taking that kind of public
perspective rather than a
corporate perspective you can do
a lot of great things by having
community solar and local choice
work together actually.
Madam chair and senator I would
you indicated that the local
choice requirements must be that
the renewable energy standards
set by the EPA on page four line
six twenty forty says we have to
have eighty percent renewable by
twenty forty by twenty forty
five it says zero carbon what is
the difference between those two
so data present zero carbon I
twenty forty five and it what.
Eighty percent renewable wise
what renewable one zero carbon
what's the difference.
Well madam chair etcetera the
only I can say this with taken
from the Energy transitioned
Act.
So but but I will say that are.
You know one of the challenges
frankly is you know we still
allow well anyway I don't so I
don't really have a great
specific answer for you other
than this comes from the energy
transition act so this bill is
drafted to track with the energy
transition act in that section
simply says it has to follow
those benchmarks of the energy
transition at.
Senator this doesn't thank all
of those these have these must
be that by these what this is
new
it does track with those what's
the difference between that
renewable and zero carbon.
And yet they can after that we
welcome hundred year we talking
about.
Well.
Madam chair experts anybody want
to answer that my my answer is
this tracks with it's not new
law in the sense that this is
this is importing the benchmarks
of the Energy transitioned Act
into that so it's it's just
grabbing on to existing laws
saying that any new provider
must meet those benchmarks but
hi do you have an answer for
that I I I do think Senator
Steinborn etcetera etcetera so
there's a distinction between
there are of an interminable
Energy the primary distinction
is that zero carbon includes the
entire renewable category so
wind solar and so forth but it
also includes nuclear which has
no carbon emissions associated
with it we're talking so
renewable as a subset of zero
carbon essentially so when when
you see their part in that it is
includes the renew of nuclear
generated energy and when you
see renewable we're just talking
about wind and solar and the
resources in that category.
Madam chair and thank you and I
think that's an important
difference in the language there
that often people don't pick up
all of the research indicates
it's almost impossible to get to
a hundred percent renewable if
you don't include nuclear and so
what this is saying at the
tracks with the EPA is after
twenty forty then local choice
options must be including some
nuclear as part of their
portfolio in order to reach the
hundred percent is that
accurate.
Well that and then chair I
wouldn't characterize it that
way I think technology is
changing and and I so I
certainly wouldn't characterize
it that way and I wouldn't
inspire for that solution and I
will say one thing about I read
an article about PNM and their
plans for meeting the benchmarks
of the TA they talk about the
continual use of nuclear power
which is.
Which is something I'm very
concerned about a nuclear waste
so I that would not I mean again
this language is designed to
track with PTA which I think was
appropriate for this act
but you know certainly I would
hope that we wouldn't you know
as far as.
The technology and battery
storage and everything else that
we would not have to twenty
years from now the using that
technology to meet the
benchmarks.
Madam chair representative but
that's exactly why it is not
that different in there is
according to enroll the national
renewable energy lab and various
others is as you get closer
closer to a hundred percent it
gets.
Possible to meet the higher
package that way and busting
food you're clear and so this
particular one also that is
requiring local choice to be
that's a hundred percent which
means at least with the
technology we have today we
would include nuclear would you
agree that that's the case again
Madam chair senator no I
wouldn't for the reasons I said
before I I respect where you're
coming from any and that may be
the calculus today and again you
know what we're trying to do
here this is really not about
this is really about the local
choice and that's the point of
this bill is is giving another
energy provider the same
opportunity to compete under the
same ground rules that exist in
law today so I I appreciate the
point you're making about that
and I share those concerns
obviously about nuclear but at
but I would hope that that.
What can achieve zero carbon
will change over as technology
changes as well.
Madam chair it and senator I
understand but that is why those
words are in there is as this is
currently written would require
local municipalities that
provide to do this with your
least anything we know what this
point that they must reach
hundred percent zero carbon
which means at this point
requires nuclear out what would
happen if they don't beat those
all what are the penalties for
municipality that doing local
choice if they are not meeting
the requirements of the ACA.
I'll be fired from their
contract.
To be in breach of agreement.
This is the law.
A breach of the agreement with
who Madam chair I'm sorry.
With the local government and
and they're agreeing to comply
with the law the local of the
local choice Energy act which
requires that they meet those
benchmarks of.
The energy transition act and
given that local government will
be overseeing those contracts.
They will they'll be in breach
of agreement beyond that I mean
are there other legal
ramifications a tie that you can
speak to.
Yes the and I'm I'm a apologize
not familiar the penalty
structure that's been set up for
failing to comply with the
energy transition act but.
So so.
So that's a good so that's a
good question Senator souls that
and in terms of what the penalty
is a.
The penalties would be but as Mr
as Senator Steinborn a reference
certainly any providers would be
and in violation of their
agreements with the community
community local shows providers
service energy you know energy
companies that is thousands of
those agreements so that's
that's a larger question about
ETA that's a good question about
the penalty structure that that
that that is you know should
should probably be implies.
And madam chair like the kind of
my point here is this is a lot
of municipalities to do this
municipalities can't be a
violation of the municipalities
where they that are going to
penalize themselves of their.
We have some control to the PRC
over investor owned utilities
that don't the thank you again
even though there were no
penalties written into that box
this is separate law that is
requiring a certain amount of
energy produced from particular
kinds of sources which again has
no penalty if you don't do it
it's like oh sorry go up we get
the twenty forty and you're
eighty percent and you're
required in five years to do
that under present and the only
thing that's available is
nuclear with that then at that
point if there is not your
technology with that require in
this palette is to go out and
purchase nuclear energy on the
market.
By the respondent nuclear
question sorry excuse me start.
Go ahead type thank you thank
you senator at the center of
sources actually correct there
but a lot of studies that have
pointed to difficulties in
reaching one hundred percent
renewable or carbon for a lot of
the studies have a point to the
intermittency of renewable
resources wind and solar that
docks at generate power all day
long
hello all to this point we
haven't had a viable alternative
technology that's developed
however what we're seeing is
that energy storage is a very
powerful tool to store renewable
resources and energy and
resources are seeing very large
scale energy storage projects
being deployed here in
California and they are serving
the same role that based power
has has served in the past so
there is a technological path to
avoid nuclear if that's the
desire of the state and local
communities.
Instead you still have the
floor.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator I I certainly storage is
a big help but storage is
typically useful for the daily
fluctuations in power and the
water to date question the power
of dispatchable but it does not
meet the requirements of the
seasonal needs where there are
some cases where two years is
much higher and as with the
indicated when we move toward
much higher use of electricity
for space heating and for the
heckles out we cannot that with
the the storage capacity in the
state think project that so just
very concerned people we need to
be aware that what we're really
talking about when we get to
zero carbon these with all the
technologies right now it's
require you disparities to
purchase nuclear energy in order
to fill that gap
Madam chair at all with my
questions they're just you know
what the last piece of
in return on investment of that
the investor owned utilities I
think what local choice actually
does is it allows of energy
providers who might work on much
smaller margins that and the
guaranteed return on investment
investor owned utilities in the
that margin that could get
passed on to customers as a
thank you madam chair docking.
Thank you before we go on a
center got a ghost in senators
souls we take our hands down
Senator von case did you want to
be on the list.
Okay we have next Senator
renewable all senators to DO
Lopez and Senator communities.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator Steinborn a first off
philosophically I have no up.
Issue existed so as you
mentioned earlier Farmington has
their own city on utility and
our rates are substantially
lower than the PNM rates in the
and as far as I know.
Steve bullock creek and it's
because we don't have.
Well it exist strictly for the
benefit of the local people
personal profit motive there's
just a it's it's community on so
I think it works well although I
think the under the as you
mentioned the.
PNM utilities are PNM type
utilities
Are allowed in line and have
percent return on investment
that's where they make their
money more toys they got the
more money they make the better
they pay their shareholders all
I can think I've often tried to
think of the system where we
could change that were the
company would be allowed a
reasonable profit but not
necessarily based on their their
number of windmills I got out
there or or our plants or
whatever and I have come up with
a way to do that to.
If you want to collaborate on
that and visit with me about a
system that does that but under
the current system I don't know
how we get to it Albuquerque
bailed on the amendment for
example.
And said we're gonna have a
community system.
What would that do to a utility
like PNM if you take that big
that big of a chunk out of their
total.
In base of customers can you
give me a feel for what that
amounts to though madam chair
senator Neville thank you for
the question thanks for sharing
the story about Farmington
because that's a real world
example of what other
communities opportunities they
can get
two with local choice and only
that what Farmington has to be
able to maybe be able to sell
its energy to local communities
your by and further for the left
so the exit the on page fourteen
of the bill it deals with this
really important.
Element which is the the exit
fees and recover recover doing
cost recovery for utility that
loses some of its customers the
basically the customers in the
City of Albuquerque in that
situation if they were to say
we're going with a different
solution than PNM coaster of a
cost recovery process with the
with the PRC to determine.
What is the value of that
investment that they made to
service that area that otherwise
would be certainly borne by
other customers and then the
customers there in Albuquerque
as part of that process would
have to absorb those costs so
that they're not being passed on
so that's the answers is those
those costs are absorbed the
those business losses and away
are absorbed by the customers
are choosing to exit from their
system and so knowing that they
then we'll decide if that's
still a good deal for them to
exit and go with a different
solution or not.
I guess that's where I'm getting
to is PNM is that number power
lines and they have a number of
substations all and thank and
that's on the books you don't
have to do anything those
numbers are are on their on
their balance sheet somewhere so
it's a billion dollars on what
is some big number of teacher
yeah and so.
Albuquerque says we want to do
that the amendment says we're
supposed to get nine and half
percent of our residual value
whatever it's depreciated two
million dollars or half of that
whatever any number.
So they get their line and have
present there doesn't appear to
be a cost savings there you
still got to pay the nine and a
half percent the PNM is already
got yeah they can go by their
electricity from some solar
plant across the world you know
somewhere else and maybe so
cheaper but and they can sort of
the so just like from certain.
But I'm not sure that there's a
real savings that's what
concerns me is that.
Going from one system the other
it might even be more expensive
I've been in was involved as a
real estate appraiser unit that
suffered tired but I used to do
that the couple years well more
that few years back I did City
of Bloomfield wanted to come out
of the Farmington system and
when you start to do the numbers
and you add up all right away
that's where I was involved I
did all right away regions of
that.
Is a big number and you try to
get out the city of Farmington
for Bloomfield by that.
Whether it's fees were not
audible they haven't done it yet
so I guess come to the
conclusion.
I am concerned that the
economics may not be fair and it
so may ultimately end up costing
the.
Repair more money in the long
run not because it doesn't work
if you started from the
beginning what Farmington did a
hundred years ago.
If you and your bill over over
time it is a better system a
grant but when we have a system
that's in place now trying to
evolve it and let some community
separated out and not have to
pay off all those costs to the
utility I'm concerned that it
may not be feasible.
And madam chair senator I I
really appreciate that the
question and I I I want to kind
of separate out a few issues for
the committee you have
I guess you can lump them into
three different categories of
the energy generation and price
process and transmission process
you have the energy generation
component but then you also have
the sorry the yet the generating
of energy and then you have the
distribution of it within town
to customers many of the
transmission lines and PNM
became as I understand it
transmission and distribution
company for the energy
generation part of it
so in this bill it only deals
with the generation part it
doesn't deal with distribution
or transmission so to the extent
PNM is still the transmission
provider or these other
providers not touched in this
bill they still are still have
that entire captured market
the to the extent that we are
now transitioning energy sources
away to cleaner energy it's
actually a.
As high said I'm not sure who
started building a presentation
it's a perfect time that is they
migrate out of that energy that
that those assets are frankly.
You know coming to the end of
their live within our energy
within the energy transition act
so it's a good opportunity for
them or different private
provider to replace that
generation really with different
energy knowing that the
distribution and transmission
will stay the same.
Distribution transmissions one
thing but.
In M. el Paso they help all have
invested in various types of
generation.
And now Santa Fe wants to buy
from a solar farm down the road
and they have been there's been
an allocation of the resources
from the amendment to supply
them number your thoughts and
now they don't need that so what
how do we pay back the amendment
or a selector for that loss.
Senator madam chair yes on page
fourteen again that's the.
That's the cost recovery piece
that they're allowed to work
with the PRC to recover
reasonable costs related to
those stranded assets and those
investments and that that is
part of what.
Customers in a in a municipality
that chooses to leave that there
are.
Leave that agreement have to pay
so that it's not and we
recognize any incentive matter
absolute fairness that these
utility should be able to
recover the costs of those
investments made in good faith
to service an area that if that
service base and chooses to
leave that that that utility be
entitled to recover so this lot
has that this bill does that a
page fourteen it's detailed in
what's called faster cover.
That's that's my point is that
you have to think about recovery
efforts thank transmission
distribution you have to pay for
all the things you've been
paying for anyway Russian go
over to the new solar farm Papen
electricity there looks to me
like it can't be cheaper I am
concerned it cheaper I would
like to do that but I'm
concerned with everything in
place and trying to transition
actually cost.
People more money so I I
understand of the choice of the
community side that but
sometimes a city council decides
things are necessarily good of
the citizens of having been one
of those commissioners and in
the past I know that sometimes
you get beat up because we make
that change.
That's my concert thank you Mr
chairman madam chair senator.
Thank you senator bill next we
have Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Schmedes Senator bond if
you want to be on the list.
Okay please go ahead Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senator
renewable could you take your
hand down.
Thank you madam chair
One of my questions have been
asked but I I guess I want to
clarify another one.
When you talk about weird and
which and I'm building I think
on on the Senator to bills
question when you go to fourteen
and you and the and you're
calculating the exes exit fee it
says that the public utility
will have the burden of proving
in a compliance filing I presume
that's what the PRC that the
costs it sees it seeks to
recover our just and reasonable
in the public interest and
consistent with the ETA I mean
the local trade center Jack and
the public utility act.
Does when you say public utility
act does that incorporate the
idea of whether those
investments were prudent or not.
Great questions and I'm gonna
defer to tie because they're all
very legal questions some of the
defer to tie to answer.
Thank yes thank you senator at
that as it certainly doesn't
corporate those concepts the
just and reasonable standard is
there's well it sounds bank
there's an entire body of law
around right making that is
built up around that that
includes includes prince.
The.
That's a problem that was I'm
unclear in the first certainly
at least to me in the in the
gate and I guess.
I just worry I think that we
could that it's possible to make
this better than the ETA
because one of the things that
you said was if that if that
cost about stranded assets
because of stranded assets
really bother me because of re
utilities have incentives to to
create infrastructure and then
recover from rate payers and if
they can just recover from a
subsequent user even if those
actions were not prudently
purchased that kind of concerns
me and I think you have to go a
long way in the sack to figure
out that maybe there will be a
prudence analysis in their at
least to me it is not clear and
I apologize because this is not
my area of law.
It's never been and I'm I've
been working on this for for a
while now trying to understand
it and it seems to me could be
better and better in the TA the
J. in the sense of clarifying
that exits the how it's
calculated whether they are
whether the stranded assets
would be recovered if they were
imprudently purchased and then
there is not a penalty under the
TA that was established in prior
question and maybe there should
be a penalty here I just I just
throw that out I'm not I'm not
going to make an amendment or
anything
And then finally the thing that
worries me the most about the
energy distribution in our state
is when you know that there are
Navajo people in on the Navajo
Nation watching looking at the
transmission lines.
Going over to California or
Arizona and they don't have
electricity and they're they're
taking water I mean taking of
water when lines are taking
energy that was produced in our
state and we're not providing
our local communities and so it
is my understanding that this
act will address that is that
correct.
Madam chair senator it certainly
could yes.
It could be help helpful is
there a way to director for
encourage.
It's a little bit further
because the problem with is
exactly what's what senator
Neville described is is because
we're such a sparsely populated
state you really have to
encourage
some of these these are
utilities to to provide those
those small markets with energy
and nobody's seen it seems that
to provide the people a lot of
people are in isolated
communities with that energy.
The manager Senator so you know
transmission to the to the
extent I understand it is
regulated by the federal energy
regulatory commission work and
you know transmission lines it's
all other regulatory back which
is not really this bill this
bill is about local governments
getting to choose new energy
generation but I think it's it's
some that's great that you're
thinking about and that we work
on and if there's a way that
this bill can help with that
means let's keep talking and
think about that.
That's.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
that's all I have I mean thank
you this is a box.
Madam chair that's all I have.
Thank you if you could take your
hand down Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair
and thank you Senators Time
Warner the enjoy the debate so
far I'm gonna pay you back a
little bit on to the the issues
brought up by page fourteen and
then kinda try to tie it into
what I'm looking on page nine so
I'm gonna kind of go go back and
forth between those those two
pages but I've as has been
brought up by some of the
attorneys that are on the
committees that I serve on is is
is you know we we don't want to.
Develop legislation that's just
going to lead to litigation and
so I hear you on the on the
reasonable work I've done some
personal research into that I'm
not concerned about that phrase
but the public interest
I think public interests
you know utility rates climate
change all those things coming
together
I just have a concern there that
what if what if someone argues
and suse.
That Hey this was not in the
best public interest so could
you give me
some information on a I guess
when I say I'm concerned that we
could be generating litigation
in terms of who decides what's
in the best public interest what
if a party over here says.
This is in the public interest
and another party says no it's
not in the public interest how
we gonna resolved that there.
Thank you madam chair Senators
committees good question and I'm
gonna defer to tie.
Senator Schmedes thank you for
the for the question at the bill
contemplates that it
determination about whether the
exit fees in the public interest
is
made by the public regulations
commission so this would take
place in the regular service
center that I was doesn't
preclude people from litigating
issue outside that setting but
it would be an issue just like a
number of other similar
determination is that the PRC
makes on a regular basis.
Okay because I can just see very
reasonably that I mean gosh we
had a lot of litigation over the
ETA
and and how the PRC saw that
obviously and and so I can just
you know just looking trying not
to overcomplicate this and then
I can just see the PRC would say
here here's the exit fee it's up
here and community choice
programs I don't know I it is
the really we're seeing is down
here.
There's very competing interests
there and I I just feel like I
mean don't you feel like we're
we're gonna be setting ourselves
up for litigation over
disagreements on on exit fees is
that reasonable to to have that
concern or should I not have
that concern.
Madam chair representative
Senator I just wanna say I had
the same questions as far as the
drafting of the standards and
you know where they are cherry
charms or they actually terms of
law
and again I'm gonna defer to tie
I'm just going to say from my
own perspective I think it
becomes important this activity
becomes a hugely important issue
and your right to zero in on it
because if you have a utility
that's allowed to recoup an
exorbitant fee based upon well
my profit over the next hundred
years would be acts then you're
right it basically makes the
whole thing to factor not work
and it is unreasonable and it
might be based on in fact it's
not in the public interest so
it's so I think it's that's a
worthwhile concept but it is
service a term of law I'll let
hi you know elaborate on that a
little bit.
Yeah thank you senator Senators
maybe so that certainly we can't
predict the future with one
hundred percent certainty so we
don't know someone's going to
litigate the issue or not the
the standards that were included
in the bill for the exit fee
we're standards that were are
commonly used within the public
regulations commission decision
making process and so we we use
those and quite intentionally
two so that the existing body of
law that's been developed around
and can be applied in the PRC
say and so while the others of
there's a chance that it could
be litigated after the
regulatory process unfolds and
you're absolutely right that
ensure they're gonna compete
there would be competing
interests at stake in in the
regulatory process
the first step there is is is
that regulatory proceeding and I
think we can expect parties to
if you do have those competing
interests compete there and for
the should get resolved there is
always a chance litigation chair
but that you know there's a
process in place to work all
this out.
and so madam madam chair and
Senator Steinborn out a move on
from that issue I I you know it
is still concerned I don't think
anybody wants to generate
litigation I'll finally say
though that.
The yes there is litigation
brought forth because of the
conflict in exit fees.
The the cost of the litigation
to the public is not going to be
incorporated into the cost of
their utilities it's going to be
a hidden hidden costs so just
another concern there that if
there's litigation it's that
really to me that actually
counts toward making utilities
and electricity more expensive
in our state yet I just don't
see how it's going to actually
count toward increasing utility
rates I'm also that Madam chair
Senators time when I'm really
interested in the opt out
provision.
And so I I'm gonna make an
assumption here and and just
interrupt me if I'm wrong but
you know if you're you're gonna
create a program like this.
And and you want a lot of people
to sign up you're gonna do it
opt out you're not going to do
an often right because people
don't want to take the time to
opt in right I'm and so you when
you drafted this bill of course
you have the freedom to do an
opt out and opt in I would
choose an opt in
the reason is because I feel
like a lot of people could just
get swept up in the
municipality's decision
and so I.
I don't know if we need to.
Can I get in to that because I'm
gonna also assume that you would
not consider an amendment to
change it to adopt and and I see
you smiling so you know I I just
wanted to raise you know raise
that concern but here's my one
question about the opt in.
Once again we have certain
interests so let's say the City
of Albuquerque wants to wants to
do this or City of whatever
municipality okay.
They're gonna want people to to
stay in there that you know that
they're not going to want people
to opt out right so is there
does this legislation offer with
when that letter comes in the
mail or on the email goes out.
is there control four a
neutrality in explaining the.
A pros and cons of this program
or or is there a potential
conflict of interest that's
going to be incorporated into
that letter that these people
receive to opt out.
I do want to answer that
membership.
Yes or.
Senator thank you if I may there
that the law does not currently
contain any
specifics about the contents of
the notice other at that that is
going to be supplied to
customers that is certainly you
know something that that we can
discuss but the the cut the.
Notice is is you know pretty
straight for requirement and and
doesn't really have any
specific requirements around
other than to notify the
customers.
A bare bones notice requirement
okay commitment madam chair
Senators time what I would for a
from a consumer protection
standpoint I would humbly
suggest.
Change to this bill that we have
some sort of.
Some sort of neutrality
guaranteed in that notice
because obviously we have
competing interests we have a
public utility that's gonna want
to.
Keep their customers versus
someone else and then we're
gonna have these hopefully not
but maybe these advertising
campaigns for maybe someone
voluntarily is going to send a
letter to people and say no no
what what the City of
Albuquerque told you is not true
you need to opt out so I don't
want to I want to avoid all that
I don't think anybody is trying
to do that here but if we don't
guarantee some neutrality in
those letters that go out I'm
afraid that you know I don't
want to be trying to sell
something to somebody we have
competing interests here right
there some residents of cities
that highly value and are
willing to pay more money to cut
down on carbon emissions but we
have some other people that
maybe paycheck to paycheck and
maybe they actually want to be
carbon free but they just don't
have the money and there's all
kinds of people out there that
have different interests and so
I would just leave that as a
suggestion in this bill that I
really think we need to really
try to neutralize the that the
letter that goes out so to
speak.
So I'll move on from that but I
I just had a concern there
just a couple other things I
want to try to and there's a lot
I think we can talk about that I
want to go up to a page to the
definition of of who who can be
doing this all the economic
definitions in just a simple
question here
I'm scrolling up sorry so
Do you subsection do the
definition of local choice
energy provider and if you go
down to the bottom it says in
the middle it says a
combination of municipalities or
counties so as soon as madam
chair and and etcetera Steinborn
so I'm assuming that the we
could have say you know
wake county and the city of Los
crucis and the City of
Albuquerque in the state Senate
could all form one CCA is is
that correct sure Madam chair
Senator chair.
Okay okay just wanted to be the
clear on that
Well I I think I think that's
the end of my questions I I
still have more you know kind of
actually I do have one more I
did want to bring up with you
out of state there's been
there's been talk of in state
out of state and trying to keep
things local but could these
community choice appropriate is
local choice programs I mean
they would actually be free to
buy energy from out of state is
that correct.
Madam chair representative yes
that's that's correct I don't
think there's a local
requirement in the bill okay
okay no concern there I I just
I just wanted to be clear on
that
so okay I think that's I think
that's it those are still my you
know my concerns on this it's
obviously you know complicated
bill a lot going on I'll just
close with the comment on the
nuclear you know other countries
were were able to go way way way
low on carbon free like France
that relies heavily on nuclear
and and I I just want to put
that plug in there that if we
really want to very quickly go
to carbon free we we to go to
nuclear and and and there's
other models we'd in and and
France have done that and and
and they're way ahead of us on
you know as far as that goal
you know a lot of the research
shows that I mean solar in the
long term solar produces a lot
lot more so solid waste and
nuclear does and obviously
there's concerns here and there
but I think that's kind of off
you know this is this bill is
not really about nuclear but
since it was brought up just a a
comment there that and I that I
resonate with center schools
comments about how nuclear could
come into play for me it's more
of a benefit understand for the
sponsor of the more negative but
that's that's neither here nor
there so thank you for answer my
questions fascinating Bill thin
concept thank you senator thank
you for your discussion Senator.
Thank you Senator guy a goes you
have your hand up.
Yes madam chair I I had a ray of
light to sunshine when Senator
deal Lopez had discussion madam
chair I'd like to ask Miss the
sponsor if the talking about the
native Americans with the
committee choice Association we
willing to build distribution
service star native communities.
Well
met madam chair Senator I
wouldn't pretend to understand
what would be involved in that
that kind of a commitment in
this legislation because the
Dale that's regulated by the
federal energy regulatory
commission and those take years
to do so.
Showing that it is a requirement
for any local choice energy
program I mean I would even
begin to know you know I'm all
for the goal though I'm all for
looking at it and yeah so let's
keep talking about it maybe the
three of us can huddle and
consult with some highly paid
lawyers maybe even make more
than time I don't know that's
transmission citing so I don't
know the answer Senator back I
think it probably pretty
challenging.
Well madam chair etcetera I just
like the idea that she in no as
she realized I know who US house
Rep Carl Trujillo talked about
it there in his area where he
lives that they would come by
and the older people were not
being able to be served so.
That all yield I was just hoping
for a test center so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I'm I have some
comments but I'm gonna put them
aside for the time purposes what
is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam.
The amendment okay so I have the
first person I heard was Senator
Hamblen center Hammond please.
Madam chair thank you I look for
do pass with the amendment that
Senator Steinborn brought up
about the clarification of
language.
A second.
To move the need to move the
table with the amendment.
Okay I'm sorry hang on one
second.
We never adopt the amendment.
I guess we did.
Adapted.
Bill was adopted there is a
motion to.
Or do passed but then there is a
tabling motion so tabling takes
precedence would of the
secretary please call a vote on
it tabling motion.
Senator wanted.
Excuse.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes the table.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Neville yesterday will.
Senator poke.
Now.
Senator Schmedes yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Next.
Everybody yes.
Okay yes.
Yes able.
I'm sorry sorry.
I'm sorry so I yes to table its
three noted table is.
One two three four five okay
thank you now we're back on the
a motion of Senator Hamblen
which is a do pass on Senate
bill eighty three as amended was
there a second.
Senator Sedillo Lopez second
okay there is a second
could you please call the vote
roll Senator serve on this
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Neville no.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Smitty now Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes and German
annex.
Yes explain my vote.
So that's fine yes three no and
one excused thank you and thank
you Senator Steinborn I think
that you heard some
recommendations here for a
possible amendments as you go
forward to your next committee
but that's all I wanted to say
thank you so much for present
day and all your experts thank
you thank you all very much have
a good day okay so we have the
madam president pro tem Senator
Stewart.
On Senate bill one twelve.
And.
This we should have gone first.
Should be simple.
Thank you madam chair of very
much I also have as an expert
witness Tom Solomon of who is a
retired electrical engineer many
years and and with Intel if you
will
And then also.
So the US Senate bill one twelve
should I begin madam chair I was
going to check cover is Tom
Solomon Solomon on.
I am here the madam chair okay
thank you go ahead Senator
please thank you madam chair so
Senate bill one twelve creates a
sustainable economy task force.
For five years made up of eight
of our cabinet secretaries or
their designates those cabinet
secretaries are from at the
governor's office the land
commissioner.
That we see if we can find my
list here tax and Representative
department of finance and
administration
economic developments the
treasure state treasure.
And.
The Secretary of Indian affairs.
Each of these eight cabinet
secretaries or their designees
are also able to appoint up to
two members public members each
for this task force.
So the.
You know we're all talking about
and seeing New Mexico's economy
we've just had a boom and bust
cycle for many years but we have
tremendous renewable energy
agriculture technical and
recreational resources plus lots
of available land talented
workforce permanent funds to
invest the idea behind this bill
is to plan a sustainable economy
that will work for all New
Mexicans so this task force
require stakeholder consultation
with affected communities of the
goals are to look to add
sustainable jobs to replace the
twenty five thousand or so
direct jobs we have right now
and two billion per year for
this general fund that comes
from a natural resource
extraction the goal of this
would be to take five years well
work together
The colder input including all
of our tribes in reservations
look at survey recommendations
from economic studies
development efforts from New
Mexico universities the lapse
state agencies economic
incubators to take five years to
try to turn our economy into a
more sustainable economy so
we're New Mexico's number two
and solar we're number twelve in
wind or number eight into
thermal we have a unique
combination of world class and
complementary renewable energy
sources we could supply the
lowest cost electricity in the
US we are closest to the windy
state California it's a huge
export market for us that needs
wind power we should be
manufacturing some of these
renewable energy components so
we can accelerate a jobs in
these other areas if we work
together that's really the
purpose of this task force is to
have our agencies work together
with experts to move us away
from this boom and bust cycle
that we have
so the other thing the bill does
is that it just puts these
powers in the secretary's duties
section so that they know that
they have to try to help develop
the strategic plan and abide by
it and it also has an
appropriation for the first year
so I'm I'm sure I've left out a
lot of things madam chair but
I'll just end by saying you know
if we create the statute for
five years it those of crossed
governors to try to stay away
from politics that progress on
implementation has to be
reported every year.
To the legislature we need this
kind of the plan I believe with
extensive consul consultation
with our affected communities
and did so at this point I would
like to yield to prom Solomon
for some comments thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr Solomon.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Stewart members of the
committee.
so I a little bit.
I thank you Mr Solomon could you
please introduce yourself and
your affiliation for the
committee okay yes
So I am elected retired
electrical engineer I'm also
with three fifty New Mexico the
work over the past many months
with Senator Stewart and a
number of others to help draft
this bill and I think it's a
great bill
I spent actually thirty four
years in high tech manufacturing
with Intel and twenty one of
those years were here in New
Mexico so I've got a soft spot
for good factory jobs that I'd
like to see many more for them
and other good sustainable jobs
grow in our state
and I guess I'd I'd comment that
Twenty twenty one was another
one of those boom and bust years
for our state economy that we've
seen too many of on top of the
pandemic oil prices drop to good
thirty percent for the full year
destabilizing the state budget
and causing significant job
losses in the oil sector
especially in southeastern New
Mexico because of a drop in oil
demand and we are in the midst
of a worldwide transition
towards renewable energy and
towards electric transportation
for example just last week
General Motors announced that
they're going to invest twenty
seven billion dollars over the
next five years developing
thirty types of electric
vehicles and then by twenty
thirty five they're gonna stop
selling light duty gas and
diesel vehicles altogether this
is just one example of the
economic trends that will keep
reducing the demand for oil year
over year and in recent weeks
the Albuquerque journal has
published three front page
stories and editorial concerned
about the future of the oil and
gas industry here in New Mexico
and so what this bill does is it
calls for our state to make a
determined effort to plan for
that future I'm not leave it to
chance and that future will be
one let based far less on
natural resource extraction with
the different diversified and
sustainable economy less subject
to that boom and bust cycle.
So my expertise is in the
technical economic and other
factors that are pushing us
towards that renewable energy
future and the need to prepare
for and I look forward to your
questions thank you.
Thank you very much and I no one
signed up to oppose this bill is
there anybody that entered the
zoom.
To propose if so please raise
your hand.
Okay we have many many people
supporting the bill and Trevor
please give everybody a minute
two men and a half with a hard
cut off and then and a half and
since there are no opponents
let's here are ten people
please.
And Matt madam vice chair I'm
stepping away for a minute.
Sir Trevor please go ahead.
Yes first we have Jim McKenzie.
Mr mackenzie please and you
yourself
don't have thank you madam vice
chair.
Hi my name is Jim McKenzie madam
chair Senators I am the co
coordinator along with Tom
Solomon of three fifteen New
Mexico chapter of the
international environmental
organization three fifty dot org
I'm speaking on behalf of our
almost eight thousand members in
New Mexico are organized around
common issues madam chair I am
standing today in support of SB
one twelve I like to start by
quoting my favorite or founding
fathers Benjamin Franklin.
By failing to prepare you are
preparing to fail.
Preparation to avoid failure is
what we're talking about here
today the future is rushing at
us an accelerating pace the
future I'm referring to is the
climate emergency call global
climate warming I leave to
others to enumerate the multiple
negative impacts the increasing
unstable climate is already
having on our lives both urban
and rural and how those effects
will only increase intensity on
the path we are on.
At it is long past time to take
our collective heads out of the
sand and begin the transition to
a state without the prime mover
of this climate emergency the
oil and gas industry I must
remind you that New Mexico.
And New Mexicans thrived for
thousands of years before the
discovery of oil and we can and
will thrive after the petroleum
ministry has been shuttered.
We should be clear most of the
market and regulatory forces
driving this transition are
beyond our borders but they will
have massive effects here.
Establishing the sustainability
economy task forces set forth in
SB one twelve is an essential
step on the road what is certain
the coming of the zero carbon
New Mexico Academy we can throw
up our hands I'll just finish
briefly we we can throw up our
hands and cry the sky is falling
or we can plan for what's coming
the transition won't be easy it
will take hard work why this
investments and the wealthy
paying a larger share of the
costs of government through
restoring a graduated New Mexico
tax structure.
Please vote to pass for esprit
three twelve thank you thank
you.
Thank you Trevor next person.
Trevor.
Next we have Anna Hansen.
I'm.
Good morning madam chair and
senators and thank you Senator
Stewart for bringing this
forward I am representing the
coalition of sustainable
communities of New Mexico and
Santa Fe County which I am a
Santa Fe county commissioner for
I want to there's a saying I
think you all know it if you
don't know where you're going
any road any road will get you
there Alice in Wonderland well
New Mexicans however no where we
need to go we need a diverse
economy which is significantly
less resilient on oil and gas I
support the sustainable economy
task force because the experts
and that will bring together.
The experts will bring together
can develop a strategic plan to
get us to assist animal diverse
economy I see it every day in
Santa Fe County.
We have talented hard working
people we have tourism and we
have recreation and we have a
great culture something I
strongly support and we have
little and we have a film
production and a bit of high
tech and we have so much more
please vote yes on Senate bill
one twelve we need that
strategic economic plan for the
future of our children and for
their children I thank you very
much commissioner Ana Hanson.
Thank you Robert next.
We have Stephanie Weissberg.
Thank
you madam chair and committee
members including my own Senator
tactician eighties thank you for
the work protecting our
beautiful state for generations
to come we've been fortunate to
have a history of oil and gas
who is contributed to thirty
percent of our state coffers but
now is the time to start Baker
sleep growing the other seventy
percent that holds the key to
our future my name is Stephanie
Y. spirit I recently retired
from UNM where something
unprecedented happened for the
first time ever students
convinced the board of charter
financial analysts to oversee
the four million dollar regions
fund to sell most of its fossil
fuel stocks and reinvest the
proceeds and clean energy abbey
the young woman giving The
presentation told me the board
consists of quote old man
they're probably less than
thirty years old who always say
oil is coming back well this
time they had their doubts they
saw the financial risks already
playing out for awhile and how
fiscal regulators are moving to
at the true cost of carbon to
its price I heard a lot about
these costs this week from your
fellow legislators in rural
counties where farmers ranchers
and outdoor recreation companies
are suffering from a twenty year
drought and this is just not
just any drought scientists say
that would have been a moderate
short term I've been testing
pushed into the second worst
manager out to twelve hundred
years by climate change which
has been brought about by the
release of carbon into the air
we need to S. B. one twelve like
never before to remove barriers
for business for that seventy
percent and to create a roadmap
to promote manufacturing
protective booties and protect
protect the outdoor recreation
and agricultural industries
before they disappear and all we
are left with is a bunch of.
Banded wells empty farms and
acres and acres of test.
Next we have Paul Gibson.
We.
You.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I do want to
thank bill sponsor for this
for interest using this
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson and the co founder retake
Our Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred member statewide and
this year we identified twenty
bills we call transformational
and SB one ten is one of them
you will hear from others that
if this bill is passed and
message to the gas and oil
industry a message that you are
willing to risk your condominium
owners budget.
Jobs in the state this argument
could not be more wrong the days
of profitability of gas and oil
are clearly and eight we have no
choice but to transition to
other forms of economic activity
and revenue generation is up to
the government to prepare the
state for this transition this
bill would empower state the
state to generate a multi
faceted plan for just transition
one that favors the interests of
the people over the interests of
the gas and oil industry you
managing transition from the
stone age because they ran out
of stones they had other options
that were cheaper to produce and
have more adaptable applications
we do not have to wait until
every drop of oil is extracted
to make our transition indeed
our younger generations are
thanking you to do so now this
B. one twelve the choice is
clear plan for a just
sustainable transition to turn
our work to turn our backs on
the needs of the younger
generations will be forced to
deal with the ramifications of
your decision we take our
democracy in its twenty five
hundred well informed engaged
and active members strongly
support SB one twelve and will
log the committee for showing
the courage to vote for Josh
transition thank you for your
service and I'm actually
gratified to see that there
isn't the opposition from the
gas and oil industry thank you
very much.
And we're gonna end with
Stephanie Honda model.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thanks very much
comment today I'm Stephanie home
auto I'm a constituent from Los
crucis in district thirty one
Senator Cervantes district I
strongly support SB one twelve
to support to form a sustainable
economy task force I am a
biologist I'm the assistant
director at a science education
nonprofit that reaches tens of
thousands of students in
southern New Mexico every year I
am the immediate past board
chair of a charter school in
Senator district and I'm a
mother of school age children
I've been teaching students
about environmental issues for
over a decade and I can tell you
that our kids are concerned to
combat this I infuse hope for
the future and to my left and I
applaud you all for your work.
To ensure that is also there
are.
I'm asking you all to support
this bill and consideration for
the future of our units and our
state overall are heavy economic
reliance on a single industry is
on whites we need to diversify
our revenue base I've seen the
effects of the boom and bust
nature of the oil and gas
industry and education resources
first hand in years of low oil
and gas revenue in the state we
have fewer funds for education
programs and to give our
students the resources they
really need I think you know
that many of our children are
struggling and all of our kids
deserve study funding that will
ensure they receive an excellent
education regardless of their
resources at home.
And supporting our youth with
diversified revenue streams I
would like to see more
opportunities for our talented
workforce to take advantage of
our state's abundant renewable
resources especially wind solar
and geothermal let's grow the
outdoor recreation and tourism
industry and our beautiful state
let's incentivize science and
technology industries through
our laps and spaceport I hope
you'll support SB one child
because our children's future
should be funded by things that
will ensure that they can have a
bright future not industries
that degrade their.
Thank you for the opportunity to
share this information and thank
you all for your service to the
people of New Mexico.
Thank you thank you madam vice
chair so let's go to the
committee I have Seri Senator
Stewart you want to say a few
words.
Madam chair I thought you said
ten people could testify I think
there is only I let in there's a
Patrick Killen from chevron
would like to testify if you
could at least let him I would
appreciate that certainly and
Trevor how many people did we
hear and then we'll go to
Patrick and we can have a few
more.
However.
We did the people in the loop
I'm on the list that I sent a
link out to I don't see any of
them in the list but Patrick
yeah he is he's in the room
please Mr Khan.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members Patrick Killen
registered lobbyists for chevron
in New Mexico and legislative co
chair for the New Mexico oil and
gas association the new mobile
legislative committee support
Senate bill one twelve and we
think Senator Stewart for
bringing this proposal forward
many of us who work within the
oil and gas industry in New
Mexico do you want to see our
state's economy diversify New
Mexicans from both sides of the
aisle democratic and Republican
want to see our state to track
new business and better paying
jobs in the same way that
surrounding states have been
able to diversify their
economies sure this legislation
passed we respectfully ask that
a representative from the oil
and gas industry you considered
for a public member position on
the sustainable economy task
force this one chair seat of the
table and economic transition
discussions the one hundred and
thirty four thousand oil and gas
workers in our state and for a
sector that accounts for upwards
of forty percent of our state's
budget enclosing Moga
respectfully ask that the
committee voted yes on Senate
bill one two one one two thank
you very much.
Thank you.
I do see someone else covers on
the list to has her hand up
CENIC up.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee us I'm a
representative of yesterday or
you senator Clemente crisis
action.
Yourself for the committee
please of course my name is
Annika Johnson
yes I'm and the steering
committee member for yucca.
yeah and step down in almost
years ago yucca and a grassroots
partners have championed the
need for a just transition of
state economy we called for a
just transition study plan and
fund and we are glad that their
proposals this session that
begin to address that call
because we need a plan to
replace dirty energy revenues
sustainable revenue sources and
we do need it now New Mexico
produces more than twice the
national average of greenhouse
gas emissions per capita and
this is largely the result of
our greenhouse gas intensive oil
and gas industry I see houses
the world's single largest and
cheapest oil field in the
Permian basin if I plan as soon
to basic logical collapse it
will be in large part because of
the action or in action being
taken in New Mexico we've been
given a group of pretty clear
coat moral imperative to
transition our unsustainable
economy but given that will and
gas revenues comprise more than
a third of the state's budget
you need a debt Davis men and
diversification plan any just
transition policy must have real
science based timelines
accountability measures to make
sure our government is
responding to the crisis and not
just industry's demands and
being equitably inclusive and in
consultation with those most
directly impacted being
frontline indigenous and people
of color communities use and
displace workers systems must be
led by those most directly
affected by its consequences and
we support the idea of this
legislation to help us move
towards that transition however
we want to make sure that the
task force's composition
represents a commitment to
equity and environmental justice
by making sure that impacted
communities have a genuine seat
at the table and extremely this
is and that sorry that you
listen to we believe our
communities to be leaders in the
process so that the outcome is
accountable to Communities New
Mexico we also believe that
there should be timelines for
the plan to transition our
economy to comport with the
science so we hope that you'll
make some friendly amendments to
this bill to strengthen it in
that regard and also to help
clarify how the task force
conceptualized this bill
interfaces with the newly
proposed climate solutions Tax
council and transition task
force in the house thank you.
Thank you very much
Senator was there anybody else
you wanted to hear speak before
go to committee no thank you
madam chair thank you so much I
have Senator Hamblen Senator
Sweety Senator gray goes Senator
Hamblen first.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Stewart for bringing
this to the to the table I'm
very grateful for this is you
know as the CEO and president of
the Las Cruces green chamber of
commerce we talk about
sustainable communities in
keeping money in our communities
and also providing sustainable
jobs I'm I would like to echo
agency senator Johnson's
concerned about making sure that
we do have all of those
communities impacted at the
table I feel that that will be a
very vibrant and proactive
conversation to have as we move
toward you know clean energy and
and and being able to and
advance our ability as a state
to provide jobs in the renewable
energy industry and the clean
energy industry I'm also at the
same time though a creating a
a workforce where those folks
who are working in the oil and
gas industry as Mr Killen had
mentioned that we have an
opportunity for them to transfer
into a high paying qualified
jobs as we move off of our
dependence on oil and gas so I
feel that this has a lot of
opportunities opens up many
doors for that and and
appreciate that concern and
obviously my whole point is
let's create jobs locally let's
keep the money in our state
let's reduce our impact on the
planet and let's make sure that
communities have access to the
resources that we all feel are
essential resources like energy
like water and I have to put
their can activity to the
internet as were all seen so
thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Stewart for bringing
this forward and I appreciate
those considerations.
Thank you senator okay centers
communities.
Thank you
madam chair and and
Mrs of pro tem um.
I had a question on the on the
we're talking a lot about fossil
fuels sounds like all the
testimony was about oil and gas
when I read the the phrase
natural resource extraction.
that would not be limited to
fossil fuels but also minerals
that are extracted is that.
Is that true is that your intent
with the bill.
So.
Chair and senator smitteez.
I'm.
I believe what you're asking my
answer would be yes this this
bill does not focus on the oil
and gas industry this focuses on
having R. eight alright months
that are the most responsible
for a good economy in New Mexico
to work together to try to move
away from the boom and bust of
our natural resource extraction
so you know that's a general
goal but what we want our jobs
we want manufacturing we want
more and renewable energy
there's plenty of other ways to
expand our a sustainable economy
culture
The film industry
and yes counterparts but there's
plenty of ways for us to have an
economy that's more sustainable
that's not this boom and bust so
there were a lot of comments oil
and gas but this is much more
than that this is looking at how
we create jobs and have a
livable good environment and
have more manufacturing and
focus on things other than
natural resource extraction that
is going to be with us I am not
saying it's gone but rather than
having the boom and bust economy
that we have we have to focus on
more development on other
weights to diversify our economy
that is the purpose of the task
force.
Thank you
Madam chair and senator
I am I completely agree with the
boom and bust the concept the
tax stabilization reserve fund
you know was created an attempt
to to help with that I think it
was a great one great strategy
that that we can we can utilize
another quick plug for G. R. T.
reform you know I'm not I'm a
fan of not in diversifying
economy I don't think we should
just say well let's go pick this
one industry and grab it and get
it in New Mexico let's let's
just level the playing field for
all the small businesses and
everyone and stop yeah let's
let's do G. R. T. reform I don't
think and and I hope that this
committee would would discuss
that as a way of diversification
because I think if we open up I
mean I.
There are hospitals in New
Mexico.
And when you write them a check
for your bill you write them a
check to Denver or Texas or
Arizona because of our G. R. T.
issues.
I mean a lot of businesses that
subcontract out they contract
out of state because we penalize
them with G. R. T. so that's
just one example but look to get
back to the heart of of what I'm
thinking in my eight my main my
main concern that just jumps
right off the page when I see
this bill is is that instead of
fossil fuel extraction we're
talking all natural resource
extraction in in this committee
we've we've had an opportunity
to talk about this issue
you know that the United States
is a hundred percent dependent
on foreign minerals for for
seventeen of those seventeen for
minerals and so we talked boom
and bust well you know we have
geopolitical conflicts in other
countries for those seventeen
minerals and and all the sudden
if there's a war that breaks out
there's a boom and bust right
there we can't get the the
arsenic or the or the Indian or
Galion for our solar panels are
the rare earth minerals for our
winter for for cobalt in lithium
batteries and so from a national
security standpoint I I think we
need to be looking at more a
natural resource extraction and
environmentally friendly way and
I think Americans in New
Mexicans we can do a better job.
More environmentally sound then
other countries so it's good
it's got to come for the wind
solar manufacturing everything
it's got to be extracted
somewhere and I I would trust
you know this state who is it is
very environmentally conscience
over a place like the Democratic
Republic of Congo or or China
and in the Democrats in in DC
you agree with me when they
passed a resolution that was
signed by Barack Obama and I
think twenty ten of the about
conflict minerals those are
tantalum ten gold and tungsten
it was a partisan vote you know
the I think you know
In favor of of the Democrat
party there and they realize
this this issue that I'm
bringing up
that we need to ethically
sourced our minerals and so I I
just want to raise that concern
because I feel very strongly
about it and I think that
because mineral extraction is
going to be included but I don't
want to a if we're just going to
say we're gonna transfer away
from that
I I really think we can be more
environmentally sound it's one
planet no we have one shared
planet and if we're gonna allow
unethical extraction in other
countries in transition away
from those I feel like it's
moving in the wrong direction so
just want to bring that up I am
respectfully would be opposed to
the bill mainly for that reason
because of the mineral
extraction issue but thank you
very much for the discussion
center and thank you madam
chair.
Well I would like to respond to
that yes you so I I agree with
you Senator maintenance this
bill does not say we're not
going to extract natural
resources it says we want to
move away from our reliance on
it and the reliance is oil and
gas right now so there's nothing
in this bill that says we can't
do that I agree with you we
should be mining isn't natural
minerals we have them in New
Mexico that's certainly could be
something that this task force
will forward on a rather than
other issues so I don't see
anything in this bill that says
we're not going to have
natural resource restriction it
the aim is to move away from our
economic reliance on so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
goes.
Madam chair Madam pro template
you for the discussion I do have
just a couple of questions but
one of my wanted to go back to
Suresh metes comments of the
The
Expulsion the natural resource
extraction I want to kind of few
years go to negotiate for the
state New Mexico and damning has
a really good magnesium deposit
that trying to really wanted and
and I like the idea Madam pro
ten that you've said that this
doesn't stop that because there
are other options force
statewide but madam chair then
pro tempore my.
General question comes to the
amount of people that are on the
task force and I was wondering
missed Senator Johnson had made
of that the impacted communities
would have a voice and I don't
see the legislature or LFC in
the
list of those are going to be
part of the task force.
Madam a program is there a
reason why legislators are not
going to be allowed.
Well madam chair and senator
great those.
You know we usually put
legislators on task forces
this is really run by our state
government.
By the governor.
And by seven other departments
the most important departments I
think that deal with our economy
but each of these.
Secretaries or their designees
can point up to two public
members so the the court task
force are these eight HSD and
then if they each appoint two
that's how you get up to twenty
four that's where they could.
Point other people to take part
also the task force can hire and
contract with consultants and
experts and they must
they must.
Consult with impacted
communities so I think there's
enough leeway in this task force
of for everyone's concerns
This is really kind of up front
fire level task force then we
usually do run by state agencies
giving them five years to try to
do something perhaps like us
Senators meaty suggested I know
we have some of these rare
minerals minerals here in New
Mexico we're not minding them
so we ought to be doing that
that's certainly something that
they can do so I'm I don't to
they do have to report every
year to LFC to the Economic
Development
Department to the legislature so
we should be hearing from them
every year about what they've
learned what they wanted to how
we can enhance our economy in
these different weights.
Well madam chair.
Madam pro tem and I appreciate
know that you have those two
members of the public from each
one of the members pointed but
and just compacts Mr Johnson's
Madam I think the southeast
corridor for the southeast
corners can be heavily impacted
in the near future and I don't
see any way that I would be
asked to be on task force so
only that with you I appreciated
I I just that's my concern not
be why would be voting no so
thank you madam chair members
pro tempore.
Thank you.
The second point.
Okay could you all take your
hands down what is the pleasure
of the committee.
I am moving to pass.
Is there a second I second.
Thank you Senator Stewart did
you want to close.
The madam chair I appreciate the
committee's time you've got a
lot of work so I appreciate the
questions thank you so much
moronic it could you please call
the vote world.
I'm sorry for the public let me
announce again what we're doing
we have a due pass motion on
Senate bill one twelve and it
was made by Senator Sedillo
Lopez is that correct yes yes
and seconded by Senator Hamblen
so now for that US secretary to
please call the vote Senator
surrounded.
Senator Gallegos.
No matter.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes senator Neville.
Although yes.
Senator pope.
Yes I'd like to explain my boat.
Senator so.
Yes.
Senator Smith no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Thank you Mr CENIC's yes.
Yes to know in one excused thank
you and Senator probably wanted
to explain your vote yes thank
you madam chair thank you madam
pro jam for bringing this
legislation forward I appreciate
this this is what we need a
strategic plan we have all these
ideas of how we're going to make
that transformational change in
New Mexico and I believe this
will set us on the path to do
that so thank you.
Thank you so much for being here
today madam president thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Now moving on to Senate bill
eighty six.
use water for oil and gas
operations Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank.
Madam handers up could you take
it now right Jeez okay.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I do want
to remind the chair that I do
have an amendment and I will be
happy to submit it at the proper
time.
Senator Sedillo Lopez of when.
In the when was the amendment
received by the secretary of the
committee so that it could be
sent out for the analysts.
I believe it was January twenty
fifth.
I have an email reflecting that
it was sent to of Veronica when
you look.
The committee amendment is dated
that I just wanted to make sure.
Let me look at my email the
analyst not receive it.
What.
Indicated that one that it's
possible very analyst did not.
Madam chair I just emailed him
to see if he has received.
You just spent.
Brown I get all the analyst
receive a copy of the amendment
no at that time they did not it
was just the committee analysts
the debt we decided that this
week.
Amendments to everybody okay yes
so this was not at that time.
Do we know when it was sent.
To the to everyone.
The twenty fifth
I'm sorry I'm sorry everyone I
don't know that would be running
for Annika answer that question
please.
I have to check in my email and
then I can let Senator Gallegos
no.
Okay now I don't know until I
check okay so but why don't you
go why don't you check while we
hear a presentation on the bill
the amendment does replace term
a phrase for and word you're out
and so it might not be as
complicated as we think but.
Senator Sedillo Lopez why don't
you start with the explanation
of the bill.
Thank you madam chair.
The produced water act two
thousand nineteen was a step in
regulating the toxic waste that
comes up.
Seven barrels of waste water for
every one barrel of oil
extracted.
The industry the oil and gas
industry uses a massive amount
of water that is impacting
agricultural use and has the
potential to completely deplete
aquifers as we have seen with
the a lot of a lot of I prefer.
In average of two or more spills
of this toxic waste today it
threatens to turn the Permian
basin and other areas where
fracking fracking occurs into a
wasteland or some called it a
sacrifice zone.
As I believe my experts norm
down will will testify it also
appears that the reporting on
these bills is sporadic and not
consistent.
This bill.
For transparency accountability
and protecting our practice
precious water it traces the
source introductory and ultimate
disposal of fresh water what and
and it requires disclosure of
the toxins in still water and
still to release water including
normally occurring radiation.
It also provides consequences
four four disposal or release of
of water right now it is they
there's a consequence it was
mild for not reporting this bill
there is no consequence for the
actual deal itself.
In addition it will level the
playing field of the companies
the oil and gas companies that
are out there because it will
have some enforcement and it
will have some review of of the
documents that are filed
because as my experts will show
it appears that from the data
that there are some industry
some companies that are very
very
Messi in their sales and some of
that are better about it however
it's unclear whether they're
better about it or whether
they're just not reporting.
But that that with that I'd like
to introduce my experts.
My first is if Mr Huang go.
Mr Mr down of.
Is a retired licensed water and
wastewater engineer he's a
graduate of Hans high school in
New Mexico State University
governor Gary Johnson reported
appointed him director of the
New Mexico interstate interest
Stream Commission from nineteen
sep nineteen ninety seven to two
thousand two and the New Mexico
produced water a research
consortium in two thousand
nineteen appointed him as a
member of its technical steering
committee so with that I'd like
to introduce
I I don't see him anywhere but
I'd like to introduce my expert
on down.
Okay.
Let's pause a moment Veronica
were you able to find them.
No ma'am I'm still looking.
Okay I'm looking through my
emails as well.
I'm here is it was around the
twenty fifth twenty sixth of
January.
I see him.
Yes we're waiting please we're
trying to track down the
Amendment and when the.
Madam chair of Cody Morrow who
is my analyst as saying that he
usually does not receive until
after we adopt them so I'm
wondering if we are.
To take the time to get the
amendment out and we look at
this on our next meeting.
So that is one page we're going
to be able to put it on the
screen in a minute.
My problem is that have that
have been analyzed what happens
in this bill directly affects
where I live and I'm having a
really hard time being
blindsided and not be able to
see what the actual wording does
to the whole bill.
Fund manager.
I'm an avid do you want the
amendment up.
Yes.
Then we'll have selected a
severe Lopez responded to
comments from senator great goes
that will go back to Senator
Gallegos.
The grant is putting having the
amendment put up.
It
Makes changes in the title of
the bill.
On page to page nine page ten.
so let's get that out.
Mr guy goes I I mean Senator
Gallegos I apologize I did not
know that they did not go out
immediately of this this is been
presented since January twenty
sixth to the committee and I I I
think that you're.
Yeah Lopez just wait a minute
please okay okay for the public.
What we're talking about is a
change in the title.
On page.
Line thirteen.
Guests for.
And after water put in.
Or other non domestic liquid
wastes.
And on page one line twenty
five.
After field in search.
Prohibiting the discharge or
disposition of untreated
produced water for activities on
related to oil and gas
operations requiring
characterization and public
disclosure of contaminants to
use treated produced water
outside the oil field.
All language in the title.
On page two.
Wind seventeen.
Right guests.
And after non domestic insert
liquid.
And on page nine.
And then there is the same
amendment line fourteen.
After water.
Yes answered recycled produced
water.
The same on page nine line
twenty four.
After water insert recycled
produced water.
On page six.
Yeah I'm sorry on page ten line
three after water insert
recycled water and that was the
extent of the amendment.
Madam chair senator Neville.
Yes Novell I don't know if this
is substantial or not in the in
the in the bill to that's the
issues we can't analyze it on
the fly
in our.
Analysts is having trouble
reading it because he's on the
webcast
normally what we reduce it for
something like this would be the
role of bill are we would
estimate to be put on in the
next committee so I would
suggest one of the other chair.
What we could do is of.
I appreciate the recommendation
and so I think what we can do is
we can start with the.
R. explanation of the bill not
take any action on any amendment
or and or the bill.
So that if we are losing an
expert at the next meeting they
will have the opportunity and we
will not call them back again
until its questions and answers.
This is that
Pass muster with our committee.
Madam chair I would prefer role
the bill to the next meeting but
I am in the minor Authority.
Well
I'm Senator Sedillo Lopez
Can we ask you to roll the bill
to the next committee.
No madam chair that would be
very difficult to because we've
been coming my experts have been
coming every day to conservation
since January twenty fifth when
it was first scheduled out I've
had difficulty without one of
them had a vaccination schedules
we had to scramble to to deal
with I would be very concerned I
have all of my experts now in
fact one needs to I have to
rearrange the order because of
preacher preacher Dave Rogers I
need to go first because you
have to leave at twelve fifteen.
We are going with the
explanation of the bill thank
you Senator Sedillo Lopez thank
you senator value because we're
going to move ahead with this
short explanation of the bill we
will not get to anything
substantive and then when we
come back on next.
To say we will start out with
the amendment to the bill.
Senator Sedillo Lopez please
proceed with a short explanation
and I will get your expertise.
Has I suggested has already
explained this bill is very
important in providing for
transparency accountability and
protecting our precious water.
Some people have told me that
it's okay just let that let the
let the Permian basin be a
sacrifice them.
For a wasteland and I don't
think that that is fair to the
people in that basin so what
this bill does is it it provides
consequences to the oil and gas
industry for release and
spillage.
Requires disclosure of the
toxins in the spilled water
and we will hear about some of
the the experiences of people in
the area it will trace the
source and trajectory and
ultimate disposal of fresh water
there are massive amounts of
fresh water that are taken out
of the basin in fact
I believe the two thousand
nineteen there was more fresh
water taken out and used in the
industry in the City of
Albuquerque uses an entire year
and it will level the playing
field for the the operators in
the days and so that everybody
is treated the same and
everybody has the same
consequences with that I would
like to I would like to
introduce
minister.
Mister Rogers lives in the
Carlsbad.
In the Carlsbad area he's been a
resident of edit and David
Wilson Rogers reference
dedicated rental Wilson Rogers
has been a resident of any
county for over two decades he's
a pastor the first Christian
church in Carlsbad where he's
been advocating for
environmental justice and human
rights through most of his
ministry.
He co founded citizen caring for
the future of the local
grassroots organization.
Without I'd like to introduce
our preacher Dave.
Madam chair distinguished
senators thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak very
briefly
produced water is a very serious
issue here in Carlsbad and I
think you will hear lots of
different perspectives well you
consider this bill I simply want
to tell you of one of my church
member families who a year ago
last month was awoken at two
o'clock in the morning with the
sound of produced water
exploding out of there
the pipeline across the street
from their ancestral home not
knowing what the noise was they
scrambled outside at two o'clock
in the morning on a cold January
morning to figure out what was
happening they were showered
with produced water Prachuap.
when they called the nine one
one to find out what was going
on the operator of the fire
department can only say there's
nothing we can do but just stand
by and let the Oil Field shut it
off and it took a long time to
get oil producers out there to
shut it off.
Once it was done they had skin
rashes and health effects and
all sorts of problems that are
precipitated from that spill
their livestock had to be
euthanized because of the
toxicity of the water in which
they were exposed they
eventually had to leave that
land because they could no
longer safe we live there and
nothing would allow the oil
company to even disclose what
chemicals were in that water but
they would just say all we don't
have to worry about it it's it's
just fine this is just one of
many examples where human lives
have been totally disrupted by
unnecessary and unregulated
spills of frac water it does not
make sense to take our fresh
resource of drinking water turn
it into a toxic sludge and run
the risk of destroying families
and environments the way I have
seen this happen right here in
Carlsbad.
Another expert yes I have two
more are my next of expertise
going down who I have already
introduced he's an expert and he
worked on this bill very we
worked on this bill very closely
over the summer.
Please go ahead.
Mr down you need to on the
yourself.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
This bill is intended to advance
to matters of public interest
the first is to protect our
limited freshwater supplies.
The second is to protect public
health the environment and fresh
water from oil and gas industry
pollution.
Many industry leaders are now
using minimally treated produced
water in lieu of fresh water for
their deep drilling and fracking
activities.
Multiple stories reported during
twenty twenty by the Carlsbad
current Argus include impressive
photographs of huge new oil and
gas wastewater treatment
facilities.
And treated produced water
storage ponds to provide the
industry with moderately treated
produced water which the
industry calls claim Brian.
A representative of EOG
resources.
Which is the top ranked oil
producer in New Mexico.
Told me last week that their
water use is ninety eight
percent clean brine.
Industry leaders are quoted
urging wider use of clean brine
in lieu of fresh water and even
describe it as better for
fracking.
Senate bill eighty six would
require use of clean brine.
Rather than the scare spread of
fresh water resources in both on
the ground water around the
Chaco canyon and from
the area of of the Ogallala
aquifer in the pickles river in
southeast New Mexico.
Every bit of a fresh or brackish
water unnecessarily used for
deep drilling and fracking is
turned into a poisonous waste
water laden with salt.
Oil and gas as the industry
wastewater volume is
outstripping the capacity nearby
disposal wells.
Senate bill eighty six would
help New Mexico by.
Reserving scarce freshwater
resources and also by reducing
the volume of oil and gas
wastewater requiring safe
disposal.
Basically if water is not
imported and and pumped into the
ground for deep drilling and
fracking and turned into
wastewater.
In produced water is used
instead then the amount of fresh
water safety is peak in the in.
And amount of fresh water safety
is translated into amount of
waste water that doesn't require
disposal.
On the second point of
protecting public health the
environment and fresh water
resources from oil and gas
pollution.
Senate bill eighty six would
reduce bills of toxic sailing
oil and gas wastewater.
It would do that in two ways.
By making spills illegal rather
than merely required that they
be reported and cleaned up.
And by requiring rules to
regulate the hardware and
operations that create
preventable in negligence
stilts.
I will talk about the oil
industry's waste water spills
briefly and what the state's
data show deal during this will
address the bills requirements
for rules.
Spills are common.
We'll conservation division data
demonstrates the prevention of
spills is entirely voluntary.
The data is self reported by
operators.
Blanking conflicting data
indicate poor quality control.
The data.
This imported data
is for example.
You know the next will produce
recurrences one skill for about
every three million barrels of
oil produced.
The second ranked oil producer
reports more than ten times that
rate of spills.
The tenth ranked oil producer
experiences more than twenty
five times that rate of spills.
Most bills are preventable.
Over half are due to equipment
failure corrosion human error
overflows taxed pets.
And other.
Corrosion is likely caused by
the use of materials that will
not stand up to the highly
saline highly corrosive produce
waste water.
Overflows and human errors our
management problems.
New Mexico now relies on
voluntary good faith efforts
like oil and gas operators to
prevent spills.
Voluntary efforts to reduce
bills are not working.
The state our environment and
our people are being abuse.
Some operators invest in good
equipment practices and
management and have a relatively
good record.
Others do not in spill their
waste water over the landscape
with impunity.
Senate bill eighty six would
level the spills playing field.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you one more expert yes
I'd like to I'd like to
introduce the world to remove
Dale's during this water issue
chair for the Rio Grande chapter
of the Sierra Club and she
serves on the executive
committee of this yet Sierra
health club she's a hydrologist
who's worked in water resources
and water quality protection
programs in New Mexico for
thirty four years including the
environment department the
environmental Department of the
state the City of Santa Fe and
the Interstate Interstate Stream
Commission she holds a master's
degree in hydrogeology and a
bachelor's of science in
geology.
Please go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak today and
support Senate bill eighty six I
want to thank the sponsors
Senator Sedillo Lopez and your
staff Madam chair for co
sponsoring this important piece
of legislation.
As senator and Mister Bob have
stated Senate bill eighty six
is necessary and important to
preserve and protect our scarce
freshwater resources for future
generations and to protect
public health and the
environment and freshwater
resources from oil and gas we.
And pollution.
Well and then three statutes.
And as they relate to oil and
gas wastewater first of produced
water act that was passed in
twenty nineteen.
Also the oil and gas back in the
water New Mexico water quality
at.
So we thought it would be
helpful to give you a brief walk
through an overview of the bill
because it is you know if it's
because it's amending three
statute it it may be difficult
to wait throughout the our main
provisions that we are proposing
are so.
Section one of the bill is I'm
the section of the oil and gas
act that requires oil and gas
operators to use produced water
recycled or treated produced
water for deep drilling and
fracking instead of fresh water
I want to
And on that any further because
Mr gonna cover that well in his
testimony and the second.
Action star section June I'm on
page two of the bill I'm.
It's a prohibition on built in
related penalty I as Mr stated
currently it's not illegal to
leak or spill oil and gas
wastewater such as produced
water so this.
Asian provide the defined and
enforceable consequences for
unauthorized releases.
Section three of the bill.
Create the oil conservation
division data compilation that
the mouthful this fund is
created to use the penalties
collected from sales to improve
OCD's technological capacity to
gather information and to make
that information available to
the public.
Section four of the bill which
is covered from pages four to
eleven of the bill.
Makes the rules that govern the
oil and gas waste mandatory the
oil and gas.
Acts will make you provisions
are currently discretionary.
And and do not have consistent
requirements that those rules be
protective of the environment
public health and fresh water
resources.
The bill moves the rulemaking
provisions concerning oil and
gas waste including produced
water to a new section that
requires that as the past rules
based on the best available
science.
And that they provide for
protection of the environment
public health and fresh water
resources it also request the
requirement for tracking of
produced water there and treated
produced water to ensure proper
storage and transportation as
well disposal of the huge
volumes of waste oil and gas
waste are generated during the
drilling and production
processes.
Section five of the bill and
this is covered pages eleven
through seventeen.
This section add definitions for
fresh water and water pollution
to the oil and gas.
Currently the oil and gas sector
is not defined these terms even
though they these terms are used
in the oil and gas that and are
defined in the oil conservation
division's rules.
The bill proposes to add these
definitions using the definition
of fresh water which is found in
the oil conservation commission
rules.
and is and using the definition
of water pollution that is very
similar to the definition that
is found in the New Mexico water
quality act in the conservation
OCC rules so conservation
commission rules.
Your entire section of the
underlying and that's because
they had to re after the highs
the the
The entire section of
definitions and that really the
main the two changes are there
as I mentioned.
Section six.
I'm it requires compliance with
the oil and gas act from.
Time this from the time this
bill that acted the sections
that we update a prior
provisions of the produced water
act to reflect the date of
implementation of this bill.
Should it become law.
Section seven and then the water
quality act.
To clarify that I'm treated
produced water cannot be
discharged outside of the Oil
Field and that's minimum
requirements for rules governing
the reuse of treated produced
water outside of the Oil Field
to.
It also requires public
disclosure of contaminants.
In the produced water that is
offered for re use for non oil
and gas purposes.
Lastly madam chair members of
the committee Senate bill eighty
six does not include an
appropriation with that the bill
provides the framework for OCD
and NMED rules to protect New
Mexico's environment and
precious water resources by
strengthening the existing
provisions governing produced
water.
We recognize that the
Environment Department New York
conservation division's budget
and staffing are woefully
inadequate to even carry out
their existing charge.
But as you know both agencies
that staffer large cuts to their
budget on the Martinez and.
Station.
And have yet the those those
budget that that yet to be
restored to the level that they
were under
the ridges and Administration.
Are all the best.
For those agencies with or
without the passage of.
I'm.
Madam chair Senators the deal
with the members of the
committee I thank you for this
opportunity today and and for
all the work that this committee
does to protect New Mexico's
environment and our precious
water resources.
That's all I have.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay Sir Senator Sedillo Lopez
we are laying this over now and
till Tuesday morning.
And we are taking no action so
that's not a negative action you
would that we will continue This
bill on Tuesday morning with the
opponents the proponents
questions from the committee.
In the mean time committee
members on I have just asked our
secretary.
Descend on each bill
individually.
The bill the F. I. R. the
committee analysis and any
amendments and to label it with
the bill number so that if we
ever need to go back to find it
we can do that in an organized
manner.
Then searching all our
conservation.
Emails and so we will get that
clarified for to do so Senator
Sedillo Lopez I hope some of
your opponents and proponents
can come back Tuesday morning.
At this time we are moving on
there is a section in the agenda
that had a little.
Cut off from the more from the
first group to the second group
that is a group that Senator guy
a ghosts and Senator Sedillo
Lopez worked on as possible
consent or not all
appropriations they were just
agreed upon as items that
the entire committee my willing
to go forward with.
So at this time is Senator Lopez
on.
Senator Linda Lopez.
And you might have to look for
the sponsors in the waiting room
cover because she said she'd be
back at noon.
There's no one in the waiting
room okay so Evans in the room
okay so we're waiting on Senator
Lopez Senator Woods Senator
Woods and myself so is Senator
Woods here.
No he's not.
Shares Senator Lopez here.
No she is not.
Well committee members I hate to
jump ahead.
So I will get my file on Senate
bill eighty five the land grant
Merced assistance fund and madam
vice chair if you run the
meeting and out I'll be I'm just
walking but and I'll be right
back.
Yes madam chair.
And Veronica perhaps you could
text
Senator Lopez and Senator Woods.
To let them know our Trevor that
there are.
Okay so members of the committee
this is Senate bill eighty five.
And I'm hearing this for the
Land Grant Committee the interim
committee of that looks over the
entire states land grants and in
the bill I'm chairing this
meeting.
Okay so in this bill I it
creates an annual fund.
It's a brand new fund intended
to provide annual distributions
to the various Land Grant recess
in the state with a half a
percent of the net receipts
attributable to gross receipts
taxes.
So this of course would go on to
other committees besides this
one.
And.
I have an expert witness here.
And.
I saw her.
The president of the land grant
council was on for quite awhile.
How are you on this one.
I don't see how Mexico will.
Council and because of now.
Padilla is on and aren't sure
what's going to be here so
This bill thank you madam chair.
Mr DS.
I yes I can you all hear me.
Yes.
Okay my name is Leon I president
of the New Mexico land grant of
Shetland circle which is
actually a grassroots
organization that supports all
land grants and what I'd like to
ask that all the numbers so
madam chair and all members of
the committee to please support
this bill I don't know if you
know the most all land grants
New Mexico are primarily working
on donations and fundraisers.
This revenue stream would assist
us tremendously and moving
forward with types of things we
want to do which is economic
development we want to start use
programs that will help train
are used for the future in terms
of jobs we want to start
scholarship programs to educate
them in any way we can all this
revenue source will help us meet
those lands on I don't think
it's a lot of money coming out
of.
I think we can do a great a lot
of good for our communities so
please please support this bill
and it
I can say it will allow us to
become more self reliant self
will.
To take care of ourselves we are
hoping you know excuse for all
the caps lock away all these
other things we may be able to
use this money to to keep us
going and to create again
economic development for
communities.
Thank you thank you and I have
Arturo.
Who is the director of the land
grant council I just saw him
areas Mr to let that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee yeah this this
bill is is very important it's
something we've been working on
for several years she is to
provide that sort of revenue
stream for land grants
to be able to function and M. to
sort of meet the commitments
that they have is government
entities are unlike most of what
we need to governments grand
grants have no guaranteed
revenue stream don't have taxing
authority the do actually pay
taxes on the common lands so the
they do provide a source of
revenue to the state this bill
would be really a minimal cost
to to the state in terms of the
dollar amount and it's crafted
in such a way that it provides
for the the revenues that go
into the funds to come off of a
percentage of the gross receipts
tax us that are collected by the
state so we'll actually
fluctuate with a picture
downturns in the economy which
is a good thing it doesn't you
know create of an earmarked
specific amount of the state has
to come up with every year and
and actually it's a very small
percentage point zero five
percent of the gross receipts
taxes and it's actually
calculated after the money is
comes out of the gross G. R. T.
this distributed to counties
municipalities for the Food
offsets as well as for the
offset for for sure health care
so.
Good thing in in that regard
that it's not going to sort of
impact of the small counties and
municipalities that receive that
offset so that the calculation
would happen after that and what
it what it does is of the so the
estimates that tax revenue
department put together for last
year before the sort of the
economy turned out it it was
going to generate maybe of
approximately one point five
million dollars to the fund that
would be distributed to land
grants and that would you know
equate to around forty to fifty
thousand dollars per Land Grant
and it's really a doesn't seem
like a lot of money when you
look at the the the total of
budget of the state in a one
point five million to kind of a
very small portion of that but
that forty thousand dollars per
line that would go a really long
way on and allowing them to not
only pay their taxes on the
property that they own but can
continue to provide community
services a lot of our land
grants have been hit really hard
now because of the Covid
restrictions many of them that
have community centers for
example on their main source of
revenue throughout the year is
is rental of those facilities
for a gap public gatherings we
have been able to generate any
of those revenues and so they
still have to be the lights they
still have to pay the insurance
costs this bill would just
really provide that opportunity
for land grants to kind of get
to the next level in terms of
not only management of the of
the assets that they manage like
community centers and and be
good stewards of the common
lands that they have and protect
those common lands but would
also provide them with an
opportunity to ensure that they
can be all and professional
service needs that they have and
so this is really just of a very
important bill for land grants
on so we definitely encourage on
the committee to to pass this
and extend from questions.
Madam chair that all your
witnesses and expert witnesses
there may be I think there's
some people here to support it
but again this is not consent so
to go pretty fast.
Const it is so citizen consent
are we having public.
Well madam chair we can either
go for thirty seconds are just
raising hands.
I mean this is a new process for
our committee Senator guy it
goes what would you prefer for
consent.
Senator.
Senator I.
I would like to just see it
right in the happy to be enough
for me.
Okay with that we get capped.
With that can everyone who
supports this bill that is on
line
Raise their hand what this means
is you go down to the bottom of
your screen and there's a
reactions.
I con and then right above that
there is a there is a if you if
you click on that and you can
click on raise hands I just did
it to as an example.
And then to lower your hand you
click it again but please raise
your hand.
So that we should be raising
your hand in hand Mr Deanna.
So madam chair on the reactions
we only have the option for a
clap hands are thumbs up
Thank you.
Would be fine too what I see
here is missed Padilla the NASA
so we link Anna Hansen Paul
Gibson Leonard T.
I don't I don't see the rest
on how Covid about that okay.
I see well average I guess is
count them one two three four
five six seven eight nine ten.
Looking at the next page eleven.
I believe that's eleven in
support is I am is anyone
present who is opposed to this
bill.
Please lower your hands.
If it's okay.
Lower your hands if you're in
support of this bill and if
you're opposed to this bill bill
would raise your hands I don't
see anybody propose let me go to
the second page.
But individuals I see no one
opposed.
What is the will of the
committee a letter.
Winner T..
It would miss at Leonard's T. M.
eight what I see on my screen
are you opposed to the bill.
At madam chair this is a
Martinez of the somewhat
committed showing no all of
referral or my hand I I support
Senate bill I thank you okay all
right thank you please lower
your hand all right think saying
no one opposed to the bill what
is the will of the committee.
Two passed.
Do I hear second.
Madam secretary will you call
the roll.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Yes Senator Neville.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator sold.
Committees yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
You Mr CENIC's yes.
It is a two one ADS one excused
madam chair you got a unanimous
do pass on your bill thank you.
The land grants of the big
struggle will be in finance
we now are going back to Senator
Pirtle for Senate bill one
eighteen with an emergency
clause Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's definitely a
pleasure to be in front of you
this morning
I have before you Senate bill
one eighteen and Senate bill one
eighteen is is a bill that I
actually
got from a a friend of mine that
that I met at one of our
national events a representative
Tyler Lindholm from Wyoming and
we were talking about local meat
inspection and things like that
and he mentioned to me about a
bill that he passed in Wyoming
in two thousand fifteen and and
subsequently to other states
have passed since that really
cuts out the red tape that gets
in the way of our local farmers
and ranchers from processing
their act drugs into jams
jellies and things and getting
them to the consumer that was
passed two thousand fifteen and
to date there's not been any
issues with that related to
illnesses or anything so I think
that's that's an important thing
to say and the other big part of
that is.
I was reading an article in
Forbes said over a hundred small
businesses have started up in
Flores due to this law that
we're that that's been passed in
those states so the idea really
came about to push for that this
year when COVID hit and the shut
downs first happens I'm sure we
all receive the phone calls and
and experienced ourselves the
the lack of food being able to
make it to the stores the the
trucks were coming you know a
lot of processing plants we're
not able to processed meats and
so New Mexicans didn't have
access to food and yet here
locally there's a lot of farmers
to produce things but are
allowed to sell them because of
government regulations and and
and how hard it is to be
licensed and do and so this just
comes from that that you know
our farmers markets are
Cottage industry is something
that New Mexico could be really
strong if we just got out of the
way of the producer to the
consumer and ensure as much
labeling as necessary to ensure
that the the consumers informed
and then there's a fix of the
tax you know right now if you
sell a jam or jelly it and you
grow the apple yourself unless
you make an apple butter I don't
know how many you guys are
familiar with what apple butter
is but it's a delicious spread
that you put on toast that my
grandmother made for us when we
were kids that to you we
thoroughly enjoyed but let's say
you have an apple tree and you
made some apple butter since you
process that it actually
qualifies for gross receipts tax
but if you go down to your
Walmart or your Albertsons and
you want to buy Welch's brand
apple butter not grandma's for
an apple butter there's no tax
on the one at the grocery store
so this would ensure that they
get they receive that same
deduction as as the commercial
grocery stores at at our farmers
markets and things and then at
the end a few years ago I'm not
sure.
Chairman's the fed ex if you
were in in the Senate I can't
remember when the that your last
year was here but it was like
two thousand twelve somewhere in
there they ended the statement
inspection and I've had mixed.
Reasons why they did that I've
heard a bunch of different ones
but you know that the reality is
there's more cows than people in
most of the areas of the state
we have a robust cattle industry
and we have to find a way to to
get all our beef produced here
in New Mexico by our farmers in
the hands of the consumer so
this would allow for state meat
inspection they would have to
follow the the rules of the
federal rules for me inspection
but hopefully in the state was
in charge we have more
inspectors and and essentially
that with more places to have a
process to get to the consumer
with that'll stand for questions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Pirtle do you have an expert
witness.
I do not have an expert witness
but they were going to be a few
people I don't know if they
ended up signing on to speak on
behalf of the bill or not if
there in the waiting room.
We.
Thank you we don't have anybody
in the waiting room everybody's
on screen so let's ask you if
you how many people are here to
oppose this bill please raise
your hand.
We have one opposition okay Pam
right would you like to make
your statement.
You have to.
Of Pam.
Pam I'm yourself there you go
madam chair committee members
thank you very much for this
opportunity to
speak with you in the moment
respectfully to Senator Pirtle
we really appreciate you
bringing forward the issues
around local locally grounded
the reasons why we need market
opportunities in the state
and a fort locally grown and
processed foods
we want to say we respectfully
as the New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council
oppose the bill for the reasons
we feel that it really limits
the regulatory requirements that
are really necessary we know
that people don't processed food
B. and intentionally
potentially make people feel ill
but what can happen is if
somebody has process something
in a home kitchen without
understanding some of those
rules and getting more informed
by the.
Environment Department and on
agriculture but there's that
possibility so we just feel that
it's important for the rules are
in place already through New
Mexico's cottage food Act
actually really do provide that
leg up for people who are
wanting to get involved in in
small batch processing but also
to learn how to do that in a
safe way and to keep the public
safe so again we really
appreciate that there's an
opportunity for many many
options for marketing and
building out small business
opportunities The New Mexico
especially around food and
agriculture we will stand in
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much hi is there
any other opponents before we go
to proponents.
Okay first of are there are
supporters of this bill who
would like to speak just raise
your hand.
Yes Lauren Patterson and then
Tiffany Rivera Lauren go ahead.
Thank you chairman.
Stefan X. thank you everybody I
apologize for just being on
audio at I live in a small rural
area and and we have a wind farm
going in and it's Max our
broadband but we stand and we
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing forth this legislation
we support it we we do believe
that New Mexico cattle growers
would benefit from the meat
inspection program we do have
one concern though we would pre
fire that the meat inspection
program go through the New
Mexico livestock board where
formally was we believe that the
livestock board has that they
experience the opposite the
statement Marian and the
traceability requirements of the
live animals we'd like to see
that on the on the harvested
animals to I'm as we're all
aware of any animal disease can
have a great impact on the
community on our ag community
and we believe that the office
of the state that has the
legislative and law enforcement
capabilities to handle that
situation should one arise.
Thank you to me.
Madam chair members of the
committee to be Rivera director
of government affairs for New
Mexico farm and livestock
bureau.
We'd like to see that on the on
the harvested animals to.
As we're all aware of any.
Webcast on turn it off yeah
everyone.
On.
I'm sorry we didn't make that
clear.
If you're on the zoom you must
have your webcast off okay
please go ahead to the
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
afternoon Tiffany Rivera
director of government affairs
for New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau and registered
lobbyists we stand today in
support of the Senate bill one
eighteen we appreciate the
spirit of this legislation and
what the sponsors looking to do
specifically we thank you
Senator Pirtle for the language
that pertains to me inspection
we as an organization are very
supportive of that and hope to
have it back here in the state
to allow our producers increase
access to markets we are also
extremely supportive of the
tax provision included in this
bill as well we do have a few
concerns pertaining to the
cottage component but we
understand
that the sponsor will look to
address those and we look
forward to continuing to work on
this piece of legislation with
them so thank you for the
opportunity this morning.
Thank you.
Other opponents and proponents
that I have missed.
We know now go to questions and
comments from committee members.
Could you take your hand down.
Yes.
Because madam chair I believe
that there is someone that it
says farmers markets on the
bottom who raised her hand.
It's on the bottom of my screen
I don't know thank you thank you
senator I'm at thank you senator
and madam chair and members of
the committee I'm I'm sorry I
just was forwarded this link
just a minute ago my name is
Denise Miller and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico farmers marketing
association I did send a reply
to the committee last week and a
letter to to the committee so
thank you for giving me a moment
to speak and The New Mexico
farmers marketing association
would like to stand in
opposition to this that bill
we also recognize the spirit of
what Senator Pirtle is
attempting to accomplish here
with you know opening the
markets to new of producers and
food vendors but in general we
are extremely worried about the
public safety and removing all
regulations including those for
the non potentially hazardous as
well as potentially hazardous
foods which would be sold at
farmers markets and other
outlets and well there's a few
provisions within the bill that
mentioned the up drugs could
would be put to one side and
there might be a sign on the
table or something like that to
let customers know that these
drugs were have not been
inspected or regulated in any
way we do not feel that that is
adequate public safety there
were there does not need to be a
label on the on the
Products and we work very hard
to make sure that
members of the public and can be
really protected when they shop
for food products at the farmers
markets and there are provisions
as was previously mentioned for
home cottage rules so that
people can of produce some of
these products in their homes
but not be potentially hazardous
category of products and we were
just stand in opposition and
prefer to work with the
Environment Department of who
regulates these products and we
feel has the interest of the
public safety most most at hand
and familiar with those sought
the science behind all of that
thank you very much.
Thank you okay now we are going
to questions and comments from
the committee.
Yes there are none what is the
pleasure of the committee.
I would do pass Madam chair I'd
second.
There is a motion representative
bill for a due pass in the
second I.
I did actually have a concern to
to raise before we we vote on
the on the do pass yes Senator
hammered as senator pope and
Senator Sedillo Lopez so we we
if we can have that that
opportunity.
May I go first madam chair yes
you very much madam chair and
that Senators I I echo the
concerns from the New Mexico
farmers market and the food and
ag community the two women who
to talk about that.
I have is on the
internet everybody needs their
bike off.
Thank you senator Hammond please
go ahead.
A much I do echo the same
concerns that are were expressed
by the farmers market of New
Mexico and the food and ag
council
there are concerns I think I
think Senator Pirtle I think
your bill has some really good
legs and I think in terms of of
the statement inspection you
know I'm always talking about
making sure that we have stuff
that is in our community and in
our state and that we stop
putting money outside of the
state and feel that you know we
can we can focus on that the
cottage food act really does
provide the guidance that's
that's already in place Los
crucis has one of the best
farmers markets in the country
and we you know for four COVID
times we would have thousands of
people at the farmers market
every Saturday morning and my
concern is because of the
opportunities for people to get
sick from food that is not
prepared by guidelines that they
they need to to follow I really
worry about how it's really
going to have a detrimental
effect on small businesses not
support small businesses I do
feel that we are going to be
seeing more and more folks
coming up with opportunities to
create their grandmother salsa
or homemade tortillas as a way
of supplemental income however
we need to have those guidelines
in place and so I do feel the
bill has merit but I also
recommend re working at a little
bit with the considerations have
been brought up here today thank
you madam chair that is I am
finished.
Thank you Senator pope.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Pirtle for
upbringing for this bill Senator
Hamblen kind of express some of
my concerns and I think there's
the balance and and I do want to
find a way to bring some of
these items to the consumer and
help out our small businesses
and mom and pops but I also want
to make sure that there's a
little more transparency on the
production of these items and
what's in it to the consumer so
those are just some concerns
that I have so what I would like
to see is maybe a little more
here I think we're going in the
right direction but those are my
concerns and all yield.
Thank you.
Lopez and Senator Schmedes thank
thank you Senator Hamblen and
and.
Senator pope but addressed a
couple of my issues I just have
one one more and if the question
is to Senator Pirtle what do you
think about
the issue about who inspects the
meat whether it should be in the
house has suggested or or not
that seems like a very
interesting question to explore.
I mean in the state of intense.
Madam chair and and etcetera you
referring to whether we use in
and do a as my bill says or
livestock board yes.
And and madam chair senator I I
appreciate that question as it's
as we have the people come in
for somewhat support I think of
the bill it was kind of
interesting
the the reason I really thought
that NMDA could best handle it
is there a little bit more
statewide they have
you know our County extension
agents in every single county
that do the training with all of
this the food safety and things
already and so I thought maybe
it would be easier for them
logistically to put in a meat
inspection program and really
they they already inspect the
eggs and do all types of other
things with us it just makes
more sense for me and again the
the real important part about it
is it takes politics out of it
to an extent it gets one degree
further away from politics where
you have a new governor well the
governor appoints the the
regents it doesn't just happen
right away so you're not going
back and forth with some of
these regulations so that way we
have good sound science the the
rules and regulations are are
created by the the border
regions essentially out of the
Act school and where the
livestock or can become a little
bit political where those change
a little quicker when you have
new governors come and so I just
thought it was a great way to
make sure it was a a non
political issue that it has a
little bit of a degree of
separation away from those types
of appointments that we've all
seen after after election and
that the the New Mexico
department of ag is just a
better suited and and larger
organization that can handle
this task and ensure that we
don't come back for five years
from now and cancel it as as the
livestock or had it before and
so we want to ensure that this
is successful.
It it just seemed reason this is
a life to live staff board
has so much more information
about diseases but I I respect
your I respect your reasoning
and thank you for the
clarification.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
Senator Schmedes.
This brief comment madam chair
thank you and senator
Look at this bill I mean I I
I've often told people I kind of
come from a very very D. I. Y.
district
farmers markets farmers people
that you know repair their own
homes and do those sorts of
things
And of course that resonates
with my constituency I did want
to share very very briefly my
experience you know in.
just kind of do direct farm to
table US foods is when I when I
I spent
a few years overseas and we
would see the calles up on the
hill.
animatic a group of people
called the Fulani would what
branch those cattle and then
every Tuesday there was a cow
that was was butchered brought
brought down to the market and
so if you wanted some meat you
had to go on Tuesday just get it
and it was right there
I don't I have no idea how they
were cleaning their knives or
anything else I just but I do
know is that the cow was the
meat was very very fresh
and same thing with our fruits
and vegetables no regulation
whatsoever I mean what so ever
and we had no problems
and it sounds like with I think
you said four other states they
had no problems and so I I hear
the concerns
and as a physician I'm very
concerned about public health
but I I I think that if we have
president you know this was a
brand new idea that never been
done before
you know I I would urge maybe a
smaller scope of of sort of
drugs and and scope of the bill
but with with such no precedent
and with who New Mexico is a man
I think this is a New Mexico
this is a heritage Act I believe
it's a it's a it's a heritage
law and so for that reason I I
certainly
would like to
you know just just want to share
my experience in kind of a more
direct farm to table settings so
thank you senator thank you
madam chair.
Thank you
I have we do have a motion on
the floor but I do have a
comment
the.
Our inspection and the meat
packing industry we actually
heard and economic on rural
development and we have several
bills moving along for that I do
appreciate the heritage portion
of this I love apple butter but
I do think that we probably.
We need this bill to address.
Different topics in different
ways and it could it could be
actually separated as well
that's my only comment so I
think we have a due pass motion
from senator Neville and we have
a second was it from Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am okay chair okay so the
US.
Would you please call the boat.
The public we are voting on
Senate bill one eighteen and
we're taking a do pass motion
vote.
Are you there.
Sorry I Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
No I'd like to explain more
about senator Neville yes
Senator pope.
Now.
Though.
Senator smitteez yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You have mute yes yes and I
would like to point out thank
you Senator Stefanics.
Now.
It's for yes for no in one
excuse.
We have
I'm non definitive vote so
Senator Pirtle we can.
Another motion.
Madam chair I moved a no
recommendation.
That there is a second motion
for a no rack.
So Veronica please call the
roll.
I'm sorry who made the motion
please.
Senator.
Okay and second.
Senator vote I never had the
opportunity when my vote.
Okay well first of all
Senator Hamblen you asked
explain your vote.
Madam chair you know I I I
really would like to follow the
advice from the New Mexico
Food neck Policy Council and the
farmers market is when we're
talking about apple butter and
people meeting kitchens homes
they have had to navigate the
health standards for many years
to make sure that not only other
customer safe but that they're
also protecting the entity in
which they're able to sell their
goods and so I think that this
bill has a good legs but I do
feel that it needs to to be
reworked a little bit and so
that is why I voted now thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes I voted yes for almost
exactly the same reasons I was
going to encourage the sponsor
to address these issues as it
moves its way through through
the committee so that that's
interesting.
We now have a motion for a no
recommendation for the bill to
move on it was made by Senator
Nobel seconded by Senator guy a
goes with Veronica please call
the both.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator guy goes.
Yes ma'am on the no REC Senator
Hamblen.
In the past I'm not clear on
this.
Okay.
And let me explain no
recommendation means that the
bill will get out of committee
and the committee report and
with the no recommendation and
they will have the boat total if
it passes it will have the vote
total with that as it goes to
the next committee which is a
marker to the next committee
that we were a hung jury.
I think that if I may madam
chair if I make it my doctor.
Yes
yes I'm gonna pass okay I know
recommendation.
Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator poke.
Our test and I like to swim my
boat.
Senator Soth no.
Senator Smitty yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Seven yes one no one one excuse.
Thank you Senator pope slain his
boat thank you madam chair up I
once again I want to thank you
for bringing this for Senator
Pirtle I just want to echo some
of the comments that were
expressed here specially Senator
Sedillo Lopez if we can just do
some modification of this
because I really want to support
this bill.
Thank you very much okay we are
going on now we have Senate bill
sixty eight.
Canvassing boards fertility land
grants senator Linda Lopez.
Madam chair it's good afternoon
and I appreciate the opportunity
to present Senate bill sixty
eight I do have my expert
witness our food Archuleta I
know who's here with us also.
but madam chair Senate bill
sixty eight was endorsed by the
Land Grant Committee earlier
this interim will asked in terms
of I say and what of the bill
will do is it Maez the law
governing elections for the
board of trustees of the land
grant Stewart said that will of
course require two appointees in
the election judge to serve on a
convincing board and clarifies
the qualifications of person
serving as election clerks
judges and of course and see
board members and madam chair
members of the committee this
specific legislation will apply
to the chili Land Grant were
said that it's consistent with
the provisions that govern all
of our other land grant work
sets so if I could madam chair
just referred to I could ask Mr
to let the if you like to say a
few words also.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Lopez
I think Senator Lopez did a good
job of recapping what the bill
does it just just provide for
those canvassing boards and and
then the who can we can serve on
those boards and the reason that
you can be is in as well as
because there they have their
own separate statute on the our
unity government but they
recognize through a separate
statute of most land grants are
recognized under the general
provisions which is article one
of section forty nine of the law
and should be as under article
four I'm so this just kind of
brings us the parity between the
two.
With that metric centric
questions.
Thank you do you have anybody
else as an expert.
No madam chair okay because this
is consent we're gonna do it by
hands only all those in favor of
this bill which is Senate bill
sixty eight please raise your
hand.
Okay I have one too.
Three members of the public
supporting the bill one two
three four sorry is there
anybody opposed to the bill.
Okay back to committee members
you can take a hands down is
there a question or comment from
the committee and if not is
there a motion.
Do passed.
There's a motion for do passed
from Santo guy a goes and I
second and there is a second
from Senator pope.
K. Veronica could you please
call the vote.
Minister mantis Senator
Gallegos.
Yes ma'am Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Neville yes Senator pope
yes Senator so th yes Senator
committees yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Stefanics yes.
Okay eight yes one.
Thank you very much Senator
Lopez and all your witnesses you
have a unanimous do pass thank
you madam chair members of the
committee okay we're moving onto
Senator would.
Senate bill one oh one and you
have to built here on a consent
let's see if we can keep on
consent and Google.
Thank you madam chair
The ideal here but it's a pretty
simple that we already have this
program in the action it is the
Actor culture workforce
development program I've got an
expert witness with me here
today
so why is is a expert witness
and I would so I think and she
is on the zoom I'd like.
Due to.
We need to get to move along
real fast year I'd like her to
explain the bill because she is
directly involved with the madam
chair if you would allow.
Thank you so it's great to see
you if you done it yourself and
make a couple minutes Madam.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we think New Mexico
campaigns organizer for the
national young farmers coalition
at young farmers I support young
and beginning growers and
ranchers across New Mexico
working with R. three chapters
to advocate for the future of
agriculture I also have my own
farm Waco diversified that's
doubles in areas livestock with
my husband Carlos here in
Bernalillo county as well as in
support County
my late great grandpa taxes a
rancher and pecan farmer down to
the rest of but I'm the first in
my family since Sam to be making
a way for myself in the world of
agriculture I'm honored to be
here today working with senator
woods in senators Sedillo Lopez
on an issue so important for New
Mexico's agricultural future
Here at the end farmers
coalition we work to reduce the
barriers facing young and
beginning farmers and ranchers
trying to break into and find
success in their agricultural
careers one of these barriers
that's most frequently cited by
our members is a lack of
meaningful on the ground
training opportunities we must
cultivate more opportunities for
individuals who are interested
in agriculture to get skillfully
trained in addition our state's
agricultural work forces older
on average than any other time
in history and as the current
workforce nears retirement we
must ensure that the next
generation is prepared to carry
on New Mexico's agricultural
legacy.
Preparing the next generation of
the agricultural workforce for
long term success is an issue
that we sought to address with
the agriculture workforce
development program act which
was passed in two thousand
nineteen thousand the NMCA the
program incentivizes
agricultural producers and value
added ag businesses to hire
younger beginning farmer interns
and provide them with vital
hands on training that it takes
to be truly successful in this
field under the existing program
eligible act businesses can hire
up to three rate in terms and in
turn those businesses provide at
least one hundred and thirty
hours of training and education
over the course of no more than
one year in return to add
business is reimbursed by the
department of agriculture for up
to fifty percent of the costs
related to hiring and training
the intern or interns during the
twenty twenty season live five
firemen pearl to New Mexico was
able to successfully hiring
training in turn to support
their organic herb mostly
lavender and vegetable operation
flies a small two acre family
run farm before participating in
the act work force development
program they had never before
had an employee but with the
support of the program and of
NMCA during the twenty twenty
season they were able to
successfully training misfiring
in Medicare in on the inner
workings of their farm and they
planned to hire her as their
first official employee and the
twenty twenty one season.
Our coalition of farmers and
ranchers as well as our many
partners and food security and
agriculture across the state
secures support for continuing
agency AG internship program
with a hundred thousand dollars
appropriation for the next
fiscal year we hope you'll
continue to invest in New
Mexico's farmers and ranchers
with this requested
appropriation thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee for your time today.
And I'll stand for questions.
Thank you so much okay because
consent this is not for
committee members to raise their
hands.
Is that are there any members of
the public opposing this bill.
Please raise your hand.
Members of the public supporting
this bill please raise your hand
through the reaction.
Okay we have five supporters on
thank you and plus so we so
thank you very much for being
with us today back to the
committee you can take your
hands down everybody back to the
committee.
Are there any questions for
Senator Woods.
Senator Hamblen you have a
question.
I know it's more of a comment
madam chair sure go ahead thank
you madam chair I just love this
legislation mistake thank you so
much you know we're in southern
New Mexico and there's a a
family the Watson family that I
have watched their children grow
up in a farming that's where I
get my green Chile from every
single year get my Oprah from
get my asparagus from and the
challenges is to continue to
cultivate young farmers and so
you know but it's it's part of
our our state fabric it's part
of our cultural history and so
Senator Woods and speak at I am
just very excited about this
legislation and you know we do
what we can to make sure that we
help people.
Be able to continue to farm and
also welcome new opportunities
for people especially people of
color and diverse communities
also to be able to farm I look
forward to this and and thank
you very much for bringing this
legislation forward I'm I you'll
now.
Thank you so much
And I have many young farmers in
my district I'm really excited
about this as well so any other
comments before we go to a
motion.
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
I just wanted to comment about
how I think of Senator Hamblen
actually did a much better job
than I did then I can in in
describing how important this
bill is for the future the state
of New Mexico and I was honored
to be asked to Mexico will co
sponsor it this is yeah and I'm
sorry I didn't mention that no
that's okay and so whenever
you're ready madam chair I'm
happy to make the motion.
The
committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm of the past.
Thank you a motion by Senator
Padilla Lopez second by Senator
Gallegos could Veronica could
you please call the roll.
Wanted Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
Number one I'm very excited yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
pope.
Yes Senator so yes Senator
committee yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes and Senator Stefanics
yes yes one excuse.
Thank you have a unanimous do
pass and now senator Wirth we're
going on to Senate bill one
twenty six weather modification
program if you'd like to set a
few words and then introduced
whatever expert you have thank
you madam chair to get a loan
apologize to Senator said in a
Lopez that I did not include her
as a whole sponsor of the last
bill today I want to bring
forward a bill that has to do
with whatever weather
modification and madam chair I
dislike to start with this
statement.
We all talk about the weather
but nobody wants to do anything
about it.
This particular bill is doing
something about it and I've got
an expert witness with me today
that knows a lot about this and
his name is Mr said Monday
September and I would ask madam
chair if he can make a comment.
Yes I know say quite well also
please Mr silver go ahead.
Hi I hope you can hear me yes we
can great madam chair.
I need the segments over and I
can be reached at segments so
we're acute outcome on the
president of the New Mexico
other modification Association.
Our.
Hi support SP one twenty six
because New Mexico needs more
water and other than
conservation of cloud seeding is
though quest approach to adding
water to our waters why.
Give you some new information
that some of you may not know
which is why
counseling works.
And the first is that at these
latitudes are.
Over ninety nine percent of our
precipitation involves condition
which means that the moisture
has to first freeze in the
crowd.
In the summer if forces range
and in the winter falls is now
but the glaciation process is
the key.
For.
Precipitation to happen.
In the tropics is a little
different.
and another piece of information
it's hard to believe was hard to
believe for me at first is that
pure water vapor in clouds does
not freeze of thirty two
degrees.
Our hello thirty two degrees
remain liquid and it's called
supercooled liquid water S. L.
W. now the reason it freezes in
your refrigerator is there ice
cubes tray serves as the
catalyst for it to freeze as
temperatures.
Thirty two the state.
In the atmosphere we're lucky we
have some natural.
Compounds that help with this to
to most important or vermiculite
and Kayla.
The state.
Will not work at temperatures
warmer than minus thirteen C. so
there's a gap.
And still raw.
I.
The.
Mr silver you're cutting out so
if you take off your picture and
just talk we might be able to
hear you better.
might why technical person just
left me so.
I'm not sure this.
Okay you are freezing up is
there any way.
Madam chair I might yes.
The end of questions and the
technical questions.
We can do it that way thank you
so much Senator okay is a could
all the support my video.
Okay so we're we're gonna end
you so that we can go on this is
a consent item and I really
appreciate all of your knowledge
you're an expert in this area
but I'll.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
from the public could out all
the supporters to raise your
hands from your zoom reactions.
We have one two three four and
of course your expert five six
thank you so much you can take
your hands down are there any
opponents to this bill.
Okay and now we're at questions
and comments from committee
members Charlie want to take
your hand down please
okay.
Your.
Committee members at questions
and comments senator souls and
then Senator pope.
Thank you madam chair this bill
coming up I actually started we
have a wonderful resource called
Google and started googling
cloud seeding and learned quite
a bit about it just be done with
so right crystals because they
believe structure that was very
similar to ice crystals
and as someone who's been trying
to research and reading research
it was very interesting in that
because of the huge number of
variables involved in cloud
seeding.
Did this research as to whether
it works or not is very very
difficult to do you can't help
can still control groups with
that the win research that came
closest to having that
that there was a slight increase
in precipitation but it was
within the margin of error there
was not a statistically
significant increase in any of
the person Tatian and waster.
Some of the research indicated
that and for the amount of this
particular bill I think it's one
point two million dollars as I
look over it hi my draft of the
the bill
it doesn't backed a result in
any kind of significant moisture
one point two million for
getting her feet so water might
be fairly reasonable
and so I always hesitant when
there's not scientific research
behind that clearly shows it's
the statistically significant
increases spending one point two
million Sliq goes to New Mexico
State University is New Mexico
State University available and
to administer this program and
run this program in which
researchers at Michigan State
University you would be doing
the study.
After a little bit of discussion
my question.
And the question being who at
New Mexico State University
would be doing as a researcher
during the study is that the
question Mr.
Madam chair and senator.
Chair and senator Munoz says the
Mexico City University will
develop and administer weather
modification program who'd
Mexico State University is going
to be developing monitoring that
program and whether the results
are statistically significant
for the money we spent.
Okay first of all Senator madam
chair if I could direct that
question to Charlie markets it
that would be satisfactory yes
trying.
Madam chair actually of what
would happen is University of
New I'm sorry New Mexico State
University would be the one that
would act as a special agent for
this and they would use results
falling water conservation
district to actually run the
program collect the data and
reported back.
Mr chair our madam chair and if
Senator if you really want
technical information which I
think you do.
I would ask.
Mr Siegman said we're to expound
on the scientific part of this.
I looked it up I'm pretty good
at separating out which are
responsible scientific journals
which are just a Google comes up
gives you newspaper articles and
other kinds of things as opposed
to actually hear reviewed
scientific research and it's
again the research is very very
spotty as to.
scientifically significant
difference is that the one study
that seem to be able to control
variables showed that there was
a slight increase but it was not
statistically significant and so
that's my concern and how are we
going to determine whether this
is an effective program or not
if we don't have researchers
like at New Mexico State
University that are actually
researching it as opposed to
just the the managers of the
soil and water conservation I
kind of went around and around
so I apologize and.
No I.
If you would rather madam chair
if it's Senator if you'd rather
go to Google then my expert
witnesses I completely
understand so madam chair I
guess we're unless you have less
Senator so has another question
okay so thank you senator was
does anything more.
No.
Like you said just concerns
about you know whether how we
verify that we're getting a
return on our dollars so thank
you.
Thank you senator Paul Senator
thank you madam chair thank you
etcetera what's
I kind of the same concerns from
Senator soul just kind of doing
the research my background
science as well and there seems
to be some conflicted from a lot
of the the pair research on
whether this works or not I want
this to work I mean we we need
water here in New Mexico and I
think this is a way to get there
so all leave that there and but
I guess the one question I would
like to ask your expert that's
okay are there any negative
aspects to actually cloud
seeding.
To our environment or or you
know I I've.
What that's a legitimate
question also may I ask madam
chair if Mr Sadler could answer
any of those questions.
Mr so we're.
I should also mention that I'm a
member of the S. C. H. B..
Our.
Standards committee on whether
the case where we are you are
going in and out so you're gonna
need to make your point very
very brief.
Okay
It is.
The first.
Our.
I don't see it being in
Roosevelt and Lee County the it
was done by a I think
cooperation with the
taxes.
Our.
The he was responsible for that
I have most of those reports
I've won through those reports.
I'm sorry madam chair and I
think we're just going to have
to use pre pool instead of
precipitation.
Okay.
We really cannot hear you so I
think we have to just move on so
Senator.
With the mess let me answer what
little research and I've done
Senator and madam chair the.
It's real funny when you start
talking about silver all right
thank which is normally what
issues
there is no no adverse effect of
silver from my research but I.
I'm sure you I did it all go go
so I may or may not be true but
the what I found in Google it
said that the silver discovers
your skin and silver is also
used in a lot of water treatment
apparatuses so it's not like
we're doing that and as far as I
have done our world is patient
and I had that in and I know the
good doctor Committee not want
to chime in on this but it is a.
That part of it is not.
I am the.
Content to cause trouble either
and one way that they did
major according to my study up
on some snow pack in Utah to
determine whether this saying
heading effect or not was how
much silver was in the snow.
So there is measureable ways of
doing this and I'm not going to
debate to any of those others
because it is simply what I read
out of global and I'm so a
probably should of you that my
expert witnesses got a poor
internet connection because he
is very knowledgeable on the
subject so.
You madam chair.
And Senate.
Madam chair.
This is on point yes.
Okay very briefly please yes
madam chair we actually have the
person that did the study that
Mr Sugarman was talking about.
They actually executed a pilot
program last year and what they
did was they went ahead and used
did this Roosevelt Lee County.
and they used a silver iodide
and and quite frankly I mean the
expert is on line of and he it's
his name is Mr Gary Walker
Senator I I don't know if you
want to answer that specifically
because he does know what the
subject.
Find out we have exceeded well
over five minutes and this was
supposed to be a consent item
yes normally we wait just a
minute center which in.
Normally if we were in the
middle of an agenda and we were
going over five minutes
discussion we would just move it
back to our regular calendar.
This is the last item for today
so we are finishing bill and I'm
explaining the process if our
ranking member and advice here
decided and calendar.
And if the discussion goes long
white by over five minutes ten
minutes we need to move it to
the regular calendar because
that involves more discussions
questions and answers so we're
gonna let this play out very
briefly because some people go
Senator Hamblen is going to the
committee at one thirty I'm
presenting and finance shortly
so
Let's finish this conversation
for Senator Woods there's no
need to come back to this bill
again Sir Senator pope you still
have the floor.
Madam chair I I I will yield at
this time and that's all all the
questions that I have thank you
senator solace your hand this
up.
Okay so.
Any further questions or
comments or discussion from the
committee.
On
here at noon two passed.
Is there a second.
All second.
Okay there is a motion from
Santo renewable for a do pass.
And the second from Santo date
goes.
Is there any further questions
or discussion.
Okay Veronica could you please
call the roll.
Wanted.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Neville yes Senator
poke.
Yes.
Senator is also.
No.
Senator Smith.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm sorry your.
Yes explain my vote thank you
Senator Stefanics yes.
Okay it is.
Seven yes one no in one excuse.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
to explain her about.
You're on mute Senator.
Thank you I I voted for it to go
ahead but I started googling
allografts which not a content
calendar because it does look
like there are some questions
about the efficacy of of this
process and it would be good to
get more information from and I
miss you but for the next
committee about how they plan to
spend this amount of money.
Thank you very much are there
any other comments from the
committee before we adjourn for
the day.
So committee members today is we
are we will meet again Tuesday
morning at nine AM.
We will probably maybe Thursday
morning at eight AM because
he'll be short session for the
floor and then we will meet on
Saturday from nine to noon so
next week I will remind
everybody about our meetings but
to say it will be nine to one on
Tuesday thank you very much and
have a great day madam chair.
Senator and yes can I tell my
experts that we will be going
first
The second I'll talk to you
later thank you thank you.
