Okay.
I believe that we could.
Start the webcast we have five
people.
We can.
Okay good morning would you
please take the role.
Senator sirventes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
Here Senator Neville your
Senator pope.
Senator smitteez.
Senator solve
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr thanks yes thank
you.
We have a quorum.
Thank you very much good morning
everyone and I hope you're
having a.
A good weekend we are starting
with Senate memorial twelve as
amended Senator Hamblen and if
the Center Hamlin would take it
away.
And thank you so much for thank
you so much madam chair inside a
jump jump every I'm very excited
about talking about this today
and it is a beautiful Saturday
morning able to be here in
southern New Mexico where we
have a quite a few dairies in
Dona ana county and that's what
I'm talking about today is the
dairy rural effect on
groundwater resources just one
second Senator.
If any of us are cutting in and
out would you tell us so that we
can take our picture off while
we keep our speaker on yes thank
you very much so Senator.
Thank you madam chair so we're
talking about the dairy rural
effect on groundwater resources
in New Mexico has approximately
a hundred thirty dairies with
the largest average herd size of
two thousand three hundred and
fifty seven in the nation New
Mexico is currently ranked ninth
in the nation for milk
production and fifth in the
nation nation for cheese
production as I mentioned before
in a previous committee I come
from she's royalty understanding
that brick cheese is something
that was invented down the line
in my family and we have a
cheese factory in Los crucis
because the smart thing to do is
to bring the cheese factories to
the dairies so I just wanted to
give a shout out to our cheese
factory that we have over on the
west mesa according to the dairy
producers of New Mexico the
dairy industry in New Mexico has
brought significant economic
benefits to the state according
to New Mexico State University
the average New Mexico dairy
produces forty four million
pounds of milk per year worth an
estimated five point eight
million dollars and I want to be
very clear that I recognize the
economic impact the Jerry
industry has on our state.
The element that we are
addressing with this memorial is
providing the dairies and other
agencies with data that has been
collected already that tells us
what is happening when you
concentrate hundreds of cattle
on comparatively small sections
of land I curry county for
example tends to have the
largest operations in the state
with an average of over twenty
seven hundred cows per farm
while the eight CM Bernalillo
county's have the smallest
operations with an average of
five hundred cals perform in
doing yet we have twenty four
farms with over fifty three
thousand house occupying those
sites and how the bill addresses
those problems is that we've had
for years data about the
groundwater discharge permits we
now have the opportunity to
compare that data and use it to
perform a comprehensive review
and report on the effectiveness
of the Jerry role in protecting
New Mexico's groundwater
resources this will also help us
as legislators create policy law
that not only crude supports the
dairy industry but also protects
our groundwater especially in
our rural and agricultural areas
now the Senate rules committee
did provide feedback on this for
a friendly amendment including
removing informations that
opponents of the memorial we're
concerned about being public
with page and also adding the
dairy farmers of America and the
jury farmers of New Mexico to
this bill I do have to experts
here I have Dan warmer who is
from the Rio Grande chapter of
the Sierra Club we can talk
about the history of the data
and also Kathy Martin of Martin
environmental services in Norman
Oklahoma who has worked with the
New Mexico citizens Jerry
coalition for over a decade and
so at this point madam chair I
look forward to any questions
and look forward to discussing
this memorial.
Thank you very much Senator so
let's go to your experts Mr
Lerner and ms Kathy who are.
Martin okay so Mister Larmer go
ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair.
The committee my name is Dan
Larmer I'm a volunteer will with
the grand chapter of the Sierra
Club and spokesperson for the
New Mexico citizens dairy
coalition.
back in two thousand and nine
senator Clinton harden junior
ran of bills Senate bill two oh
six that called for industry
specific ground water just
charge rules for permitting.
Gary is as an industry and
copper as an industry the
environment department who
administrative the process of
developing the rules started
with dairies.
So that process took five years
of negotiating.
After that.
There was a settlement agreement
signed between the parties
including the New Mexico
citizens Jerry coalition the
agency as well as a dairy
industry group well I'm back
rule was quickly adopted by the
W. QCC and is the dairy rule
today it's been on the ground
for five years as signatories to
the settlement agreement we're
interested to see if the rule
increased New Mexico's
effectiveness in protecting our
groundwater.
Without without.
Talking about anything except
the impacts of dairies
groundwater
the rule.
Basically has no way of being
reviewed right now by the
environment department they
don't have a data base that
allows them to do industry wide
comparisons and to do a
comparison between today is up
monitoring statistics that show
the ground water quality it
around Aries and the statistics
ten years ago are we doing a
better are we doing worse we
just don't know and it's
difficult to administrate a
rural and regulate like our
ground water quality of bureau
does without understanding if
the rule itself works and so
that's the reason we see for
this
a memorial.
Thank you.
Thank you very much miss Martin.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kathy Martin I am an engineer
I live in Norman Oklahoma but
most of my family is in New
Mexico anyway I'm at the the
honor to work with The New
Mexico citizens very coalition
as was said earlier for
a significant amount of time and
was.
Right involved in the state for
the process and the rule making
and also testified during the
actual rulemaking process as the
technical person I am.
I really enjoy.
Appreciate some of the technical
aspects of the rule and will at
the enforcement of that through
the permitting process has
actually protected groundwater
and as Stan Larimer mentioned
earlier we're we're very eager
to see if there are some
groundwater data coming out of
the dairies today which is
required by the permits by the
way that proves that this
groundwater's and improving.
And that state is behind this we
think there's been a significant
amount of time at the rule is
been in place of permits have
been issued and facilities have
been operating under the new
requirements I would just like
to get a report card on the
progress thank you.
Thank you very much last after
we go to the opponents and
proponents Senator will offer
you a minute to make any further
comments before we go to
questions and discussion.
any opponents on this bill.
Our this memorial.
Yes we do we have.
I just wanna let everybody know
we are on Senate memorial twelve
as amended their rule effect on
groundwater resources so go
ahead with the opponents Trevor.
First we have to fifty Rivera.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to join you all this
morning my name is to me Rivera
and I'm the.
Relations director for New
Mexico from livestock bureau as
well as the registered lobbyist
we stand in opposition to this
memorial Senator Hamblen
mentioned are sector dairy
sectors the most highly valued
Ag sector in state contributing
roughly one point eight billion
to the New Mexico economy with
over two hundred and one point
nine million in exports
annually.
We oppose this memorial that
will compromise the many years
of great work that has been done
on the Derry role this work was
done in collaboration with our
state's dairy producers industry
stakeholders and the environment
department the general currently
in place of the most stringent
Jareth ground water regulations
nationwide well the amendments
are appreciated and we thank
them and Senator Hamblen very
much for her I continue to work
on them the memorial still has
the potential to place our
producers at risk of increased
lawsuits lastly the environment
department already collects the
data reference in this memorial
so we feel that it is I needed
thank you for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you next.
Really.
Good morning thank you madam
okay good morning thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee on Beverly it's in
god's act director Gary
producers of New Mexico I first
want to begin by thanking
Senator Hamblen for meeting with
us to discuss this memorial
several times and how the Derry
will came to be as a Dan
mentioned it was unanimous
agreement between the dairy
industry the environment
department and the environmental
coalition that resulted in us
having the most stringent very
ground water regulations than
any other state start
consternation is this could be a
pathway to opening up that will
and and doing the years of
collaborative work between those
groups.
In addition some of the
information required is personal
could open up producers to
frivolous lawsuits which has
happened in New Mexico in the
past and also at tax from anti
animal agriculture extremists we
know a lot of the personal info
was removed in a previous
committee on this memorial but
we don't see the need to have
this and so out there and and as
was mentioned it can be
requested from the Environment
Department through it for a but
again want to thank Senator
Hamblen for meeting with us and
discussing all of this but we
have to stand in opposition
thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else in opposition
lastly we have Michelle frost.
Yes miss frost.
Yes Madam chairman members of
the committee the shop Authority
happen New Mexico categories of
low growers and well twelve of
me at the very role which took
several years to establish in
our it has been stated the dairy
industry Environment Department
and environmental coalition all
come together and they resulting
in the most stringent
groundwater regulation at the
very than any other state.
New Mexico dairy industry in
their producers can't make it
because of the target
Representative off the by
opening up the rule the
information that the memorial
act four is already available to
the public process for this
reason and we previously stated
we stand opposed to the memorial
twelve.
Thank you.
Thank you is there any are there
any other opponents Trevor.
Let's everyone who signed up.
You see any hands.
There's no hands.
Okay let's go to the proponents
of this memorial.
First we have Dale to request.
Go ahead Dale.
Thank you
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gail during
this I am a hydro geologist and
I have more than thirty years
experience including twenty
years.
Managing groundwater protection
and cleanup programs for the New
Mexico environment department.
also the water chair for the
Sierra Club.
And I am here today to support
this memorial this memorial just
makes common sense and I just
want to correct a couple
statements that have been made
this bill does not open up the
dairy rule it is simply a review
of existing data and
There really you know yes you
can access that data through
that process but I think this
rule would I mean sorry this
memorial would benefit the HSD
as someone who manage those
programs as well as transparency
to the public
I think it's someone who manages
purpose this role would
definitely be helpful for the
agency to be able to take a step
back see with the rules doing
and move forward maybe possibly
with just changing are not
changing anything depending on
those results so thank you for
this opportunity and
I'm standing here and I'm in
support of this memorial today.
Thank you.
Rick part of your.
Lastly at Walter grant.
Thank you Mr Bradley lieutenant
governor
thank you madam chairman members
of the committee and thank you
senator animal for your
cooperation and and working on
this memorial.
I really echo what my
counterparts in in the industry
have said what the data is is
already available and it's a
little difficult see that a real
need for doing this and
obviously.
Our industry works very closely
with the environment department
and we've been informed that
they are already seeking the and
in the process of acquiring
software that will do exactly
what this memorial do.
having said that then I would
say that
with the amendments that the
rules committee put in place as
long as those all stay in place.
Can the support the.
A memorial.
The if the senator so wishes to
go ahead and move it through.
Thank you madam chairman.
Thank you Mr Bradley anybody
else are covered.
That was it on the list and I
don't see any.
Okay Senator Hamblen do you want
to make any comments before we
go to the committee.
You're on mute.
That is going to be the name of
twenty and twenty twenty and
twenty twenty one as you're on
mute thank you madam chair I do
appreciate the we just the the
opportunity for conversations
from both sides of this and and
and I do appreciate the ten
governor walls read these
comments you know I I really do
want the data to help provide
not only the industry but also I
don't want money to be wasted if
we've spent money on gathering
this data we need to find out
what the results are and I do
feel that it's an opportunity to
share with what the juries are
doing because of the
conversations that we've had I
understand that you all are are
doing everything you can to make
sure that the groundwater is a
safe as possible and I'd like
that dated to be shown I'd like
that to be to be you may have
folks be made aware of that so I
do appreciate the opportunity to
have this conversation and and I
look forward to questions from
the committee madam chair.
Thank you very much first we
have Senator souls then Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair.
Does this memorial open up the
dairy rule.
Now Mr madam chair Senator sells
it does not.
Thank you what does it required
to be reported.
Madam chair Senators souls I
think I'm going to go to either
Dan or Kathy to be able to
provide that information.
Okay madam chair and senator
sells this is captain Martin and
I believe the question is what
is asked to be recorded report
this point at this point is that
the remaining topics are an
analysis of how many of liners
and meters have been installed
which is one of the a big part
of the very real.
It was some other items that we
wanted which would have looked
at ground water quality those
are no longer on the table thank
you.
Thank you up and Senator could
report also showed that the rule
is affected we protecting
groundwater that's being used to
protect the varies from industry
an industry from lawsuits that
they are doing the right thing.
Yes madam chair Mister etcetera
etcetera cells yes that that's
the whole point I do know that
are very workers are in our
Jerry farmers are doing a great
job and I'm really looking
forward to seeing what the data
does show to show that I look at
this as an opportunity to help
support the dairies and the good
work that they're doing
especially as an industry that's
incredibly important in our
state and then also provide
resources for them you know this
this gives us the opportunity
for future legislation or policy
that will help them continue to
do the work that they're doing
and if they need resources also
help that.
Thank you madam chair that's the
only question that.
Thank you very much Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Is the personal and madam chair
Senator what is the personal
information that that opponents
were speaking about because as I
look at the amendments to the
bill any identification of
Jerry's was struck out so what
is left that might be of
concern.
Madam chair Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes there were and and
understandably so the
information that was requested
this was as it went the rules
committee but we had some very
insightful
committee members go through and
strike the information and so on
page one it would be actually
there is some of the
information.
It's mainly the information that
would be anything that would
give an idea as to where the
dairy is located
some of the information that
those areas are very very
careful about having to be
shared and there was a concern
about the opportunity for
bioterrorism I understand that
and so we wanted to make sure
that there was comfort in that
and I do appreciate Mr veris
compass comments and it's C. as
a comments as well we wanted to
make sure that there were still
relevant information coming out
of this but that that was
respected understanding the
concerns that they have in the
industry.
Thank thank you madam chair but
I don't see any personal mature
a personal information left
because the number and identity
of Jerry's expanded operations
well executed complies with all
of that is struck so so I I I
appreciate that I appreciate
that that was done I think that
that's very important
Because you know I care about
sensitive information
and it can be revealed through
for us and and that's that's the
or the specific information may
or may not be available to
repress and and that's important
because that's what provides a
transparency now the the FIR
talks about the budget cuts that
the E. ID
the end of the city I do that
the environmental Department has
has experienced and they still
haven't come up to pre two
thousand eight levels of in that
department I just want to share
with you that I gave the bulk of
my junior money to the water
programs at at the in the
environmental Department and I'd
be proud if it went to this I
was hoping that we'll go to
produced water
analysis.
But this is another important
important kind of analysis to
makes it so you can see so the
we can see exactly as you said
whether the rules are working
just share with you my family's
from Los Chavis own own a farm
though we account consistently
had to drill deeper and deeper
and deeper to get quick good
quality water and my hope is
that those wells a working and
that the water is is in better
shape
so with that I am I'm in support
of this memorial I think it's a
great idea.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you very much it.
Any further questions or
discussion and if not is there.
A motion.
I'm sure I move that part to
pass the Senate memorial twelve.
Okay I'd like to move to table.
Okay Lang motion is non
debatable so Veronica would you
please call the vote on a
tabling motion.
I'm sorry I guess I wasn't
unmuted Senator sirventes no.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am.
One.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville.
Senator pope.
Senator Schmedes.
Yes.
Senator sold out Senator Sedillo
Lopez no.
In Germiston CENIC's I'm less as
senator Neville.
I got an email from him saying
that his internet is very strong
yes can you hear me yes yes run
at okay.
Okay and I don't know.
So six no into yes okay so we're
back on the do passed motion
made by Senator pope seconded by
Senator holes would you please
call the front.
Senator wanted yes.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am.
One.
Yes Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Paypen.
Yes.
Senator Smitty.
No.
Senator so also.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Sure chairman Stefanics.
First I intend to vote no I can
barely understand you people
have got very poor connection
this morning okay thank you
we'll put you down is no and I
am a yes.
Okay it's six yes and three no.
Okay at seven AM on Univision
past congratulations.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you everybody for your your
comments and your input and your
concern I appreciate it thank
you for the time thank you okay
but now we're on to.
For an emergency bill.
Which is for nineteen.
And we have Senator.
Steinborn they do not pass has
already occurred.
And so we are on the committee
sub.
For nineteen.
So we don't have to do the
motion for I do not pass it's
already happened so Senator
Steinborn to explain Senate bill
committee substitute for Senate
bill four nineteen.
Senator Steinborn you're on
mute.
I was so L. but we to you really
miss that stuff.
That is my fault.
Madam chair committee good
morning I was just saying
hopefully the third time's the
charm today we are focused on a
really important and long
reviled a piece of New Mexico
law regarding the taking the
allowable taking of animals that
are perceived to be in conflict
we're threatening ones property
of the bill before you for
nineteen does two things number
one it reforms that law and put
some very reasonable
side bars of it you know if that
it actually requires the game
commission to create rules on
the takings of animals while
still allowing taking in certain
circumstances without any
questions asked including if the
life of a person feels
threatened
the second thing the bill does
madam chair and committee is it
adds to our wanton waste statute
of the.
listings of species that must be
harvested from the field of kids
and that we're adding to that
list there have only been
Krueger.
And these are a statute we have
on the books to basically
require that you can't just kill
certain species and we've amount
of the field you have to take
the harvestable portion of the
animal with you and again we're
adding in that they're probably
not go there and so with that
madam chair I am honored to
have co sponsoring this bill
Senate president Mimi Stewart.
and I know she has some complex
this morning on initiative to
try to make it if you can and I
have three experts to of which I
love it they could you say a
word one is John Crenshaw was a
career gain additional weight
you can describe the way this
rule is working now and now
white needs reform and how it
would work in the future and
then the second witnesses then
take a Santiago su is not new to
anybody in the capitol who had a
very powerful and disturbing
personal experience with the
current law you can also share
why it needs report.
And with that will stand for
questions okay so.
At first is Senator Stewart with
us.
Well if he joins Trevor make
sure that I know about it move
over to the top if you can.
Mr Crenshaw.
We.
Yes
yes you Madam.
Internet excuse me we.
Your remarks to about five
minutes that there might be
questions for you later in the
same way with Ateca.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you and I'm going to defer
to my check up for a very
compelling eyewitness account of
what we're going to try to
address here
and go straight into the bill
Mari are are looking forward to
the debate we're here to try to
amend the NMSA seventeen dash to
dash seven point two all call so
called the Jennings law enacted
in nineteen nine hundred ninety
seven jumping right into section
one section ones court Jack do
this together the state game
commission authority to
establish rules around the legal
taking of deprecating for
nuisance gamebattles for bears
and other species protected
under chapter seventeen NMSA.
The current statute does not
give the commission that
authority and some individuals
have begins that gap in the law
to kids wondering why he's
trying to to big game animal
sense law passed.
The commission state game
commission is capable of running
and that carnage while also
preserving citizens ability to
protect property from
deprecating became rather
protected species.
Wait expected commission to
exercise that authority
prudently curbing the excesses
we saying but also recognising
that while I can and do cause
damage that needs to be
prevented and addressed as
appropriate preferably with
nonlethal methods nonetheless
legal control but with real
world site more for instance
limit the number of animals
taken and perhaps the gender and
require of the proper kind of
firearms for instance are to be
used in those are sorts of
things that any of the gentleman
Lujan our lives whether it's an
extraction except every time.
The commission won't make its
new role in a vacuum and it's
rulemaking process is a month
long procedure it invites
extensive input from all
stakeholders that would
certainly include ranchers
farmers loggers lilac goods and
any other interested publics.
Senate bill four one nine also
retains existing clauses in the
our law that requires the
department to provide
intervention options and to
respond to initial and
subsequent complaints within a
prescribed time line.
Just before one nine does not
amend other depredation related
statutes livestock owners may
still kill without a permit
covers bears and bobcats and
killed livestock poultry with a
permit they may kill protected
for bear such as foxes raccoons
and predatory birds that
attacked poultry and it.
Anyone McAllen animal that
presents an immediate threat to
human life for safety and I'd
like to correct misinformation
that's been going around as we
go through here Senate bill four
one line does not repeat not
given to commission authority to
regulate the taking of skunks
rather nuisance species such as
pack rats regimens that are not
protected under chapter
seventeen and on the side.
And as the discussion continues
let's keep in mind that the
current legislation Dick profit
systemic changes in how while
locked up predation is address
changes are that are in statute
and rule and that we believe
will make the current
permissiveness obsolete.
The Jennings Water dates for the
legislature the state game
commission engagement fresh
Department develop quality
procedures response times
options and funding for managing
depredation and nuisance
wildlife ninety five percent of
the issues are resolved within
here is mandated by the current
statutes and it would be in the
mid amended statutes as well a
twenty four seven of reporting
hotline is available.
Martin has a wide range of
nonlethal options at hand are
you excited for full time
private land specialist to help
with a present value waited
address while locked up
predations and assist land
owners and property owners with
other matters such as help sign
ups and so on
and we can't overlook that there
are other came officers all
around the state that also
addressed hundreds of
depredation in nuisance animal
complaints every year the HSD
expands conservatively about one
point three million annual on
the program and all those
programs will remain in place
I will pause here to ask if you
would like me to move on to our
numbers two and three or stop
there.
We need your total testimony so
we can go on to take that and
then we go on to the opponents
and proponents so could you
please somehow finish up okay
well thank you very much madam
chair.
Reverting back to that guy one
point three million dollar
annual expenditures to help fund
those the legislature created
discount three dollars residents
ten for non residents that
started to each big game license
sold revenues going to the big
game depredation damage from I'm
not actually late process to
section three which is directly
relevant to section one of the
legislation creating that fund
restricts expenditures to
purchase of materials supplies
equipment and contracting for
depredation response the
revenues are consistently
greater than allowable
expenditures so the funds cash
balance now sits at two point
six three million dollars
section three would allow that
money to be spent on personnel
and other administrative work
that's relevant to depredation
responses and put that money to
work.
Section to ensure sat edible
made America great have a lane
is removed from the field for
human consumption as required
for other big gang and it's in
addition to ethical hunting
obligations to the partnership
and also as provisions requiring
hunters to attempt to try to
retrieve a wounded animal the
same as for any other game and
that R. belongs there and third
those three species to the list
of those for quick chair it is a
fourth degree felony to kill
without a license round season
and remove only the header other
trophy parts such as hell to
bear Krueger and to leave the
mate that section of the statute
is used to prosecute black
market programming and sales and
that's the relevance of that and
not without madam chair all
status signed thank you very
much for your time I'm looking
forward to that are protected so
that yes.
Thank you.
We might have questions for you
later so I hope you can stay on
so much of.
So go ahead.
Good morning chairman Stefanics
and members of the committee I
am a take us on be honest and I
am here on behalf of myself I
strongly support the creation of
a reasonable policy that sets
boundaries to the mass
slaughtering of animals on
private land and Senate bill
four nineteen does that by
narrowing the conditions for a
landowner or the C. taking or
killing animals by revising
provisions for taking or wasting
a game I want to thank Senator
Steinborn and Senator Stewart
for sponsoring the legislation.
My husband and I live in LMAO
New Mexico which is located
twelve miles northwest of coral
and on the west side of
interstate by twenty five we
live in unit thirteen the seven
at the national wildlife refuge
is approximately three thousand
feet almost due west from our
property.
I have great respect for animals
the law the hunting community
and the ranching community and I
believe people have a right to
protect their property I grew up
in Gallup.
My family has been hunting since
the nineteen thirties five
generations of license hunters
my parents enrolled my brothers
and I in a local hunter safety
course at a very young age I
shot a rifle for the first time
at age seven and have continued
to practice shooting sense I
hold the current New Mexico
concealed carry permit my
nephews are licensed New Mexico
outfitters my husband owns a
ranch that's been in this family
for five generations.
I share this with you because
from what I've witnessed
literally brought me to my knees
broke my heart that day and made
me determined to change the
Jennings Law and here is why.
July twenty nineteen I'm inside
my house just before seven AM I
heard a gunshot to the north I
peek out to see what was going
on and heard two gunshots coming
from the same direction I
couldn't see the shooter or a
vehicle because it was blocked
by my father's house.
At the same time I start heard
about jumping over my dad's fans
and noticed several were
injured.
I then heard two more gunshot
said money to the LFC were
already running across my
father's field and then my field
my neighbor and I mean that my
good neighbor and I mean that
sincerely we're good neighbors
that lend a hand no question
now.
He has about eleven head of
cattle next door to our family
property he leases approximately
sixteen to seventeen acres to
grow wheat and pasture to feed
his cattle.
It's told me several times that
he's going to just shoot the LFC
because they're tearing up this
past year he mentioned that is
working with the game and fish
department to put up an out
fence but the landowner doesn't
want the fence so now is just
going to shoot them the LFC he
was within his legal right to
take action under the current
law and that's exactly what I
witnessed about eighteen now all
measuring six by six bulls many
traumatized and injured from a
shooter they shot repeatedly
into the herd I counted eight
goals with a broken leg each
struggling to run across my
property.
Minutes later I saw the ball
with his job loan off in another
bowl that he did not only get
shot got shot with a broken leg
as well.
Another boy with a broken leg
fled west and found to be here
cation branch and stayed in the
water because he couldn't get
out others scattered in various
directions some even jobs
several fences to the east and
almost ended up on interstate
twenty five the game warden
could I believe six down.
Now back to the shooter he was
shooting towards a dwelling and
across our property but he was
within the law in a rural
village where families farm and
ranch and an area where the
horrific incident took place
children walk to the bus stop
and neighbors take their morning
and evening walks.
And depending on the time of day
we get to see Alcon dear that
have used the same migratory
path for over thirty years I am
greatly appreciate the game and
fish department and the
commission for their assistance
that day I support reforming the
Jennings law by setting rules
promulgated by the commission
that provide when whether and by
what manner and method of
species can be taken our kids in
order to mitigate damage and
Senate bill four nineteen does
that by giving the commission
authority to put some structure
behind this and limit mass
slaughter situations.
What Senate bill four nineteen
does not do is take away my
rights to use legal action to
protect my family livestock pets
or property.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
today please support the bill.
Madam chair.
Thank you very much Senator
Steinborn madam chair if with
your permission it would be
great if we could allow the
other expert Jesse developed
speaker one minute about the
wanton waste part of that
statute.
Okay one minute please because
we twenty eight people on each
side to speak okay thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee and
Senator Steinborn I'll be very
brief pulling across the country
continues to show overwhelming
public support for activity of
funding for the purpose of
procuring wildfire risk losing.
It's currently legal for
licensed hunters to kill
javelina Blackburn without the
requirement of removing that
meat from the field it poorly
represents the value and respect
that New Mexicans have for the
wildlife that collectively
belongs to all of us quite
frankly allowing this activity
to remain legal in the state is
in my believe one of the
greatest threats to the future
of hunting in New Mexico please
support just before nineteen
madam chair members the
committee and thank you Senator
Steinborn for the opportunity.
Thank you we are now going on to
the opponents and the proponents
there is a long list so we're
gonna take twenty.
On each side which I think will
cover most everyone who signed
up and they're gonna get one
minute each so I hope you're
prepared to of basically thank
because Trevor are assume
operator will be cutting you off
after one minute.
So let's start with the
opponents Trevor.
First on the list we have a
hundred Klay.
Hello madam chair can you can
you guys see me.
I don't know that we're gonna be
seeing you as much as listening
to use you hear me.
Please proceed okay madam chair
my name is Audrey McLean I am a
six ation Roger and I am from
catching County I'm a single
mother and the sole support for
my four young children my ranch
is located in the healer for the
Mexican gray wolf was
reintroduced I lose between a
hundred to a hundred thirty
thousand calves yearly to the
endangered will fish and
wildlife from this as they would
pay for will update deprivations
they still owe me for two
thousand twenty deprivations
they can't pay this is another
example of why this will not
work this bill was functioning
this this bill would
functionally prohibit landowners
from protecting our private
property private landowners
whether they are ranchers
farmers gardeners we invest
ourselves in our land I believe
we have a fundamental right here
in the west to protect our
investment including a right to
protect our property from
thieves we have the same right
to protect our private property
from wildlife the damages.
If you try to prohibit us from
doing that you're passing a law
that I guarantee the state
cannot enforce and that people
will break I don't think that
this is what the legislature
should do you should not pass
laws that you know you can
enforce and the citizens of the
state will break I am really
tired of people that do not live
here making laws that.
Next we're.
Wesley Allison.
The good morning can you all
hear me good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Leslie Allison I am the
executive director of the
western landowners alliance we
stand opposed to Senate bill
four nineteen because it will
hurt wildlife most of all but
also farmers ranchers and rural
economies but we give you just
one example seventy six percent
of the Landen unit for is
comprised of ranches that depend
on hunting and grazing to stay
intact it is also in the middle
of the one of the most important
L. corridors in the region just
this week one of the most
important ranchers in that
quarter was sold and subdivided
if you repeal the Jennings law
removing landowners statutory
right to protect their
livelihoods and the foundation
of the plus program which is the
ultimate goal of this
legislation you will get the
economies of places like China
Sen landed a subdivision and
open the floodgates of conflict
and litigation everyone loses
and most of all wildlife despite
these implications Senate bill
four nineteen was sneaked into
the legislature late in the
session without any stakeholder
engagement process we urge you
to vote no on Senate bill four
nineteen thank you.
Next we have believed by.
Madam chair.
The Jenny's law was created to
ensure landowners that well at
the credit they should be dealt
with swiftly and decisively by
agencies assigned to manage the
state as well.
Farmers ranchers are bit
businesspeople and deserve the
right to protect their crops of
the state might provide for
their families this bill has
only suggestions with no
definitive immediate solutions
land owner should be able to
have a set of rules that are set
forth in advance not subject to
constant change interpretation
I am sure more big game animals
were taken by illegal poaching
in through the Jennings law so
perhaps we should concentrate
our efforts on that instead of
attacking private landowners who
willingly provide a substantial
part of the habitat necessary to
sustain the states while up
thank you.
X. Kerry.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes yes we can hear you okay
thank you.
Then Senator on madam chair
Senators.
My name is Henry carry a high
the owner of ranch management
company.
It's been suggested that the
changes to the landowner taking
section of this bill is nothing
to do with the plus actually
they're joined at the hip.
We see a wildlife a public
resource benefiting from the
forage crops on private lands
without compensation to those
owners this constitutes a taking
right now those he plus tax rate
many of the bills.
What we're talking about here is
adding a few out tax for
recreational hunting versus
people's livelihoods the changes
to section.
To section fifty will result in
a taking affecting many American
ranchers and broiling this the
state an analyst lawsuits.
Many numbers have been flying
around on this issue I
respectfully ask the committee
to table the issue until on an
impartial study can be completed
thank you.
Next we have a need a hand.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Anne to hands I live in
catching County.
I find it ironic that this
morning as I was gathering my
thoughts on my opposition to
this bill to coyotes were in my
backyard one tie it was trying
to kill my chickens while the
other one was chasing my cat if
this bill was in effect today I
would have had to call the game
department on Monday to get
permission to protect my private
property and my animals by
Monday my chickens roosters and
cats would all be dead for this
reason and others stated I stand
in opposition to this bill and
ask you to further review it and
have more stakeholder opinions
and input and stand in
opposition to this bill and vote
now thank you.
Next we have any Rivera.
Madam chair members of the
committee took me Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
today's done before you and
respectful opposition to Senate
bill four nineteen this bill
removes the ability of our
landowners to take animals on
private land that place is an
immediate threat to their
private property across wildlife
species are responsible for
damaging utilization of
resources on private property
wildlife the eat crops or cause
other damage to private property
are in effect taking that
private property any take of
private property for public use
without just compensation is a
violation of a property owners
constitutional rights under both
state and federal constitutions
the eight plus program under the
New Mexico department of game
and fish compensates these
landowners for the losses
incurred by this well let damage
this bill seeks to repeal that
important provision and abolish
the plus program this is another
attempt to remove this vital
tool and we respectfully request
that you oppose this bill.
Next morning Patterson.
Thank you chair Spano ex members
the committee lord Patterson on
behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers association our
membership stands in opposition
although Senate bill four
nineteen allows for the taking
of an animal that threatens
human life it does nothing to
protect property livestock or
four legged family members from
immediate threats the current
Jennings always been a very
successful measure that defines
the rights citizens have in
regards to state trust wildlife
in citizen interactions Jennings
laws not been overly utilized as
detailed in the study performed
by the library instituted New
Mexico State University it is
not in here impacted hundreds
rights or hunting opportunities
but does help remove problem
bears from mountain foothill
communities nuisance recommends
for Matix in Albuquerque and
animals that show signs of
diseases such as rabies and play
Jennings laws never affected
wildlife management by the game
and fish and has not been
presented to the game commission
for review if the Jennings laws
repealed in house the state
going to compensate property
owners and property damages
utilization of resources
industry.
Next we have Michelle frost.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee
Michelle Croft manor beginning
on behalf of New Mexico will
board we stand opposed to Senate
bill one nineteen our producers
are the individual close to the
land with a working knowledge of
the impact news that the
wildlife population imposed our
livestock crop in making
infrastructure which is our
local economic impact in our
livelihood repealing the
beginning bought with strict
landowners of their right to
protect private property and
livestock of deprecating
wildlife it would call to
navigate Clark you will New
Mexico.
Landowners who have exercised
their rights under the law I've
had no impact on they renewable
management of wildlife
population.
Why would the legislature give
up is the story and part of the
commission to declare what would
be the law the state legislature
should continue care from the
heart rate of private property
owners with we thank you for
taking their property for
wildlife for these reasons in
recent previously stated we
stand opposed to Senate bill
four nineteen.
Next.
Good morning and thank you
senator still function committee
for allowing me to opportunity
to speak in opposition on Senate
bill four nineteen today it was
bill would cap and I'm here
representing rocky mountain
farmers union.
In New Mexico are to be punished
for the terrible actions of one
K. to tell total very
descriptive and and heart
wrenching story about one bad
actor this law will next next
next Lee affect Mexico farmers
and ranchers the local
government wrecked last resort
to protect the property when it
comes to allow life damaging
their crops the law requires
landowners work with the New
Mexico department of game and
fish for a year before being
allowed to take action when no
other recourse is been
affecting.
A city plus program and there
are just too many unanswered
questions from our members the
field they lose much needed
income as a standard setting
rights that have been
traditionally provided in
exchange for the forage that and
habitat landowners provide
provide not just for the
wildlife in our state before so
this is also thank you.
Next we have cable in our.
Good morning chairman Stefanics
a members of the committee I'm
Caitlin hard representing lot
over a coalition a group of
farmers and ranchers who manage
land watering cattle New Mexico
totaling approximately one point
five million acres of the in the
slant and roughly twenty five
thousand head of cattle just
before ninety removes farmers
and ranchers ability to protect
their domestic livestock
domestic animals and their
investment many of our members
have had predatory animals such
as bears and mountain lions
attack main and main calves
horses and dogs in fact one of
our members spent six months
rehabilitating a horse that was
attacked by mail online due to
the limited staff and large area
to cover game and fish officials
cannot keep up with the demand
in a timely manner subsequently
Everytime predatory animals come
in contact with people modern
technology they're less likely
to be scared off by nonlethal
measures making them more gender
dangerous to farmers and
ranchers we think Senator
sideboard for bringing forth
this legislation but we cannot
support at this time and stand
in respectful opposition.
Next we have care town.
Sorry Madam chairman members of
the committee my name is Karen
Kallen I'm here as a member of
the New Mexico federal land
council the Grant County
calibers Association and protect
Americans now we fully support
all the points in opposition
that have been pointed out that
far there's one point that had
been kind of strong around that
I'm concerned with on page one
well in section a of the bill
committing on page one and
following over to page two it
that what animals can be taken
in an immediate threat to human
life when you drop down the
section B. and it says that
human life cannot be our
wildlife cannot be taken to
protect human life if it merely
a threat most people when faced
with the wildlife situation are
gonna have a hard time
determining what that immediate
crack and what the track we feel
that this bill in addition to
all the other thing to admit
that put your life in jeopardy
thank you for your time and we
urge you to vote now.
Sh.
This will.
Can you hear me.
Hello yes we can hear you thank
you.
Yes.
I'm real state broker
specializing in rural and
agricultural properties and the
you know I'm gonna say that the.
This is going to harm rural
communities.
No greater it this this Jennings
law is going to be the first
step in repealing the plus
program.
And that's going to kill rural
landowners rural communities
I have many stories of small
landowners calling me concerned
about losing the income from
their hunting tags hello because
and lose their land.
used by a personal income and I
know there is a real estate
broker.
I had estimate that losing tags.
Will cost about forty percent of
not greater devaluation of the
property.
this is gonna be a bad deal this
can be a bad deal for small
communities you know that eighty
plus system the list of greater
than fifty percent of those are
small local landowners and these
people gonna get crossed.
By this legislation.
So I vote against it.
Next we have Tom Reynolds.
Hi madam chair I can run your
me.
Yes.
Okay.
Thank you for letting me speak
here in front of all Senators
Representative the Rincon ranch
were west central New Mexico
and.
SB four nineteen is a direct
attack on our ecosystem this
ecosystem is what we utilize to
fund the projects on our ranch
to give back to wildlife I mean
we own a ranch that is built
around hunting and wildlife and
you know we have put a lot of
money a lot of time into that
ranch and we've done it by
actually using the plus system
to fund these projects.
Taking away our our ability to
work with New Mexico game and
fish department.
Will absolutely destroy that
ability for us to give back to
wildlife I think that's an
important factor that people
need to understand that as
landowners we use the plus
system to give back to the
wildlife that are on our ranches
and in in turn improves our
populations and the quality of
our wildlife thank you we.
What we oppose this bill.
Next with Kyle Jackson.
madam chair Senate members of
the committee thank you for
letting me speak speaking on
behalf of her male park ranch.
Guarding the Jennings Law taking
authority of out of the statute
and moving into the game
commission is going to create a
lack of consistency regarding
what is legal and what is not
legal each commission will be
allowed to set and the rules
according their own agenda and
there are likely to be
significant swings in allowable
methods for mitigating damage to
private property by landowners
well this law is not perfect has
occasionally been abused and is
generally viewed with disfavor
by many different groups and was
passed into law for one
important reason there are often
no other practical solutions to
these problems without
significant cost both the
landowner the hunters to pay for
wildlife depredation response
and to the wildlife itself.
Agencies cannot resolve every
issue in our nearly capable of
immediate solutions to the
issues such as staffing and
complaint response times created
by the rural nature of New
Mexicos communities having been
a conservation officer ten years
came to yes I can tell you
immediate response to these
compliance is almost impossible
conversely this law is routinely
used by many homeowners across
the state each year to result
smaller planes like raccoons
where leading Chile.
Next we implore Riley.
Madam chair of.
Senator Steinborn Laura Riley
I'm Representative again led
solutions today I landed in
resource management consulting
firm as well as my family I grew
up in Rio Arriba county and we
often had encounters with a
large game species.
Prior to that Dr ation of of the
Jennings our family had no had
limited legal options to deal
with threats to our lives not
property children from wildlife.
Department of game and fish
response time in the area was
measured in weeks not days
understandably the department is
charged with management of
wildlife over seventy seven
million acres in the state in
New Mexico with eighty
conservation officers that
that's a significant low one
evening we came home to find my
ball dogs broken windows in the
kitchen and buddy bear tracks
all over the porch came
information they could have a
real spot sometime within a week
or two this was unacceptable to
my father with three small
grandchildren new polls and baby
caps to be accountable for our
families need the options
provided by the current Jennings
law for these reasons we oppose
the changes in respectfully ask
the members of the committee to
oppose as well thank you.
Last three lastly we have John
Thompson.
Is John Thompson on.
Is there anyone else.
One research analyst I thank you
for rural should be our last
speaker okay.
Right Kerry correct.
Okay.
Good morning madam chair one
minute.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee caricature Meryl
on behalf of the New Mexico
council about theaters and
guides despite the claims from
proponents that the Jennings lop
despite the claims for
proponents the Jennings law is
not utilized by landowners for
L. control very often this is
because under the plus programs
help have value without ePlus
help would become just another
past that competes for resources
with other income producing
assets such as cattle and crops
in October of twenty twenty
several of the proponents of
this bill put the outfitting
industry on notice that they
were planning to dissolve the E.
plus program in order to force
private land hunting
authorizations back into the
draw repealing the Jennings law
is step one in this effort this
bill is not about saving
wildlife there are there are
simple ways to tighten the
loopholes in the Jennings law
without repealing it but this
bill doesn't provide any of
those solutions and it's clear
to us that the end goal has more
to do with private land hunting
authorizations then it does
actually protecting wildlife we
oppose the bill thank you.
So Trevor let's now start with
proponents one minute each.
First we are rated in when.
Hello madam chair and members
the committee funds brand when
I'm speaking for myself as a
fifth generation new Mexican
from a ranching and everything
else Stanley
A lot of the opposition to this
bill is based around this
mythical damage that it would do
to E. plus.
In the past before you post
reform that might have been true
but ePlus is bullet proof with
respect to this Jennings law if
you change it it's just not it's
just false what they're saying
the number of permits in a game
management unit is fixed by the
amount of private land in the
unit and the permits are
distributed based on habitat
quality which is scored by the
game could by the department of
game and fish so they used to be
able to extort private land
permits lenders use the restore
private land permits and can no
longer do that it's a fix
measureable system now so.
I don't know what happened here
I'm here somebody else did I get
a chance.
Yes we speak.
Okay I'm sorry there was it
blanked out I heard somebody oh
seeing somebody else's house but
so C. plus argument is just
false if you look at the
technical because I sent a
letter to everybody on the
committee I it's to try to
explain one minute if you would
please look at the letter I sent
everybody on the committee I
would really appreciate that
thank you very much thank you.
Eight years.
Thank you and good morning madam
chairman.
Greg Peters public lands and
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters here stand
in strong support of SB four one
nine blueprint of rents are
public wildlife heritage into
the present here.
Fourteen minutes away from
outdated solely consumptive
approaches to a broader view of
what management as we work to
manage a world class the system
was held in public trust is.
Pretty changes to the current
laws that standardized wildlife
policy including adding probably
not cougar and bear to the waste
of game statute so if you you.
The also recalibrate the
controversial Jennings statutes
were reasonable management
approach instead of killing wild
like been calling Department you
call Department first course
legal control is still permitted
personal safety livestock pets
property refresh this bills
opportunity to honor New
Mexico's wildlife heritage we
respectfully urge to pass both
this reason and other reasons
described by the ONS thank you
for the opportunity to speak to.
Yes Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brooke
Miller again I'm full professor
of biology at New Mexico State
University with a PhD in ecology
I reside in Senate district
thirty one in favor of Senate
bill four nineteen I wish to
emphasise two points first New
Mexico's wildlife statutes need
updating to allow good
management practices to reduce
waste and to balance landowner
and public rights.
Second existing practice makes
clear that accomplishing these
goals is feasible and
beneficial.
The department of game and fish
has successful programs in place
and the law should reflect the
policies behind them.
Is long past time to align New
Mexico law with modern practice
and to recognize the ecological
harm of mismanagement and
needless waste that this
resolution would curtail I urge
you to pass Senate bill four
nineteen thank you very much for
your attention.
Next we have Joel J..
Madam chair members of the
conservation committee of Jolgeh
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico chapter of backcountry
hunters and anglers we strongly
support.
Yes the four nineteen we
recognize that this conservation
minded and ethical hunters we
need to protect our reputation
and the long term our ability to
continue to hot SB four nineteen
does that exactly it says to the
general public that we do not
condone the wanton waste big
game animals for any reason by
anyone.
This bill would require hundreds
remove the edible portions of
all game animals including
Hellblade apparent Krueger this
ammendment is long overdue and
shows our commitment to
conservation we also strongly
support revising the Jennings
law which is a lot of small
number of unethical landowners
to senselessly kill elk antelope
and other big game for perceived
threats to their crops under
this bill landowners would be
required to work more closely
with game and fish resolved
depredation problems it
demonstrates the public that big
game animals should not be
killed without the involvement
of state wildlife managers
shares we urge you to vote yes.
Robert are you know.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
the Senators I respect the
rights of the farmers and
ranchers and appreciate all they
do for our state restaurant in
southern New Mexico I'm a third
generation New Mexico landowners
and sportsmen fishermen
I am in support of SB four
nineteen for the common sense
approach to wildlife management
as it pertains to upgrading.
The portions of the laws that
are out there that don't catch
up to modern ecological
standards I've seen people in
the desert here just slaughter
Kurds of coyotes and makes no
sense to me I appreciate fishing
and hunting I appreciate all
everything it does for the great
state of New Mexico please
support this bill and with the
two passed about thank you.
Next we have Jessica Johnson.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters and we support this bill
particularly the reform of the
controversial Jennings law that
allows landowners to
gratuitously killed protect.
Without department permission or
oversight of the first measure
because the wildlife because a
perceived threat to their crop
for property.
The change in the bill does not
eliminate legal control after
acquiring proper permission and
subsequent rulemaking will set
out exactly how legal defense of
property would occur it also
does not affect at all the legal
control of unprotected wildlife
like coyotes but with new
mitigation programs and funds
available to private landowners
establish since the passage of
the Jennings law to protect
property improper we urged the
legislature to ensure that
landowners utilize those
resources and only use legal
control through managed and
regulated process these we
respectfully urge a yes vote for
the that and other reasons
stated by the proponents thank
you.
Next we have a J. and early.
One of the US good morning
chairs the finance and members
of the committee my name is a
triangle with the New Mexico
wildlife federation the course
chapter seventeen and the
department of game and faced
relies on the commission's
ability to have direct oversight
on take a wild game this
includes oversight and review of
species gender firearm season
and other factors that
department biologists consider
in their meticulous work to make
science based recommendations on
management the Jennings law has
created a gap in management by
removing the commission from the
equation removing the commission
also removes both rulemaking and
the important public feedbacks
stages of the rulemaking while
the commissioner of the
department or able to soundly
make science based decisions
landowners cannot on their own a
perceived threats to fans and
crops is not science based
management thank you for your
time and for the opportunity to
testify this morning.
Next.
Los.
Good morning members madam chair
members the committee Garrett
Pentecostal Mexico while
reforming archaic wildlife
killing laws like the Genting
laws long overdue our state
can't afford to condone
unmitigated wildlife slaughter
if we were to build a robust
outdoor recreation economy which
now is a ten billion dollar a
year industry that generates a
hundred thousand full time jobs
you know this guy is not
following here and I would also
like to reiterate that this
legislation has nothing to do
with the plus I live in the
country I I live in the country
and I'm surrounded by bears and
coyotes and bobcats and I
oftentimes use rubber slugs and
shell cracker rounds to scare
those bears off my porch and you
just don't need to the used lot
not nonlethal methods to to kill
as wildlife and the gamefish has
plenty of staff my neighbor as
pigs and goats and she calls
gamefish when the bears get.
Problematic and the and the
gamefish takes care of it so you
know it's high time that we we
form these laws and and please
support Senate bill four ninety
thank you very much.
Next we have merry Catherine
right.
Morning Committee Senators my
name's where captain ray
wildlife chair for the Rio
Grande chapter Sierra Club I
also live in the hinterland of
Sikora county and while not
often we have seen heavily not
bear and cougar on the trail cam
at the wall like water in our
yard these along with sightings
of elk deer and other wildlife
our treasure treat for us
wildlife is the heritage of all
New Mexicans it should not be
killed out of anger for thrills
or for no reason at all Sierra
Club supports this bill because
the current allowance of
wasteful wildlife killing is not
acceptable while like belong all
of us consideration of that and
out of respect for the animals
themselves we ask that you
support additional thank you.
Next we have Michael tax.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee my name is Michael
dax on the New Mexico
representative for defenders of
wildlife I will be brief here
when laws are egregiously abused
those laws must be changed to
prevent further abuse that is
what just before nineteen is
doing is nothing to do with you
plus it returns wildlife
management decisions backed
wildlife managers ensures proper
oversight that doesn't currently
exist thank you.
Next we have again asked was.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Dave bosquet summer city
councillor in Los crucis I'm
also a hunter and angler and.
You know I've heard the
arguments here and absolutely do
not believe that this the bill
anyway would affect the plus
system I do believe that we must
continue to treat our wildlife
with reverence and wildlife is a
public resource I'd like to
remind the opponents members of
the committee I'm it does not
belong to private landowners
user on their various medically
important parts of this bill
that would positively reform the
way that we manage wildlife in
the state it's critically
important for those of us in the
hunting and angling community to
be seen in a positive light to
to be able to continue the
traditions that we all enjoy
including those folks who sign
up for you plus system and that
means that we have to eliminate
the one way statue and that
Jennings law which we have seen
abuse time after time and so
this is a common sense bill
everybody here should support it
including the landowners if they
want to continue programs like
the plus because esports
equipment people who take
wildlife as a public resource we
have to be more responsible
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Next we have some.
Morning madam chair members of
committee thank you for the
opportunity to address you
regarding the bill SB one four
I am also a lifelong resident
New Mexico former again
commissioner
and and I'm representing actual
here Hispanics enjoying capping
in the outdoors we stand strong
support as you for nineteen.
As a family farm owners
sustainable farming more County
we've dealt with creditors
before when they get in our
sheep I have no qualms going out
showing that there were chilling
Act title game department has
never has never had a problem
with me doing that according to
these regulations what I've seen
consistently as a game
commissioner and now is that
what miss Santi honest witness
that people are using this
Jennings Law School sales
slaughter large amounts.
That's why this bill needs to be
addressed we need to have
respect for our our wildlife and
our property so this bill bill
needs to be addressed with
public input thank you for your
Europe opportunity to speak and
I urge your support for this
bill.
Next we have also since the.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee members
of the committee I'm Oscar
Simpson are Representative New
Mexico sportsmen and another
group called Rio Grande
indivisible I'm also a former
came commissioner.
Senate bill fourteen for
nineteen corrects needed then
came management to take care of
the ginning laws problems I
witnessed numerous times in the
past or the landowners
indiscriminately kill big game
in order to leverage or try to
get more tags under their
landowners system.
This bill is really needed if
we're going to expand our
recreational economy thank you
very much.
Lastly we have Kevin Bixby.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Kevin Bixby on the executive
director of the southwest
environmental center.
In Los crucis we strongly
support just before nineteen.
But you know wildlife management
is always a balancing act in the
gold standard is co existence
finding ways to balance the
interest of individuals with the
interests of the public.
While the animals are not
anybody's personal assets or
commodities.
My life is a public trust in the
state has a duty to manage that
trust in a way that benefits all
the Mexicans they also wild
animals also deserve not to be
got shot and maimed by angry
individuals trying to kill big
animals with inappropriately
small weapons as has happened
under the Jennings law.
That is all has failed to strike
that balance is led to the
horrible incidents like the one
we heard about today as before
nineteen would remedy that in
balance and I urge you to pass
it thank you.
Okay so that was twenty on each
side cover.
Sixteen our position thirteen us
okay thank you very much we're
now going to the committee
Senator Steinborn do you want to
make a few comments before the
committee questions and just yes
madam chair I would to two
important points number one
assistance at this bill does not
touch the the plus plan based
tax system and clearly that's
seems to be more of a concern
for the folks speaking in fact
is what all counterintuitive
that by preventing unnecessary
killings that we would somehow
reduce the amount of tax
available to private landowners
I think the opposite is probably
true I never to madam chair this
does not affect the taking of
unprotected species like coyotes
so if your.
The former and that's your
primary issue this doesn't
affect it this is really about
protected protected animals.
And we're really just for
placing an arbitrary system with
a more managed system and I
would also add from the chair
that we we allow this bill also
allows the department for the
first time to use the two point
six million dollar depredations
on for staff so that if the
demands on this program grow if
they actually have the funding
to be able to hire more people
so it's great we we actually
this bill compress on a path to
an even better system that
prevents not only current
conflicts the future ones as
well because we built
backbenches for people and all
kinds of permanent solutions
with this money that we do for
landowners thank you madam chair
that will stand for questions.
Thank you senator we are now to
Senator guy a ghosts then
Senator souls then Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator guy a
ghosts.
Senator at thank you for the
third time to hear additional
I'm just wondering since last
time this table one groups to do
business with to try to amend
this I noticed and to say no
landowner Anil track taking
morning who you visited with on
trying to revive this bill.
Well madam chair senator thank
you for the question it's not
the same bill and it's the first
time you're hearing this bill
this bill is just one piece of
as you know many pieces in a
previous spell and
Didn't get a whole lot of
discussion about some discussion
but that this is something madam
chair that has been discussed
for literally over a decade in
the state of New Mexico
including the department itself
is try to reform this loss so
it's been well discussed well
bedded and we just decided to
narrow in on this because we
felt like there was more
consensus on this particular
issue.
I appreciate that madam chair
and senator wondering if you had
direct connection with the
fishing game I had asked for
analysts to try to get some
insight on this.
And
yes we didn't get first off they
don't answer their phone signal
they didn't ever give an answer
I'm just wondering if you had
actual discussion with the
department on this bill there
has been to miss madam chair
Senator there has been
discussion with the department
of the bill and we've had
discussion with them for quite
awhile about the pieces of this
law and what they'd like to
reform and up I think they're
analysis just got posted last
night yeah so.
The short.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair center
then my next question I don't
know who were respond this
Chair and senator one of the
people have talked about the
perceived threat to cross.
How would you define the
perceived threats I I don't know
that this is just my thought on
rate for grazing.
All right taking of drinking of
water on a private property I
would see that would be a
perceived threat of loss since
the land owner does not own
their help the more the some
outlined anything like that so
any kind of intrusion could be a
threat of loss of crops.
How are you how are you guys
looking at that is forced
definition of how they protect
themselves from any perceived
threat of loss.
madam chair Senator that this is
I'm sure defining current role
and would be further to provide
for an extensible making process
required in this bill but I I
would turn it over to John
Crenshaw to give a more
technical answer your question
Senator.
madam chair I have to apologize
to who's preparing for a
different question and our could
that be repeated.
Yes madam chair Senator and miss
Crenshaw this Saturday those and
I'm trying to understand what
how you guys look at the
proposed perceived threat of
loss to their crops or you know
for them to have a reason to be
able to protect themselves that
perceived portion would I think
have to be well really laid out
in wording because to me at in
on another bill I made a
statement for I just so ranking
Colorado we've had since
eighteen thirty three and I had
a five hundred page bill a staff
one winner that the LFC took it
out completely constantly
they're taking out my pants and
the one time blast fishing came
to take care of it they
advertise my friends to know
value and of why they never get
anything for for the Hey either
and and I'm just trying to
understand how you figure out
the perceived walls are
perceived threat to my crops
because and I don't have it
anymore our our cables figured
at six thousand of per acre.
In less we had a huge for come
through and then that changed
the dynamics on how many cattle
horses I have on the property so
all you use if you can picture
that to try and find an answer
thank you.
Are you also.
Thank you senator madam chair a
Senator
I would hope.
two things one Colorado New
Mexico have different systems.
they eight plus system is are
somewhat but not directly at all
okay column
way recognizing that property
owners do contribute to help
contact.
In recognition of that they can
get a landowner permits under
the question that they can
resell are and often for
thousands of dollars
the game and fish department in
New Mexico R. and understudy
Bond statues doesn't have the
authority
to
get directed mints have cash to
every person who's lost property
to say L. eight eight then
turned up haystack or getting
into across.
As to how to define it perceived
or real threat I would hope that
if this rule does get opened up
after it's just a bill passes of
that that would be part of the
pretty in depth discussion the
commission and department and
landowners and all stakeholders
would have with the to bring
some.
clarity to that and some of.
Drill side boards and guidance
so that that could be recognized
is that awful.
Madam chair Senators yes it is
and and this is you're talking
about no if they get us to go
forward that would be a
discussion I appreciate that
because we're gonna have to
understand that receive thought
but as you were talking I just
realized I should just in the
state of New Mexico my self
then my finance the LFC
continuously came through is
state line so I've been fighting
with wrong state since I was
fifteen years old I I didn't
realize it they're trespassing
from New Mexico and Colorado I
then had a better fight in New
Mexico but I'll go into my next
question and thank you for the
discussion on that
madam chair and senator one the
I think its missile Janice it
brought up in her testimony of
what happened which was really
that I've seen so that we used
to blame Texans there in
Colorado if a lot of game or
shut but in her discussion
others talk about her then
shooting at the highway in the
dwelling madam chair center do
you know what they're rested for
that because both of those items
are against the law.
Madam chair of the tech out
will.
You to respond.
This on campus but I do know
that we have state laws that
prohibit shooting at dwellings
or across a public highway so
please agency on campus.
Madam chairman and and thank you
Representative Senator guy a
ghosts and Senator Steinborn
understanding that I'm not an
expert in this however the
research that I've done.
Within the laws in New Mexico
regarding this specifically I do
want to make sure that it's
understood that the the C. was
within the parameters of the law
my husband and I actually went
out and measured and spent
plenty of time
Researching the possibilities
and I have to say in my own
professional capacity today not
an expert in this it was
threading the needle.
Regarding the parameters of of
the space within dwellings but I
am confident that the lease he
was within his legal right.
Madam secretary miss Santana
said thank you for that and I
know it's a tragic situation I
appreciate due diligence to try
to measure all that stuff but it
comes back to you have a bad
actor of the probably should
been incarcerated.
And and I just feel forward I
just wanted to clarify because I
would as an individual B. as
adamant that if they did shoot
at my drawing more my found was
and or across I was they should
be incarcerated for that and
that could stop solve this whole
problem did you have a response
handle.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
senator guy a ghosts I did reach
out to the game warden
regarding this.
And all all disabled that Sir
thank you thank you.
Madam chair and senator I'm in
closing I just wanted to bring
up a couple of items so I know
that in Albuquerque that so when
someone traps and more in the
larger cities they have have to
take in rural New Mexico and
they released in there and then
the ranchers and and farmers in
those areas have to deal with
them
and that's problematic because I
think as this more of this bill
goes forward it just makes it
harder for them to be able to do
what they think they need to to
protect their assets I did want
to read a
conversation those was senator
Jennings he said the ranchers
will private landowners
The state's wildlife and he
thought it was a quick moment to
real estate or realtor housing
department of.
Image back up real state housing
organization housing the
homeless in vacant house while
they're waiting we sold both a
rancher in the realtor or
responsible for all the damages
and costs incurred.
Even though it's on his own
property.
Yes personal property he leaves
well running of in order
to provide water for wildlife in
the past years that he's not
using that season there is
that's why I was worried about
the perceived threat is because
any time wildlife is on your
property.
Eating your grass you could use
for cattle or horses or other
animal Center years I see the
image of taking my my problem
with your bill Senator madam
chair is that we're gonna
restrict them the the landowner
from being will do what they
need to do to be able to protect
themselves from us the state and
with that on you thank you
madam madam chair I can just say
we don't necessarily.
I'm sorry your muted madam
chair.
He was not asking a question you
can include districts in.
Okay we now go to Senator souls
then Senator.
In addition committee.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Steinborn many of the
questions you might went direct
to John print shop because they
they have to do with some of the
details of statute and things of
that sort but certainly anything
that did you like to answer
first Senator Steinborn or Mr
constructed you please direct me
to where in this bill that
includes non protected species
like tile as far as being under
the Jenny walk.
Madam chair John.
John you're still there yes I'm
sorry
Madam chairman members of the
committee Senator cells thank
you the question.
It isn't in there
are in it it cannot be
interpreted to be in there
so the answer is coyote pack
rats.
Thanks.
Moles gophers other spaces like
that
if there.
In your business you can take
care of yourself you will not
have to call the game department
get a permit.
Just
two years ago
the legislature had the
opportunity under bill sponsored
by Senator Steinborn to make a
coyotes and skunks.
Acted for bears the legislature
chose not to do that and it has
consistently chosen not to do
that there you commission does
not have authority to regulate
those species in this bill does
not now in its current form or
in the future important give
them that authority.
I don't care and and Mr Gonzalez
Senator thank you because there
were some comments made that
this would allow people to
protect their chickens from Ohio
and I couldn't find any place
that that was in there
Madam chair and and senator and
again Mr Crenshaw yeah we've
heard lots about that this was.
Thank you no wait what this bill
is I look the whole Jennings
lawyers in seventeen dash to
what part of the law is plus.
It is not part of the long it is
not part of the plus
and not eight plus.
If I could which section of what
is he plus yet.
actually plus is a as a
commission rural that Sir
promulgated under the
authorities given to the state
can commission are under
seventeen one fourteen NMSA
but it's an extensive I'm very
detailed sort of
rule and policy and this bill is
not affected
it is due for examination that's
certainly been no secret
the the are you percent but it's
it's this is not affected.
Madam chair and and Senate there
and and Mr bench I my
understanding is this whole
section deals with seventeen
dash two and it losses in
seventeen dash three out Senator
is there any part of this
particular bill that deals with
seventeen dash three.
Well Madam chair Senator this
has nothing committee plus let's
let's answer the question that
way.
It doesn't.
And it was his under seventeen
dash three which is not anywhere
in this particular part and
madam chair and senator is the
president mentioned in this
bill.
Madam chair Senator souls now.
Thank you and and I want to
point out I love the small
landowner and we get tags tags
under the file system per year
but you indicated this doesn't
say anything about the plus
where landowners are given state
property.
The right to hunt and so often
times those people selling the
page don't point out as income
for their taxes will be the
concern with that
it seems like people are trying
to conflate the plus with the
slaughter of the state's big
came out which is very using
lots of misinformation and fear
tactics you know in order to to
do all of that.
Madam chair and senator how big
is the current deprivation Fund.
It is starting here yet and
actually madam chair Senators
all the depredation Fund at last
check on the passionate portal I
believe was around two point six
million dollars.
Madam chair of that this bill
will change how the deprivation
funds can be used.
It does madam chair the
depredation fund currently in
law.
Says it the the fund can only be
used on materials to build
fencing and what not in what
this bill before you also allows
is for the agency to be able to
use that fund for personality
trait of costs as well.
So for the staff that they're
paying and so if they need
additional staff they could use
this fund to to hire additional
people.
So madam chair and senator it's
been very responsible that as we
are
Increasing the potential need
for depredation concerns to the
department that we are also
providing the funding in order
to deal with that additional
responsibility is that accurate.
I'm madam chair yet well they're
already spending money on it so
it's it's I view it as we're
allowing them the ability to
stand use this funding for a job
they're already doing so that's
kind of where I'm coming from
but.
Yes I think that's a reasonable
thing to do.
And madam chair I think my point
is the deprivation funds can
actually be used for additional
staffing that they do need to
cancel it additional deprivation
that might come up as the result
of repealing what's normally
called Sliq Jennings law so I
think that's a very responsible
thing to do with that no has
sufficient funds in order to
manage to do this.
Absolutely madam chair and
senator actually I think it you
kind of make a good point you
inadvertently or otherwise is
that is that up if by not
allowing them to use it for
staff maybe you're creating a
maybe there is an inherent
disincentive
for the department to hire more
people but if we're allowing it
and there were not taking away
from game protection fund Sicko
sports all the rest of their
mission so I think that this
will help to beef up that
program so people get good
customer service from the
department.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I think it's correct to
make major areas actually there
are three main areas that I
think are very appropriate in
that in that it.
Prevents the water of animals be
some because somebody is
frustrated or angry it certainly
correct and moves towards what
is responsible taking of
wildlife with the wanton waste
and requiring people to take out
the the useful edible portions
which is undergoing hunting
etiquette and then also expands
the use of the deprivation to
include staffing so that there's
adequate stopping to manage the
deprivation concerns that might
be within the state so thank you
senator I appreciate it and
thank you madam chair on.
Thank you we now have Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator Schmedes
in some cases Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank thank you madam chair I'm
glad that it does not affect the
plus programs all my questions
about that or are just
eliminated but I had to a lot of
the game and fish
Issues what we often talk about
how game and fish or regulations
that we pass in Santa Fe or
what's the best in Santa Fe
affect the city's or addressing
city problems but then they are
might not be appropriate for for
the rural areas and in this case
I have a question about the flip
side of that because we heard a
lot about how this law would
affect rural communities but I
had of we had incidents in our
neighborhood dealing with
raccoons.
Which are for bearing protected
for bearing animals and all of
that all of the regulations are
a regulations not not statutes
of the game and fish and I have
an extremely positive experience
with game and fish in terms of
of the regulations and how they
are interpreted in and what a
nuisance animal is and what you
can do about nuisance animals in
my question is it and also I've
learned that the city could even
Declare records if they wanted
to to declare reckons a city
wide news and and so I I was
just very impressed with the
game and fish department and the
knowledge there but my question
is is with this with these
changes affect that process for
dealing with nuisance animals in
this in the city or how would it
I guess the question is how
would it affect the process
which I understand or
regulations not statutes but I
wonder whether the statutes
would require a change in the
regulations.
Madam chairman attorney John
Crenshaw the short answer is it
depends what species because we
have no managed and protected
species in the state when you're
talking about
Manage species that are
enumerated in law it affects
other departments reach some and
they course have programs on
that this with the fact that
John do you want to add to that.
thank you madam chair Senator
essentially this this bill would
allow the state game commission
to re write that rule I would
anticipate that it will not have
to affect the raccoon
depredation responses are.
Hardly at all raccoons by the
way are the most common
complaint now that the
department deals with and most
of the more urban
the department also has a
contract with greater control to
help try to control them in the
Boston area about Bernalillo
county in particular
but no the department would
still be offering means of
taking them whether it be a live
trapping or or whatever but yes
are you you would be still
covered just as well if not
better.
And in the experience that we
were dealing with was when a
raccoon a bit of a young a young
boy and he had to go to the
rabies series because of the
raccoon it was very very
dramatic but my question is is
could someone since since this
would still a permit somebody to
To harm the raccoon if there was
a threat to life I would assume
that a by eight with the
potential of rabies would be
such an experience what such an
example is that correct madam
chair.
Madam chair this Senator
absolutely
Yes in fact the department of
health would probably prefer
that the animal be safe so what
can be tested for rabies and.
All of that but yes that that's
that's legal action and very
just I.
Okay.
Okay I wanted to interject that
there are also the laws of the
state in the city that would
rural shootings as well tell I
didn't stay shooting but but a
disruption thank you for taking
live but thank you thank you
madam chair that's all I have
okay thank you Senator Schmedes
the centers of this.
Thank you madam chair and
etcetera etcetera thank you.
you know I have the.
I serve in public affairs
committee we've seen a lot of
the I know I know you did too I
see a lot of bills creating new
felonies and this bill creates
several new felonies one of
which is the taking of a cougar
outside of the you know outside
of the user license are outside
of the season and as well as the
Havoline and bear
My my my main you know we I tend
when we criticize I tend to vote
for them especially if there are
particularly egregious.
particularly
you know kind of these heinous
crimes but in this case
I want to discuss this with you
because if if we do.
Selenite somebody they will
Miner stays on a real to possess
a firearm again is kind of a
life sentence of death sentence
for a hunter and and maybe
that's the the they program I'm
not sure yet but my my main my
main issue is with with the
cougar
You know what my understanding
is that it's it's kind of it's
kind of new wants something
there's these time limits in
time windows in these zones that
open and close and I can just
picture a hunter that goes into
the wilderness and I don't have
a cell phone or they don't
they're not checking their email
and and they and I don't know
maybe they should be I I just
don't know I'm not a cougar
hunter but my understanding is
that the zone could could
potentially close they could
take the animal and then be
selling iced and so my my
question is really specifically
about Cougars but also
generalize in general do you
think that's appropriate level
of a penalty for what we're
talking about here.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
defer to John Crenshaw answer
this question.
I'm looking at the statute
Senator is that existing staff
is that existing statute or is
that New four exist madam chair
it's existing statute we're not
adding a new.
Yeah the only manager the
penalties the same and we're
adding to our adding new new
situations new scenarios to it
so.
Correct.
Your defer to fly the Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair of center
she managed
The the bill is written and as
it stands and granted out those
three species to that
that was created to.
Prosecute what market trophy
hunt essentially and the primary
problems have been
really Bankhead he beg that
record deer elk and pronghorn
are and their kids out of season
usually spotlighted the heads
taken off very quickly and
stopped and sold through the
black market to somebody who
wants real wall hanger on in
their office
and it's not a pervasive problem
but it's consistent and it's
certainly reasonable to have
these three species to it Barron
cougar in particular have a lot
of value are their belts do and
sometimes even the stuffed
animal the situation you're
talking about a legal Lujan
licensed harder hunting in
season and getting caught out
when the
quote is reached within that
unit and he can no longer take a
cougar if he does have one it
would be a misdemeanor because
presumably he would be following
the other parts of the law.
And I think sometimes to officer
discretion works and and he
could be issued a citation or
warning citation but he would
not be subject to felony
prosecution and any cracks.
So madam chair and senator Mr
Crenshaw so so there's another
part in statute that would suit
to proceed this this new statute
of this one's adopted is that
what you're saying.
madam chair and senator no that
would be the same statute and
and what I was trying to explain
how it came into being and why
that particular sections in
there about felony.
Okay thank you madam chair
etcetera I don't want to get
stuck on this I just I'm having
a hard time how would taking a
cougar out of out of that season
outside of that with that tag
how would that not be subject to
this fourth degree felony how
would they just go away with the
citation if they actually took
the cougar outside of the
permitted time frames.
Even if it was incidentally
benefit wasn't really
intentional I mean if it's it's
it's it's outside the time frame
or not right and I just can't
quite understand that okay are
the the critical factor there
would be under this one did you
bring out of the entire Carter
certainly stumble questions plus
the power.
Okay and Mr madam chairman
Senator misconduct I see that
part a little over down so it
and that's how I understand the
statute that was gonna be my
next question is we can achieve
a felony by the waste of game
portion or we could also see the
penalty higher up in the in the
on that page we can achieve a
felony if you take the cougar
outside at the appropriate time
frame.
So it would be either or if you
if you do either of those things
you would become a fourth degree
felony is that is that right.
Madam chair senator I don't
believe so I believe it has to
have both
out of season
and taken without the mate and
taking the pelt only years in
this case.
Okay.
I guess I'll have to go and look
at I.
I don't see
I'm looking at the statute madam
chair.
And I don't it just says a
violation of the provisions of
this paragraph it doesn't say
all of the provisions that just
says violation of provisions and
and so the the the way I read
that in an and has an order
there so I don't.
You know maybe we can move on I
I don't want to get stuck on
this but I just.
It just seems to me that a plain
reading of the bill is if you if
you leave them if you leave the
meat out there for three felony
if you shoot something outside
of the the season or outside
that tag it's it's a felony and
it just seems like like that's
what is so I would just.
Maybe encourage you guys take a
look at that I just think
especially if someone is
unintentionally doing something
I mean obviously leaving the
media's intentional but.
With the Cougars zone's opening
closing and that the these time
frames I I just don't want to
sell it to someone who is you
know House attacking is trying
to be a the the US responsible
hunter but then you know has has
a almost a technicality and a
technical and fractionally
solemnize them so but that was
kind of my next question is
let's say that that someone
issues an animal and then
something's wrong you know they
they states they see like a
sickness or something in the in
so something where they say you
know I don't really want to take
this home and eat it
maybe they have only maybe the
you know the gland got exposed
or whatever I don't know for
whatever reason they don't want
to with what they have the
freedom to call game and fish so
so they're not selling eyes or
would they just have to take the
meat out and just throw it away
or what what would happen there.
R. Madam chair Senator
thank you.
Officer discretion comes into
play in a case like that
The any worthwhile going Martin
they are all very good would
certainly look at the
circumstances and so yes this
guy's telling me the truth and
it would probably help to bring
it out or take pictures or
whatever to do that what you're
talking about and it would be
just fine and I've I've had that
kind of experience in the field
myself and sometimes just simply
have to make a decision you ride
warning ticket given a verbal
warning or do you go ahead and
take a gentleman to court
and that's about as close as I
can get on that.
Okay Madam chair in the center I
just have a couple questions
about the Jennings law now on
and I think that's all
what you know I've heard on the
minutes it's pretty clear what
the you know if there's pros and
cons to something I mean there's
pluses and minuses just about
everything it's pretty clear
what the negative aspects of the
Jennings law are and how it's
been abused what are the
positive aspects I mean what
what has you know game and fish
seen or do we have any data on
the positive effects of the
Jennings law in New Mexico.
Well I would just John much of
what you and I mean you know
from my perspective Senator the
abuses frankly have led to
creating more more.
Support and creation of the
departmental responses to try to
mitigate those complex.
So that's been positive but
unfortunately it's the part of a
law that allows.
Kind of unregulated taking that
is that is always the problem
and so it's time to fix that
particular part of the.
While in the other part.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator
with with these kind of gregis
abuses can we can you know mom
my
The way I see wildlife is we
have to focus not on what people
are doing but on the health of
those wildlife populations and
and so not you know.
My question is.
Can we connect.
Can we connect these.
These events these heinous
events to an actual the problem
with the overall health of that
wildlife population.
That was in Senate bill three
twelve Senator I'm just getting
but only.
Only only getting a little bit
I think that's part of and again
that's also in need of
modernization frankly that's a
conversation is going to
continue how we manage this
department manages wildlife
populations and looked at
population trends that we have a
lot of great New Mexico X.
frankly in that other bill
that require these exact kinds
of things but I mean they they
do monitor wildlife populations
and John I'm sure can give you
more specifics on that if you'd
like.
Yeah well I was just a chair and
I was a specifically asking if
like let's say you know someone
you went out you know they they
shut you know something you know
some elk
under this Jennings law that you
know has anyone connected that
to a let's say a decrease in the
overall health of the L.
population or or something like
that I mean I I just have to I'm
trying to remain scientific
about it we're we're is this you
know that's the real question is
is the Jennings law actually
harming a particular wildlife
population in Mexico do we have
evidence that.
Madam chair Senator the numbers
are small enough that terms of
population
Totals and the prospects into
the future
probably not in spite of the
fact that some of the our
killing of the thirty nine
problem or is our kids are
summer on for instance in our
believe it was two thousand two
thousand one but
That that's a sizable enough
number that it would fit have a
of of a small local or regional
effect even on the prom board
urged that area but overall
health population is not going
to be harmed
by what's been happening so far
it remains in the front give any
sort of our ethical approach to
guide management
However but I will also add them
and madam chair Senator you know
what the tech it was with mixed
with a bunch of bull ox being
taken out
you know you you're definitely
impacting
biology and reproduction and I
kind of indiscriminately taking
out.
Our.
Taking out animals that are are
kind of point to for potentially
quarts of the reproduction in
that particular area so we talk
about E. plus we talk about
hurting landowners and
populations taking out
indiscriminately a bunch of bull
Elks are can have those impacts
and that's why again it's
important we pass this law to
allow the department to put some
rhyme and reason grandmother's
behind that so that we're not
adversely affecting the ecology.
Okay thank you and madam chair
center I just have one last
question about about sensing you
a good mention sensing to
mitigate that depredation issues
I what one of my fears I think
we all agree in this I mean we
don't want tons and tons of
fences going up in New Mexico
but I I do have a at my my fear
in this my apprehension is we're
taking away a a remedy that a
private landowner can use to
manage wildlife and we given
little liberty there so there is
unfortunately these instances of
abuse but I hope we can all
agree that that the majority of
cases there you know people are
most people are result most
people are responsible in New
Mexico we we're going to you
know have a lot of uses of
Jennings law that are
appropriate valid and it's
really the only solution there's
just an immediate issue and and
so we've we've we've kind of
taken away that remedy well how
are people going to respond and
I think well some people gonna
respond with offense well who
who who are the types of people
that can afford a nice big tall
fence that could mitigate
depredation issues well it's
kind of the wealthier landowners
and so it leaves the the the
poor landowner with without you
know we we take away the
Jennings already from them and
then they're not gonna have
enough money to build sensing or
change whether water is or all
these other things so I I feel
like it I mean what would you
agree with me that kind of the
the the point seems always when
we you know take a bigger hit
here some of the just doesn't
have as many financial options
to mitigate deprivation night
would you share that concern
with me or where do you think
it's and I'm concerned.
Mister chairman Senator if that
were true I would but but they
could but the good thing about
the deprivations fund is that
time is that the state actually
build that fence forty.
So you're not having to bear
that expense so I think it's
actually a really generous
solution from the state no
matter what your situation is
the landowner that well it's
funded by actually hunters but
but that.
That this state is literally
building offensive that's what's
great upon so I I think what you
said this is kind of not
accurate in the sense that you
you have to purchase the state
actually purchases at forty.
Yeah well and then but then
madam chair and and and etcetera
I'm just in reality I I I
believe Lisa spoke with game
wardens and some some landowners
you know it it's expensive to
build a fence line game
aficionados that and I don't I
mean I just don't see them you
know it it it seems that it's
been a rare and I know it does
happen and I know that you pay
for in some circumstances
but those funds are not
unlimited and and then I also
don't want I mean to be honest
offense is a permanent structure
these you know these big is big
eight foot fence whatever it is
and
to to be honest it if there's
just a of various specified
issue where they can you know
just take a few animals it
doesn't you know we've heard and
most certain case spaces
circumstances it's not going to
affect the overall population
that wildlife I I'd rather that
happened then a permanent sense
be putting up right now we were
putting up lots of fences and
it's going to mess with
migration and and the way the
animals move in so I I certainly
don't hope that happens a lot
not just for the finances K. but
but also just because we don't
want tons of fences everywhere
so right madam chair right well
let me let me just let me just
go back to a bigger point which
is that this bill does not take
away a tool I think you said it
takes away till it doesn't
actually take away a tool it of
a landowner maybe even taking an
animal it just requires the
agency to come up with the rules
on the parameters for that and
so I think really what's going
to happen here if this bill
becomes law ninety five percent
of the taking this and
management is going to happen
exactly how it has in the
agency's going to come up with a
very common sense role with
feedback from ranchers
that are in the best interest of
everybody gets just gonna limit
those out liars that
unfortunately happened more than
once in a Blue Moon they tend to
happen.
Keep happening
they're just going to come
together get kind of close those
off so I think landowners will
still be given the opportunity
this bill taking animals quite
frankly this bill doesn't
eliminate that so we're not
we're we're just letting the
commission come up with new.
parameters.
Okay thank you madam chair that
that's all I have I Senator I'm
when I'm I'm again a lot of
thought to this bill is so when
I listen to the debate and and
see what else what other people
are gonna say I just because
this issue and I I didn't
realize you know I mean I knew
the original bill with it being
so big and broad I figured it
was gonna have you know a lot of
supporters a lot of opposition
and I thought this kind of more
focused bill maybe things would
be a little the last.
You know back and forth but
clearly it's it's still a very
contentious issue I can tell
and I mean I don't own land
besides the the lot that I have
with just my my house but
but just from what I'm hearing
from anyone else I because of
the contentiousness ness
contentiousness of this I I feel
like I'd rather see this put in
statute then us kind of.
You know just just allow it to
be in the rulemaking process it
I just feel like just because
people feel so strongly on
either side I I just would
perhaps rather have the
legislature take a crack at it
that's kind of where I'm leaving
right now but I all of all
continue listen to the rest that
they thank you for answer my
questions and appreciate.
Thank you senator Senator Servan
tastes thank you madam chair you
forgive me for not putting on
the video.
Internet service centers number
one thing is is building next to
Senate finance is that right.
Correct madam chair Senator all
right and and so the last point
of centers communities about the
weather this loans in stature
ruling and any other questions I
don't Senator Steinborn I know a
lot of folks listen to all the
debate a lot of folks are very
concerned about the implications
of this change your statute but
with my reading of it is like
let us Senator Steinborn it
simply authorizes the
promulgation of rules.
The deal with now what is so
essentially a black letter rule
that allows landowners to take
this would establish some of
those rules I I.
Senator Schmedes brought up
initially point as long as
stature or the rules and I'll
just note for him and for others
I when I came into the office I
serve one year under governor
Johnson.
Republican followed by Democrat
governor Richardson followed by
Republican.
Governor Martinez followed by
Democrat.
Governor Lujan Grisham you may
see a pattern here.
New Mexicans seem to and I were
it's it's always been discuss
there's a pendulum and
inevitably we go one direction
and then it goes too far and
then the pendulum seems to go
back the other way and and let's
district near the point of all
this is that that he should
ministration comes in with the
new agency new agency had new
members of commissions were
appointed and the pendulum
swings back.
In the other direction.
So I I I like the rulemaking
process in some regards because
it does kind of keep things on a
one of Allison Joyce itself.
But I don't have any more
questions for Center San Juan
but I really do have one last
Senator Steinborn which is if we
if this bill was to pass the
Senate and or or pass the
legislature.
We would be eliminating the law
now that allows the property
owner to.
Take wildlife to protect their
property.
And pending rules to be
promulgated by the agency by the
commission what happens during
the interim period of time in
other words how do you see that.
Is it it's if this gets passed
in July and my experience as it
usually takes agencies earlier
today about the general I don't
know how long it took to the
Derry rules but I don't I don't
want to say it's certainly more
than three four five six years I
don't know whether anybody the
call on the committee knows how
long it took it took a very very
long time.
So so assuming that the that the
agency here given the
controversy given the very
different interests and
perspectives within the agency
takes three four five years
promulgate these rules what
happens in those for five years.
Thank you for the question madam
chair Senator I'm glad you asked
that because I called the
director of the game into staffs
the specific question how long
do you need to make rulemaking
so that we can put an
implementation date of the law
gives you ample time not just
anymore time and ample time to
get the full press the public
comment and the date he gave me
was January first of next year
so from the time the bill were
to be passed and signed that
would be what nine months like
that and that was there that was
their number Raul can certainly
be passing a much shorter amount
of time but they can also take
longer as you pointed out but in
this case that's what he felt
was appropriate and so that's
the patient eight we ran with
the bill.
And so.
What would happen was.
There would not people would
have certainty is to there are
rules they would have an
opportunity to be able to
participate that would be have
ample opportunity get ready for
a new will.
That's why you have the delayed
implementation date yes exactly
all right very good yeah that's
what that what that answers my
question it's a it's an
important question of just how
this committee particularly
those where the conservation
committee.
I've been hearing about what are
called a warm A. W. R. M. rules
the state engineers office
they've been eminently coming or
about twelve years by my
estimation.
So you know when that when
there's issues that are
controversial like water or
other issues that are oftentimes
the very rules another example
sometimes you get pretty bogged
down so.
Senator I'm when I appreciate
the agencies telling them get
these rules implemented by
January first that's memberships
thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Seeing no other hands for
discussion center so your hand
is up.
Over the past.
Is.
Madam chair second.
There is a motion and a second.
Would you please call the vote.
Senator sirventes yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville no.
Senator Paypen.
Yes.
Senator smitteez no.
Senator sauce.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator I'm sorry this Senator
Gallegos.
In Germiston panics.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair committee
you got rid of the state that
was easy.
Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair committee thank you
for the discussion thank you for
everybody who attended today as
well thank you and thank you to
everybody who attended so
committee members we will be
meeting Tuesday morning at nine
AM we will start with of another
emergency bills etcetera your
legal harm you know on the youth
conservation corps and then we
will going to house bill's so
have try to have a nice weekend
I know many people have
committees today and tomorrow
but we will see you in this
committee Tuesday morning thank
you everybody by we are recessed
thank you madam chair.
