Trevor are we live.
Having an issue with my.
Okay are we also.
On the webcast we and with yes.
Okay good morning everyone thank
you committee for joining in I
see a hand up from Senator guy
Ecosse.
Yes I've been getting quite a
few texts and emails from people
that have not received that the
the opportunity to speak is that
something the drivers working
on.
Hi everyone who wanted to speak
is required to register the day
before and that is at the bottom
of our agenda we do have
hundreds and hundreds of
requests for speaking so if they
continue to send it to.
Yes.
and see.
At N. M..
Legis dot gov and I will repeat
that.
But it is at the bottom of our
agendas it says S..
C. O. N. C. at N. M. legis L. E.
G. I. S. dot gov.
Thank you for bringing that to
my attention.
thank you madam chair.
Certainly so this morning we are
moving ahead with Senate bill
eighty eight.
Has an emergency clause and send
it Senator Candelaria is with
us.
He it is entitled public project
revolving fund projects.
So Senator Candelaria the floor
is yours but before you start
sorry
Trevor go ahead and start
letting in.
The our opponents and proponents
for the next bill so we don't
have to wait for them and I
understand Senator Candelaria
that your expert witness.
Yes Marquita Russel and she was
on with us.
But I don't see right now.
I think we can proceed Senator
unless I get really in the weeds
she's she's on so it's Senate
Candelaria welcome to our
committee and please please
proceed thank you and good
morning madam chair and madam
vice chair and.
Mr ranking member I think I got
that right so damn coming before
you as chairman of the New
Mexico finance authority in term
oversight committee
seeking your approval of our
endorsed bill Senate bill eighty
eight of the public project
revolving fund project
authorization
as many of you know the public
project revolving fund is the
keystone program of the New
Mexico finance authority by
leveraging what are excellent
bond ratings in both the
superior and inferior bond
issuance that NMFA now holds a
trip away NMFA is able to let
that out to finance public
infrastructure projects for
local governments across the
state of New Mexico at far lower
interest rates and they would
ordinarily.
Eve on the open market by
themselves under the New Mexico
finance authority act The New
Mexico finance authority must
come to the legislature to seek
approval of any public project
revolving fund project that
exceeds one million dollars so
all of the projects listed in
the bill are estimated to be
over one million dollars in
scope I will note that the
inclusion of the project in this
bill does not mean that the loan
is approved it does not mean
that the project is guaranteed
to be funded it merely means
that the legislature is
providing its authorization to
NMFA to continue its process to
bet these projects and then to
issue the funds if all of the
requirements are met the last
thing I will observe madam chair
is that the authorization for
these projects is three years
and so three years from
enactment of this bill and MFA
in the local governments
involved have the ability to
ensure and to whatever
agreements they need to to
transfer the funds otherwise the
authorization expires as a
matter of law unless we
authorized by the legislature
and without madam chair I'm
happy to entertain any questions
thank you so much for your time
this morning.
Thank you senator miss Russell
do you have anything you'd like
to set an.
thank you madam chair I think
the senator did an excellent job
in describing the program and
the bill in front of you I would
just note that in addition to
they're not being a commitment
for us to make a loan there's
also not a commitment of by way
of this authorization for the.
Local body the public entity to
actually submit an application
so the simply give them the
ability to file an application
anytime in the next three years
for the projects that are listed
typically what happens this bill
comes before you annually the
bill comes in a very in the
smaller form it typically gets
amended once during the session
and we end up with a much larger
bill the bill you have in front
of you is about a hundred
projects greater than the
initial bill you saw last year
at this time and I think that's
it due in large part to a couple
of factors one is that in
January of twenty twenty the
finance authority a limited all
fees related to the public
project revolving fund so it
does not cost of local entity
any money to come to the finance
authority so we get those triple
a interest rates that the
Senator combo audio mentioned
that are passed along to the
local body
at at no additional charge so
that's one reason that we're now
seeing greater interest and the
other is that the disruption in
the market place last spring
March and April of last spring
really limited the access for a
lot of local bodies so finance
authority has been look to more
this past year to serve clients
that this that didn't
necessarily see a need for some
prior year so what you're seeing
now is I think the result of a
couple of factors but what yours
what we are seeing is greater
demand for the program and with
that I would be happy to stand
for any questions.
Thank you so much are there any
if you are there any opponents
or proponents for this bill
there were none that called in
to speak.
Okay we are going to questions
and comments from committee
members is there any discussion
Senators metes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator just one quick
question
That the debt refinancing was
listed on on those requests on
the bill I just want to know is
that something that is normally
part of the PPRF or is that part
new this year Mr chairman and
madam chair and senator sheet is
thank you for the question I'll
yield to miss Russell that's one
of those get into the weeds
questions that she's more adept
at answering madam chair and
senator sure these get it's a
normal part of our authorization
now we are seeing a number of
entities that went out to the
bond market ten years ago when
interest rates were low what
much higher and would like to
refinancing again as I mentioned
this is a very low cost way for
them to re finance some of those
public infrastructure loans they
have so that's been fairly
standard for about the last five
years great great okay now that
was my only question thank you
very much Senator thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair earn.
So I was just wondering on this
of.
Are the bonds issued to make
loan obligations of the state I
didn't see anything in the FIR.
Madam chair adventure my best
guess at this and if I'm wrong
is also going to correct me but
the answer is no
the NMFA has a separate bond
rating than the state of New
Mexico what what my life for us
and senator I think is important
and miss Russell is not going to
Pat herself and her team on the
back for this but I will you
know it's not it's it's very
unusual that a financial
institution like NMFA of public
financial institution will carry
a triple a bond rating in both
air superior and inferior box
and MFA is achieved in both
which is a real testament to the
solid Management that has that
has been put in place and NMFA
over the last several years
particularly since this Russell
joint.
I appreciate that center and and
I guess I was just my hi my
concern I'm wondering if they
could manage the rest for months
for so thank.
Well you thank you Sir.
Thank you us being no further
questions what is the pleasure
of the committee.
I'm moving to pass.
There is a motion for do passes
their second by second there is
a second from a Senator Hamblen
of the motion was made by
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
could secretary please call the
voting role.
On Senate bill eighty eight.
The secretary please call the
voting role.
I'm sorry I and I forgot to
include Senator wanted.
Senator.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Paul.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Mister Lopez yes.
Montoya the panic yes.
Please show Senator von case as
excuse for the day he indicated
he would join as soon as he
could but he might not be able
to get on today okay.
Thank you.
Unanimous Senator Candelaria
thank you very much for joining
us today I thank you madam chair
and vice chair thank you miss
Russell for acting as our expert
have a good morning everyone
thank you thank you all.
Thank you before I turn this
over to the vice chair to run
while I present a bill
I'd like to ask us to keep in
mind
I'm not trying to limit
discussion but I'm asking for
privative and for staying on
point you're on the topic so
that we could try to move
through a few bills today we
were good enough to get through
to bills on to say and maybe
we'll have a few more today
maybe not.
And we do have a hard stop we've
been asked by the pro tem to do
hard stops at noon with the
morning meetings so that people
had to have a break before they
go to their afternoon.
So the very next bill the bill
that we just passed for the
public.
And temporary I you're letting
in people for the next bill
which is Senate bill eighty four
which would be opponents and
proponents and there probably
will be about.
Fifty twenty five fifty people.
we have passed Senate bill
eighty eight.
Which is the public project
revolving fund we are now going
to Senate bill eighty four which
is community solar after that we
will be going to Senate bill
thirty to the wildlife
conservation and public safety
act so at this point I'm turning
the
Committee over to our vice chair
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair you may
present the built.
Okay
today I am here with uh Senator
Linda M. Lopez and we are
presenting Senate bill eighty
four community solar but there
are many Sanchez on this bill
this is a group effort we have
selected Bobby Gonzalez Senator
Thomond Senator Sedillo Lopez
senator Linda Lopez Senator
Steinborn Representative
Patricia
Roybal Caballero and
Representative Andrea Romero and
they might join us on this
bill this bill is being brought
forward members of the committee
and madam chair on behalf of a
group of people I do have to
expertise and we will try to
keep our entire presentation to
fifteen minutes or less
the two extracurricular Thomas a
partner in the law firm Quarles
and Brady and the second one is
Rick Gilliam program director
distributed generation
regulatory policy about solar so
hopefully they'll get on before
we get to any detailed
questions.
But I'd like to talk about how
we came up with this year's
bill.
This bill is not my bill it is
not Representative Roybal
Caballero spill from the past we
had a Senate memorial sixty
three that we passed at the end
of last year.
And during that bill created a
working task force.
To bring together.
Many different groups advocates
investor owned utilities
electric coops developers
communities that are interested
in this in this topic and just
general members of the public.
We are received a small grant to
hire a facilitator for this work
group and this workgroup was
given the go ahead by
Legislative Council and it was
either in late June or early
July.
So the workgroup started in
July.
Matt for six months.
And they met every other week
for two hours.
The group had an overall
participants of ninety people.
And then of the on going groups
that met every other week for
fifty to sixty people at a time.
So if we try to include anyone
who wanted to be involved we
also had Senator Pat Woods
participate
in this because he has avid
interest in community solar.
Our goals were to bring together
these representatives and to see
if we had any areas of common
ground.
And to identify the areas of
disagreement in order to craft a
bill.
And I can try to minimize areas
of concern.
I mentioned how many people we
had the group members were
surveyed at the beginning and at
the end of the process on key
issues the annual program size
the facility size and utility
participation.
Additional meetings I should
start out that the national
renewable energy laboratory out
of Colorado did provide several
trainings to the group for short
periods of time on basically
what community solar was how to
finance low income websites
these projects might be and to
give us a review of the entire
country and the lay of the land.
So during this meeting we also
are during this process we also
had separate meetings with the
rural electric coops.
The tribal community solar task
force also interfaced and my any
Bruton led that with all
Indian.
I'm gonna send all name all
Indian public council but it's
the tribe's it's all all the
tribes and came up with their
resolution that's included in
this as well.
Are we met with the investor
owned utilities we had
presentations from them we
incorporated resolutions from of
outside groups and we actually
had the chair of the PRC.
Visit with us for twenty to
thirty minutes.
To share with us how.
Descriptive are non prescriptive
they would like to see this bill
in relation to their duties.
And for example.
There is nothing in there
statute or rules that allows
them to set up special programs
for low income people and so by
putting they said if you really
want us to address this as a
component you need to put that
into the bill.
Then you need to let us do our
rules for this
energy generation.
Just like we do for other
utilities and so we listen to
those words as we.
Drafted the bill.
The final working group report.
Was shared with all legislators
in December.
The bill was the result of many
of those consultations.
Now let's move to what community
solar is and then I'm going to
say a few more words and then
turn it over to Senator Lopez.
The solar are of local solar
arrays they could be field.
Or it when we come to the
The development of the large
round a race that could be set
up as well because I've been
privy to a few of those.
Then community members could
subscribe.
To the energy that's being
created from those solar fields.
It's making solar.
Community it's it's making solar
power available to people who
maybe are renting may be.
Cannot afford it don't have the
property to put it on maybe have
covenants against rooftop I
don't have a number of years and
to put it on or and the
financing.
There are economic benefits to
this and we were very lucky
there was a study that was
funded by the U. N. M. bureau
the bureau of business and
economic research that shows
great benefits to our state.
There is over there would be
over five hundred million and
economic benefits to various
sectors of the economy and
creating close to four thousand
high quality jobs over the next
five years if this bill were
enacted.
It would be over to and this is
according to their study so the
study was made available to
everyone and if you don't have a
copy we will be happy to get you
another copy.
It was over two point nine
million in tax revenues annually
for the state funded through
private investments people who
are developing and investing in
these developments not requiring
increased taxes or in the state
investment.
Every county in New Mexico over
a twenty year.
Right could benefit by almost.
A few million dollars in output
and then hundred and seventeen
new jobs over twenty years.
The local sectors hardest hit by
COVID by our virus would
benefit.
Direction restaurants because of
the workers professional
services real estate and health
care.
So the economic development
report done by bureau shows that
this whole program would be a
major plus for the state.
Senator Lopez.
Would you like to judgment.
Yes.
Thank you senator and madam
chair members of the committee
what else is in our bill that's
in front of the committee for
discussion today is out to
shorter than previous years much
of the detail has been pushed to
the PRC which would include
consumer protections for
subscribers ensuring that
utilities are fairly compensated
for interconnection and
administrative costs and also
determining the subscriber bill
credit rates based on total
aggregate retail rate
methodology.
The PRC is to conduct a
comprehensive community solar
program review after three years
and recommend adjustments if
necessary to annual cap facility
size REC etcetera there's one
hundred megawatt statewide cap
approximately which is
approximately one percent of
utility retail energy
consumption divided
proportionally by investor owned
utility others five megawatts
per project cap there's thirty
percent of the statewide cap
reserved for low income
households on the REC credit for
the renewable energy credit it
goes to the subscriber
organization which can sell or
transfer them to the utility a
co ops may opt in either
completely if they're ready or
only for a single project
examples also will exempt
pueblos in Indian nations from
some requirements that are in
line of course with their
sovereign rights and that madam
chair
both Mr Thomas and Rick Gilliam
I will also make some remarks
about cement possible
misconceptions about community
solar and if I may.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez I I do
not see
Miss Thomas is.
Our expert witnesses are not
showing up and I'm getting texts
that there are many people in
the waiting room for this bill.
Mr Riley Trevor.
Rick is not here yet either.
Now.
Not at least not on screen
young.
Are there is there is regularly
He's connect go ahead and get
started with Mr Gilliam until ms
of ping ms Thomas gets on would
that be okay with you Sanchez
yes
Thomas Mr Thomas and Mr Gilliam
are on now so
These are expert witnesses and
they each would like to make a
couple of minutes of comments.
Okay.
Miss Thomas.
Please and I said morning I
apologize I had the.
Website up listening to where we
were I apologize good morning
good morning the Senators my
name is bill are Thomas I'm a
proud graduate of the university
of New Mexico school of law
and so at I'm happy to be back
virtually in New Mexico to make
some remarks on this bill I'm
just couple points I want to
make an opening one is related
to the tribal exemptions I'm to
practice tribal energy law
former director of the office of
Indian energy at the US
department of energy I work very
closely with the New Mexico
pueblos and tribes on energy
development and so it's
important in this community
solar bill to acknowledge the
tribe's sovereign authorities
over their lands over their
resources and over people come
on to the reservation and
pueblos for energy development
purposes and so provisions of
the law it knowledge and support
that sovereign authority I'm and
it's also important that tribes
have equal and level playing
field when it comes to
potentially developing community
solar projects Pickering's
Pueblo northern New Mexico had
the benefit of having a very
good working relationship with
their co op and so to be able to
give tribes kind of equal
footing as well as to have a
standard set of rules and
processes that the tribes can
follow and that the utilities
can follow is important and why
we have tribes included in the
bill I'm on my tribes are
included in the bill I'm
secondly from the rate payer
perspective you know tribal
members should be able to
benefit from community solar
just as any other rate payer in
the state and I think as we've
seen in some of the studies that
were mentioned there are
substantial rate payer benefits
in multiple ways including for
example expanding access to
solar for rate payers who may.
May not be able to put rooftop
solar on their rooftops and
renters people live in multi
family housing small commercial
businesses that maybe only have
a small storefront and so those
ratepayers will now be able to
get access to the direct solar
benefits the community solar
calls for we'll see reduced
energy costs for those
ratepayers especially through
the net metering offset process
that's included in the bill and
so typically you see
Representative reduction in
rates reduction in costs and
that can be especially helpful
for low income.
Community members and low income
ratepayers where substantial
amount of their income is on
energy costs stabilize energy
costs the fees typically charged
by subscriber organizations will
roll the main relatively flat
and so there's certainty that
you're fees your energy costs
will remain relatively flat
regardless of what's going on in
the broader energy market
and multiple studies of confirm
these benefits have looked at
them including a recent
department of energy Lawrence
Berkeley national lab study
which looked at the cost of
distributed solar in the grid
system and the benefits to
ratepayers and some of the cross
subsidy issues which I think
Rick will speak to I'm on the
third point I just want to make
this kind of some broader
benefits across the grid in
across
the communities at large
Senator Stefanics talked about
the economic development study
that was done in addition to
those kind of economic this out
development study a budget
you're going to have and I in
but go in this a little bit more
detail you're going to have some
great benefits you're going to
have avoided generation costs
avoided transmission costs
because the power is being
produced where the power is
being used you'll have avoided
large losses because you lose
power when you generated out in
the middle of nowhere and have
to move it to the city and line
losses can be substantial and
climate change will impact of
those line losses as well so you
reduce the line lost you
actually get to use the most
more the power that you generate
there's more resiliency and
reliability in the distribution
grid itself and not to mention
of course the environmental
benefits avoided carbon a cost
avoided transportation costs
reduced water uses so a whole
host of kind of broader social
and other environmental
And even utility budget and so
with that I will turn it over to
a wreck and and happy to take
any questions later.
Mr Mr Gillam could you and
please a need yourself yes I
just noticed.
The thank you Paul are and madam
chair Senators I'm happy to be
here this morning to talk about
this important bill
Just a little bit about my
background I am with vote solar
I am the senior program director
for distributed generation
regulatory policy I work
primarily in the intermountain
west I've testified before this.
The legislature in New Mexico on
a number of occasions and I've
also worked with the PRC in New
Mexico a number of times as
well.
my experience primarily is in
the regulatory arena however I
primarily work in general rate
cases I integrated resource
planning cases as well as
renewable energy cases are so I
think that provides good
background for me to give you a
little bit more detail on some
of the elements of the bill and
what I want to do very briefly
is just address some of the
questions that we often hear
about up our community solar the
first one is probably the the
the single most popular question
that we here which is or whether
or not non participating
customers that is not
subscribers will pay more as a
result of implementing community
solar and the answer is not
completely clear because there
are a lot of moving parts but
the answer is not likely.
You are mentioned a couple of
the the budget and those
translate into economic benefits
as well but first let me talk
about our a couple of elements
first there is no incremental
cost of developing community
solar facilities for the
utility.
Costs related to the facility
are either born by the developer
themselves or by the subscribers
so there's no incremental cost
to the development.
the legacy utility costs that is
the cost of their generation
transmission and distribution
is spread to customers in
general on a basis of cost
causation whoever causes the
costs to be incurred pays the
bill our so utility customers
are generally pay for all of the
assets used that is the
generation system transmission
system distribution system our
but because community solar
customers for the energy they
get from the facility only using
the distribution system they
only pay for the distribution
system and that's part of the
bill credit process.
Our so are there impacts on what
other customers pay and and yes
there are.
Because community solar is are
providing energy to distribution
customers during the peak hours
in the summertime when costs are
are driven by that peak our.
The the costs that are allocated
to those customer classes for
instance the residential class
the small commercial class
as well as to the state of New
Mexico in general if the utility
is in more than one state those
costs are reduced as a result of
that generation during those
peak hours.
So.
That's so I think evident that
the costs are reduced to all
customers now there are our
revenue reductions as well and
there's about that's that
happens in the general rate case
process so my experience with
these types of facilities is
that when you balance those cost
reductions with the revenue
reductions there's a very small
impact if any at all and it can
go either way it could be a
slight increase or slight
decrease.
Another question we hear
frequently is that if utility
scale solar large solar projects
are cheaper than community solar
why not just do all our solar
with with large scale projects
and what I'd say to that is it's
a it's a matter of two elements
one is dilution and the other is
delivery when you build projects
as to our said out in remote
areas whether they're solar or
any other type of generation you
have to get that energy to where
the customers are there's a lot
of cost in doing that as well as
losses on the system.
The on the dilution part when
you add a large scale solar
project to a package or
portfolio of generation
resources including coal natural
gas nuclear other solar and wind
the impact of the savings on a
large scale is relatively small
because it's a small piece of
the entire generation package
with community solar the
subscriber is getting the full
benefit of those savings for
that project albeit smaller and
more expensive than utility
scale but it's still less
expensive than a production in
remote areas and the
transmission all that energy to
distribution customers so
there's a savings there and
That leads me to the next point
I want to make which is how does
this benefit low income
customers the definition that
we've used in this bill is based
on the high definition eighty
percent of average area median
income.
We call these customers are
customers that are income
qualified
in other states at least half of
the the states have included
some form of low income our
consideration in some cases it's
a car about in other cases it's
a financial incentive we're
leaving at up to the commission
here to to determine although as
you'll know if there is a car
about built into the.
The system.
So how does that car about get
mad by developers.
There are number of ways to do
it some developers will build
up our projects dedicated to
income qualified customers other
cuts other developers will build
projects where the anchor tenant
which can make up as much as
forty percent of a project our
can provide
R. sum as essential a sum of
funding for discounting the the
cost to the lower income
customers so for example are
when a project is built a anchor
tenant may get a five percent
discount off their traditional
electricity rates are.
The average customer may get a
fifteen percent discount and the
lower income customers can get a
twenty five percent discount
that's up to the developer and
the the market will work to
ensure that income qualified
customers are included in the
the portfolio of customers of
subscribers so with that I think
I'll just stop I'm sure will be
able to discuss that more in the
queue in a section and I will
give it back to Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics.
Madam chair of the bill that is
explicitly says that the co ops
will opt in not opt out.
And they wanted one more
sentence of clarification so I
do have an amendment for either
now or later whenever you want
and I know there are opponents
and proponents waiting but do
you want the amendment now or
later I think it makes sense to
do the amendment now so that we
can have comments and know what
it is to be clear on what the
bill is so would you introduce
the amendment okay so the thank
you madam chair so the the bill
already says that the coop to
opt out opt in opt in which is
different than last year's.
And this was in negotiation with
the New Mexico ring of rural
electric coop association we
have a board resolution from
them so that's how I got into
the bill but they also wanted
some further clarification so
it's one sentence on page eleven
line thirteen.
After the period insert.
The decision of our rural
electric distribution
cooperative to opt in to the
community solar program shall be
in the sole discretion of the
cooperative's governing board.
That the co ops recommended that
language and it took away all
ambiguity in their minds that it
goes back to their boards to
decide.
So for purposes of discussion I
move this amendment to the bill.
Do I have a second.
I'll go ahead and seconded for
purposes of discussion.
Do we have any questions on the
amendment.
Most.
Yeah I don't really have an
objection to this later on in
board during when we are asking
questions I have the amendment
that talks about deals with the
rural electric co ops but it's
I'm.
More discussion about what it
does and how it does it so I'm
not sure how to proceed with
your discussion on that
particular man that is my
amendment would kind of remove
or change some of what this
amendment does.
Madam chair would you rather
just have this amendment entered
and then address all I I have
moved the amendment okay all
right so let's go ahead if
there's no other discussion on
the amendment let's go ahead and
vote on the amendment
Veronica would you please call
the roll.
Well actually are there any
objections to the the amendment
easier way to do it if anybody
has an objection to the
amendment please raise your
hand.
So madam chair.
I might Mr in senators Mitch
nineties.
I just it was it was up and I I
cannot see it anymore
is there any way someone could
put it back on the screen.
Madam chair are you didn't get
it so thank you madam chair
masons rules indicates that
twenty twenty version that any
virtual proceedings.
Ricart requires a roll call vote
when there is any dissension and
not a unanimous
Agreement.
Thank you madam chair of let's
go ahead brown I can call the
roll okay Senator savant.
Senator.
Yes my yes.
No I didn't thank you.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville.
Although yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator so no.
Senator.
Senator.
Committees which would you.
Yourself sorry yes.
I scare Lopez.
Yes.
And the next yes one no.
So it eight and one.
So you have your amendment.
Thank you madam anything before
we moved to public comment now I
think we should go on to public
comment thank you very much for
that.
Senator maintenance may we take
it off so that we can see the
cut the the costly thank you
thank you for doing that.
Thank you.
I have a list here of people but
I don't see that it says for or
against.
I'm on this list so I will love
I prefer to go with opponents
first however I can't tell from
this list.
It looks like.
It looks like proponents only
but I know.
From the moment.
Do you have the sheet of paper
with the speakers yes I do okay
the right hand side.
Of the con of the con the right
hand column are opponents for
example the first one is Mike
the Antonio okay
opponents yes okay what I would
suggest is we have we have four
opponents on this list although
it says proponents of the top
notice that.
So we have four we have four
opponents and I have received a
text in an email from a Mister
Gregg Sonnenfeld who said that
he registered as an opponent and
it's not is not in but I will go
ahead and call the opponents
first and then because we have I
opponents I would like to give
of the same amount of time and
consideration to the.
Proponents so if the proponents
could decide on page five of the
ten we have listed here would
speak that would really help us
move this along so with that
I'll ask Mr Michael d'antonio to
unmute.
And to go ahead and make his
point and if you could be brief
no more than two minutes please.
Thank you madam chair
commissioners Mike you Tony with
Xcel energy for those that don't
know excel serves the eastern
part of the state we're we we
service southwestern public
service company we are a leader
in national leader in renewable
energy.
We just completed our Kirk uh
said more we project which will
take our New Mexico renewable
energy penetration to over forty
percent this year which is so
well ahead of the vehicle which
is said to twenty twenty five of
forty percent I want to say that
we're part of the process and we
think that.
Senator for the stakeholder
process although we felt like a
lot of our.
Comments recommendations were
not included in the legislation
what we we would prefer to see a
residential program because we
think that that really is what
you have we we have a fear that
low income folks are going to be
very disproportionately
Representative not to be many
Representative at all I'll give
you an example we have a program
in Minnesota and we are one of
the leaders nationwide are excel
Division in Minnesota.
In existence for several years
in that program.
We have over three hundred meet
paid over three hundred million
dollars in billing credits to
participants and what that does
is it comes back to those that
three hundred million dollars is
picked up by all other
customers so they all of the
customers are subsidizing with a
participating community solar
not and so this model
unfortunately in Minnesota even
though there's still lowincome
participation over approximately
ninety percent of the Energy
soul from our community solar
programs there go to commercial
industrial customers so our our
preference would would have been
to see a residential loan
program S. recommendation we
made community solar is two to
three times more expensive than
utility grade solar when we put
here so are we pay a lot less
sports and therefore we can help
help hold the total cost to our
customers down which is
important.
we also had issues with the
reckoner shipped issue of we
would like REC ownership so that
a actually can count towards our
ETA goals which now it doesn't
so there are few few several
issues here
that that that's the main one is
that the low income customers
because you read so few with
this type of set up that they
will end up paying more money on
a on a class in it would without
without this program in place
and so we have a fear for of
those low income customers said
that will not be participating
maybe Mr dental no thank you
that you did your time thank you
thank you
Next on the list I have Dave
Kennedy.
Mr can I give you could make use
of their your yes thank you
madam chair and you can keep it
under two minutes.
Okay.
The state members of the
committee of money say Kentucky
on the director ranching and
conservation up at Philmont
scout ranch in Cimarron also
that you're tell growers
wildlife Committee founder of
the Cimarron watershed alliance
just pointed out that a career
in conservation one of the
things that I would like to
point out on this the
conservation and public safety
at sounds great but like many
titles may not reflect exactly
what is going on of the
department of game fish as rules
already on trapping and they've
increase bill so long bill.
I'm sorry this Mr Kentucky we're
dealing with the.
With the console that's what I
thought but I was I was prompted
to step in I'm on I'm on.
I'm sorry your on this list and
also I guess you they were the
ask you to come in so if you
could step back out of step out
but I'm for solar thank you.
Okay of.
And with the interesting okay
the next person I have is
Matthew hundred medio I'm PNM
resources.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and as
as Representative for the public
service of New Mexico we're
always looking for supporters
anywhere we can get them.
And so it's wonderful to see you
madam with members of the
committee even though it's
virtually I'm glad to see that
you're all safe and it's a
pleasure to have you here in
Santa Fe doing what the with New
Mexico the needs to be.
Done.
My name is Matthew how to be on
the public Representative the
public service company of New
Mexico and I realize that there
are some people probably in this
room given up in its commitment
to renewable energy that maybe a
little taken back about why
we're testified against a
community solar bill here today
but I want to explain our
reasons for that level before
just I want to reaffirm to
everybody that can and does
stand resolute and committed to
making sure New Mexico is a
clean energy leader and we are
backing that up by everything
we've done with the making a
Mexico under present carpentry I
started with closing the San
Juan coal plants and working
towards an early closure of the
four corners coal plants
investing in our infrastructure
constructing new infrastructure
incorporating cutting edge new
technologies like battery
storage in order to help New
Mexico keep up with that demand
for our solar and wind
generation which I think this
committee really appreciate and
also continuing to build on the
partnership we've established
with a lot of our environmental
and business advocacy friends
and communities to ensure that
we are all aligned as we work
towards meeting the goals of the
Energy transitioned Act and
progress toward sustainable
energy I also really want to
make it emphatically clear that
we are not opposed to the
concept of community solar a
community solar does have the
potential to be an important
part of this transition and as
the energy transition back to
something that almost everybody
in this room work hard to enact
and I said almost everyone from
the governor to the
legislature's local businesses
to the environmental advocates
are lowincome partners and the
unions worked really hard to get
that energy transition act
passed and it lays the
foundation towards eighty
percent renewables and a hundred
percent zero carbon energy for
every New Mexican which is
really important our primary
concern of this community solar
bill as it's written under mines
that hard work and the fact is
this version really hasn't been
updated from the previous
versions to really called.
Amid the Energy transitioned Act
and briefly I'll I'll go through
the specifics.
Initially it doesn't allow the
energy generated by community
solar to count towards the
extended and aggressive mandates
of the renewable portfolio
standard I know that there may
be an amendment that might fix
that.
However at in our mind that
really is a great first step but
it's just not enough the current
draft creates an undue financial
hardship on those with supposed
to help especially during this
time of COVID making the
transition to sustainable energy
will require the support and
good will of the entire
community something that would
I'm sorry Mr honey I'm sorry
your time is up.
Okay.
And I would just say we learn
more about the ETA that we we
did about your opposition to
this bill of
okay and next on this list.
I have
Vincent Martinez.
And I have to step out for a few
minutes so I have asked my
colleagues Herald poke Senator
Herald pope to a to take over Mr
pope did you representative what
did you get the the list.
The less and I'll be able to
take over so I will be at work
up for just a few minutes while
Mr
Martinez work yes yes Sir.
I understood that goes to the
ranking member I just wanted
clarification.
That is correct and needs to go
to Senator data centers to be a
Lopez thank you thank you I
appreciate that let me send you
the list Senator guy goes I did
not I was not aware of that I
need to brush up on my masons
rules so Senator guy goes I'm a
send you the list right now.
Come through there's been delays
in it but all of for.
yeah I.
But I've not seen an investor.
Can I give you my personal email
that may be faster.
It will be if you could text it
to me because otherwise it'll be
public on the web and I don't
know if you want to pursue
public let me let me just.
Both back is your provided email
David got dot guy Aigles.
Yes.
At NM Legislature gov.
Yes.
Mologen yes.
I see what I did wrong.
Madam chair.
Yes Senator street is just a
real quick suggestion I wonder
if if for future meetings the
the zoom authority may just send
the list to the ranking member I
mean I don't think it'll happen
too often but but that way they
would have it ahead of time and
and just maybe save some time
just it's just an idea thank you
Madam that that's an excellent
idea
Mr I'll leave that up to to the
chair to the the regular chair
but that is that is a great idea
Senator Gallegos did you get the
list members not to give you the
because I publicize my David dot
RSI at Hotmail dot com
everywhere and.
That may be faster.
David.
Dr David R. R. yes I like Ralph
Sam Isaac.
At Hotmail dot.
I also know we have a very
aggressive stand for spam filter
and hundreds and hundreds of
emails coming in so hopefully
did you get it did you get this
one.
I'm actually getting ready check
my job just in case you want to
the.
John file.
This neither one of the last two
have come back.
I just now received thank you
with that I'll turn over the
chair the the chair to a Senator
Gallegos for a few minutes and
I'll return.
Thank you madam chair.
Before you leave.
Okay before I leave yes just
trying to see where we're at and
I'm having a hard time to get
this zoom all open I've got it
it's a blue.
In format I can't seem to get
it.
Expand what can see it it's a
PDF.
What where we are is we're stand
Mr Vince Martinez is the next
speaker he is he is the last
there is another person who has
contacted me but is not on that
list Mr Greg's son in field
that he registered as an
opponent and has not
is not in I promise five
speakers for each side.
And so so Senator guy goes if
you could choose I speaker or
well I I would like the the
proponents to suggest there I
speakers from the other side but
the last at it but right now the
speaker would be Mr Vince
Martinez.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you thank you I
apologize for this and I'll be
vaccine.
Thank you.
To go on.
Paul does.
We do here vespertine is
correct.
Madam chair we have not heard
from Vince Martinez and he is on
the
zoom here okay that we should
hear from him.
Yes Mister miss Martinez to go
and get on.
Mr chairman
I have I have no comment on I
was put on this somehow no
comment thank you.
Okay.
We'll go to the proponents.
Madam chair
In all.
I'm also here to oppose.
You are.
I am Ashley Wagner I'm the
director of public policy with
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce formerly AC I.
Okay we'll we'll take your test
fund thank you thank you so much
in twenty nineteen our
organization was part of the
ground swell and energy
transition act supporters and
advocates that work hard to get
the bill passed that year we
stood together and establish our
state as a national leader in
this clean energy transition no
longer at the bottom of all good
list we now lead the pack the
energy transition act is a
testament to the amazing things
New Mexicans can accomplish when
we all work together that is
stored Bill gain national
attention Andrew other like
minded entrepreneurs businesses
and economic developers for
beautiful state are cleaner
energy transition is truly great
for business and the community
today we again strongly boys are
support for this clean energy
ship while highlighting some
challenges at this particularly
outdated bill presents
incredible hardy get twenty
twenty and the continued
challenges of twenty twenty one
a compound needs are very simply
say that our communities local
businesses families and friends
need our support now more than
ever this community solar bill
as currently drafted will harm
our local businesses and
communities local businesses
need regulatory stability and
here's why we're pushing for
continued energy policy that
helps not harms our energy
transition this community solar
bill as written inherently
favors out of state solar
corporate corporations over
local New Mexican solar
providers the bill harms
struggling communities and
families because the true cost
of community solar for the
average family or business has
not been established how can
anyone of us push policy through
without knowing the true cost
and financial toll it will have
on our most vulnerable
communities.
And twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty have been unpredictable
and financially volatile for so
many of us stability and a
robust economy is needed to help
our businesses stay afloat and
survive adding no cost burdens
of community solar is just too
much additionally our state
recently voted to approve an
initiative to make our energy
regulatory body the PRC more
experienced and provide them
with the necessary staff to
better regulate our energy
companies this is not the time
data complicated and non
complementary energy policy to
an outgoing regulatory body and
we want this clean energy
transition support small
businesses and communities with
affordable reliable and cleaner
sustainable energy but this
outdated energy policy is
basically a copy of community
solar legislation written before
the historic energy transition
actors ever written so as a
representative in New Mexico's
business community I can't
support your responsible energy
policy that will undermine the
successful progress that current
energy policy has already
provided New Mexico from an
energy generation standpoint
will be eighty percent renewable
by twenty forty and a hundred
percent carbon free by twenty
forty five that's incredible
progress New Mexico is now a
leader in sustainable energy
policy this legislation will
undermine that progress and
leadership New Mexicans have a
cheat due to the outdated and
non complementary disjointed
Energy approach at this
legislation brings thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you madam.
Actually create the the dialogue
we'll go to the proponents I
actually have.
Eleven names on here have they
decided who would be a first.
Mr chair I sent to the list that
the proponents sent to that
Senator Sedillo Lopez it is Neal
Denton commissioner Hanson Ben
Shelton Joseph Hernandez and
Lisa Loeb wrote.
And I sent that you by text.
Okay and I will look for that
and if we can get.
No then to come off.
We'll be able listen to his
testimony thank you Madam.
Madam chair I don't know I don't
seem on this side.
I wonder travelers get in.
Just came on.
We're waiting to speak.
Do that would you unmuted
yourself.
Yes Senators dependence I'm here
okay it's your turn to speak two
minutes.
Thank you.
Yes thank you I am the
sustainability planner for the
city of Santa Fe and I am here
to read a letter from mayor Alan
Webber
more Webber is also the chair of
the coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico which
represents the City of Santa Fe
Santa Fe County.
Yes yes my being heard yes you
are okay good I am the
sustainability planner for the
city of Santa Fe I'm here to.
I am I.
Mr chair.
We tell him to turn off his
webcast I think that's where the
confusion is.
Yes the weather is off ready to
speak.
Thank I am that sustainability
planner for the city of Santa Fe
I'm here to read a letter
written by our mayor Alan Webber
who is also the chair of the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico which
represents the City of Santa Fe
Santa Fe County City of
Albuquerque and the city of Los
crucis I'm reading an abridged
version of the latter in order
to do so in under two minutes.
However rights.
Here in New Mexico and across
the country we're on the cusp of
a new energy future well we do
not yet have all the pieces in
place we do see the components
of this new energy agenda at a
minimum we know what it must do
for us and for our children and
grandchildren it must address
the existential crisis of
climate change it must
contribute to the healing to
healing the historic economic
and social inequities in our
communities you must be flexible
and resilient able to meet the
challenges of natural and man
made disasters you must be
tailored to the needs of
individual consumers it must
promote and reward continued
innovation and grassroots
entrepreneurship you must be
able to adapt to change or to
anticipated all of these tests
in more met by community solar
community solar is a commitment
to our renewable energy at the
grassroots level.
It is a critically important
next step in the evolution of
our energy portfolio and our
commitment to clean energy
increases and improves equity
and accessibility offering solar
energy to those who cannot
benefit from on site solar.
Is important savings to all who
subscribe in in particular
reduces the utility bill for
those who most need to but their
paychecks to other critical
needs such as food requests for
health care.
It offers the resiliency and
adaptability that only come from
distributed energy generation
and it spurs more into
innovation experimentation in
entrepreneurship by giving the
consumers of the Energy the
incentive to participate in the
generation of their energy with
the offer of benefiting directly
from home grown system
improvements so much of our
future and our children's future
will depend on what we do now
based as we are with the planet
in peril and economy in need of
rebuilding a social fabric in
need of repair and a vision of a
better way of life threatening.
I'm gonna have to apologize hi I
started you three different
times and we exceeded the two
minute level thank you for your
testimony in the gonna
commission commissioner and.
Thank you Sir.
I'm good morning ranking member
I guy goes and members of the
committee and senators I thank
you for the opportunity to speak
I'm I am a Santa Fe county
commissioner on Hanson and on
behalf of the Santa Fe county
commission and our citizens I
urge you to pass Senate bill
eighty four I'm as I'm sponsored
by Senator Senator Stefanics
What I planned on solar now is
the time to be bold we have been
working on community solar for
many many many years and this is
a good bill it gives us an
opportunity for three years to
develop a process of how
community solar will work I'm
Santa Fe County also includes
seven pueblos including Cochiti
Santo Domingo Santa Clara the
main pueblos of participate what
K. number eight and some of the
Alfonso simply put the sovereign
nation communities deserve the
right to make their own
decisions regarding who provides
them with electricity it is time
to democratise energy production
in New Mexico it's time to move
away from outdated models and
monopoly power.
Thousands of citizens in the
county live in near poverty
circumstances it
disproportionate percentage of
their modest income goes to
electricity based on national
averages from communities west
community solar the ten percent
or more production to twenty
five anymore
Is what folks put out a month
for electricity means something
it's a little bit more for
groceries rent or even for extra
present for a child at
Christmas.
We know also that the job of
solar installers is the number
one perfect professional growth
for the next day it we welcome
you.
Okay.
Time but please remember our
installers thank you for giving
me a moment to speak I
appreciate it thank you Matt
next we'll go to Menchaca.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank members.
Quickly I am I'm with
conservation voters New Mexico
but I'm also speaking get on to
today on behalf of vote solar in
the coalition for community
solar access together we
represent some of the solar
energy advocates have been
working on this bill
participating in the Sen Morrell
sixty three stakeholder process
that Senator Stefanics
introduced a couple quick points
if I can I'm gonna try to say
about two minutes here.
I think that New Mexicans much
like Americans are best often
you make an participants that
customers that's really at the
heart of what this bill does it
allows people to take control of
energy generation in their own
communities and Billy
participate in this market in a
rust robust way the bill that we
have here but does two things
that are one underscore that it
does that I believe previous
versions did I think this one
does even more specifically it
protects PRC oversight and
public regulation commission
oversight to protect.
This entire process and ensure
that it is being managed
effectively.
and it also does have a strong
car about for lowincome
participation in New Mexico
which is which is something it
is extremely important
protective think we got a out
guidance for the PRC here to
develop that program in a way
that is going to the ground
really effectively D. ETA we
worked my organization I
personally worked very closely
on the passage of the ETA as
well as development the ECAC
background piece of statute this
operates in the foreground these
things fit together very cleanly
it's it's together clearly all
across the country we are not
the only state that has a
renewable portfolio standard
operating as well as a community
solar program these are things
that can and tends to be very
complimentary of every
expectation that there should be
that way and not in New Mexico
as well.
My final point like that just
sort of Senator Schmedes on
Tuesday mentioned that the
government is not in the
business you creating markets
I think we have an exception to
that rule here because what we
have is a regulated monopolies
most of which you heard it speak
opposition to this bill we are
creating a managed exception and
I think that it is logical to
assume the market will emerge
between between managed space
this a regulated market I think
we have an opportunity creates
real business progress here
thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you thank you for your
time.
Next we have just of Hernandez's
Izzy on Federal.
Joseph Hernandez.
We move on to lease a little
rock are you available.
Yes I'm available.
We look take your testimony
thank you.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Lisa
rock and the sustainability
officer for the city of Los
crucis the city is very
supportive of Senate bill eighty
four community solar for several
reasons to fulfill an accelerate
the state school of clean energy
we must employ a variety of
strategies community solar can
complement the energy transition
act to move this forward and
given the scale of the energy
transition the management should
be shared amongst more than the
investment owned utilities
economic benefits
should be shared and create more
jobs for our residents and the
businesses within the state the
city is poised to provide land
and management of community
solar in our region the city is
also concerned about low and
moderate income residents who
are disproportionately impacted
by higher utility costs and the
city is working on ways to bring
together community solar and
other strategies to scale up
right to fitting low and
moderate income homes to reduce
costs participate in the work
force and prepare for stresses
of extreme heat as a
representative of the city Los
crucis and a member of the
coalition of sustainable
communities in New Mexico I
participated in memorial built
working group we spent almost
twenty hours in discussions
building consensus with a broad
cross section of stakeholders
co ops opting in was part of the
consensus the city believes this
bill bills from that consensus
works for exhilarating the
energy transition and provides
equitable access to clean energy
and we urge you to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr on.
Now we'll go back to Mr I'm just
so Fernandes are you available.
If you don't need.
Good morning my name is
Hernandez and I and the the net
and if you're gonna exert for.
Nave education project I live in
Shiprock New Mexico I want to
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee to
allow me to provide public
comment in support of Senate
bill eighty four as a member of
the tribal community solar task
force I can also comment on the
in depth tribal consultation
process within the Senate
memorial sixty three working
group and in drafting bill
language for SB eighty four most
legislation does not engage in a
meaningful tribal consultation
process with S. B. eighty four
however that task force was
brought into all levels of
decision making regarding tribal
community solar development and
with that direct implication of
tribal nations and native
communities of New Mexico and if
you see behind me this is
actually a Navajo tech
energy assistance program this
is there what they call their
community solar.
training laps of the students
there are actually learning
about community solar and
they're gonna be getting ready
to you know be there to support
the workforce so so this is a
small
Lab out in Crown Point New
Mexico so I just want to thank
the committee and I look forward
to our this passage in a but you
guys to Navajo tech to visit
this facility thank you.
Thank you for that.
M..
Madam madam chair Senators
departure you do would you like
to go speaking before we go to
questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chair I know that
there are many more people who
might want to speak and we are
trying to limit the time for the
public evenly and I appreciate
that very much and I think that
you probably have received many
materials factual I wanted to re
emphasize the UNM beeper report
on the dynamics of
extra finances extra revenue
coming into our state and I
think at this time we would
stand for questions and
comments.
Thank you.
Safe we haven't raised hands I
don't see any.
Senator Hamblen.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you Mr vice chair I.
Your hand.
Thank you.
Good to go.
Go ahead thank you thank you Mr
vice chair and madam chair I
appreciate the opportunity and
mine's more actually of of a
comments you know we at I love
seeing what Mr Hernandez and the
the the Navajo tech out of Crown
Point I think this bill has some
really great opportunities to do
a number of things first and
foremost is to create jobs as we
start talking about moving away
from oil and gas the critical
element is to have a renewable
energy industry and solar as
part of that to have that as as
part of our our our plan for the
future because as we move away
from oil and gas we need to have
an industry for people to go
into to either make what they've
made while they were working in
the oil and gas industry if not
equal to or more as we slowly
transition to renewable energy
so I think the opportunity to
create jobs in the example that
we're seeing a Navajo checking
Crown Point is absolutely
exciting
secondly when and what I would
with just a point of concern for
me and is not about the the the
legs of the bill but more of I
would really like as miss Wagner
talked about earlier a
preference shown to locally
owned solar companies and state
owned solar companies because if
we're going to talk about
economic development and we
spend money to solar companies
outside of our state we're not
talking about economic
development we're talking about
supporting a business that has a
headquarters elsewhere we're not
keeping money in our community
so I would hope that there would
be a consideration and a
preference for locally owned and
state owned solar companies so
that we can not only support
those businesses keep money in
our community but that we can
also support those jobs just a
point of fact when you spend a
hundred dollars at a chain store
or national business about
fourteen dollars stays in our
community when you spend a
hundred dollars at a locally
owned business for state on
business anywhere from forty
five to sixty eight dollars
stays in our community we're
talking about those returns on
investment that's what we really
need to put that emphasis and so
I.
Would encourage us to have that
preference for locally
understate on solar companies so
that we can keep that money in
our community.
And that's all I have to say Mr
vice chair thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
Thanks.
Next on the list I have Center
souls.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
That are quite a number of
questions and then as I get to
those parts of the the actual
bill I have a couple of
amendments that I would would
like to to offer and so what
first questions what is the
purpose of the community solar
my understanding from the
testimony or the the
presentation is to give all New
Mexicans an option for solar.
I thank you for the question Mr
chair and senator the intent
here is to provide community
solar opportunities for small
businesses and.
Residents who cannot.
Ford or include solar on their
property or renting and for low
income individuals to
participate so yes.
Okay thank you and also this
comment that was made talk about
and I think it was competition
or that community solar is more
expensive other places if
community solar were more
expensive than the public
utility.
Isn't it accurate that people
would not provide a for
community solar that this
creates a competitive market for
community for solar energy.
Mr chair representative I will
start and then perhaps Rick
Gilliam will also chime in but
when a developer works with an
anchor tenant which would be a
small business and then receive
subscribers that is how.
And you know I have to tell you
I I totally lost the question.
Mr chair and senator up the
question is this provides for
lower cost energy that a public
utility
Is it right that if the cost of
solar is going to be higher than
investor owned utility costs.
The company would have no
subscribers.
That is correct and that it's a
long term savings so Rick do you
want to speak to that.
Yes.
Mr chair and senator souls
you're absolutely right this
this will engender a market in
the state and if I a developer
can't build a system that
provides savings to its
subscribers that will be any
subscribers I don't think people
will buy into a project simply
out of the goodness of their
heart you so you're right that
the market and competition
between developers should help
to drive prices down as well.
Mr chair chair yes I'm sorry I'm
sorry.
Interrupt
Representative Patricia Roybal
Caballero who's one of our
sponsors has joined Senator
Bobby Gonzalez has joined I
mentioned earlier that Senator
Pat Woods also participated in
our workgroup so I just wanted
to recognize them before we kept
going thank you.
Thank you mentioned.
Mr chair your back to make.
Center souls were I thought
we're listening to testimony.
Right what was that question.
I I think that would the the
part or the answer to that short
piece of it and so I I think we
heard testimony that investor
owned utilities have the of
large scale with vantage I.
Their size they're able to do
lower cost energy and if they
can't then community solar would
step in and therefore the
community solar create a market
driven energy what what that
cost is that correct Senator.
That is correct and Senator
Lopez at any time will chime in
as well.
Thank you Mr chairman senator do
you know what percent of the
customers in New Mexico are part
of the investor owned utilities
PNM the past electric and excel
and what percent of the
customers are real Lecter coops.
I cannot answer that so I would
look to our two experts people
are are Rick one of them to
answer that.
Mr chair and senator saws are
unfortunately I don't have an
answer specific answer clearly
the investor owned utilities
serve most of the customers in
the state.
Mr chair and Senator do we have
an estimate as to what it is I
mean are we talking about to
present are we talking about
forty percent.
I don't need an exact number
that I'm to hold someone to.
I am looking at my fact sheet
and I'm not quickly finding it.
Sorry I had you on meet what I'm
I apologize what was the
question again Senator question
the question was for our state
the percentage of customers and
I use versus electric coops.
okay.
And Senator Sedillo Lopez needs
to get back in generals that
people aren't almost.
Yes.
I miss my second expert and
senator Cynthia Lopez is trying
to get back in.
Okay.
Mr chairman and senator you know
if somebody can find that that
would be helpful and useful and
again I don't need to know
exactly that it's twenty one
point three percent or anything
like that but just a rough
estimate is kind of what I I
would like to know up I think
the testimony was that
approximately one percent of
that this bill would only allow
for approximately one percent of
the I'll use capacity each year.
In other states that have done
this how fast have there been
subscribers sign up and use that
one percent we've seen in the
state other programs where you
can sign up by the end of
February you do get participate
because capacity was used up how
but the estimate that help asked
one percent capacity we get used
up.
Okay.
Thank you Mr yelling for that
answer.
Mr chair and Senator solves
in the early days when a a
program is first initiated it
takes some time for developers
to market that the concept
initially and then begin to
acquire subscribers and
typically the commercial
customers will understand the
the concept much quicker because
they are generally more tune
to their energy consumption and
so forth
but I'd say it it it wraps up
pretty quickly again I I can't
really give you an exact time
frame but does that for instance
the projects in Colorado are all
of with I think one exception
subscribed in excess of ninety
percent and nearly all of them
are subscribed at the ninety
eight percent level or higher.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and out
Senator.
It indicates that the.
The person is based on the
number of customers by each of
the different utilities if what
do you tell the as a lot
subscribing and another utility
doesn't and the extra capacity
move over to a different utility
or as one utility essentially
get the.
for lack of a better word just
kind of follow ones they don't
get to be used by customers if
they don't have subscribers.
The experts to answer.
Mr chair and Senator souls
the way this bill has been
written I think that the answer
to that question will be that
that the public regulation
commission will be able to.
Provide flexibility to make
those sort of adjustments in in
its rulemaking on this subject.
Mr chair and Senator no I
appreciate that the bill is
silent on who would make
decisions of that sort that that
was the reason for that the
question on page five of the
bill where it possible co
location and it says
the five megawatts or laugh but
it indicates we're we're doesn't
if I look to whether they can be
co located in the.
A rural are up coop coop and get
my words mixed in a our
communities so we're what three
four five five megawatt.
Programs right next to each
other to distribute out there
was testimony that we want this
to be out in different
communities what prevents co
location of multiple of.
Community solar thanks I.
Mr chair and Madam chair of I'm
not sure who's Cherry I
I apologize I have to tell you
sitting in the waiting room you
just don't know what's going on
and I was sitting the right
waiting room for a lot
of so a so what I what I
understand is happening is that
this is now the question and
answer period for the committee.
I yes so we're answering Senator
souls okay so Senator souls
there is I found it quite and
answered your previous question
seventy nine percent of is the
energy group from the I. O. use
twenty one percent from co ops
and
That.
See here sorry seventy percent
twenty one percent and then
there's a fuming municipal and
there and in terms of code
location of madam chair and
senator souls
there was a push back against co
location in the past because it
would create larger projects so
this was left to pursue this
bill addresses smaller projects
to encourage more projects so
that is how we ended up with
five versus to work systemic
what.
Madam chair and and senator I
understand that but on page five
it doesn't talk about it talks
about this hi that that have to
be located the service territory
but it doesn't talk about
whether they can put in four
five megawatt facilities there
that's making a.
Yeah we solar facility that that
is sold subscriptions reported
recruits yeah that's not getting
their jobs and the the
distribution of the distribution
lost I did it this seems to be
silent on co location.
Thank you for that question
madam chair senator and I'm
gonna turn director PLRT answer.
Mr Gillam Mr miss Thomas.
Madam chair and senator souls I
just see the language if you're
referring to I think certainly
the the spirit of the bill is
not to co locate multiple five
megawatt facilities in order to
to have a mega facility as you
suggest
you know the clearly there will
be limitations on
the distribution substations
that these projects may connect
to and but it's argue at least
that these projects should be
physically separated
and I and and we've had
discussions about that in prior
years I would hope that the
the commission can address that
issue although I I recognize the
point that you're making.
Madam chair representative yeah
I spent about four hours on June
meetings with some of the
proponents of this and brought
that up what that that was going
to be addressed in the final
draft and it didn't show up
there at all because I think
that could be a major concern of
the public utilities that we are
having a made up of some of the
in competition rather than more
of a distributed model as was
presented as one of the the
purposes for community solar so
very disappointed in the in the
various people I work with that
that was not considered or move
forward through the the working
group on that up and madam chair
if in Senator if I can move over
on page eight line for where it
talks about the renewable energy
certificates.
And.
Yeah with I can I'd be happy if
somebody correct that I am not
accurate but the renewable
energy certificates are
typically used as the accounting
that could do them for how much
renewable energy is on the
system.
this particular bill.
Let me make sure I'm on the
right place online three we
talked about the environmental
attributes it says the solar
facility may over the racks
renewable energy certificates
maybe sold or transferred by the
owner of the qualifying utility.
That you may be sold or
transferred.
This is up to our Thomas so the
the
this would allow the subscriber
organization or developer to
sell or transfer the renewable
energy credits that would be
generated from the power to the
utility there is and the utility
would then be able to use those
renewable energy credits as part
of its requirement to meet the
renewable portfolio standard
under the ETA
typically there is a market for
renewable energy credits so it
would this this language allows
the developer to decide or the
subscriber invasion or the tried
since tribes are eligible for
these projects to conduct to
develop these projects and on
these projects to decide for
themselves whether to keep the
racks as part of the value of
the project to transfer them to
or sell them to the utility to
sell them to a third party REC
to sell them to the federal
government who buys rex so
there's a market for renewable
energy credits so this this
allows for that for the
developers to decide for
themselves where they will send
those racks and so that that's
why it's may I'm gonna get
flexibility on the developer or
the tribal developer side tribal
government cider the subscriber
organizations side.
Madam chair representative as I
look at this this doesn't
indicate any of the other things
that only talked about the rex
for these programs and gives two
options that they could be sold
or transferred to the qualified
utility it doesn't indicate they
can be sold elsewhere that they
could be capped they can be
transferred or sold why in the
world would a qualified utility
that that work has renewable
energy audit system.
I don't think it's going to be
transferred to the.
I would like to answer.
Yes.
madam chair and senator cells
the utility is acquiring the
energy for distribution to the
subscribers the racks are are
a separate quantity that have
value as you are suggesting
and in the states that I'm
familiar with utility typically
purchases those racks for his
own purposes to meet its it's
read renewable portfolio
standard obligations.
Madam chair and senator but the
utility have the renewable
energy on it system and when the
state is trying to account for
how much renewable energy is on
the system for meeting the
requirements of the ETA.
Shouldn't that help those
regardless of whether they are
or purchased those and this
doesn't indicate any other
option other than they be
transferred or sold to the
utility.
Mr are madam chair Science
Center souls.
One of the bill might be silent
about that the PRC can include
in its rulemaking the
possibilities of the sale the
PRC does have authority in this
bill through its rulemaking to
set up some of the details.
Madam chair I guess then.
The bill.
and senator I apologize I have
done the bill Lotta stated that
the.
Of the distribution of the REC
should be left up to the PRC
and share it with that yeah I'd
like to propose an amendment.
And I think you have that
amendment it's a point two one
nine three six eight point two
but it's the amendment on.
The the renewable energy
certificates for bill eighty
four can we put that amendment
up please member center.
The if the longer of the two if
that point two one nine three
six eight point two.
Canada now.
Okay madam chair up a point of
process.
In other committees.
When something.
New has been introduced in the
public does not have a copy.
The new language has been read
aloud.
So that the public is informed
and we are remaining
transparent.
So you might want to decide
madam chair how you want to deal
with this amendment parts of the
our new language in part to the
are not.
Thank.
Senator Senator I might.
Would you like to read it.
The the actually is about three
pages because they had to
include the entire section but
the actual amendment change is
about a paragraph at were less
if and so if you would like I'd
be happy to read that portion of
it it is on the the actual
changes are on page two of the
amendment.
Thank you please do so so that
we get page two of the public is
aware of your amendment.
And
this would fit into the various
places.
the generator is a community
solar facility as defined by the
community solar act in which
case the renewable energy
certificates are owned by the
public utility who is the
elector distribution system the
community solar facility is
interconnected.
I'm very briefly if I may madam
chair what this bill does is it
changes the language that is on
page eight line three that have
that the the rex the renewable
energy certificates can be sold
or transferred and it says if
the.
If the community solar is
connected to a public health
utility the public utility gets
applied the racks last meeting
there are working toward meeting
their requirements for Jeter to
transition back this is
something that helps protect the
utilities and it also keeps this
is an important piece if you
want a from that in to purchase
the racks that are being forced
out of their system and that
purchase has to be paid by
someone and it's going to be
paid by the other.
Up members Rapp customers that
are on that public utility.
So you move I will second this
amendment for the purposes of
discussion
is a discussion on the
amendment.
Madam chair yes.
As the sponsor we consider this
I'm friendly because
this bill was developed from the
working group.
And.
While I understand.
The purpose of this amendment.
And I believe.
It still might be possible in
the future
that working group.
Did not recommend this language.
Now the bill I just want to
remind everybody the bill has a
three year evaluation process.
And I have had other people ask
me for changes and I indicated
that perhaps at the end of three
years but of course this is
going to be.
Whatever the committee wants.
Well I'll go ahead and second of
this image is for the purposes
of discussion and if so what
we'll hear discussion on this
amendment I see two hands
Senator bills and Senators maybe
these are is this about the
amendment.
I see a Senator savant this is
do you have something about the
amendment.
Money is not about the okay
Senator smitteez years about the
amendment yes ma'am okay
Senators maybe he's.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator souls
The way I understand this
amendment is there's a there's a
a cost sharing tension between
the community solar and and the
utility.
and so this is shifting some of
that to the utility it seems
fair to me that they would get
credit for having a solar hooked
up into their system but I my
question is about the that
costsharing tension who who is
bearing the burden of of these
things.
so it in in the context of this
what about the
What other worker one other
burning of cost is the utility
picking up by allowing the
community solar to come in for
example transmission line
management and and those sorts
of things and and bold you know
voltage management on the grid
can you give me a little details
there and how how that costs
tension.
Connects to the costs tension
that you're addressing your
amendment.
Madam chair insiders committees
of this this amendment has
nothing to do with any of the
other costsharing pensions.
Yes in and madam chair and and
senator Munoz I I realize that
but I eight in order to make an
informed vote I'm trying to
understand you know this is
going to shift a little more of
the burden away from the utility
in on to the community program
and I I just need to know how
how much has already been
shifted it seems like a lot of
the burden has been shifted to
the utilities but I'm just
trying to understand I know
you're not changing that but I'm
I'm asking about the context and
then maybe this question goes to
the bill sponsor more it and and
I can be more direct with the
question is can you tell me a
little bit about who is bearing
the cost burden of of
transmission line management and
and those sorts of things and
you know I want one the expert
witnesses talked about line lost
in those sorts of things so
could you give me just a real
quick explanation of of that.
Thank you senator I'm going to
ask one of my experts to
respond.
Madam chair and senator
as I think I mentioned earlier
there are are no incremental
costs for connecting to the grid
in other words if there's any
upgrades that need to be done
for Act for that interconnection
the developer pays for that
as far as the grid itself goes
to the extent that are are the
distribution system is used the
distribution system is paid for
by subscribers in addition if
there are administrative costs
related to this this process I
incurred by the utility those
costs are also paid for by
subscriber.
I.
The subscriber will only pay
though the costs that relate to
the parts of the system that
they are using transmission
system is not used and that
obviously the generation system
is not used either so the
community so our.
Process that billing credit
process is set up to provide to
the utility recovery of costs
for the parts of the system that
the subscriber uses.
Thank you madam chair and and Mr
Gilliam out my last question a
follow up to that.
Is you know I I've heard talk
about
you know managing load and house
you know solar.
you you you can have different
different
No fluctuations in and load.
So is that how how is the
utility how is there no costs to
the utility.
It went when they're when
they're picking up more solar
when they have to do some sort
of managing of of the the
changing voltage load.
The madam chair us we're all the
amendment is that a question
towards me to me you know what
is this one lasted Mr Gilliam.
We'll send Senators meetings we
need to really focus on the
amendment so I'm just going to
if if are selected cels doesn't
believe that that deals with the
amendment will just have to move
wait until your work back of the
bill okay that.
You make your amendment.
It Gerry it does not okay.
Wait until we're back on the on
the bill itself are there any
more questions on the amendment
itself.
Are there objections to the
amendment and I believe we're
we're gonna have to call roll
call vote if there are
objections in your budget just
very briefly kind of clothes on
the amendment thank yes of
course and senator schools.
Thank you up and the purpose of
this is trying to make sure and
and recognize that the public
utilities are being forced to
take all of the the energy from
the community solar and they
should get the credit on for the
renewable energy that they have
on the system this is renewable
energy on the system they should
get credit for having that on
the system without paying
additional money in order to
meet their requirements under
the PTA.
Thank you senator souls
what I'm let's just do a roll
call vote.
Mr taken would you would you of.
tally to vote.
I don't see her.
Could someone.
Contact Mr take up.
We're taking a vote.
Current.
I'm.
Next door.
Okay.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator poke.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes like to explain.
Yes.
Thanks.
Would you it was yes and to
explain my boat.
Okay it's one no.
Okay Senators maintenance would
you explain your vote yes I'm
just I'm voting yes on on the
side of safety I think but but
still will have further
questions on what what things of
value have been transferred from
the utility to the community
solar I'm voting yes because
this is shifting something of
value back to the utility but I
still have other contextual
questions but but if I have
those answered I may change my
vote on this amendment but I
guess it wouldn't make a
difference but but I do support
the amendment and thank you for
that.
Thank you senator Ortiz
Senator is to provide it for you
for your vote yes I voted yes
but my the group that's working
on this is pretty divided so I
felt like we should go with that
sponsor of the amendment thank
you.
Thank you so now we're back on
the bill you you are and I
believe that Center souls I
believe you still have the
floor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee I I think with this
makes the bill better which is
the whole point I'm a big
proponent for community solar
but I want to make sure we have
a good deal of so I I appreciate
that up the other questions up
for madam chair and and senator
do rural electric coop customers
have a choice of their electric
provider.
Mr chair right now they do not a
budget by another bill during
the session passes they might.
Yes thank you and and that.
Madam chair and senator I think
they typically are considered
captive ratepayers is a word
that often use similar to the
ratepayers professional utility
they don't have a choice in
their there are electric
provider.
That section eight which is I
believe the last page of the
bill.
section eight page show Levin
are starting online eight
section eight
We talked about the electric
customers in rural electric
coops this bill will allow them
to participate in community
solar.
Mr of our madam chair Senator
I'd like to remind everybody we
did Amanda this and add another
line on this so no it would not
allow people to participate and
last the electric coop board
voted itself to participate and
there are several reasons for
this.
The electric The New Mexico
rural electric coop association.
Spent a great deal of time in
their own board meeting
discussing this.
And also with the working group.
It was determined that some
electric coops are moving ahead
with community solar.
While others did not have yes
the capacity to develop
such a project.
That while the right the rural
electric coops are going to be
you reaching towards the renewal
the energy transition goals for
our state that there was some
needed time I don't see lag time
but needed time to develop that
capacity so that.
Right now members of the coop.
Would have to go along with what
their coop board decided.
And madam chair and senator in
and thank you I I appreciate
that of my earlier question
where approximately twenty one
percent of ratepayers in New
Mexico of a long to rural
electric coops the bill would be
presented it was discussed that
this was to allow all the
Mexicans have reduced electric
rates that some New Mexicans
depending on where they live for
instance General Electric co op
if the board chooses not to.
Individual members of the board
chooses not to are left out they
are being treated different the
people who live in areas where
there is an investment utility
that is being required to have
community solar and so we are
not treating all New Mexicans
the state based on where they
live out of.
We know what the average
electric bill is for people with
with rural electric costs
compared to investment owned
utilities.
Anyone know.
We typically just here yeah
anecdotal evidence that the rule
electric coops are expensive
compared to investment owned
utilities but.
Does anyone know what typical
bill or differential might be.
Mr our madam chair Senators
souls I cannot answer that
question.
Okay.
Your experts no.
Madam chair yeah that might be
some some useful information as
it moves forward is what are
typical what elector bills for
say seven hundred fifty kilowatt
hours which would be yep between
six hundred seven hundred fifty
I think artifical residential
sites electric bills what would
those be for the investment
owned utilities I do have that
information but not work or the
rule electric coops and they are
often the least discussed is
being the most expensive energy
in the state of New Mexico yet
this bill allows those how what
to tell their residents to
battle yeah we don't do that
yeah so that they certainly
could agree to it and so madam
chair of its appropriate I'd
would like to appropriations
second amendment.
And the I know Veronica has it I
think I've got it here.
Can we put that on again right
now I can't do it until they.
Proposed that so then being
scanned thank you.
That's amendment point one nine
three eight five point one.
Could you just again explaining
at the amendment while we're
waiting certainly and.
This one is slightly longer just
because they had to put some
other pieces into it
I'm currently in the bill yeah
I'm on in section eight says
that the rural electric coop can
opt in which is essentially
means the law doesn't apply to
them unless they choose for the
law to apply to that.
That is the discretion of the
board and blast right here's
depending on where they live
from what having an option of
community solar.
This particular bill what it
does is it changes that from an
opt in opt out they are expected
to follow the law and allow
community solar on their
systems.
Exceptions and the exceptions
are that they can get a waiver
for five years recognizing the
uniqueness of our electric coops
that that they have.
Purchase agreements for buying
electricity on the open market
this would not require them to
get out of those agreements that
healthy or anything of that sort
of gives the PRC the authority
to review their opt out request.
And grant up to five years of
that request for either
contracts that they cannot get
out of work compelling reasons
and then it gets an eight it to
the PRC to say yes you are right
there is a compelling reason why
your customers don't get the
option to participate in
community solar.
Madam chair is this a friendly
amendment.
No madam chair senator I'm
afraid it's unfriendly because
this was negotiated with the
rural electric coop association
and all the coops also with the
additional language and I put on
earlier.
So I would have to vote against
this thank you.
Okay I'll go ahead and so
Senator Senator souls has a move
amendment although head and
secretary seconded for purposes
of discussion do we have
discussion on the amendment.
Senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair
By definition a coop is already
a community of it's not solar
per se but it's a community
elector program I've got
properties in Colorado that are
already under a coop program I
get to vote for the board of
directors I get to attend
meetings I can do what all of
the things that you would
normally expect a community
organization and they should be
considered a separate entity but
they're not the same as an
investor owned utility by a long
ways there they are by
definition a community owned
program and the I don't think we
need to.
I think the option is much
better situation if they if it's
to their advantage in that they
have enough citizens and say I
want to do that and I think
that's a reasonable choice that
they can opt in to.
It seems to me that to putting a
burden to where they have to opt
out and then they have to
justify it and all that it's.
Contrary to what we think of a
co op what they are doing that's
my opinion sure thank you thank
you senator Neville you Senator
us maintenance is on the
amendment.
No okay would you lower your
hand please Senator savant this
do you have a question on the
amendment.
The amendment okay could you
lower your hand please
are there any other comments or
questions on the amendment.
Okay with that we'll go ahead
and call the roll on the
amendment she's.
I wanted.
Senator wanted.
No.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
Could you and you still Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm sorry I didn't hear it least
indicate with your head because
you've muted yourself again.
Yes or NO.
Go like that or like that.
From the brace.
I believe that was a note.
Okay thank you yes.
And I can hear you all will okay
Senator Hamblen.
Now.
Senator Neville.
Senator poker.
No.
Thank you senator so.
Yes.
Senator Smith.
No.
Right
now.
Okay the amendment has failed to
one I'd like to vote no.
I did say your name I'm sorry
okay Senator funding is also in
a.
Okay thank you I think it was
pretty obvious since it was not
a friendly amendment I think the
line is already thank you for
the clarification okay so that
amendment failed let's go back
to the bill or I'm sorry the
Senators you still have the
floor.
Thank you and I appreciate the
consideration of there's been
some testimony that we need
monetary investments out in our
rural communities that's where
these rural communities are I
hope sometime in the future that
we can make sure what we're
passing bills that their bills
that affect all New Mexicans not
just those who are captive
ratepayers under utilities at
the end of the questions I
haven't thank you committee for
indulging that.
Thank you senator souls is there
anything else on the bill.
Senator develop.
Senator developed thank thank
you madam chair
Just a quick question just to
clarify.
Investor owned utility is has a
defined area who authorizes that
is that PRC or is it a community
like the City of Albuquerque
today authorized PNM to be the
primary providers so that
community or.
Why can't City of Albuquerque
for the solar panel already so
few animals the one of your
experts and to ensure that yes
I'm gonna deferred killer Thomas
on that.
Sorry so in New Mexico the
investor owned utilities
certainly have voluntary
community solar and so part of
the purpose of the bill is to
again create a level playing
field across all of the
utilities with respect to
standards and such from in
addition
like the City of Albuquerque
maybe using a tribal governments
as a as an analogy tribal
governments in the City of
Albuquerque share the
governmental status with respect
to authorities to make decisions
so could the City of Albuquerque
do it yes they still have to
work with the I. O. U. that
serves them PNM just as a tribe
would have to work with the
utility that serves them and
negotiate that that solar
community solar project again
today that I'll use can do that
voluntarily and so the City of
Albuquerque in a voluntary basis
would have to negotiate that the
City of Albuquerque doesn't have
its own municipal utility unlike
some other uses a cities in New
Mexico and so they have to work
with the incumbent utility to
accomplish that community solar
project goal.
That's kind of my question the
city of Farmington has a city
owned utility that covers most
of San Juan County in the
northern part.
And yet the local hospital a few
years back good in the solar
field.
Your hospitals supplement their
energy costly this season or not
with a joke or not but never the
less they were able to do that
inner city utility I just
wondered if there were some
reason why somebody couldn't
come in already without this log
to something similar City mastic
solar field.
Session terms so a lot of places
are doing this and putting in
solar what is our investor owned
separate from that I have you
all it just I'm just wondering
if we're putting in the bill
log.
Essential is already feasible or
possible maybe not.
Not easily done but I I wondered
why we do this bill really help
that much.
So madam chair I'm gonna comment
on that when I was a Santa Fe
county commissioner we did pass
a resolution to initiate a
community solar program and it
was not accepted or
By the need that I owe you and
we could not move further there
was an interest from the city
and the county of Santa Fe in
particular with our.
But when director version of our
water to try to do this and
while we have solar fields that
hi again we were not
In graced by the I owe you to
set up a larger project thank
you.
You got to get the permission of
the human existence or mentioned
that doesn't meet their
financial goals that it doesn't
get approved since we were at
that's correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Neville Senator serve on
this.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize for not and with many
of with me today.
Thought occurred to me.
Instruments the Kurds the rest
of you with the this committee
used to be made up a lot of
members of judiciary.
There was a mini Judiciary
Committee.
That's no longer the case
although I'm pleased that my
former professor.
As a legal colleague on here but
but we don't have the benefit of
the process that we once did
with the legal time to
scrutinize the bills at this
committee process in this bill
really should have that.
The the last thing that I want
to do I know that well as the
with one who is have the
experience we have with the EPA
and other bills we passed them
at all we do is create
ambiguities litigation and
lawsuits the just Miner down the
process and really the way what
we all want to accomplish which
is increasing the expansion of
renewable energies so let me
just suggest to the sponsor that
I really do I know that nobody
wants to have three referrals
but I hope that the in the
presentation either we have the
chance to talk more to avoid it
I think we would need to be a
lot of amendment either the next
committee or on the Senate
floor.
Trying to be a couple of
examples.
If you turn to section nine of
the bill the last section the
bill in fact the very last
sentence of the bill.
As it exists now on page eleven
says the rates paid for
subscriptions shall not be
subject to regulation by the
commission.
Rates paid by such crucial
eccentric but the reality is
that throughout this bill we do
exactly that.
Throughout this bill we provide
all kinds of language with the
rates paid for the subscriptions
are regulated by the commission
in fact we get the commission
plenary rulemaking authority to
do that and if you look at the
definition the definitions we
use the ball provides from the
three regulated by the
commission that we say right
shall not be subject to
regulation what that does of
course is provided through
education reporter confronted
with inconsistent mandate from
the Legislature were on one hand
we say rates are not subject to
regulation by the commission on
out otherwise we give ample
authority to do precisely that
and if you look at every looking
at above that in that same
section it says organizations
should not be considered public
utilities subject to regulation
by the commission so as a result
of their ownership but as I said
earlier we we've now gone
through here given a great deal
with authority to do exactly
that to the commission so I I
think you're going to need to
proceed with the bill in its
present form and I'll vote for
it because I supported in the
initiative but but it is not a
lot of work done in this bill I
assure you we're just gonna see
a lot of litigation over the
ambiguities and inconsistencies.
Well All I won't try and work
through them now because you all
have seen me do that before it
takes hours and we don't have
hours maybe five minutes of
today's meeting but I'll just
try to go through these very
very quickly for the committee
and for the the Sanchez benefit
and and perhaps some we can
avoid having to do a lot of
amendments and other communities
on the for but but if you look
on page two of the bill
subparagraph C. identifies what
is a community solar credit
right.
this is the right we were just
talking about so disturbed by
the commission.
Although we just said at the end
of the of the commission shall
not have authority to do
calculation for rates if I'm if
I'm reading that correctly again
I won't I won't I won't ask the
sponsor to to go through each of
these with me now but I'll be
happy to talk with you Senator
Stefanics later I just want to
try and identify the things
right thank in a quick way what
I see there may be some again
some inconsistencies or
ambiguities
if you look at the next
paragraph program being
community solar facility if you
read that to me that reads
awkwardly in ambiguous I can't
really understand what it means
is it tries to define the
community solar facility
consists of facility that
generates electricity follow all
of that by means of a solar
electric device.
But then after the promises and
subscribers to the facility
receive a bill credit for
electricity generated in
proportion to size of
subscription that is make sense
to me that definition doesn't
make sense to me to to define a
facility which is sort of as at
the beginning but then it's an
indescribable facility as this
is to subscribers receive a bill
credit in proportion I I just
think that that definition is
very awkward and and probably
could use some work
the the lowcost customer
definition program G. is based
on a community I'm sure on a
county area median income of a
look at that online I but I
suspect in many cases the
qualifying utility a qualifying
disability will expand beyond a
given County area will not be
confined to a single County
that's the case I think you may
run into problems with defining
who is a low income customer
where you're defining that based
on eighty percent any county
wide median income but may have
different counties of all and so
you may have within the same
program different qualifications
for different people so I think
that may be a challenge for the
bill as well
if you look at paragraph on page
four paragraph am This Is finds
a subscription and it defines a
subscription based on a chair
nameplate capacity for the
Canadian solar facility I'm sure
the name plate capacity hasn't
understood meaning in the
industry but there is no
definition for that is in the
bill and so we're trying to
define what a subscription means
my reference to ensure made
quick advisement there's no way
for me as a lawyer to know what
that means because it's
undefined.
The
the pair have been is
problematic because it defines
total aggregate rates as a total
amount of the energy demand and
this is another charges but does
not include certain things such
as the minimum monthly charges
in question but it says such as
so there's a lot of ambiguity
here because it says what it
does is aggravate redirect this
important is will determine with
the rates you're being paid but
it says the utilities demand
energy says or other charges two
other charges is ambiguous but
this is it does not include
charges of such as the minimum
monthly rate charges customer
service when is it goes on sale
or other charges not related to
the qualifying power production
that's always a big fight my
experience with the PRC is and
what is the cost of the
production and what's gonna be
included or not and then it goes
on the station should not
include distribution functions
that's always been a I think an
issue earlier I think there was
a good point made by Senator
souls the goal here was to have
smaller facilities not to have a
lot of co located facilities to
create a mega facility that was
a big concern in the last couple
years and I heard one of the
presenters say earlier that was
not the spirit of the law but
forgive me and and the other
lawyer in the room doting as our
chair lawyers don't get we're
very far with arguing in court
the spirit of the law did say
that again just want to engage
in and we argue to the judges
this is what the legislature
what their spirit was at the
time but that the judge was
saying no that's not what a lot
of sense and the law says that
them here again you have a
nameplate rating of five
megawatts as I pointed out
earlier we don't have a
definition of what that means
nine point rating and then it
says is limited to five
megawatts or less but you by co
locating facilities that
essentially becomes meaningless
and that.
Imitation is really just I
watched for a suggestion that
particularly because we look at
some program before that it says
there's an option.
To co locate with other energy
resources of the same thing so
you you really not avoiding any
way the creation of a mega.
Producer here and you're not
doing what we we think we're
doing what's right community
solar we're really creating the
competitive competitive
providers.
And then that's a likely could I
think of what would happen here
just because it's pure economics
economics means that we're going
to go looking for stories in
common areas to improve their
efficiencies and economies
there's no reason they wouldn't
do that so that's exactly what
would happen and we're not prove
we're not preventing that you
know the that clearly is our
spirit we're saying that's what
we want to do that's not what we
will in all by the legislation
and there are other other issues
that I guess I could spend more
time on Madam chair as I said I
the intent of both the bill
because I support the idea I
have I have the same concerns
that were expressed in
subsection five earlier by
others some paragraph building
which provides the subscriptions
can be transferable and quot
portable within the qualifying
service territory so that's kind
of interesting because that
would mean that the native
American in pueblo subscriptions
can be transferred within the
qualifying service territory
which would mean off the
reservation and off the the the
pueblo lands because it would
still within with the within the
qualifying utility service
territory even so that would
allow for portability of
subscriptions off of the native
American lands come into the
service territory that may or
may not be what we intend to do
but I I would think not no
that's not the intention behind
the bill.
the I'm concerned by
subparagraphs section six Hey I.
Before which allows for the
carryover credit this allows the
carry over from year to year and
in and I'm sure from month to
month such as an amount that
exceeds the monthly bill can be
applied to the next monthly bill
there's no limitation to that so
presumably you can you can
exceed that of that limitation
is limited amount so it looks
like it's a limitation but it's
really not a good carry it
forward all the way
through the bill so all all in
there madam chair thanks for New
if you all have seen we do
before on this bill a great deal
of time I don't know what to do
the service to the sponsor order
her goals are the many advocate
so I support but but I I'll
repeat what I'm again we we pass
these bills and we we just by
ourselves years of litigation
and all recall remind the
committee that even with the ETA
we passed up the first year
entirely
it did not pass with a lot of
work that had to be done even
after that first year during and
even then still under water
litigation and as I understand
it still has we gauge and
surrounding that ETA so while we
celebrate it here today we
should rightfully be proud of
our progress we have to really
ask ourselves if two or three
years later in the settlement
litigation gender whether we're
really making progress so we're
just spinning our wheels so I
look forward to working with a
sponsor more in with the old
committee and all my colleagues
to make this the best we can be
proud of thank you.
Thank you thank you senator
So and senator she meetings and
senator guy go to your heads up
to make comments on the on the
bill.
Senator smitteez yes thank you
just just to comments and a
question
Senator Hamblen and brought up a
really good point one just echo
and and get a a plug in for how
how potential G. R. T. reform in
some more business friendly
legislation I think could could
help here the the point was that
if you know the big chains and
and corporations and things are
purchased in New Mexico do not
contribute as much local economy
and there was some
Testimony given on either side
of this issue in support and
opposition about concern is this
going to just lead to out of
state solar investment was going
to be in state but I I think
that if we're looking at in
state investment
some good comprehensive G. R. T.
reform treating everybody
equally no special treatment for
industries and then we all
benefit together solar budget we
have a lot of sun here we have
and good temperature we have
wind
and so we're gonna take
advantage of those natural
resources let's create work
together to create Sen George
your form where were all war
those industries can benefit
so give me just a comment there
have one just one question
and I think the it is either to
the bill sponsor or the or the
the expert
this is this is kind of a
hypothetical but I didn't see it
addressed and I had seen some
written testimony about house
some of these communities had
had some hard times and failed
so my my question is if there is
a community that a community
solar program those develop that
becomes no longer financially
viable I'm what what would
happen at at that point in time
if they were to you know disband
or something like that.
Your back up plan for the.
I'm thank you Senator I don't
have an answer for that but I'll
turn to Rick and see if he can
respond because he has
experience with other states.
Our yeah.
At I'll go ahead and and speak
first and and a large I may have
some other comments to make
Madam chair and senator
honestly I have not seen that
happen and other states what
what typically happens if
customers are unable to maintain
your subscription which is
unusual because it's a discount
off of the electric bill so a
customer would always be better
off keeping the subscription
that and letting it go or
transferring it to another
customer
but the as I mentioned earlier
the subscription rate is very
high for these projects so most
of the companies are
particularly in Colorado next
door have waiting lists for
customers that would like to get
in on a project if there is an
opening and so if a customer for
whatever reason decide maybe
they sell their house they
decide they no longer want to
participate as a subscriber that
subscription can be transferred
to another customer and usually
there are as sufficient
customers on a waiting list to
to jump in on that.
Thank you.
I would I'm Madam chair Senators
I would add that that's one of
the benefits of having an
expanded rate payer base as well
for who's eligible to
participate as a subscriber you
may have some ratepayers who may
enter want to enter into I'll
call it a long term subscription
and so there are some more
certainty and subscription
revenue that would help continue
to support the economics of the
project but I agree with REC
that.
Community solar projects I don't
typically see a complete loss of
subscribers and especially since
this bill as Rick points out
allows for the transfer ability
and the ability for new
subscribers to come in when old
subscribers leave and so that
also helps promote the
sustainability of the economical
aspects of a project which keeps
it then operating but should you
have a circumstance where you do
lose all subscribers or or I now
subscribers that the the project
is no longer economically viable
then that certainly would likely
be.
Something that will have been
worked out with say the
landowner if you're leasing land
so it would really be no
different than any other type of
development where where the the
tenant but I have to abandon the
property
so you wouldn't you would really
see anything different from all
from my how do you how do you
deal with I'm no longer viable
operating enterprise.
Thank you.
thank you the missiles Mr
Williams I just maybe as a
suggestion
I don't know if if there's any
interest in it or if if it
sounds like the likelihood is
very low but yes if
unfortunately something like
that did happen
it that they'd still be hooked
into the utility and then those
solar panels at some point over
the years would the greater
could be you know could be a
hail storm or could be damaged
in some way and and and then
it's kind of it seems to me that
the utility would have to deal
with that so.
Maybe the likelihood is so low
that the bill sponsor is not
interested also think it's
necessary to add on a provision
where that if that happened
it and and I I understand that
but but just to
the suggestion there that maybe
maybe they would need to include
some language to deal with with
that possibility to tighten the
bill up and then just just a in
closing comment for me
I am I have supported that you
know so solar legislation in the
past couple sessions of varying
times
I
Looking toward not not voting
for this just because of a few
concerns that I've heard from
from the public in that
the community solar rates tend
to be more expensive than the
utility solar the utility scale
solar and I'm I'm very sensitive
to
you know we have a lot of
retirees have a lot of people on
fixed incomes and in my district
people who were who were older
and when we the and the
testimony given respectfully I
say this is that it's not likely
that rates would go up for for
other folks
and and I appreciate the our
testimony as to why the rates
would not.
Likely go up but the key word to
me was likely and I'm just very
very sensitive to these very
basic things like our
electricity our utilities are
are gasoline costs to people on
on fixed incomes and I I need to
be a little more confident
before I would support something
like this and I'm happy to talk
to anyone who'd like to discuss
it with me as the bill moves
forward but I I need my money
concerns really a swage for my
my constituents that are on
fixed incomes that that their
monthly budgets are very
sensitive to these very basic
needs and costs and so but I do
applaud the sponsor for some of
those modifications that were
made on this version of the bill
so thank you very much madam
chair cruciate the discussion
thank you Senators maintenance
Senator bagels.
Madam chair.
Can you hear me now.
Madam.
Yes.
I just want to make sure you can
hear me thank you madam chair
and.
Session.
Early on.
Our chair was saying that we
wish we get to see.
More bills but I'm grateful for
first we had it won through
rural these other than a lot of
dialogue on this and actually
uses for an learning experience
but.
First I just wanted to ask just
a what just give you a little
bit inside I work for PNM
I retired it sort of retired
from P. and S. have more
chairman over a hundred eight
hours.
Well.
The gas but so I understand some
of the guests issues similar to
the elector discharge
transmission and I want to bring
out the western farmers who has
our area of the state US flies
are clocking Lovington and
currently they've done a really
good job the B. fifty percent by
twenty twenty two and they have
letting customers know all.
Be it.
Fifty by twenty twenty four and
I've actually worked on some
solar plants here in the county
of the company I work with.
So we've been trying to
understand some of the
Of the storm wind energy one
thing I did find out is that the
average cost of the product here
Senator solche
faster in our average cost and
here's ten to twenty percent and
twenty cents per kilowatt hour.
And will call on the density of
the population.
But it just rationale I do have
a question if.
I'm sure if I ask you are Thomas
just a few questions because of
the distance the difference when
understand between a gas company
and or looking at it on the
losses on the
on the shore.
According to climate change and
she brought up a point earlier
in just twenty by could refer to
her after question.
yes senator I get Griego some
the agency Thomas can be brief
please.
Yes my comment about line losses
there is a recent study out here
done by Arizona State University
that a value waited what the
expected transmission line
losses might be given in the
base case scenario in climate
change analysis and the national
assessment for climate change
and and the there's already lots
of studies done about how much
line losses there are when you.
Transmit power over long
distances over transmission
lines and depending on the state
but Arizona which is a little
bit hotter The New Mexico
C. somewhere between twenty and
thirty percent line losses that
means a between twenty and
thirty percent of the power
generated at say the Navajo
generating station which I know
shut down but that was one of
the places that they look by
time that power reaches Phoenix
twenty to thirty percent of that
power is gone.
So that's the line loss and as
climate change becomes more and
more impactful as temperatures
heat up this study did an
analysis and I'm happy to
provide a link to the study the
committee if if it's if it would
like to see at but they
estimated that you would see
another ten to fifteen percent
line loss the hotter it gets the
less productive transmission
lines are so that's why I made a
mention that there's a bent the
bent one of the benefits to the
energy system the machine itself
in general with community solar
is that the power is produced
where the power is used and so
you're going to be more
efficient in your power
production you're gonna be able
to use more solar power because
you're not moving at hundreds of
miles and losing twenty to
thirty percent of it so that's
one of the big budget and of
course the more you have to
replace coal with solar first of
all the more so all you have to
produce because the capacity is
lower and if you're having to
move it long distances you have
to make up for that line lost so
the system becomes more
efficient as well remember the
transmission system is the
world's largest mechanical
system as a as a department
energy like stick likes to
characterize it so so the more
efficient you can be
I want the more power you more
electrons you get moved around
the more money you actually end
up saving there's lots of
analysis of the benefits of
reducing line losses and they
direct financial benefits of
reducing line losses so that's
why I made the comment about
community solar one of the
benefits that aren't isn't
typically talked about is use
you don't have the same line
losses because the power is
being produced words being used
in so those electrons are
dissipating as they move
hundreds of miles they're only
moving a few miles I.
And so the just the the the
mechanics of that are are major
benefits.
Well thank you for that Mr
Thomas in actually what what I'd
written down when you're giving
testimony was the difference
when ambient temperature and
electron movement and I I just
couldn't understand it is just
the electron with those adding
to the participate dissipation
but now that you're saying is
temperature goes up and
temperature increases in that
that's where we get our loss.
Right that if you don't mind I
have another question for you
though because in in talking
about of community solar in the
use of the power lines let's say
for PNM.
once they purchase it back from
the homeowner are they can get
any.
Encumber any the costs that they
have for maintaining their
distribution system or is that
still years due to the
The regular generation of power
I know that it's it's a they
make more money are there not so
it is wholesale when it comes
for instance from my house to
PNM I get the regular rate on
that but in my gonna have to pay
for any of their maintenance of
their system.
Is this on in time.
Engine pull except.
Yes it was Rick pointed out the
language of the bill from a from
an offset the cost offset
standpoint to the repair the
repair will get credit for the
power generated they will they
will not get credit so to speak
on the distribution system
because they're using the
district distribution system so
the right pair in a in a the
subscriber will continue to pay
for its use of the distribution
system and those rates as you
know are set by those are
terrorists that are set by the
PRC so the utility goes to the
PRC and says I'm as Rick is
pointed out this is a cost of
service so the PRC the utility
says it cost us X. amount of
money to operate the
distribution system and that
that X. amount of money is then
distributed across the weight
repair classes and that's why on
your electric bill you see a
line that says transmission and
distribution and that's your cut
your share of how much it cost
you to use a distribution system
that line will still that costs
will still be
charge to the subscribers
because they're still using the
distribution system so that's
how that's why there's reduce
cost cost shifting as well so if
the distribution system costs
more money to operate and
maintain the utility goes to the
PRC and says now it costs us X.
amount of money and they get
that that included in the right
so at yes the distribution
system overall cost increase
which they tend to do because
you're putting what for lots of
reasons those rates increase
across everybody including the
subscribers to the community
solar so they continue to pay
their fair share of the
distribution system costs.
Thank you that's what I was
trying to understand that
they're paying their fair share
so thank you for that
Madam chair and senator
saponification and my last
question concern is and we're
talking earlier about the
subscribers dropped we offer the
possibility and I just did not
understand and it's utility does
not if you don't have to take
over if there's a subscriber
dropped off the project and if
so I would assume.
I would want to come in to me I
would look at this
Representative may have to drop
off to the finances or anything
else would be the lower end of
of.
The secretary and I'm not sure
why a developer would want to
come in and take over the that
kind of call in and I just
didn't understand and if the
utility actually has state of
burden the subscriber just.
Never dropped off and.
Can't bill.
We.
That question I'm gonna refer
that to wreck.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I'm not sure I
completely understand your
question but let me just give it
a shot
if you're asking
if a income qualified customers
is a current subscriber and for
some reason R. drops his
subscription the utility you
would
Supplied that portion that had
been previously supplied by the.
Community solar facility it I'm
sorry is that your question.
Maybe so I'm trying to
understand when someone is
When you have a subscriber.
And and and there into the
system.
If they drop out then you're
saying the utility would take
over if they stop you and so
this production's then the issue
dealing with takeover of selling
them electricity at the is that
what I'm understanding.
Yes madam chair and senator yes
that's correct the utility work
that supply the electricity that
I wouldn't in that case no
longer be supplied by community
solar which is the same thing
that happens for instance if a
customer has a reason to
increase their load on the
system perhaps after decreased
due to lifestyle changes may be
adding an electric vehicle there
are many reasons that
our residential customer use
fluctuates from month to month
and year to year.
And madam chair and senator and
Rick if I understood right do
you say that rarely is there any
low income individuals that fall
off
Of the subscription is that
correct.
Madam chair and senator that's
correct with the exception of
that that comes to mind that
customers move from place to
place and so if a customer moves
out of the service territory of
the utility they would no longer
be eligible to take that
subscription with them they
would be in a different
utilities territory but the
transfer ability and the.
Allows the the customer's
subscriber to take that
subscription with them and
continue to receive the benefits
of the community solar.
thank you I I am I wish we would
move on to the boat Center guy
goes I don't know if you have
any any more questions but a lot
of these questions have been
asked and answered so.
I would like to and madam chair
I apologize and I'm ready for
the vote but I just have a
closing comment but I am trying
to a little.
Learn and a lot of the dialogue
I don't have solar.
And I've worked on sort of power
plant but I don't understand it
for the consumer side of it but
I just closing them up but I
just want to say is there's
three concerns the.
The cost increase to consumers
and businesses the lack of
oversight in the regulation of
out of state so accomplish the
cost for bility.
Be damaging small businesses and
that actually came to be closed
are very cold from the
presidency of that.
Chamber was stating that her
concerns were not trying to work
through those because I I and
what questions but due to time I
understand that but it's just
one of those as forward I'd like
to learn a lot more.
Senator about this and said that
you know he he I think system
have more.
Mints I just don't want to vote
in the positive and have some
unintended consequences doctors.
What what thank you ma'am.
Thank you so is there any any
other questions or comments.
Okay do you would you have would
you like that closing comments
Senator Stefanics thank you
madam chair I'll turn to Senator
Lopez in a minute but I want to
thank all the people who came on
to testify for and against this
and for every committee member
and their comments we will work
we have put to amendments on
this bill we will work with
Senator von case to and we'll
get one of our attorneys for
that advocacy groups to work
with him and me on this so that
we get the right lying it
language in there it's good
debate but we want to make sure
we get this bill of rights as it
goes forward and I respect
everyone's positions and thank
you very much and Senator Lopez.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much madam chair
Senators to fantexts I to want
to say thank you for that the
discussion suggestions
amendments that we've had
hearing committee today and also
from I think this is always for
me and I think for many of us
it's an opportunity for us to
have a good thorough discussion
and in the end we want a good
product that really help those
in many of our communities who
can benefit from community solar
so again thank you for for this.
Okay and then I have been
encouraged to say that well we
had five people register to
To oppose the bill there about
fifty that we're ready to
support the bill and we just I
apologize to those many people
who wanted to support the bill
however as you can see the
discussion was very rich and you
have good representation to
address a lot of these issues
and and thank you so much for
attempting HBs are very
difficult times terms of trying
to get everybody's voice voice
heard and with that let's I will
just turn to the vote on the
bill.
Running would you of would you
tally the votes we we need a
motion and we need.
And I I I think that there's a
couple people ready to.
Okay thank you thank you of do I
hear a motion to the to move
this to a for the past.
Over the past.
Is there a second I second.
That's.
By senators.
Two passed by Senators goals and
second I believe I can't by
Senator Hamblen.
So
Okay with that would you tally
the votes thank you thank you
madam chair.
Wanted yes.
No.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville.
Okay.
Senator S. hope.
Yes.
Senator so yes Senators meeting
no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
explain my vote.
Yes.
So that is fixed and three no.
And I would like to explain my
vote that by saying that I I
have been impatient about moving
community solar forward and been
impatient by all of the
roadblocks and I really respect
the senators to phonics and
Senator Lopez leadership in
putting together this task force
and getting all of the groups
involved and I also know that
Senator Stefanics will meet with
the various individuals who
raised concerns and
and get this bill right so with
that that's my explanation for
the vote now we are at two
minutes until twelve I don't
know I I will turn it over to
the to the chair now that you
got your you got your you do
pass Senator Stefanics thank you
very much madam chair thank you
committee members we have been
asked to stop at noon but I have
requested
The ranking member center guy a
ghosts and Senator Sedillo Lopez
to look at our bills that we
still have on the list for next
week to determine if there are
any bills that might have a
majority or consensus boat for
example and those usually are
appropriations bills or funding
bills that would just have to go
on to Senate finance at this
point in time
we will put the Senate bill
thirty two on next Tuesday but
yes the ranking member and the
vice chair can come up with any
other bills to hear first to
move quickly will do that and
it's not that we want to start
with Senate bill thirty two
thank you so much members for
our first week of Senate
conservation and let's see what
next week brings thank you.
Thank you.
Thank.
