If you're not at the witness
table to come to the middle and
stand and use the microphone so
that everybody who is watching
on webcast can see and hear what
is being discussed.
It has been our practice when we
come to a vote for the second
many secretary to call each
person's name with a yes no or
excused and then we announced a
vote at the end but this is so
that everybody in the public
understands what we are doing.
Before we go to our guest
speaker committee members you
all have received a an
invitation.
For a committee a conservation
committee dinner this thirsty.
And the details are listed and
we
Invite you and a guest and the
secretary the committee
secretary did a distribute these
guests today.
Madam chair yes I've had a
request in just to make sure
that it's very clear whether the
press are allowed to take
pictures in here or not
absolutely this
The entire proceedings the
legislature are being webcast
they are available to the public
and the press is welcome in the
committee rooms they are asked
not to interfere with testimony
or to disturb the testimony and
to be respectful of the sponsor
so yes the press is a welcome.
Madam my mic turned off.
And so I think does that mean
we're gonna listen to all
morning.
Okay anything else from
committee Senator Sedillo Lopez
madam chair I'd like to
introduce my in turn this week
from UNM she is a made a double
major in political science and
she gonna studies and she is
helping me and working really
hard this entire week.
Thank you and I just wanted to
let the audience know that many
people are wearing masks because
we do have COVID starting up
again among our committees are
committee secretaries the
hallways so please be careful if
you're not going to wear masks
state six feet apart that's just
a recommendation not a
requirement.
So of we have in we have
invited and we're very pleased
that Stephanie Garcia Richard
our New Mexico state land
commissioner could join us this
morning she has been invited to
come and talk about the
conservation programs at the
State Land Office we've had
invited all our speakers today
and going forward to speak for
ten to fifteen minutes until
about fifteen minutes or so for
questions and answers of our
speaker we have game and fish
coming we have the AG and the
water Madam coming and that will
be determined whether it's open
or in executive session when we
get to that moment in time we
have a secretary Kenny coming
Secretary props coming and we
also will be hearing from the
state engineer about the
Colorado River issues a couple
weeks from now so we're gonna
try to spend a little time
making sure we're on top of the
issues that we have to make
decisions about.
But welcome Madam land
commissioner and the floor is
yours thank you thank you madam
chair it is amazing to be here
in front of you to have this
opportunity to really brought on
the great work that the hundred
eighty employees of the state
land office are doing to protect
and preserve our state trust
lands that we hold intrust on
behalf of our beneficiaries and
just real briefly madam chair my
first few slides are really an
overview and background of the
state land office for those not
familiar we have a dual mandate
in the constitution to raise
revenue this is oh sorry yes
thank this is the hand up with
being provided to the committee
members and we will need to make
sure that we get it posted on
the web somehow later thank you
for.
So essentially we operate in on
behalf of our state's twenty two
named constitutional
beneficiaries and our our
mandate is to Representative
raise revenue but not at the
expense of the long term health
of the trust and the way that we
view that madam chair is to
preserve the the resource for
future generations and and it
our money that means the land
water air wildlife that are in
our care so you'll see of the
Land Office has.
You know enjoyed record breaking
earnings on page three it
literally that is what you all
are making decisions about for
the next.
You know forty some days.
slide for has some of our
accomplishments some of which
are conservation based.
So we.
In addition to that record
breaking revenue all talk about
some of the first ever of their
kind programs that we put into
place to ensure that while we
are making that money the state
of the resource remains
protected because historically
the State Land Office has not.
Focused on that piece of the
mandate.
page.
I have some of our agency
challenges and and later on when
you see our budget come over
from the other side you'll see
that the every single one of our
budget requests actually speaks
to these challenges though
amendment commissioner there are
certain things.
Besides the few mobile uses of
the financing.
Good point thank you.
So I guess the thing all start
with this page six.
on December first so.
A little over a month ago or
almost two months ago we
implemented the first ever
cultural protection rule at the
State Land Office that requires
archaeological surveys and
tribal consultation of for any
new surface disturbance on state
land and essentially we have a
number of our lessees who who
already carry out this practice
they're used to doing that on
other land that they of develop
federal land requires this
already.
But State Land Office
of R. thirteen million acres
only has a very small fraction
that has been surveyed and as
you know and slide seven shows.
The land that we manage is
ancestral homelands to many of
the tribes that still
live and and exist here in our
state so New Mexico itself has a
long history going back
millennia of of people who have
lived and worked in especially
work the land here and we want
to make sure that that cultural
knowledge is reserves.
another sort of challenge that
we face is that while we rely on
that billion you know record
breaking revenue we know that it
comes from a finite resource it
will not always be with us and
you all I'm sure this committee
here about the future of that
revenue source all the time.
And because I'm a my background
is as a public school teacher I.
E..
Diversifying that revenue
ensuring that we have continuing
revenue into the office for
future generations is a huge
priority for me understanding
that our classrooms.
They rely on those dollars and
so we have undertaken some
pretty robust diversification
efforts and let me just say and
and I I see this in every
presentation I give madam chair.
We don't think that our
diversification efforts are
going to result in a dollar for
dollar revenue.
We don't what I'm gonna talk
about today will not equal two
point four billion dollars like
we made last year.
But if we pursue multiple spokes
of a diversification we'll we
will be able to at least ensure
that there is continuing revenue
maybe not at the two billion
dollar mark but we will ensure
that there's continuing revenue
into the into the office.
All right so Page ten.
Talk about some of the ways that
we are trying to incentivize
our.
Conservation among our grazing
lessees and just Representative
for the committee.
Of the nine million surface
acres we have most of that is
least up with Ag use.
So we've got thirty five hundred
our culture lessees.
If you can imagine that you know
my office of you know a dozen or
so field folks is responsible
for that nine million acres.
It's impossible for us to be
everywhere all the time so we
are heavily reliant on the
partnership we have with our
thirty five hundred greasing
recipes to help us manage the
land.
And for us conservation in an ad
sense means that we are using
that land for agricultural
purposes so grazing farming but
we are not doing so at the
expense of that resource so what
we are have undergone is of a
few pilot projects in
partnership with some of our
lessees and I can provide more
detail on this you know it's as
the committee requires but it's
essentially practices that
Encourage healthy soil.
Encourage things like rotational
grazing to ensure that the
resource itself is not depleted.
And what we're hoping to do
eventually.
Is.
Be able to create carbon credits
on that ad land.
That we can then be monetized I
mean essentially that's what we
want to do so we're in
conversations with folks that no
whole lot more than me about
things like that but our lessees
have been real forth coming in
there
willingness to partnership
partner with us on things like
adding you know so oil additives
like bio char
insuring that that folks of
operations you know occur in a
way that doesn't deplete the
resource and so some of these
are listed out here.
As you can see on page ten and
I'll read them out so folks who
don't have the presentation
carbon capture credits add
partnerships soil and ecosystem
management practices
conservation leases and
easements we actually have a
partnership with the Rio Grande
return on a conservation
easement on on some of our land
that we're exploring and
mitigation payments.
So that is one way that we are
really using the land not only
for conservation purposes but to
monetize hopefully it's good use
and good stewardship.
Another way obviously is our
renewable energy leases and I I
talk a lot about those because
we have been hyper focused on
developing State Land.
That we see as prime for solar
and wind.
For renewable energy uses and
you can see the stats on page
eleven really show of the past
four years we've been able to
triple everything every metric
of renewable energy on statement
the money we make the megawatts
generated acres use the the
turbines built
So you have some examples here
pattern wind on the side of our
state.
Has both Western Spirit and
Cynthia.
And then down in the southern
part of our state page thirteen
with one of the state and that
is a solar project.
As you can imagine madam chair
the fires that devastated the
state really impacted State Land
pretty severely
but what we found is that
because we put a lot of effort
resources dollars into
fire mitigation of fire
prevention ahead of time.
The.
Page sixteen has a nice example
literally of the dividing line
between two.
Different managers.
On the right hand side is a fin
for us on state trust land.
On the left hand side is a dense
forest.
That is not on state trust land.
You can see the different
behavior at the fire.
Finally on page seventeen is
really what I came here to talk
about and that is our
enforcement accountability
program so essentially anytime
State Land Office of enters into
a lease with any party.
We negotiate the terms of that
lease everywhere except for the
oil and gas lease the oil and
gas lease is set in statute the
terms are set in statute the of
the amount of time the of the
the cost for the lease all of
that is that named out in
statute so we have very little
leverage
to.
Basically hold folks accountable
to those terms and what we have
done is look into that statutory
lease for ways that the state
Land Office can maintain
accountability with the land
that we manage on your behalf
and so what we've done is
implemented this program that at
any time the least changes hands
if it's a renewal if it's going
to be assigned to another party
we look at the state of that
lease are there spills are there
wells in need to be plugged is
there remediation that needs to
be done and so we use that as
leverage to get that work done
not.
Paid for by the trust but paid
for by the industry and we've
had incredible success with that
particular program.
You can see the metrics on page
eighteen.
So in the time that we've
implemented the program of over
a hundred fifty wells plugged at
the on the time of industry
fourteen leases reclaimed twenty
one enforcement lawsuits filed
and then over eight hundred non
bonded leases discovered and
those bonds correct.
But we can't do that with just
the amount handful of folks we
have on the ground we rely
heavily on technology for these
conservation efforts and so we
have a system called planets if
you've been in any of the
finance hearings you've heard us
talk about planet planet is
basically Google earth on
steroids we have a subscription
to the service that gives us
resolution of within three
metres of the ground that close.
We can do tasking.
On the satellites were if we
want to look at a particular
area over a period of time they
can show the change we can do
change detection so you can see
some of the examples here.
This is the Lee County example
on page nineteen pre and post
still.
Pre and post remediation on page
twenty.
Trespass detection on page
twenty one.
Of when the levee.
Was breached in Rossell during
the big flood a couple years ago
we were able to use our
satellite to show essentially
where the breach was in the
levy.
Now this is not to say that we
don't have boots on the ground
verification but this will allow
us to sort of sift through.
The issues on state land.
In a very
Efficient way.
Twenty three essentially what
this is a dashboard of the the.
Program is designed to.
Take the the data from a lease
so all of the legal land
descriptions of the GPS the all
of the surveys and overlay the
satellite imagery to ensure that
there's no trespass to ensure
that there's no unauthorized
activity happening outside of
the least area and so we get
these notifications and then we
dig into these notifications to
ensure with boots on the ground
that of you know.
That a trespass is indeed
occurred a spill has indeed
occurred.
Madam chair I went through that
pretty quickly but I want to be
respectful of the committee's
time so at this time all stand
for questions.
Well thank you very much for
being here and that.
Thank you have a few members are
Center came.
I have centers center K. madam
chair and.
I'd refer back to Representative
but of thank you for which you
for Land Office I do have a
couple questions so on your page
eighteen we have the van and
wells plugged is that in
conjunction with OCD are these
the state land numbers.
Yes I'm very happy to see madam
chair that we have a great
partnership with OCD
In really looking at the federal
money that's coming down for
this kind of work we have
actually partnered with OCD to
prioritize particular wells that
are on state land we meet with
them very regularly and be just
very much appreciate the
partnership from EMNRD and OCD
on prioritizing these wells this
particular list of the one fifty
five.
Is not in conjunction with our
partnership with OCD this is
this is literally from coming
through our our leases that are
so you know about to be renewed
about to be assigned and
ensuring that everything we've
got on that lease that needs to
be plugged is plucked the deal
where and I appreciate that
because I'm not saying their
numbers but I knew there's if an
Lea County were were at we've
asked those who do to take
couple wells out there
interfering in just
appropriations for a
construction company on our
property but the they're not
State Land of your across the
print from this but I just
wondering if is combined so my
numbers madam chair and
commissioner my next question
then is just think through state
Landen R. obligation for
education for kids if Holtec
were to go forward you know how
many billions of dollars that
would bring the land commission.
So madam chair I've I've heard
that there are.
You know a projected billions in
a number that I I don't have off
the top of my head
for the land office that would
be in the form of a land use
restriction because we own the
minerals below the proposed
Project I will say though
In looking at that particular
recommended use for the area we
see it as being potentially in
conflict with the operations we
already have on the ground there
and so we you know I'm I'm sure
that you have seen that we have
the land office and myself have
come out in strong opposition to
the whole tech pro proposal I
have madam chair and
commissioners and then my next
question I know that's a reality
but for them to be below ground
with our facilities Land Office
doesn't gain any monies from
that I we remove material so we
by we can't from state land for
caliche and we pay a certain
amount whether it's wages for
loose cubic yard and I just
wondered if there footprint
being underground would be a
minute more minute minerals area
indeed have to I would think
that have to pay for that area
and the movement of those
materials is that part of the
negotiations on that madam chair
the the money maker and I'll
just be real crass is the
restriction on removal of
material if they had to remove a
nominal amount of sand and
gravel that wouldn't actually
result in the billions you were
talking about the billions come
from the non realized
development of things like
potash oil and gas thank that
kind of development okay so that
Madam chairman commissioner than
they pay for now the
restrictions so okay land use
restriction is what we call it
it's called the work by and and
I've heard the number be upwards
of fifty billion and so I just
think that if we're looking at
the value to education we need
to use all the above this cover
Martinez talked that energy and
I just want to throw that out
there so madam chair I I have
never heard that fifty billion
figure actually talked about
public that's what if if we do
the calculations also we figure
that we're owed but I have never
heard any representative from
any person related to that
project talk about a fifty
billion dollar.
my staff will choose you heard
it here first so madam chair I.
Thank you.
Thank you senator again with
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and
wonderful to see you thank you
for everything you do
yesterday I had a meeting with
industrial scale renewable
energy companies and one of the
things they were concerned about
has they're investing billions
of dollars in the state on
industrial scale renewable
Is well we'll support renewables
that they're concerned about the
transmission lines and what
their fear is is that they would
invest all this money and the
kids get stymied in pursuing the
the transmission lines by
whatever
and so I would like to ask you
about the state land office is
rural in facilitating and
helping with the transmission
lines I also did ask them to
make sure you know it was
important to me that not all of
our renewable energy goes out of
state that and then our people
are left behind with no
electricity so anyway if you
could please talk about the
State Land Office role in that
yeah I will I would you know I
would be foolish to do that so
if you go back to your pages in
need that in my class twelve
thirteen I think.
I I talk a lot about generation
but truly the constraint on
renewable energy development in
our state and to really use the
potential we have is
transmission we just don't have
the redundancy we don't have the
build out we we have a we need
to a regional transmission
authority I mean there's so many
issues facing us here and the
State Land Office really has
tried to step in and be a
partner in development of some
of these things so while we brag
about this generation that you
see on the slides.
Remember we've got nine million
surface acres you got across the
line at some point to build a
line.
And so we have been in talks in
partnership with a number of
folks who are proposing
East west of.
Lines and and the north south
routes that is going to really
be required to to transmit the
electricity that we're
generating right now on state
lands.
I mean that's kind of always
issue though you run into folks
who are real supportive of you
know
non carbon or carbon reduced
sustainable renewable forms of
energy but they will require new
build out of transmission
because we just don't have that
infrastructure is not built out
to where it needs to be and you
know we we have a couple of
things on our side one is that
the western northwestern help of
our state already has sort of
the nodes of transmission to be
able to take it to markets west
and I will I will make a comment
on on our export of energy
because
you know New Mexico for sure we
have our own renewable energy
standards we want to get to
carbon neutral or carbon zero in
a particular amount of time we
also have revenue needs and as
we look to diversify I mean
setting this energy out of state
really will allow us to build up
those those revenues some of
these projects were talking
about will result in hundreds of
millions of dollars over their
lifetime that's not the billion
it's not the billion but if we
get enough of these
diversification efforts going we
can at least come part of the
way to making up energy with the
revenue we will eventually lose
so Land Office you know we
partner with Rita Ascensia
actually that we're talking
about the Synthia wind here but
there's just a son's Sunday
transmission line it's also
being proposed some of you who
have been around for awhile no
it's been about a decade in the
making
Thank you madam chair and so
it to me you're confirming that
transmission is is an important
state policy not only for its
chief in our goals but also for
For our income and so that
that's something that would be
very strong and is unlikely to
just be reversed by various
legislation or even
constitutional amendment.
Since the the constitutional
amendment would be consistent
with with that I also had a
question about
Remediation.
And I really appreciated these
these up pictures about the
spill post bill
Is is this is this bill that
you're talking about the Lee
County example was that a spill
of petroleum or produced water
or both all high school to have
to go back and and and make sure
I believe that is an oil spill
so we have we get as you can
imagine all kinds of both
releases sense built both
and so I I don't know that
particular example of but but
the substrate was but I can
definitely program for you the
reason I ask is at least some of
the data shows that we're we're
not really good and I did that's
why I love this satellite thing
that we're not because we're so
understaffed we're not really
good at verifying the self
reported spills and and reclaim
and making sure that all of this
bill is a reclaimed and so would
you say that's true or that
that's definitely changing with
satellite detection and I really
appreciated the effort because.
That's important I hate it when
companies come in and make a
mess and then leave declare
bankruptcy and leave that's the
worst but so madam chair our
efforts are actually going a
long way towards addressing some
of the concerns that you're
bringing up and we are in
partnership with some of our
fellow land managers and state
agencies like energy minerals
and natural resources OCD to
share our data with them to
ensure that we are really have
you know we have a handle
because like you said there are
there multiple ways that the
land you know can can be
destroyed and and so we want to
ensure that we're watching and
and actually I didn't we didn't
even talk about this bill are
still database but essentially
we have a place where either
individuals companies can report
with hotline that folks can call
we verify with satellite imagery
boots on the ground but we are
really trying to stay on top of
bills and statements something
that was not always historically
you know we don't have the
capability now with our
technology we really are able to
do that and we do share that
data.
Thank you madam chair that's
really excellent to hear it
again thank you for everything
you do for a state.
Thank you are there any other
questions or comments.
I have a question on the state
lands you have the committee of
our.
Many hundreds of dams.
And if you could make a comment
about anything related to that.
Madam chair so in the in the
Land Office we've referred to it
as that damn damn database
Yeah we do have a number of dams
and the issue that we are
finding is that the responsible
party for those downs over the
years that information is either
been lost there is confusion
about who has jurisdiction over
the dams and so what we've been
doing so far is just working
with directly with
municipalities and counties that
the dems are located in to come
up with reparation and
remediation plans because as you
know
the cost of of work on you know
sometimes repairing those dams
is you know in the millions even
billions sometimes of dollars
State Land Office obviously does
not have those resources but we
are partnering you know with
folks that.
Trying to prioritize the dams
that are may require quicker
attention than others so if
you've got anything that you
want more information on we can
certainly you know.
Refer back to addendum dated
database to.
To look at who the responsible
to the last known responsible
party was madam chair well thank
you I appreciate that response I
have been
In layman's terms bugging the
state engineer about dams and so
I'm glad to see it's on your
radar as well.
So thank you anything else from
committee members.
Thank you very much for coming
this morning with your staff and
you know madam chair I neglected
to lease introduce my W. W.
Stewart's certainly Stewart was
actually the previous land
commissioner so knows this job
very well he's our deputy of
operations thank you so much and
thank you again for coming
today.
So we are moving on to our first
of bills for the day and a
Senate bill nine Senator Novell
and senator Wirth.
And I think you have an
amendment but let's go through
the introductions before we get
to the amendment those gonna
start.
Thank you madam chair I guess
I'll kick it off several years
ago we started off with the idea
that we needed to put together
some serious funding to do with
some of conservation issues
around the state wildlife
forestry so in water all of
those all of the above and I
think it was five six years ago
we were talking about a twenty
million dollars appropriation to
put into a fund.
The economy wasn't doing so good
in our revenues were doing so
good so I whittled it down to
about two million and then the
LFC decided that that was a
little high they whittled it
down to one point eight million
and then we came back in special
session a few months later and
wiped it out totally that's kind
of been what the what the
history is but we we need to do
something about conservation
measures especially in light of
some of the fires and so forth
that we've that we've
experiences last summer and
To tell you a story of a
personal story I might to I've
got a place up in Colorado that
was surrounded by a forest fire
about twenty years ago.
this summer is called missionary
ridge fire if you don't know
this summer of the roads were
closed I was getting ready to go
into Durango the roads were
closed because of the erosion
come off the side of a hill
twenty years later and is cause
of that fire that happened in
two thousand and two.
the first year after that fire
with the road closed the rocks
were so big that there were
bigger than the engine in my
truck that that's how
devastating it was when you get
these kind of events they last
for decades literally so
personal experience I've been
working conservation pretty much
all my life in some form or
fashion I started with the HSD
everybody knows is in RCS of
work to the salt water districts
and so this is how may not know
much about some of the things
that happen the legislature this
is a topic that is near and dear
this is a bill
That would set up a fund it's a
two part fund
frontier my notes here to to
part fund that would set up some
immediately expendable dollars
and then some that we would save
and then utilize the interest
earnings over time the dollar
amounts are still being worked
on we hope that we get big
numbers but we have got all that
worked out I'll stop in that
senator Wirth the fill ins more
if you'd like to.
Sure I'm happy to madam chair
and I just want to commend
Center Neville for his ongoing
work on this issue and I think
if you're going to see this
morning excuse me just a second
I'm sorry for that public
audience of viewing this we on
Senate bill nine can you see the
number on the webcast we have.
Thank you very much I'm sorry to
interrupt no thank you madam
chair
so again this is been an issue
Senator bill's been working on
for some time and I think if
you're going to see this morning
there is a broad coalition of
groups on both sides that have.
Gotten into the specifics and
come up with a a way to move
forward on this bill not
everyone is on board yes that'll
continue to be worked on but
Senate bill nine is an
incredibly important
piece of legislation because it
provides for dedicated
sustainable funding for land and
water conservation for the first
time in our state's history.
And we've talked a lot in this
committee on caring a lot of
water bills and given the fires
flood drought the issues with
water supply I think having a
vehicle to be proactive is super
important and that's what this
this bill does also what's
exciting is that it doesn't go
try and rewrite a whole bunch or
create a whole new set of
statutory schemes in terms of
the distribution it uses
existing laws that many of us
have worked on and I'll talk
about one of that I worked on
with our current Forster that we
finally got past but just a
Senate bill so had trying to get
recurring dollars and it's been
really tough but what's exciting
about this is that it it does
create a new permanent fund and
the permanent fund will start
out of with the distribution in
an amount to be determined I
think the bill currently
proposes twenty five million
going into the permanent fund
called the conservation legacy
fund and then the land of
enchantment legacy Fund is the
fund that that the ultimately
that the spin off from the
permanent fund will go into
which has the distributions that
go out to the various under the
various sections of long we can
go through those
I don't think seventy five
million dollars is enough money
and I think quite frankly in the
situation we're in one of the
exciting things about this bill
at this moment is that we are
two years later in a place where
we have lots of nonrecurring
dollars what better way to put a
nonrecurring dollars into a fund
that then can spin off say five
percent a year this formula is a
little more conservative for now
because the dollars aren't
sufficient to get up to the
three hundred million dollars
number but that money that is
five percent of of three hundred
million dollars would be about
fifteen million dollars a year
that would then spin off to the
land of enchantment legacy Fund
and I'll just go through the
list of of how that money would
be allocated a twenty two point
five percent to energy minerals
split equally to support
programs and projects under the
forest conservation act the
fourth and water shed
restoration Act and the
prescribed burning Act and to
the national heritage
conservation act a twenty two
point five percent of the New
Mexico department of agriculture
to support programs under the
noxious weed management act
healthy soil Act and the Sloan
economy soil and water
conservation district act.
Ten percent to the environment
department for the reverts
stewardship program fifteen
percent to.
O. R. D. and I need to know
exactly what O. R. D. is outdoor
recreation department
with twenty five percent off for
the with twenty five percent of
that fifteen percent for the
outdoor equity grant program
seventy five percent for special
projects in outdoor recreation
infrastructure.
Eight percent of the parchment
of cultural affairs to support
projects and programs under the
cultural properties protection
act and twenty two percent of
the part of the game and fish to
support projects and programs
for the propagation of game and
fish and so many of these
programs we've heard about
recently the one I mentioned for
and endorsed in watershed
restoration Act took quite
awhile to get past I carry that
with Representative bandy about
again perfect example of if we
could get some state dollars and
there's huge federal match
that's available and so that's
what this bill does and again
we're excited to to move it
forward there are a couple of
amendments one that you have and
then another one that we've been
talking about that I think is
relatively straightforward that
I hope the committee can address
this morning will handed out and
I guess how to ever however you
like to do that madam chair
terms the amendments.
so Senators do you want your
expert to speak.
Sure.
Introduce yourself for the
record please for the record my
name's doing future on the
general counsel EMNRD on the
expert
witness for the agency and we're
standing here in support of the
bill.
Thank you very much okay so
would you like to go ahead and
talk about.
Are you gonna have more than one
amendment to tunicates Sen here
what we as we have one that you
have to share your sectors of it
giving you we have an additional
on that it addresses the eminent
domain issue that was left off
and we need to include that it's
just a basically one liner just
says that there will be any
imminent of this money will be
used for eminent domain or
condemnation condemnation of
property and equipment I think
for obvious reasons we we're not
trying to purchase property with
these funds are trying to do
conservation practices.
We wanted to alleviate the issue
to the thank.
So
Let's do the there's one eminent
domain and then there's the one
with the amount of this one is
these are all technical issues
that I think the agencies came
up with okay so let's start with
point two two four five eight
five point one.
And would one of you explain
that the eminent domain itself
this it's the one with the
amounts.
This is not I'm happy to madam
chair so what this does it deals
with the one through three a
deal with the conservation
legacy fund which is the
permanent fund up basically what
this says is originally the bill
was drafted to have money
started to come out of that at
twenty five million dollars this
changes that threshold to a
hundred and fifty million
dollars which again is designed
to try and build up a long term
fund and then what's down below
in two and three is just a
formulaic change in terms of how
the dollars get get calculated
out we can walk through that
formula if you'd like to but all
those changes are making is just
correlating the change from
twenty five two hundred fifty
million not necessarily change
the lower threshold from eight
hundred thirty three to five
million and then number four
just changes the cultural
affairs department asked that
the allocation instead of going
to the New Mexico prehistoric
and historic sites preservation
act I go to the cultural
properties protection act so
that's what this bill does from
that's what this ammendment us
thank you where does this will
go after finance of the directly
to finance okay so committee
members is there a a motion for
discussion.
All of the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Okay thank you is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you.
So.
It it and they put this so you
this this ammendment is designed
to build up the funding that's
why you're you're raising the
cap I guess I'm a little bit
worried that we run into a
situation where we have to
amended in the future or or
maybe that's okay that's what
you want to do because not
enough income is coming from the
fund that's what happened with
the as you know the early
childhood friend and I I would
just wondering are you have you
anticipated that.
There would be a good problem to
have been injured Senator we
hope we get there but at this
point that's that's our goal is
to try to get to those numbers
in the near future.
And then if I could just add the
way this is set up now if we can
get fifty million into the land
of enchantment fund which is the
distribution fund of the statute
provides for twelve and a half
million dollars each year so
there will be four years where
that number will be will be
stable and and I'm hoping.
That you know we could get
somewhere close to the three
hundred million dollars this
year that number's not in
either.
Recommendation either that the
the executive or the LFC I
believe the executive
recommendation is consistent
with the bill at seventy five
million and the legislative
recommendation for now I believe
is thirty five years thirty or
thirty five thirty or thirty
five but included in the
legislative recommendation is a
billion dollar transfer to the
severance tax permanent.
And I just think you heard me
the other day present on the
water trust permanent fund seems
to me we can do all the above
and maybe use some of that money
not put it all in the severance
tax fund but you some of that
money for water and some of that
money for this this fund and
perhaps other funds I know
center when you also just got a
bill that's got a lot of
different funds in it so there's
a there's there's flexibility
there and and we're gonna work
on making that happen madam
chair that really sounds smart
when we have such a such a.
The unique situation with income
that may or may not be there in
in the future so thank you I
support.
Thank you is there any further
discussion center gate goes on
the amendment is madam chair and
centers appreciate this just had
a question on and I didn't catch
this up there was on the
amendment a line the fourth item
line for for page four fifteen
sixteen straight New Mexico
prehistoric and historic sites
preservation act in insert
culture properties protection
what is a reason for that change
in the bill will differ
distributes the madam chair
Senator the reason for the
change we consulted with our
colleagues at the department of
cultural affairs the axe allowed
them to do similar things but
the New Mexico prehistoric in
this store excites preservation
act requires a kind of unique
partnership with the private
sector party in other pieces and
my colleagues at the department
of cultural affairs felt that
the cultural properties
protection act was a more
Useful hearing in your out
source of funding because of
because it allows sort of direct
action and again on the ground
effects of the should be the
same it's it's it's it's more of
kind of procedural complications
was there it was the reason for
the shift.
Thank you for that madam chair
and centers are you.
Thank you any further discussion
on the amendment.
Okay could we have a roll call
on this first amendment please.
Senator processes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senneville yes.
Excuse you session it is excuse
Senator souls he's presenting
his excuse Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator font yes.
So by a vote of six nothing your
amendment has been adopted on to
the second amendment please.
Thank you madam chair the second
amendment is simply prohibiting
the funds to be for being used
intimate any eminent domain
process thank you could have a
motion please.
Second okay is there any
discussion on this amendment
which is point two two four five
nine seven point one.
The motion or the amendment
basically says it cannot be used
for the purposes of eminent
domain is there any discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
Okay this ammendment has been
adopted with the same boat.
Okay we're now back on the bill
we are going to the audience and
to the soon I first like to see
anybody in the audience who is
opposing this bill your hands
please.
Okay we have to are there in is
there any opposition online.
And there is one online so we're
gonna let all three people speak
and then we'll go to the
supporters so we need you to
come to the Middle so that the
microphone can pick you up
please.
And this is a opposition if you
would please introduce yourself.
And if they if you're within the
organization or not please.
Chairwoman fellow committee
members my name is Bronson corn
I'm here representing the New
Mexico cattle growers and we
stand and respectful opposition
and I would like to explain why
I've had very good conversations
with both senator Wirth and
senator Neville and the one
thing that the hold up is for us
is this is a this is a project
based bill which we are in very
much in favor for this does
wonderful job are wonderful
projects for restoration for
water for land but the one thing
that I would like to get through
New Mexico governor's taken out
here is for the acquisition of
private properties for
agricultural properties and we
had you know we've we've had
good conversations about it I
understand the the economic
impact that this does for our
state.
But.
When agriculture have been.
Compromising ourselves to death.
And this is one thing that I I
firmly believe.
That this bill should not have
an and the department of game
and fish the the funds that it's
going to.
Allows for the purchase of
private property and we saw what
they did last year and then on
top of that the heritage
conservation act also is going
if it passes through its
committee is going to allow for
the purchase of private
properties and so with that
being said like I said I
respectfully oppose it and but
that is the only reason why
other than that I am I am very
surprised with the way this bill
reach from the way that it has
in years past it is it is come a
long ways thank you very much
thank you to someone else in the
audience who wanted to propose.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kate
ones probably I'm a registered
lobbyist with New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau we
represent twenty thousand member
families across the state her
involved in all facets of
agriculture we do appreciate the
work and the dedication that has
gone into planning this piece of
legislation and although we
stand a respectful opposition
today we do support pope
portions of the bill
specifically the money for the
New Mexico department
agriculture to go towards the
soil and water conservation
district the noxious weed
programs and healthy soils
program we agree it is long past
due that we invest and that
active management of our natural
resources we do have some
concerns within the bill as
stated before
the potential first these
dollars going towards land
acquisition we are very thankful
we working for concerned about
the eminent domain but we are
very thankful for the amendment
we met with the Sanchez and it
we just we recommended those
amendments on the issue but
thank you very much for your
time thank you very much on of
the zoom we have Howard
Hutchinson opposing this.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee how're
touching send.
The San Francisco soil and water
conservation district and I have
to commend the sponsors for
bringing this this bill forward
we are in full support of
conservation projects and as has
been expressed by the categories
and New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau we're concerned
with one of the distribution
targets and that is of the
acquisition of private lands are
currently under the.
Game and fish game protection
fund the it is allow it allows
for the acquisition of lands.
And under the natural resource.
funds it also.
I am target of private lands
we're concerned with the loss of
revenues to counties schools
other local subdivisions of
government.
And acquisition of land this is
a is a killer for this bill we
would like to see some effort in
addressing the language in the
target.
Recipients thank you madam chair
and thank yous Sanchez for
bringing this bill forward and
allowing for the discussion.
Thank you very much okay in the
audience here in the room can I
see the hands of the supporters.
Okay so
I'm going to ask if there are I.
Individuals who are not state
agencies who would like to stand
up and speak so let's start
right up here well what do three
on this side three on that side
please and remember you have to
come to the middle you might as
well come to the middle right
now.
Into the microphone please Madam
chairman members of the
committee Debbie Hughes
executive director with the New
Mexico association of
conservation districts and we
very much thank the sponsors I
just want to let you know that
I'm also a rancher lifelong
rancher my family ranches and
farms and all of the money and
the projects that go through
soil and water conservation
districts go on ranches and
farms in the state we've been
able since two thousand fifteen
through one USDA program it was
very hard to provide matching
that's why we started working
with senator Neville on this we
brought fifty million dollars
new money to the state we match
that three to one we think we
should be able to do that with
all these programs the solemn
water districts also can go
after money it from these other
agencies to help put it on the
ground with for setting and
repair and restoration of things
and yes we have to compromise on
some things because this is a
huge coalition we work very hard
we thank you so much for your
support thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee care about a cost
and from New Mexico wild I'm
really proud to be part of this
incredibly diverse coalition
brought to unity by the bill
Sanchez and by secretary Probst
we're comprised of thirty
organizations of
conservationists soil and water
conservation preservation
districts farmers ranchers
private landowners outdoor
reckon through this and
sportsman.
Everybody in this room is so
dependent upon water
productivity from our watersheds
and soil grass forest and
wildlife Health
significantly investing in these
critical resources is truly
going to shape the cultural and
economic future of our state and
just in fact seventy percent of
Albuquerque's water is generated
in the forested uplands of the
San Juan Chama watershed imagine
the impact of a calf canyon
permits peak fire in that
watershed.
And and again to put a person
into perspective do we invest
three hundred fifty million
dollars now which will have a
three one federal match or have
to pay another four billion
dollars to rebuild watersheds
and communities when the next
calf canyon hermit P. expire
hits so we're all really behind
this and and appreciate the
support as far as land
acquisition is concerned thank
you places like via the auto
which was a working farm and is
now still a working farm but it
is public land and help the
public trust and I know that the
acequia as are interested in
possibly using this to purchase
a secular ants that would be
developed and stay in in that
acequia
Purview so thank you very much
for your time thank you support.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron and we
stand today in strong
partnership with the agency's
administration environmental
organizations and conservation
groups and supporting Senate
bill nine and we think senator
Wirth and center renewable for
bring the bill forward New
Mexico is one of the only states
in the west but does not have a
conservation funds for land and
water and it is time for that to
change it is time for bold
action and we also there for
support the environmental
advocates in their position of
seeking three hundred and fifty
million dollars for this fund
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to that.
Good morning madam chair it's on
yes I don't hear real well sorry
about madam chair members of the
committee and the members public
so first well all I'm sorry my
name is Brandon when my
organization is just as a New
Mexico citizen so I have
something in common with the
committee I think I'm one of the
few people in the room beside
you all this not being paid to
be here I'm here because I have
four children and their seventh
or eighth generation New
Mexicans depends how you count
it and so what I really like
about this bill and I'm excited
about this bill is that I think
that it is a bill that has a
title that actually really is
what it is it has the word
legacy in there right so our
state motto is the land.
Madam chair and right so New
Mexicans I know that my family
is were products of of this land
right so you know when we have
this we have this huge not
recurring money right now and
the legislature deciding how to
spend it and you know you get in
politics you get this is an
investment this is an investment
thrown around a lot right well a
lot of times is an investment
like when I can have some money
which I wish I had that say I
inherited some money and I buy a
new truck I could call that
investment with us not
investment right I can go the
ranchers club have a lot of nice
meals I go to the Bahamas that's
not investment this is actually
an investment that will pay
dividends it will benefit more
than the people in this room and
the people that are worried
about things about it this is
truly something that the
legislature could do that will
pay dividends to my children and
their children and their
children's children's and what
the climate changing.
And the other issues and
development of the state of
being this is probably one of
the most critical things that I
think the legislature can do
that will be lasting and you
will all be remembered you will
have a legacy of being part of
that and there's not really many
things that you're going to do
in your careers and so I just
sectors that will carry forward
that fifty years from now people
will be talking about so what I
would ask is out of all this
money a hundred and fifty
million dollars is way too small
you need to double or triple or
quadruple it and
That's it let's just put this in
the bank for future generations
it's a great way to stack some
of this cash to make it work
forever thank you thank you for
coming today yes ma'am thank you
for thank you so if we could
keep our remarks now shorter
thanks.
No for that that's all right.
Good morning members of the
committee you have to hold the
button while the whole time you
speak okay good morning members
the committee my name in that
that a lemming is and I live in
south valley in Albuquerque I'm
here to testify as part of the
land of enchantment legacy fund
for far too long Committee
communities have been pushed out
to live farther and farther away
from our traditional ways of
life from our roots that live
close to the rivers into the
mountains by the way from the
table where people make
decisions on the future of the
eco systems our ancestors
protected way long before they
arrived here our communities of
their to have access to
community programs that are
actively creating more
opportunities for people to
engage in the mountains and
rivers for communities to girls
outdoor educators and even
mountain guides our communities
deserve to have programs that
are allowing are used to fall in
love with our planet like myself
so they see the importance the
role their role of protecting it
our communities deserve to have
those programs funded
permanently our youth and our
future generations deserve to
have the opportunity to grow as
leaders in our mountains and
rivers and protect New Mexico
for years to come these members
of the committee consider
supporting the land of
enchantment legacy Fund thank
you so much thank you for coming
today.
Good morning good morning madam
chairwoman and committee members
carry Romero executive director
of the New Mexico council about
fighters and guides we stand in
support of the creation of this
fund we feel that it's a good
vehicle for maximizing matching
funds and also will encourage
and facilitate conservation of
wildlife and habitat thank you
thank you.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
Greg Peters senior policy
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico here to stand in
strong support of this bill
proud and grateful to be here in
this other room alongside a
broad and diverse coalition of
advocacy groups stakeholders
thankful for the the support of
both of our sponsor senator bill
senator Wirth and the governor
this is been a long time coming
up we are grateful to be able to
throw our support behind this
and looking forward and urge you
to a pass a yes vote thank you
thank you very much I want to
note that online we're not gonna
have
that online is the rate of
nineteen and Pam Roy also
supporting will now go to
questions comments from
committee members Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for everybody here in the
room I see a lot of familiar
faces and and very grateful for
this bill
it I I do have a question but I
do want to give a little bit of
context that full disclosure in
my job I do a lot of work on
conservation and economic
developments in the connection
with local businesses and have
had the honor of demonstrating
the economic impact of public
lands protected public lands for
local economies including the
organ mountains desert peaks
national monument as well as the
value of the land and water
conservation fund and and it
just a little background mean in
some cases there several of you
who already know about the land
water conservation fund but up
for those who don't it was
designated nineteen sixty four
by Congress to benefit from the
revenue of offshore oil and gas
drilling I'll make it quick I
promise and
you have the floor okay and and
it Congress committed to nine
hundred million dollars every
year for communities to benefit
from this land water
conservation fund however there
were only twice in the years
since nineteen sixty four the
Congress actually up.
Actually under that agreement up
until it was fully funded in two
thousand twenty with the great
outdoor there was a bill some to
get you probably know what it is
the.
Thank you.
And and so but the thing is the
land water conservation fund
what it does is it allows for
communities to apply for money
to help improve their public
spaces so there is there there
was work that I was able to do
and and promote all the
different areas around the state
that have benefited from the
land water conservation fund and
this is where I see this bill
really benefiting for example
the Silverlake recreation area
on the Mescalero Apache tribe
that supports twenty four jobs
for the tribe others adhoc park
in Clovis New Mexico that has
public events that happen every
year that bring the community
together and bring money in
their communities in Los crucis
we have pioneer women's park
where I was having a wonderful
honor of marrying my wife there
are a lot of events that
happened in this park there
baseball fields conservation
areas all sorts of different
recreation areas all over the
state and all over the country
that can benefit from the land
water conservation fund but if
we don't have matching funds to
be able to do that our
communities can improve those
public spaces and so but also I
mean I do appreciate senator
Neville Neville who'd like we're
looking at really protecting
communities for decades to come
and so I you know when we first
talked about this house like go
for broke ask as much as you can
because we often think of what
we're protecting our public
lands and our public spaces they
were doing it because we're
either tree hugging liberal
hippies and want to protect the
land we understand the value to
our communities about what this
means to the people who live and
are able to benefit from it so
and I hate to just like always
make an economic argument but
that one's a little bit harder
to refute although they both
should be standing because we're
talking about protecting
communities for our for our
generations to come for young
people who just testified and I
saw all of you filming her
because that's a big deal and so
thank you for being part of that
process thank you for speaking
up about that because it's the.
Your generation that is
inheriting all the work that is
being done here today and so
we're grateful for you to be in
process of this so the the thing
that I think is is in senator
Wirth we talked about this in
terms of the land water
conservation fund but if you can
describe maybe just kind of how
the bill was like just the
process of getting all of these
different groups because it was
a Senator Sedillo Lopez and I
thought when everybody raised
their hands were like dang it we
should have had our cameras
ready because it was really it
was powerful how the fund was
created and I mean how this bill
was created and how we can see
the overall budget communities
so that was a long it's my only
question and comment so if if
that made sense I'd be happy to
madam chair what I'd like to do
is put it in walk it up to the
current bill and what happened
before and then what I'd like to
do if I could madam chair as
have cabinet secretary control
probes because she really has
spear headed kind of the
collaboration that went into it
the challenge has been not only
funding I mean we've had trouble
getting funding in but the
reality is getting a diverse
group as you said on both sides
to sit down and come up.
With the plan that they can work
on together.
Quite frankly until this bill
that really we had trouble just
getting everyone to sit at the
same table the key breakthrough
I think was was to use existing
programs and so to not try and
redo this or or but to take
programs that we've all worked
on various over the years that
are sitting there on the books
but they don't have the money
and so I think that's the beauty
of this is that uses existing
programs and then I'll yield to
the secretary about obviously
the negotiation who gets what
and which percentage was all key
and she's played a great role in
that.
Please madam chair members of
the committee my name is Sarah
Cottrell Propst and the
secretary of the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
and there are a lot of people in
this room and outside of the
room to get credit for getting
to this point today was such an
incredible coalition but you
know over the last couple of
years there were some competing
proposals and they were really
big really sincere really
important proposals one with an
agricultural Trust Fund when was
a conservation trust fund and
they added up to something like
a half a billion dollars which
which is a lot of money and the
governor and I am talking this
this summer the governor said
you know if there I want you to
to bring everybody together and
let's get a win this year let's
stop fighting and let's get away
so we can be and everyone
together this summer and really
talked about what are the needs
we we got together with fellow
agencies and said what can what
is your appetite what can you
administratively what can you
administer if you get the funds
we don't want to give you too
many funds and then you have to
turn it back we don't wanna give
you not enough and so trying to
to right size the percentages
was quite a negotiation but with
stakeholders and with with my
colleagues in the cabinet all of
whom were awesome and then you
know and senator Neville and
senator Wirth also forced the
issue and they opened a jacket
and said you know you guys get
get your final touches on
because we're we're going you
know whether or not you're
you're negotiations are done
either so it really took a lot
of people saying let's go this
is the year but the coalition
came together and we found a way
to fund all of the act and
conservation programs that are
already on the books established
by this legislature by the by
the legislature and they work
they all have different boards
and and processes there is a
track record of success of
projects and I'll just close
with that madam chair that it's
it's really building on a lot of
work over decades of setting up
these programs now let's fund
them permanently with this bill
and then just reap the benefits
on the grounds as you've heard
about from the testimony in the
room thank you thank you Senator
Hamblen.
But I'm sure that's all I have
thank you very much for the the
work that you put into this in
the thought and just engaging
the community center just one
quick comment the matching funds
is a big big deal here of Debbie
here's a show me numbers I could
reimpose prestige Walvis.
Three or four to one matching
federal dollars so if we take
you know a hundred million
dollars or whatever it is and
match that up three or four to
one that's a lot of money for
the state of New Mexico to come
in and fix some problems thank
you senator Senator Gallegos and
then Senator about this.
Senator thank you I appreciate
the dialogue love how many
people we have in support I I
did get a couple of questions
and I want to clarify
gun email last night in actually
on page five which I was
surprised didn't have an
amendment to it in on page five
last time I got a question on
the way it's been read online
eight of for the fiscal year
twenty twenty four and
subsequent fiscal years of for
purposes of the fund are we
looking for allocations from now
on or is there a time period for
the entry of allocations and
will stop or is it forever Mr
chair so yeah Mr Deputy no this
is this is designed to have this
continue in perpetuity and be a
non reverting fund and so the
the key thing is that the the
fifty million that goes into the
funds that's available now will
be spent out at twelve twelve
million five hundred a year for
four years but then the hope is
that we can get that one fifty
into the font the permanent fund
that will then start to spin off
money which goes down and really
the magic number I think is the
three fifty because then we
really at a point where the
where the five percent total
return on that three hundred
gets to stop self sustaining
that's exactly right.
I think that then in turn.
Of for later my next question
then has to go with so we have
house bill forty five that's
going that's I think because of
conflict this US madam chair
Senators if house bill forty
five comes into existence in you
can you look at the percentages
the twenty two point five going
to emerge if health bill forty
five comes in existence then
invert patient gets the whole
not not the eleven point two
five that would have gone to the
heard natural heritage because
of conservation act is there a
reason that we didn't just give
it to and more I I know they
have their hand in talking some
of the
people in opposition were
worried about the land
acquisition which I think and
mark would have the authority to
do that but I'm just wondering
you know in that house bill
forty fives out there for there
any discussions on how to split
this Madam chair Senators.
Madam chair Senator under the a
sort of automatic formulate
distribution EMNRD would get
twenty two and a half percent of
the twelve I annually so that's
about two point eight million
dollars one half of that so
about one point four would be
available
to programs under the national
conservation heritage Act
natural conservation here Jack
sorry we someone that acronym
again as the focus here is it is
were funding existing programs
with existing rules and
procedures as they go and it'll
it'll be implemented consistent
with those process sees so
review and approval boards other
things like that
but it would only be about in
any given year would only be
about one point four million
dollars for an HCA programs
thank you for that madam chair
and centers my problem is the
house bill forty five Maez the
natural heritage conservation
act granting nearly unlimited
forty ten work so it it just
gives me heart ache on how that
split is on paper now but if
house bill forty five goes into
effect then it sure like in more
cash control anyway insurance
centers.
So.
EMNRD has
expressed its some of its
reservations about HB forty five
in FY are that we submitted on
site madam chair Senator we have
expressed some reservations
about it again I think sort of
keeping the coalition.
Here in New and those
reservations were focus about
signing in and sort of
administration the focus here
again with the fund to sort of
states the coalition together
was to not with this vehicle try
to modify those individual
programs leave that to the
legislature as your working
bills and other things like that
and making sort of policy
decisions whether to support
house bill forty five and and
and acted into law or not but
not in this bill try to modify
and Tinker with those programs
because I I guess I can
Representative to the committee
I probably have a list as long
as my arm a little tinkering
that folks might like of
individual programs and
individual sub things and here
the goal really was to sort of.
Bifurcate those into two things
let's get the sustainable
funding in place and then allow
the legislative process to work
for future amendments and the
confidence that the legislature
can have is we will the way this
funding works it will be
administered however that guy
Act whatever's in effect now or
how it might be enacted in the
future thanks for that madam
chair Senators than here's my
last question and it just came
to the opposite opposition
discussion how hard and and you
may be already in discussion
with them how hard is it to give
them the to remove the threat of
land acquisition in the whole
bill the whole synopsis because
that seems to be the only
problem we have with the good
bill.
In terms of bill I'm happy to
address that and I think the
difference between that request
and what you just saw on eminent
domain is that with eminent
domain both sides agreed that
that would apply across the
board I think the point it was
just made by the general counsel
is spot on I've got a string of
emails for the whole budget
changes that I can assure you
many in the agricultural
community wouldn't necessarily
like to these underlying
statutes and I think the the the
devil with a bill like this and
the reason it the reason it's
working is because we're we're
not doing we're not opening the
statutes up and so that really
if there was an agreement by
everyone to to make a change
elector was amendment a main
we're willing to look at that
but I just think if you go down
open one door and all of a
sudden you start losing people
and on another side and we get a
bunch of changes and we're we're
into the into the nuts and bolts
and losing the focus on what
we're really what what's been
accomplished here and so I think
the point let the legislative
process work
if there truly are going to be
proposals to change underlying
statutes but that's not what
we're doing in this bill thank
you for that madam chair Senator
one last question I can do in
the last one I'm not a preacher
by.
Question but one more time so
forty go from here with this
bill.
This bill goes to finance and we
will see what kind of dollars
you get put in it and final
dollars or it's the one fifty or
something different but that's
we go that committed and you
know how it goes from there of a
house okay well then chairman
Senators admonish you that is
you get a chance to visit with
the other side there are a large
group in the state of I know
they come to the table you have
done a great job to to hear them
but to me that is still sticking
point I'm gonna vote for you as
a guest today hoping that
there's discussions as we go
forward because I see the
overall good I'm just still
stuck with them on that one part
I thank you for that then
chairman thank you thank you I
have Senators me etcetera
etcetera Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair.
Questions about.
Whether this is a permanent
funding not
You know the the
For our our definition of a
printing Fund so
There's a couple lines in the
bill says money the funds shall
be expended only as provided by
this section and I'm not really
finance guy the I mean can we
tell the legislature of twenty
twenty six.
That you use shell only expend
money in this way.
Chair Senator it's a permanent
fund in the same light that the
what we call the learn Jaga Fund
or the early childhood for under
those kind of things it is not
established in the constitution
like the land grant permanent
fund so it is it is vulnerable
in the event of a serious
downturn in the economy in the
oil and gas collapsed and all
those kind of bad things it's
vulnerable like those of the
funds for okay and Madam center
then that that's what I was
getting at is it in my next
question is was there discussion
of constitutionally protecting
this fund.
There was not I don't believe.
Madam chair and and senator.
Good question I don't know if
that's the secretary Schardin
had now
but I will tell you I mean again
this is I was in here in this
I'm not sure if you were here
when I presented the water
permanent fund addition which is
a constitutional fund you know I
think that if we could get this
put in place and.
Again it's clear that there's a
consensus that something that
could be looked at I think to
make it.
Even to provide those additional
protections
but again at this point this is
statutory fund as senator
Neville said okay and chair
Senators so is it okay to have
that sentence in their money in
the fund shall be expended only
press provided I mean is that
does that have any teeth.
I think as long as those funds
are available yes it's it's
appropriate as long as we have
those reserve funds available
and and the this technically is
a reserve it becomes something
gaps set aside of the we have a
hierarchy of what money we spend
first ever get the names of all
the funds but we have a fund
that we if we run out of cash we
spend that phone and then we go
to learn how to fund that we go
whatever into the early
childhood this would be a long
that sequence amount of okay
madam chair etcetera yeah thanks
I I I get the I. so that's what
I thought with that was going to
be the case
And it's no don't take this as a
negative I just think for me if
we're gonna say the use the word
legacy mmhm it needs to be
constitutionally protected and I
think this kind of frontier is
very appropriate it's one of my
just.
Terrible pet peeves of how we
treat our our tobacco settlement
fund and we pretend it's a
permanent fund and we use it we
even use it to measure our
reserves and say well we have
the summers are Senator funds
should not go toward our
reserves and and I don't know if
this bill and I don't want to
get off and all that stuff for
this bill but
I would have been involved in
any of the discussions of this
encryption this bill it's well
it's wonderful but if we use
were legacy I I would encourage
you all to put this
constitutionally protected and
and make it where because I'm
telling you once it's gone it's
gone if this is an endowment
fund for our land
it.
That we need a constitution
protected and and actually make
it a true legacy fund so once
again not not a negative but I
just think I I've you know I've
I've seen the history of this
legislative body work I've seen
how we've treated the tobacco
settlement fund
and kinda trample on that I'd
hate for the same thing to
happen to this bill especially
that's going to protect our land
so we need to think about
protecting this at the highest
level thank you very will end of
Costa.
No I would I if if it's not too
late I I would you got the big
dog right next to use so
I'll I'll.
All co sponsored joint
resolution with you if you want
thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez then Senator gave
us for the second time and then
hopefully we can get to a vote.
Thank you madam chair actually
believe that with Senator
Gallegos questions about about
the eminent domain that actually
answered my question about why
that didn't satisfy of the
individuals who were who were
concerned I am just thrilled
about the importance of this
fund and it was after absolutes
firing to see the youth in to
see all of these groups come
together we need this at at this
time we absolutely need it and
so thank you for bringing.
Thank you senator Davis etcetera
etcetera I just want to give you
some good news some in the
audience text me that house bill
forty five was tabled I did too
so takes away my Harper just
wanted some good news today that
happen often but to a I do think
that young lady to you only have
no heartburn for here because it
can come back and look at what
could come back this year sure
they could come back this year
to different Jack chair thank
you thank you I think we're
ready for a motion the past.
There is a motion from Senator
Sedillo Lopez and the second
from Santo Gaydos with the
committee secretary please call
the roll yes chair Senators
Fonsi's.
He's center that goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Sen bill yes
Sir Paul excuse Senate
committees yes.
Missiles yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
phonics test.
By a vote of seven zero you have
a unanimous do pass from this
committee as much as amended.
Thank you were waiting now for
Senator us to work on madam
president pro tem if we could
change the number.
We're now going to Senate bill
seventy to create wealth
wildlife porters Fund.
Handout for the committee.
Somebody wants to come and set
them yes if you put that set up
we only have one she she's
coming.
Let's give it a minute Center
for everybody to leave to
sleeping.
Thank you.
If they're the.
So.
Okay Senator the floor is yours
thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee.
You might recall that in twenty
nineteen we passed our wildlife
quarters act it was the first
type of legislation in the
country our department of
transportation and game and fish
work together of for two years
on looking at how to stop the
twenty million or so dollars a
year that we are expending on
fixing cars fixing people health
care costs but that doesn't
count the damage to wildlife we
have about twelve hundred of
crashes a year of the state of
they actually use five hundred
thousand dollars from the
department transportation budget
and hired experts and did a
thorough study they have a five
hundred page report.
Bring that today but what you're
hand out does it show the
priorities that they have
identified around the state and
the costs and if you'll see
project elements O. P. means
over past you payments under
pass so
This bill just creates a fund
for this project we have five
million currently in the budget
I'm actually trying to get them
to pick that up so we can do at
least one of these projects it
would take another forty million
issue C. but that's still what
we're trying to do there's lots
of money federally but there's
strings attached and it requires
a state match some of the state
matches are small some of them
are more significant this bill
would create a way for us to
show that we do want to state
match if you'll come Page three
lines three and four to provide
money as required by federal
grant programs related to
wildlife quarter projects.
I am really proud of these two
state agencies stated.
Massive impact full town halls
around the state that with the
tribes and the nation's
homeowners Senator a they
brought in folks so to me this
is very exciting to think that
we're we're really on the
forefront of this we're more
ready I think than almost any
other state to go after federal
money I'm hoping that we will do
the first project ourselves we
have significant amount of money
for not going to use that for
the first project no it'll be
it'll be it'll be depressing.
Any event
because these are projects where
you can let's do two or three
million this year and then well
let's do another two or three
million the next year and then
the next year it's just not
really going to work like that
so this bill is just designed to
have this be the the conduit for
funding to try to get more
federal funding also I think
twenty million years significant
this is really under counted
also the other states that are
working on this with us tell us
that that's that's just the ones
we know about there are plenty
of ones that we don't so I have
with me Michael tax who helped
me pass this two years ago he
then he was with the defenders
of wildlife now he's with while
lance Network right.
And that beautiful bolo is there
local so if I can have him to
speak a little bit he really has
worked behind the scenes
Department of game and fish and
transportation okay so before we
start with you I want to
reiterate for the webcast
audience from Senate bill
seventy two creating the
wildlife porters Fund so please
go ahead and re introduce
yourself yes thank you madam
chair members of the committee
Michael to acts what some
program director with wildlands
network as a senator said on it
was actually a seven hundred
page report it was extremely
thorough and as a centre said it
puts us ahead of many other
states having done this work
when applying for federal grants
one of which is coming online
sometime next month it'll be
three hundred fifty million
dollars made available over five
years to implement wildlife
crossings across the country on
the
and much like other programs
that require match this is an
eighty twenty match so fifty
million dollars could leverage
an additional two hundred
million dollars in to New Mexico
to build these kinds of projects
and because of the action plan
we are way ahead of what other
states are doing in other states
where I'm working I regularly
point to New Mexico as an
example to follow in this is
work that do you T. and game and
fish have done previously
senator bill in your district on
US five fifty round as tech
they've done some fencing work
there that has been extremely
effective Senator metes in your
district and tears canyon that
is the first project that DOT
did that continues to keep your
off I. forty there and then
Senator phonics one of the
priority projects I twenty five
at Glorieta pass is one of the
eleven priority projects
included in the report I imagine
from driving that stretch of
highway you see plenty of deer
elk bear pretty much everything
crossing from the Kalisto basin
up to.
The Pecos wilderness so this
legislation on to create this
fund would continue to put New
Mexico ahead of the game
compared to other western states
in implementing these projects
thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in the audience
here to oppose this bill.
And we'll get to you in anybody
in the audience here to support
this bill.
I do we have opponents and
supporters online support okay
let's start with the opponent go
ahead.
Chairman of the committee we
need you to come to the Middle
all the might please you have to
press down the button the whole
time okay chairman Philip
Committee members my name is
Bronson corn on here with the
New Mexico cattle growers we
are.
We are we have more questions
than anything.
So we're standing in opposition
for the for now until we can get
some some questions answered
first of all if if a private
landowner gives permission to
build a wildlife fence.
And livestock gets out here on
the highway who's going to be
responsible for that who is
going to be responsible for the
upkeep and repairs on these
fences in these corridors.
Now what is the definition of
the private land conservation
efforts related to section B.
subsection H. at the top of page
three.
And since this bill was passed
in two thousand nineteen what
are the current wildlife
corridor projects that are
already on the list.
And who is responsible for
getting all the required
approvals for doing the projects
on federally allocated lands
whenever it comes to the drew
state trust lands you have to go
through and get all our clients
and the cultural property
studies done any any federal
land you have to get the R.
clearances done wondering who's
who's gonna be responsible for
doing all this and with that
being said it's.
Where I stand I appreciate thank
you very much is there any other
opposition in the room.
Okay let's hear from two people
on each side supporters to on
this site please come to the
middle.
Needed to hold the microphone to
the public can hear.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee of the event a
cost of New Mexico out thank
thank you the Senator for
sponsoring this excellent bill
last winter I was driving from
Santa Fe to Talis at night
Low visibility snow on the road
I had a cow elk going about
sixty five miles an hour the LFC
bounced off of my car likely
should income over the hood she
went into the adjacent lane I
had a big four wheel drive truck
come around me because you
didn't want to rear end me he
ran over the Alcon almost
flipped he went into the
oncoming traffic and almost hit
the on going on coming traffic.
A long story short I didn't have
my family with me at circuits
has been a little bit different
adequate come through my
window and kill me
and it would possibly killed a
bunch of other people in the
incident this happens multiple
times every day all over New
Mexico terrifying stuff almost
having me the other day near to
more in the other Sunday I think
they all have it out for me
That you know invest what is one
life worth right what this is
such a simple thing and there's
eleven projects identify these
projects are very very expensive
and again investing in these
things long term will save many
many lives and it will increase
the health of the of the
wildlife that are dependent on
oftentimes crossing these these
high waisted to get to water or
to feed things like that so
thank you all for your support
thank you Garrett if there are
any other speakers that need to
be lining up if I wasn't clear
please come forward.
total person at the right.
You have to hold the button the
whole time okay madam chair at
thank you senator students to
refer bringing this bill forward
and she's been working for many
years on this issue this is a
public safety issue for people
it is also for the animals to
Deborah Condit with animal
protection I'm sorry sorry about
that Rep Deborah kind of animal
protection voters of New Mexico
we stand in strong support of
this bill love to see some real
money get a good amount of money
going into those funds so that
we could deal with these issues
like that like the center said
at one million two million here
and there is going to help but
if we can get large amounts to
really address the bigger issues
across the state that would be
wonderful thank you madam chair
thank you next.
Madam chair members the
committee Brian bird and
southwest are presented for
defenders of wildlife we
Representative eight thousand
members and supporters here in
the state of New Mexico
defenders well if it's been
deeply involved in this issue
for many years and we've been
working with uh Senator pro
tem's Stewart and she's been
just an incredible leader on
this this is a human safety
issue it's a wildlife safety
issue and it's really great to
see New Mexico leading the way
on this and we really are an
example for other states and
I'll just finish by saying there
will be a quite a bit of federal
money coming down through the
infrastructure act this money
will help to match and put us in
a position to really make our
highways safer so thank you all
very much for considering this
bill thank you.
Good morning it seems turn just
because because a rural
landowner and someone who
encounters wildlife every day
coming into town and I've seen
so many horrific accidents that
of as Garrett said it is truly
of a problem that we need to
solve I think just one factoid
that might be helpful there is
an estimated five million
animals that are killed every
year on New Mexico rose five
million that includes everything
that includes everything from
the snakes to the owls to the
the bird strikes to the LFC
strikes in includes horses and
cattle as well I've seen two
horses killed by one so my who
just simply could not.
Navigate around them they had
wandered on to the road so the
bills is really a way of
providing enough money even a
one good over past in the right
place like the ones on the road
up to Cuba on I fifty they make
a huge difference those animals
have a safe way to get under
that road and not be hit so
please do give them more money
this is a wonderful they'll and
I can't believe how much older
all of us who've been working on
this all right this started
about ten twelve years ago now
so thank you thank you very much
you're going to have one more
from this audience and I have
some people on zoom
please go ahead.
And madam chair my name is
Victor Marshall I stand in
support of this bill and the
earlier bills that been heard
for land acquisition
about thirty years ago I was a
state senator and I sponsored
the national natural lands
protection act which is still on
the books and there have been a
few acquisitions but not many
and not what I like about this
is of course there's money to
advance several pieces of
legislation it wants this bill
Senate bill and senator Wirth
bills so it's been a long time
but it'll be a long time in the
future so thank you very much
for moving this forward thank
you senator and the center and I
served together there's thirty
years ago so we have.
Is a Barbara Khalif.
Thank you in on mute yourself
and make your comment please.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico the
league supports the conservation
and protection of wildlife and
their habitats the contribution
they make toward the health and
sustainability of the
environment we support this bill
and thank you very much thank
you for.
Thank you so much and thank you
everyone for coming so we're not
to committee members comments
questions Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and and Michael you
know I've worked together on
other public lands issues and so
it's great to see you here in
this capacity the question I
have is do you know if quarters
like this help increase the
animal population may address
this but I'm just kind of
wondering because I'm thinking
of of of gas right now as a an
avid outdoorsman is someone
right if that if there are
studies that show that these
types of quarters help increase
our our wild animal populations.
madam chair and senator Unser
first and then I clicked so we
certainly have evidence and
other states and Canada who is
the leader in the over passes on
Arizona it's a huge percentage
that they think they're saving
from death that they do better
counting them we do impact we're
using Arizona's cameras in our
under passes so that certainly
what the research and evidence
shows.
And madam chair senator I'm not
familiar with any specific
studies from New Mexico open in
Colorado I know that as many
deer are killed by hunters as
are killed on roadways so if you
think about tag allocations
which you know another hot topic
we won't get into today but if
you're you know if you're
talking about as many animals
being killed on roadways as our
there are opportunities for
sportsmen it's certainly large
impact from that perspective.
Great thank you and and it's not
to by all means I mean if you
know the priority here is that
people and wildlife lives are
are really the main point of
this conversation but I I think
would be foolish not to take
advantage of the availability of
federal funds and is in the
conversation before we have that
opportunity as well and
investing in that we're looking
at not only long term
sustainability if we invest in
this but we're looking at other
opportunities to bring more
people to our state you know
when we see I think on social
media the bridges for wildlife
and all these different
countries and communities that
are doing this I do feel that
it's something that is an
attraction that will bring
people to our state but will
also help are outfitting
industry if there are indeed
more wildlife there and I'd be
curious to you know eventually
as we we do this but it it
seems.
Of a no brainer on this in terms
of how we with our our outdoor
are outfitting industry in just
our outdoor industry involved in
general we'll be able to benefit
from this and so I thank you for
bringing this bill and I offer
my full support.
Madam Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair this is a
really exciting and excellent
bill and I'm delighted to
support it I just have a few
questions that were in the in
the analysis that I'm just kind
of interesting whether you're
gonna dress more whether you you
think that not not not important
in the first one is a state let
State Land Office couldn't the
concern that they wanted to make
sure that consultation with
their office was required it
says the projects under adjacent
to state trust land to ensure
the effectiveness of efforts on
a landscape level
so.
Doesn't that happen now.
Madam chair Senator I I think so
it does mean these are two
really good agencies department
transportation well funded game
and fish oil funded not from the
general fund they worked
together very well and they work
with others well they've
collaborated with the tribes
they collaborate with landowners
date they do the work on this so
I'll certainly flag that for
them but I I think that's
already happening thank you that
was my expectation has well that
that that that would happen but
it was a concern that I I
thought should so to be aired
the other thing that they said
that that seems to me is
included in the bill they wanted
they wanted whether vegetated
over passes a wide underpasses
should be listed has authorized
and I my thought is is yes right
because it's it's the language
is broad enough to include that
isn't is that correct madam
chair of Senator absolutely when
I think of overpasses you know
if you see any of them that are
currently I mean it's education
I mean they're over passes not
just for big game but for
everybody I mean you see
raccoons skunks and everything
that uses that if they're done
right if they're done well and
the with this cost they ought to
be done well right.
Absolutely of then president and
madam chair the the and then the
other thing and I think you and
I think that this is implicit in
the bill or included in the bill
it says that the bill should
include evaluation of
implemented projects has an
authorized cost and again I
mentioned that the
transportation department
reviews of the effectiveness of
the projects that's why we do
such a good job and madam chair
I can just say we've we're
requiring them to report to us
starting in twenty twenty four
how did they spend the money if
we can get money in their fund
House it working not only in
accounting the listing of the
projects and so they'll have to
do their own evaluation and
they'll have to present that to
us every year.
Thank you as I said this is a
wonderful bill and will increase
resources to our state and just
do wonderful things for state
thank you and thank you senator
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair pro tem thank you
for this bill talked gentleman
yesterday and I was just
wondering and you made a
statement that would be
reporting twenty four and then
be on so I guess what the way I
understand this the DOT would be
able to go out in a value
waiting area to see if they just
muted fencing and or the
crossing and then that's where
you come up with these eleven
projects so they've done the
valuation do we know of any
areas that they have gone
through madam chair and then pro
tempore were it's just fencing
only or do they prefer the
actual crossing.
So madam chair the seven hundred
page report has all of that
detail and they hired experts to
do it and if you see on the
project elements these are the
eleven priorities this is where
the majority of the accidents
the loss of life loss of
wildlife loss of vehicles is
happening so there are places
where you don't need an overpass
or underpass there are other
methods and their report is
filled with that they've already
done that now before they do
each one of course I'm sure
they'll have to do other kind of
design etcetera this bill
certainly says the funds can be
used for that so
it I I haven't read the whole
pages but it's pretty amazing
that this work has already been
done all over the state
Madam chairman of pro tem I
appreciate that and I like the
idea of you're looking or
they're looking at underpasses
also so and moving cattle when
we cross the highway we have to
call the county usually comes
out in blockships we can cross I
would connect stops traffic for
long periods of time the under
passes I don't know how will the
overpass because on freight
heights but the under passes
work really well for Katelin
portion of last question common
and make madam chair and
approached him so my mom lived
in Clayton and I used to go to
Clayton and then come up here
for committee meetings in
between Clayton and Springer I
personally have killed seven
dear not by choice the to the
white truck and see the like
light and for some reason they
run to the light in the talks
about signage the if you go down
that road outside of Springer
the sides are facing you their
face not work this is David guy
egos crossing just so that
you're not coming so Madam think
madam chair Senators thank you.
Thank you senator Neville.
Just just real quick
Your mate is mentioned north of
Aztec there's there's some.
Fencing and so forth most of the
cross there's no overpass
crossings that there it's all
under the highway and the use
natural under passes south of
Cuba between their incentive
cedar there's some wildlife
crossings those are all existing
under you know Arroyo's
basically and it seems like we
could do a lot just by.
Doing some.
You know directed fencing and
then using the existing
underpasses without having to
build the like the picture shows
the expense to go over press
I've driven some communities up
in Canada and New Mexico and
Colorado those things have to
cost millions of dollars and I
think we can do it tremendous
amount just by using natural
drainages and fencing and so
forth just just COVID thought
madam chair if you if you
noticed project elements there's
a lot more under passes.
I think the overpasses are just
in those areas where you can't
do an underpass and where it's
most of the damage is done so
and the and their fencing and
lighting they're already doing
that the the one that was I
talked about Mike talked about
and Senators metes district on
campus that was done through the
while friends through three
while friends memorials over
eight years so they're not
they're not going for the fancy
stuff when they can use thanks
that work both of these agencies
I think are committed to having
having good but reasonable
projects so I hear what you're
saying but start that's is
already being done it doesn't
work as well so.
I think they do a good job of
juggling thank you Madam thank
you.
What's the plan committee and if
you do pass there's a motion for
to pass in the second from
Senator Hamblen.
Could the Committee secretary
please call the roll Senator
boxes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator have one yes Senate Bill
yes.
Well used Senators committee yes
explainable.
This yes Senator funds yes and
Senator Schmedes to explain this
vote thank you source for the
bill I think the State Land
Office has a point that we
should exclusively put in that
other language because the way I
read it says road crossings for
wildlife not for people not for
vehicles so I can see other
could be some disagreement there
and so I encourage Sanchez take
a look at the have a sport bill
thank.
Thank you so you have a eight
zero you have a unanimous yes
thank you very much Senator we
will roll over the other bills
to the following day after the
speaker thank you very much for
being here today.
We are in recess.
