Thank you madam chair and
committee Senate bill three
twenty six is about how the
state of New Mexico account
through renewable energy from
distributed generation for the
purposes of the renewable
portfolio standard this is most
commonly solar installed by
electric utility customers on
the property and net metered by
the utility it does not change
anything except how renewable
energy from distributed
generation is counted its
purpose is to clarify the law to
ensure that renewable energy
from distributed generation is
counted as part of New Mexico's
transition from fossil fuel
generation of electricity to
clean renewable carbon free
generation of electricity other
than how we count renewable
energy from distributed
generation this bill would not
change the status quo it makes
no change to any contracts
regarding distributed generation
it makes no change to the
renewable portfolio standards
established by the energy
transition act at least twenty
percent renewable energy now
forty percent renewable energy
by twenty twenty five and fifty
percent renewable energy by
twenty thirty leading to the
requirement of a hundred percent
carbon free energy by twenty
forty five its sole purpose is
to and the fact is to assure
that renewable energy from
distributed generation is
counted towards achievement of
the renewable energy portfolio
standards that already exist in
law.
This bill will help count
rooftop solar as renewable
energy because that's what it is
rather than ignoring it it
recognizes rooftop solar to
avoid distorting reality by
ignoring customer solar
resources and keeps distributed
generation from being on scene
and irrelevant which would make
it easy to ignore let die we
don't want to do that my
expertise Phillip Simpson is a
local expert from Los crucis in
utility cases before the public
regulation commission madam
chair committee I'd like him to
say a few words before we start
on the bill.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Phil
Simpson a retired from a thirty
five year engineering and
management career in the
department of defense and since
then have volunteered on energy
and utility issues for the past
several years I have
participated as a party in cases
involving apostle elector
company at the public regulation
commission to help with that I
went back to NMSU and earned a
master's degree in economics
with a concentration in public
utilities regulation and
economics.
Why do we need this bill.
Today PNM apostle elector can
just PS all counter nubile
energy from distributed
generation which is primarily
rooftop solar differently.
The PRC recently made a ruling
in an attempt to standardize how
renewable energy is counted.
Basically the new pier C. rural
interprets interprets the
statute to mean that only
renewable energy from
distributed generation that is
purchased by utility can be
counted towards the renewable
portfolio standard but most
renewable energy from
distributed generation is
consumed on site by the property
owner and infants not sold to
the utility.
Therefore is the rule is
implemented most energy from
distributed generation rules
will not be counted towards
achievement of the renewable
portfolio standard and that's
not what we want.
This bill very simply is to
clarify the intent of the
legislature.
Renewable energy from
distributed generation is to be
counted towards the requirements
of the renewable portfolio
standard.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for hearing this bill.
Thank you Mr Simpson do we have
anybody in the audience in
support of this bill.
Do we have anybody in the
audience in opposition to this
bill.
Do we have anybody online in
support or opposition.
She's in support okay.
Okay online we have come to
million.
We're happy to mail with Camilla
is this of is this a familiar
okay Camilla.
Camilla you I'm here can you
okay
you can go ahead and start.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
Camilla I am and director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club and unfortunately we're
here today in opposition of this
bill our partners with the
coalition for clean and
affordable energy have looked
closely at this bill and would
like to point out that currently
New Mexico investor owned
utilities like EP have the
option to buy renewable energy
credits from their customers for
solar
that those customers are
producing the bill would allow
utilities to claim customer
racks automatically without
paying customers for them the
result would be that utilities
get to claim more renewables to
comply with the renewable
portfolio standard without
actually producing more
renewables EP for example would
essentially be capturing racks
for our PS compliance without
producing more of its own
renewable energy.
There is currently nothing
stopping utilities from buying
these wrecks from customers to
invest in rooftop solar and
we're concerned that simply
granting them this right by a
statute takes away the benefits
of the installation that we
ourselves as customers are
paying for our members by solar
for their rooftops in order to
contribute to climate solutions
not to do that work for the
utilities especially with no
consultation consent or payment
to customers we respectfully
request your no vote on this
bill and have shared our
concerns in advance with the
bill sponsor thank you for your
attention.
Thank you Mr.
Nobody else in the audience okay
with that I'll turn it over to
the committee.
Senate Bill.
Just out of curiosity Senator
Madam chair Senator.
How do we know how much
electricity my house generates.
I use it all so I and then
there's a pull a little bit off
of the the grid in I'm just
trying to get to the technical
side of it with this is going to
be.
Expensive for the homeowners to
strictly up to the children of
the Grafton solvents or quick
met how does this work.
Madam chair and senator I'm
going to go ahead and Mr Simpson
answer that question.
madam chair and senator
My familiarity is with a
possible like tricks system.
In el Paso electric service
territory all Energy Genard
generated by rooftop solar is
meters so we know exactly how
much energy is is generated by
rooftop solar.
I'm a little bit familiar with
the way PNM and SPS to it and
for them it it varies depending
on the type of customer in the
type of right those people are
on
so.
It may be true that not all.
energy is
are already counted.
I I can't speak to a those two
service territories but I know
for a possible metric we have
that information is available.
Madam chair senator
You're generating a thousand
watts or something on the top of
your house and it goes.
Comes in and your house but
you're burning all of that this
open house Paso knows what
you're generating is there some
kind of special equipment that
they require you to put on.
Madam chair Senator yes Sir
there is is a meter that
measures exactly what is coming
off of the roof so you have to
buy that meter is that
expensive.
I don't.
Madam chair center that's that's
part of the purchase of the
system that's what we have in
our system as well as that there
is a special meter that we can
see when it's going backwards
and when it's going forward when
we're not generating so that's
a commuter this provided by a
passer.
That is part of the system I
don't madam chair and senator I
don't recall in our case if that
was a system that had to be
purchased through all past
electric corporate was part of
the system that we purchased
from our solar provider but that
that meter is there on my back
porch that shows how much is
being generated by the sun
every day you madam chair center
I just missed that and I'm not
opposed to the concert don't
misunderstand I'm just.
Not wanting to do an unsend
unfunded mandate for a whole
bunch of people around the state
who are trying to I'm trying to
go solar for that matter we're
in the municipal system so I
don't know how that applies to
this bill would apply to that
but.
With that that concerns me that
all of the if the PNM folks
don't have the same arrangement.
Then somebody's got to come out
by a meter that I can imagine is
very cheap measurements few
hundred Bucks of.
Madam chair center I mean
Representative I know it is a
swap out of the more that you
currently have if you're not
generating solar power it's the
same kind of round meter but
they they've got these fancy
little tools and they swap it
right out.
I know the run forward back
right much just goes in there
but if the need should go in in
if I'm burning it all before it
gets there then I don't know if
it goes back in the system I
know that the power companies
entitled R. as required in many
cases to pay you if you generate
more than they.
Then they then you needed and it
goes into the system that would
be the reverse it goes backwards
but I'm not sure how.
If I am using all the
electricity is coming off the
panels to run my elector stove.
I don't know if that ever gets
to the meter to be measured in
any form or fashion.
Senator I suit you're saying I I
I I don't know fill if you if
you want to chime in on there if
you wanna let me go ahead and
try and focus on
with our system
It is it is and I'm look
thinking of our lectured bill
when I look back on how it's
reported that there are there
are folks that I know and I
don't know if Senator souls
you're you're this wonky about
the electricity that is
generated but there are people
who have apps that like follow
how much gets generated every
single day so it's Office
sophisticated system where you
can find out how many kilowatt
you're bringing in the day and
how many you're using in a day.
Love got a solar on my camper
for example nice and it tells
how much juice is coming in and
I and I know that but it if I
was plugged into the house at
the time it wouldn't.
Wouldn't do he would do anything
I don't think anybody know how
much is happening support of
that little thing in the
campus's button.
but madam chair center I mean
the point is we want to count
that I know you want to count it
I'm just trying to it how it
works and I'm not sure we're set
up to do that and it may be a
massive undertaking a massive
unfunded mandate if you will for
the power company for the
homeowners or whoever and I
don't want to get us into that
kind of a situation that's
certainly so Madam chairman
center we can explore I think we
need to thank you madam chair.
Point thank you all on that
point because Senators souls is
okay okay I just I was just
showing off my of my idea.
my app the managers in committee
there are those there that like
to watch their solar generation
religiously I am not one of
those.
Senator souls.
Thank you madam chair of the and
some it is part of every solar
system that gets put on I think
I got about three meters on my
health one that measures how
much comes off how much I use
and how much goes the other
direction and so the it is all
how did coming off of my house
and then I've got a a mechanism
that on a good day I think I
produce about fourteen kilowatts
that then that's good about
fourteen kilowatts and on cloudy
days I get about six
that the the whole point of this
bill madam chair and senator I
think is that all about
renewable energy should count
towards the state getting to the
the standards that we need and
as it is now.
The renewable energy on my house
gets erased from that mechanism
of County all this bill does is
it counts all of that energy
it's not about buying or selling
rex rex or just a mechanism for
counting how much energy there
is and so you I think this bill
very clearly it's very short in
the the section of it but it's
indicating that the energy
generated by the DG system shall
be deemed to have been purchased
it's not actually purchase their
money changing hands it's just
deemed to have been purchased
for the counting mechanism.
And madam chair as I read this.
I'd like to offer an amendment
that may make it even a little
bit clearer.
Online seventeen of page two.
have been purchased and
delivered by to the utility so
it's deemed to have been
purchased and delivered so it's
as if apostle electric dot all
of this town it and they gave
you back the portion that you're
using currently.
Again it's just accounting
mechanism there's no money
changing hands it's going across
that me to.
And so and I think that's the
most important part so again you
know madam chair I would like to
make a motion that on line
seventeen.
Page two line seventeen.
After the body.
Insert the words in the liver
to.
And continue the rest of the
sentence.
Yes this is deemed as such so
it's not a money transfer
enhance.
First slide on one seventeen the
first slide.
What it delivered to the utility
and the and just continue the
rest of the sentence.
I think that makes it.
More clear that we're talking
about all the D. G..
That is produced ought to be
counted in the R. P. S..
That we have because it is
renewable energy on the system.
Senator is that an acceptable is
that family madam chair and
committee is that as a family
member.
Hey discussion on the amendment.
Any opposition to the amendment.
Okay your bill has been amended
did you get the amendment okay.
Thank you Senator souls do you
have anything else.
Madam chair again I I think it's
relatively simple we ought to be
County all of the do need that
is produced in the state that is
on the systems ought to be
counted as the G. that's on the
systems that's really all I
think this bill does.
Let there be light.
Thank you that was eliminating.
You were you were eliminated you
limited assault as Senator
Gallegos.
Madam chair thank you Senate
Bill last questions I was just
trying to Stan the man Center
souls explained it where you
have the three metering devices
I work for PNM and on their gas
side and I've just trying to
figure out how you count for you
almost have to and then shared
center of one the just gives you
total availability that day so
they can do the balance of that
was my question thank you.
Senator Neville for second time.
Can I just Senator souls a
question on it since he has a
lot of meters
are any of those meters
reporting to the past electors
that's my concern is not I'm
absolutely in favor this I think
it's a great thing I think we
ought to do that but I'm not
sure that your meters are
telling pasal electric I'm not
sure how much you're avoiding
having to buy from them.
Madam chair if I.
For more able to respond I don't
want to so madam chair I can
chime in it is because they
prior to I used to get money
back from what I over generated
and now I don't because that
that is madam chair that's over
generated that's going back into
the grid and I know that yeah
because your meter runs
backwards or whatever.
But.
If you're still buying a little
bit from the utility and you are
getting most of it from solar
panels they may not have a clue
how much you're actually using.
And that's my concern sure madam
chair and all and given that
Senator souls is is a solar
want.
if he feels comfortable
answering that.
About your meters I mean I I I
don't pay that much madam chair
and and committee I don't pay
that much attention to my my
electric bill.
Madam chair and senator I don't
know for sure but my belief is
that yes el Paso electric is
reading all three of those
meters each month in some
mechanism because the result of
those leaders show up on the
various almost incomprehensible
listing of which of how much
energy generated which places.
But yes yes those are on there
as a result of putting the
system on and it's not stuff
that I get the information about
they're using it.
Thank you Madam.
Thank you senator Neville I have
I have a couple questions and I
don't.
You're supposed to last so
If you to these I was very
careful to
To a Camilla for a woman so if
utilities can currently pay for
the excess.
and they can purchase the value
of the solar that the customers
may produce has.
Why should the utilities get
credit toward the renewable
energy part a portfolio if
they're not if they're not
taking the action necessary.
Madam chair and committee
for public use of an incident.
Madam chair and committee on.
Achieving their renewable
portfolio standard has been and
should continue to be about
transitioning New Mexico energy
consumption and production to
clean and renewable energy New
Mexico's invest light here and
I'm sure that people can that if
you could use the handheld if
you can use you're gonna have to
pull the plug
when you speak and speak up just
a little bit ago thank you madam
chair I was confused by erred
misled by this sciences this
Mike is always on.
It is for a lot of places okay
Thank you up.
You but basically.
You the question is will this
allow utilities to build less
renewables and really the answer
is this bill allows utilities to
right size their electricity
generation portfolios we want
renewables without exorbitant
costs because those costs are
always paid for by the rate
payers not the deliveries.
Again this is about counting.
Rooftop solar not ignoring it.
It's it's counted toward the
portfolio within the utilities
as I understood miss five women
in the utilities are getting
credit without having to to
take.
Any action toward the port
portfolio and as I understand in
in the ETA as was a very
difficult to understand but I
understood this is what about
the utilities would due to
transition.
and so that is so it is a
different it's it's giving them
an easier time it's interesting
that none of them are here to
talk about it but it's giving
them an easier time to meet the
standards and is that the intent
of the bill.
The intent is not to give the
utilities an easier time of
meeting the standard it's it's
again to count.
All.
Renewables towards the standard
I I re read the bill over the
last week and and try to glean
the intent of the legislature
from reading the bill and there
is
if you'll.
What I think you have the ETA
I'm talking about the ETA yes
ma'am
It's very clear in the opening
text of the bill that the bills
about transitioning New Mexico
towards.
Cleaner renewable energy.
later in the bill.
It starts talking about
utilities.
And in my view that was simply
an oversight
Of the immense contribution that
rooftop solar can have towards
renewable energy
so I believe that was
That was a problem with the bill
but I don't think it was
intended I I think the the bill
intended for all.
Renewable energy to count it
just when it got down in the
details it did not take rooftop
solar into account and start
talking about utilities because
that's the most this.
Our place to talk about this is
almost this thing to talk about
is renewal is utilities.
Our generation.
Thank you madam chair the
chairman and madam chair let's
do it it all right we'll get I I
all of all go ahead in I I do
have further questions but I'll
go ahead and defer to madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair
I M. sorry I came in late for
some reason no accidents I sat
on the highway for an hour just
cars sitting still so I'm very
sorry that I missed the
presentation so I'm just I
apologize if this question madam
chair has been asked already in
Senator
I got a text saying that this
would be very upsetting to
individuals who purchased solar
they by solar and the utilities
come by that credit for them but
this bill allows the utilities
to simply take it without
compensation.
So while I understand madam
chair that we want to the
utilities to
Move ahead with renewables.
And stacking up the wrecks of
many people who purchased solar
expect to be compensated for a
period of time and usually it's
limited like eight years ten
years twelve years so could you
respond to that and I'm sorry if
this is already been discussed
my it is not that's where we
were going.
Madam chair in committee and go
ahead and that Mr Simpson answer
the question.
Madam chair thank you for your
question.
This bill does doesn't change
anything.
About do you the weather
utilities pay customers for
their racks.
All it does is sure that energy
produce from distributed
generation is counted in the
calculation.
Whether or not a utility pays
for racks from distribution
iterations and how much they pay
has been and will continue to be
public up to the PRC.
This bill doesn't doesn't really
change that.
At thank you madam chair I'll
listen to the rest of the
discussion
thank you so on the on the FIR
in this is kind of where I was
going with this
SB and I I'm not sure.
The amendment deals with this SB
thirty three twenty six this is
on the FIR page three of the.
Last full paragraph.
The language could carry double
meaning create fundamental
issues.
Maybe maybe the amendment does
deal with it of all the energy
consumed on site will be
included in the determination of
total retail sales for the
purposes of calculating the
renewable portfolio standard
then it goes on to say it's
unclear this language means that
all of the concerts customers
consumption will be credited.
Or simply the total retail
sales.
If it means if it's calculated
simply to its total retail sales
that it's not a major issue
however if it means that all the
customers consumption is
calculated and that's what I
think that the deeming amendment
made.
Then.
as part of the compliance
burden.
Then it creates a fundamental
issue potentially counting non
renewable energy has renewable
energy for our PS compliance
because a distributed generation
customer may consume more
electricity than just the
renewable energy generates and
this I believe is what senator
Neville was getting at and I
didn't understand the question
the answer is to get that head
on.
Who
do you see what I'm saying well
if if the goal is renewables and
then you're counting everything
because as I was showing off I
have one of these two but it
we try to stay under with the
solar put solar did
Provides however on cloudy days
we just can't.
And therefore we are consuming
from the grid which we know with
the grid is now and it's not a
hundred percent renewable so to
me that's that is a fundamental
problem with this.
To.
And I believe that senator souls
amendment made it clear that
it's the second it's the latter
of and that you know the latter
interpretation counting
everything.
At I yield it Mr Senator is also
madam chair yeah I didn't
understand what you meant of the
latter is let out that it's
double counting it's not double
counting.
It's just for instance might
solar my system on my house that
everything that it generates
should count towards DG.
And and therefore even though
there's no money trading hands
for the extra that I'm putting
on the system or control
consuming at my house it still
is renewable energy that's been
generated on the el Paso
electric system and therefore
should count towards el Paso
electric's system requirements.
And so it was just a
clarification that is generated
by the quality had been
purchased in delivered so it's
deemed to have done that but
there's no money changes hands.
Because the law on
sixty two sixteen dash for makes
it unclear about whether you
have to a pay for it or not to
count it.
But but Senator if you go
further all of the energy
consumed on site by the
qualifying facility will be
included in the determination of
total retail sales so is that
counting non renewable energy.
I always hate it when the log
deem something to happen because
it means it's a legal fiction.
When you're deeming something
you know it's not real and so.
That's already.
Madam chair that's already being
counted.
And so if I'm consuming
electricity my meters run in the
other direction and I'm using
more than I'm generating.
That doesn't change the amount
that I generated at all and so
no that does not get counted
that's the other meter.
That's running.
And so no it's not double
counting it's not counting non
renewable energy.
Senator in in at this is to
either one of you that how do
you read all of the energy
consumed on site by the
qualifying facility will be
included in the determination of
the reach of total retail sales
how do you read that if it's not
all the energy whether it's
renewable or not madam chair
because up above it says deemed
to have been purchased.
Not actually purchased deemed to
have been purchased and so then
it's qualifying that these that
deemed to have been purchased
includes retail sales but then
it says and.
All of the energy consumed on
site I I think that I understand
what you're trying to do and I
think that's important I'm just
concerned about giving credit.
Four non renewable energy and I
just think the languages is a
little bit problematic the way
it's written so madam chair and
committee my experts just
suggested along the same lines
of the amendment from senator
souls on page two line seventeen
we have by and then the amended
and delivered to the utility in
all of the.
M. in front of energy on that
same line insert renewable
energy.
Where that clarifies that
question.
That does therefore my question
because
that's what I that's the only
thing I think should be counted
as renewable and I think there's
an ambiguity there.
So
the somebody wanna move that.
Madam chair I modify my motion
if that helps clarify things
okay so renewable will it be
inserted before energy on page
two one seventeen
Representative.
Friendly amendment amendment
could you any objections.
online seventeen instead of all
of the Energy it'll say all of
the renewable energy consumed on
site.
What I can do is re state that
again madam chair is plural
right now
page two one seventeen the line
would read by and delivered to
the utility and all of the
inserting renewable energy
consumed on site by the
qualifying facility.
And I have that modifications
here also if you need them.
Fifty and let's get that.
So.
As I said I have a problem with
the main thing is just because
of all the years I have in at
the law school deeming things
and realizing it's just not real
so
my question here is is going
back to miss the woman's
question and that is why didn't
why don't the utilities just
purchase it in order to from the
customers in order to add it to
their print portfolio.
Then Senator a very good
question madam chair and
committee and I I don't have the
answer for you I don't know if
Mr Simpson does.
Maybe Mr Simpson the.
Madam chair the committee
members
Suggesting that utilities should
pay for distribute generation
renewable energy
is.
I think doesn't quite understand
the way the the system works our
our our right paying system
works
asking if the if the utility
should pay for rex is really the
same as us should ratepayers pay
for rex because ratepayers pay
all these expenses
You know of course that the
owners of distributed generation
rooftop solar they would like to
be paid for those racks
associate with that generation
but they've already made in
economic and our moral decision
to install that on the rooftop
their neighbors and other
repairs were would prefer not to
pay for that extra burden an
extra expense on their electric
bills.
Does that answer your question.
But I'm not sure does because my
understanding of utilities is a
purchase energy and they
distributed and they charge for
it and and that's why I have a
problem with deems to have been
purchase
because they're not purchasing
it but it there do you know what
I just I I would I really wish
the utilities were here because
I'd be interested in what they
had to say is there anybody from
any of the utilities here we do
have some too okay thank you.
you are here for public comment
but.
you were on zoom in it but they
didn't they didn't catch it.
You have to come to the
microphone.
Are you taking the time are able
can't hear okay on the web
remember yes.
Madam chair members the
committee I'm so sorry I was I
was stuck on the freeway as well
for quite a long time so I
joined on zoom those having
technical connection problems
and so I raise my hand right
after miss filament was done so
I apologize but we I'm here PNM
of our Sanchez executive
director of the
Government public affairs and we
are in support of this bill.
Could you answer the question
about the utilities why don't
the utilities purchase it.
instead of just getting on a bit
of credit for.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so but the
utilities to purchase racks that
are in excess of what's being
used at the at the home level
right so we do actually have
contracts we have up in many
cases we do provide creating.
No cash value for that this bill
talks about that that which is
in excess of that is used at the
look at the household level so
it isn't the part that is in
excess that is already part of
contracts and each utility my
understanding is they do it
differently second I speak for
PNM but this bill would count
for the IPS portion of it would
count all of the amount that
gets generated.
Thank you thank you.
yes on that point question that
nobody.
Yes Senator Gallegos so madam
chair and I work for PNM for
thirty years not a good story
but I retired from the all of I
wanted to ask you so you talked
about the a cash value if this
bill were to pass and we
actually accounted for the
rooftop solar with that reduce
your cash value on on what you
pay now.
Madam chair and senator goes I
don't think that it would reduce
the cash value but to be honest
all of those details would have
to be worked out at the PRC and
the they would be subject to a
typical of rulemaking if there
were to be a change so this
wouldn't affect the value of the
racks or even the REC system
without the PRC's involvement
and oversight of that.
Thank you madam chair last
they'll think question to you.
Senator Neville.
Since we have a couple of
utility reps maybe the question
that I asked on el Paso electric
if you want to come up
Do you know how much electricity
Senator souls generated his
house.
You have to this bill requires
you to know that.
madam chair and committee let me
take out my phone I've got it
right there on on it now okay.
I'm getting madam chair with
that we have a rack meter on on
Senator souls is house so we do
know the gross amount of energy
that is being produced by his
system okay now our meter that
records the energy use.
Will roll back.
As his house is consuming.
and so there we then know
basically how much was used of
the gross amount and how much is
is needed.
We do not pay just answer the
previous cat question we do not
pay for the racks that are used
at an individual's home because
as Mr Simpson stated to madam
chair.
Then we would be paying for and
everyone else would be paying
for the energy that that
consumer used but we do count
those racks are we did before
the commission change the ruling
on it we did count those racks
in total amount of renewable
energy produced and delivered
which is the important piece on
the R. EA deliver to the Energy
to the system within EP.
Now the question that I still
have and I'm and I'm sorry
Senator Hamblen Inc and and
madam chair that I don't
understand this exactly but our
system stops at the meter.
There is some counting of energy
in this bill
that is use behind the meter at
the person's home my point yeah
and so to and so that's one
question that I have not been
able to get answered even though
I've had conversations with our
folks as to how this actually
does help in the counting of
racks.
Do need racks for for home so I
I apologize that I can't give
more clarity to that and I hope
to have more as we move forward
Senator Hamblen but that is the
one question that I I'm still
left with in the bill which I
think the renewable energy
amendment
online seventeen after the the
is talking about might make it
less clear actually because I
think that is counting.
The total retail sales to be
counted towards the amount of
energy needed for our compliance
to the R. P. S. or the R. EA.
And I hope you're all as
confused as I am as I said that
so thank you very much.
Senator Stefanics it's not on
this point it's a different
point well I believe so I'm
sorry Senate Bill
the concern is whether your
meters actually tell you the
company if you're getting a
thousand the what's from Senator
Hamblen system or not you know
that it's plus or minus and you
stand that whether if she
generates more than then she
uses it goes in your system you
you credit or with that.
But it doesn't tell me whether
a.
You know how much she actually
generated at her house and I
think that's a critical issue
because if your readers don't do
what you're.
don't tell you that information
we're not gonna have it anyway
we're just going to be in the
dark and guessing you so you're
going to have to revamp all your
wiring and meters and all that
and that could be very expensive
for homeowners or the company or
who have.
That's my concern.
Thank you.
and I'll just comment before too
before I take a motion I I don't
think it's written very clearly
I I if if I understand what
you're trying to do I think it's
confusing all of the energy
generated by the call of
qualifying facility will be
deemed to have been purchased
and delivered I think it's
really unclear has just was
pointed out what's going to be
counted and what's not and
what's behind the meter what's
what's not what's not so Senator
Stefanics manager I'd I move to
table.
Is not available all secretary.
Sure for.
All right and secretary will
call the roll Senator I this.
Senator Bancos yes ma'am.
Center.
No.
Senator Representative yes
Senator pope no.
Senator maintenance excuse
centers also no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
centers the phonics yes.
Forty three the ticket motion to
table fix passes okay your bill
is tabled but it might be you
know I would definitely
conversation exactly you madam
chair and thank you committee
for the discussion thank you.
Yes.
Thank you wanted to go next yes.
Okay so Senator so the next bill
we're doing is a bill three
sixty one which will is Senator
Gonzales is bill but it will be
presented of by madam chair.
This is a second community dish
Act funds.
It's an appropriations bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am very familiar
with this fun
I'm presenting for senator
Bobby Gonzalez it's making
appropriation to carry out the
purposes of the seeking
community ditch Fund Act there
is a line item in the budget
several of us are putting money
in either through junior or
through the regular House Bill
to and the question is which
department it will Ryan I do
have experts today eight Pueblo
ago see is on the web I believe
and the curious is here with me
and maybe some others in the
audience and will stand for
support opposition questions.
Thank you would you like your
experts to speak certainly.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity and for the
opportunity apartments Pollock
Garcia at this morning the
Senate bill three sixty one
appropriates four hundred
thousand dollars from the
general fund to the state yet
community just fund as senator
fax noted there are several
individuals were contributing
junior money to fund
administered by the department
of agriculture and provide
financial assistance to state
and community systems to develop
hydrological studies part
technological research and other
information and services
necessary to conserve and
protect water for New Mexico's
future through education of
water rights over the past
several years the A. C. T. F.
funding is exceeded the
available funding by the average
of four hundred thousand dollars
which which were us here today
and we're able for any
questions.
Okay thank you would you like
miss Garcia to Hong yeah.
Yes good morning good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm executive
director The New Mexico sic
Association and apologize for
not being there percent thank
you for hearing this bill the
second committed to fund was
established in statute in the
nineteen eighties to ensure that
I think you just have
representation in the
adjudication process the way
that I think is access these
funds is through a grant process
that administered by the New
Mexico department of agriculture
in order for the kids to access
this fund they have to be
organized into regional
association and they apply and
the state engineer develop the a
list of activities occasions
that helps to guide and AC DF
Committee in allocating the
funds in the competitive ranking
process of this fund has helped
thousands of families across the
state and defending their water
rights the legal defenses for
common elements of the one right
you need to cation process so
that kind of communities can all
band together and and
efficiently have one legal team
and one set of experts to help
them navigate the adjudication
process it's been a very
effective funding has broad
support across the state and I'm
available to answer any other
questions thank you thank you Mr
CS is there anybody in the in
the audience in support of this
bill.
Anybody in opposition.
Is there anybody online in
support or opposition.
Could you ask them if they're in
support what we fiscal intake if
you could identify three people
in the audience to speak briefly
introduce.
Or if you if you don't want to
speak that's fine too just in
the interest of time this is.
Yep to hold but the thanks.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
guy a ghosts and I work with the
national team of farmers and
ranchers and I'm also on the
governing board of the New
Mexico for neck Policy Council.
And
I I wrenched for thirty years
and I was a present the two
different a sick yes and and
I I think it's something that
that is is needed especially
since the they spent that four
hundred thousand dollars I think
we need to keep the fund you
know where where where it was
and into into just go ahead and
thought funded you know it's not
a whole lot of money it's so I I
four thank you I'm just one more
please just.
Okay.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee my name is that a
Vigil.
Representative the New Mexico
association of soil and water
conservation districts and we
fully support this this measure
thank thank thank you let's go
ahead and and the if I don't
there's anybody opposed online.
Okay we have a.
I think it Donna Gonzales the
Donna.
Don.
D. O. N. N. Egan's all is in
support of the bill thank you
just in the interest of time
we're just gonna know your
support.
So we'll turn it over to the
committee.
Any questions.
Okay we have a motion of for to
pass in the second madam madam
secretary will call the roll
Senator Sanchez Senator that
goes.
Senator haven't.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes okay yes.
Thanks committee.
Results yes this office yes
Senator bonnets yes.
The other.
Okay with the a vote of seven to
zero you have to pass thank you
madam chair members of the
committee thank you I'm sure
Senator Gonzales will be very
happy thank you members of the
committee.
I'm gonna stay right here for
the next one okay the next bill
is the water security planning
Act SB three thirty seven
centers the phonics and
Representative ended up yes and
no Representative here to is
chairing a committee so can't be
here my experts today are hand
miss Hannah rice Lee white who's
the Interstate Stream Commission
deputy director and Andrew
Erdman who is the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission
water planning program manager
madam chair members of the
committee this started out as a
state agency bills still
technically is but it does have
a committee substitute.
And you have the committee
substitute in an analysis for
that that was sent at least
yesterday.
The a change from we need to yes
but the W. tell you what the
changes the change for the bill
to the committee substitute is
inserting language recognizing
tribes and tribal sovereignty in
terms of water rights.
Okay with somebody like to to
move the committee substitute
in.
It's.
Madam chair I move to
I do not do not pass on the
original bill and they do pass
on the amended.
The demand conservation Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
thirty seven.
K. thank you do we for
discussion purposes discussion
purposes.
Do we have a second.
Thank.
All right we're we're on the
committee substitute I thank you
madam chair members of the
committee Senate bill three
thirty seven comes after the
water task force meetings over
the past summer in several
months and this section will
affect the Interstate Stream
Commission hence the staff from
the Interstate Stream Commission
is here
many people were involved in the
drafting of these changes to the
existing statute in particular
Mr norm Gaume first contacted me
regarding this bill and we
changed over from an
individual's bill to the state
agency bill with support from
the executive this bill will
create a framework for
rulemaking and guidelines which
is something that was asked for
by the water task force over the
past summer it will link
planning to implementation and
funding through prioritization
of projects and activities
developed by the stakeholders
and will ensure accountability
so madam chair I would like my
experts to speak briefly on this
bill.
Who wants to go first hand
I think that's me
thank you madam chair members of
the committee
findings and gentleman in the
water planning program manager
at the Interstate Stream
Commission so so we just talked
a little bit please can use a
hand held held like we can't
hear you very well.
Yes can
you hold down the whole time.
Okay I forgot you Mr chairman
okay thanks okay first let me
say that I Rolf Schmidt Petersen
the director of Interstate
Stream Commission would love to
be here and was unable to attend
due to illness he is online so
he could make some comments
perhaps and certainly is
available to answer questions.
so talk a little bit about how
we got here and why this is
important so in New Mexico we're
already experiencing more he and
less water it's a trend that's
expected to reduce our water
supply by up to thirty percent
over the next fifty years and
then continue planning outreach
conducted but I see including
the fifty year water plan
identified regional water
planning is a common interest
across many parts of the state
also the water policy and
infrastructure task forces the
senator mentioned concluded that
it was important tool for
achieving Water planning across
the state this is important
because the amount of water is
diminishing and present
practices are based on a level
that's not coming back
water challenges are different
depending on where you live
Albuquerque had a dry river for
the first time in years Colorado
River basin issues are
incredibly complex and involve
really sophisticated entities
from all over the country tribal
settlements are now being
completed and implemented and
will use more water in some
instances and current practices
take us revert augmentation
pumping is a process we used to
train me interstate compacts
there and it struggles to keep
up at times and hot summers
also New Mexicans have very
different values and different
parts of the state so more than
seventy five percent of the
water diverted for use in New
Mexico is used for agriculture
and farmers are concerns that
cities and growth are a threat
to their water rates large
municipal water systems have
professional water management
staff who are able to develop
sophisticated Water applications
in large infrastructure
proposals and smaller
communities don't have that same
access
there is work being done to
develop alternative sources of
water including from treated
sailing Water
and the the potential for those
is still kind of unexplored and
then there interstate compacts
that are unique in the space and
and endangered species sort of
throughout the state unequally
with different needs.
regional water security planning
offers a way for regions to move
forward on those things
independently so functional
regional water security planning
should enable regions and
regional water users to promote
important projects for them it
should help communities without
the professional water
management staff president in
large municipal water systems
science gives us a sense of
what's coming but values are
going to determine how we
prepare for it underlying water
planning our values related to
risk aversion future generations
and property rights and other
things
regional planning allows
regional water users to work
with their neighbors and develop
plans that are consistent with
their values
in my last piece here at well to
get more it's a critical time
for making the water management
decisions there's unprecedented
once in a generation funding
available for the federal
government large water
infrastructure projects are
costly and time consuming and
successful infrastructure tends
to remain in place for decades
fifty to eighty years fifty
years from now New Mexico will
not have the same sort of water
and environment has today so we
really need to be designing and
building for those needs.
climate change will increase
risks across the board more
drought more flooding greater
challenges for existing dams and
infrastructure than they were
designed for more fires and more
uncertainty
reliance on groundwater
resources has allowed New Mexico
to mitigate some of the aridity
that's part of part of our state
background what is been over
used in the past fifty years and
infiltration is going to be
reduced to recharge is going
down so surface water declines
restoration of those groundwater
resources is vital.
so regional planning in this
bill specifically designed to
empower communities across the
state including rural regions to
benefit from water investment in
New Mexico rulemaking called for
in the bill provides
opportunities for public
involvement in the specific
requirements for regional
planning statewide including the
geography of the region to
number of regions and the
process used for planning.
we've done regional water
planning before in the last time
it was a top down process and
the participants
had a lot of things they would
like to see done differently in
the future so bringing decision
making for how regional planning
is done down to the regional
level is intended to help
establish by an for the process.
So with that I'll have to do it
and madam chair just briefly
died to Andrew's comments thank
you for hearing this bill bill
and thank you for the sponsors
for bringing it and their
participation in the water task
force my name Santa rides a
white I'm The New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission
deputy director I just wanted to
add briefly to Andrew's comments
first just to say it's important
to technology up front this bill
in no way proposes to affect or
jeopardize in anyway existing
water rights also the state is
very much committed as Andrew
said to a very robust public
engagement process in the
proposed subsequent rulemaking
and guidelines this work would
in no way be repetitive or
redundant on existing planning
efforts across the state would
build on those and bills bring
them together it would enable
communities throughout the state
to really do their planning but
based on the best available
science data and models and it
really leads to as a senator
said implementation so not just
planning but the next step of
how do we actually implement the
the projects and activities that
are designed to increase
resilience across the state and
make those happen on the ground
and with that
we're happy to stand for
questions and also if Rolf
Schmidt Petersen is online he
may have comments as well thank
you so much madam chair.
Of it would you like of the
director like to say something.
The director online.
Rolf Schmidt Petersen.
All right is is there anybody in
the audience that is in favor of
this bill.
Is there anybody opposed to this
bill.
Just in the interest of time if
we can have a couple of people
come forward and and state their
reasons for their support of the
bills.
And like the first.
You have to hold the.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I my Kaman Mexico
state engineer I also serve as
the chair of the water trust
board and the secretary of the
Interstate Stream Commission I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward both
Sanchez from Senate and house
thank you Senator Stefanics of
the one thing I would add to
this is both the water transport
process and every federal grant
that I've ever looked at are
applied for and and my history
in working with the feds is that
they want to see regional
coordination planning as a
component to your app the
applications and that increases
the likelihood of awards from
federal granting opportunities
and there's a myriad out there
right now for this kind of work
so I just wanted to make that
clear that this level of effort
at the regional level will help
us fully capitalize on future of
federal grants that are
numerous at this point time and
then ongoing for a long period
of time in the future thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam have to hold the
button in the entire time.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Tricia
Snyder and the senior water
policy analyst for New Mexico
wild we stand in support of this
bill as has already been
mentioned we believe this is a
critical opportunity at to to do
science based regional water
planning it's also critical that
we get this effort right and I
wanted to point you to a letter
that was drafted with a number
of our colleagues that kind of
outlines the our perspective on
regional water planning and and
the critical components that
must be included to do this
correctly so we look forward to
working with the I. S. C. on the
rulemaking and guideline process
thank you.
You want more speakers than
what.
Hello everyone my name is down
Rogers most of you know me as
the attorney for ACMA Pueblo but
I am not here in that role
today.
In the early nineteen eighties I
was one of the group of lawyers
and other specialists Act
economists planners.
That proposed regional water
planning for the state of New
Mexico this bill brings it more
in line with what was intended
which is the local.
Emphasis on regional water
planning not top down and the
recognition that unless you
include or provide a means for
tribes to participate you get
nothing but wish lists.
And our state can't afford wish
lists anymore.
and so that is why I strongly
support this bill.
Thank you Mr Rogers.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Khan
which you know and I am the
registered lobbyist for the
public of Aqaba and also PTA's
Pueblo and we also stand strong
support of the bill as amended
and we want to through the bank
the bill sponsor Centers phonics
for her willingness to add
language that does what has been
mentioned here and that is the
the recognition that tribes have
a stake when it comes to water
and should be included when it
comes to the management of the
state's water systems and rivers
and streams so with that manager
of we stand strong support thank
thank you Mr Chino
how many people do we have
online support.
Is that the Paul Gibson and
auspices of okay
I think in the interest of time
will just notice note that Paul
Gibson an Oscar Simpson or
expanding in support of the bill
since we have no opposition.
And I guess I should double
check is there anyone in the
audience in a in opposition to
this bill.
And nobody online in opposition
okay with that would you like to
conclude or not I will wait for
questions comments from the
committee thank you madam chair
okay that with that we'll go to
the committee do we have any
questions or comments from
committee members.
In the past that there are no
questions or comments I thank
you madam chair.
Okay I do have one question and
that was
On and I don't know should read
the read this more carefully the
amended does the does the.
Does the committee substitute
take into account the analysis
in the FIR from the Office state
engineer I'm I'm assuming so
since the state engineer
supported the bill
including the following sentence
as possible using appropriations
made for that purpose.
This language should be read
located in duplicated
spearheading Sarah goes for
section three and four.
So it was taken into account
okay I would turn it over to the
deputy director.
Madam chair yes that was
accounted for in the revisions
in this amended version okay I'm
just looking for a.
Okay all right any of so we have
a motion for to pass in the
second of.
With no more comments mentioned
we called rural yes Senator
Hernandez.
Does this mean that our have
left yes Senator yes Senator
pope yes committees fuse Centers
souls yes Senator Lopez yes
explain my vote Senator products
yes.
what I'd like to say is of four
years ago I introduce kind of a
similar bill people might
remember and it's so exciting to
see everybody in line to for
planning right now and I'm
thrilled thank you senator thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee and
thanks to the Department for
bringing this forward you got to
do past seven to zero thank you.
So.
So we're just forty nine
dollars.
Senator Ingle.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee Senate bill
three forty nine is the.
Basically very simple right what
we're asking for here.
from the debate DFA for the
Chavis county flood Commission
is five hundred thousand dollars
to repair the heavy damage done
by flash flooding six to eight
inches or rain within a couple
hours.
Tore up this the draw channel
and it's in the nation from
significant repair and there I
think there's some folks here
and in the audience that may
want to add to those comments
and Senator Senator Pirtle it's
in my district but it's in
Chavis county and he is an
expert on everything and Chavis
County.
He primarily Anderson libraries
but he did come out here.
And that madam chairman will
answer any questions and of
course this bill and up and
finance and hopefully make its
way to somebody suggestion we
can get some money and I know
Senator Jennings's relationship
with the governor's close so you
know how that works.
Is there anyone in the audience
for this bill.
Good.
This is.
We have anybody online.
opposed or nobody nobody online
okay of one of and I did Senator
Pirtle raise.
Okay of when we just have a
couple of comments please.
Because we don't have
opposition.
With.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Erin
Pollock and the superintendent
of the pay because Valley
artesian Conservancy district we
support this bill primarily for
the function that macho job
plays in the hydrology of our
region and and rebuilding those
washed out structures is
important to encourage the
aquifer recharge.
Thank you thank you Mr Bolick.
Anyone else want to speak.
Okay with that will turn it over
to the committee.
I'm sure I move this past.
Okay with a with a do pass
motion from Santo souls in the
second from Senator Gallegos
David secretary would call the
roll Senator process is that it
is Senator have a yes
Centerville yes Senator pope
yes.
Yes.
In lotus yes Senator yes.
Since.
Okay with that you have a do
pass seven zero congratulations
the committee thank you very
much this will be very
beneficial to the folks in
Chester County.
Is senator share here.
There you are okay.
More than.
No he said I could go in for.
Senator share.
This is just be three seventy
two stormwater facility has
municipal utility on Senator who
madam chair I believe I have an
expert on online Dave
For the roads.
That is not.
The way he's from the city of
Farmington from the utilities
and what this does is it allows
the.
the creation of a storm water
system the same as water systems
or gas or electric or anything
else and in the cities so what
you just heard from Travis
county is that they got flooded
and so does most other cities so
this simply allows the city to
maintain another utility to
provide for important water
service so it's it would be
right payer thing but that
allows you then to to deal with
the storm water that's coming in
so that you can treat it so that
you can store it so that you can
dispose of it in a.
More logical manner than just
let it flood everything out so
that's what this does.
Would you like your expert to
speak Senator it is unlikely
sorry for.
Dave cipher that's why Ph.D are.
I know I don't want to speak
Madam well he's not here anyway.
Okay rob Mayes on.
If there's one online who's here
is an expert presenters Senator
share there was no.
Okay.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of this bill.
Anybody in opposition.
And there's nobody online.
Okay with that will turn it over
to the committee.
Senator souls thank you madam
chair up on the bottom of page
one municipality may require
any person owning controlling
real property agency how the
debate just and reasonable fee.
Is that the based on the size of
the property large properties we
have a much larger stormwater
concern and problem produce more
that comes off we're somebody
they don't very small with that
these be the same or is this
a a tax the taxes people
differently on the amount of
property they have.
I'm not sure that I can answer
that question without Dave but
it is it's a utility just like
any other utilities would be the
same as water sewer water gas
electricity so it would be based
on.
How much.
But I can't.
So madam chair and senator when
you say how much we're talking
about something that we don't
know how much until it comes so
is each person paid more if more
comes often who meters at how do
we know.
I don't know.
Madam chair I think I've stumped
someone who usually always has
words well
I'm surprised might will.
I'm trying to produce less of my
initials.
It says please Dave here says
month site it says please wait
for the host to start this
weapon are.
that means he's on probably on
the wrong side.
Somebody of.
Okay so could somebody of work
with him to get him on the on
the site where is the the link
to the site is that on the
agenda or is it on webcast with.
Okay Mr site for the the the
proper link is on the bottom of
the agenda which is on the on
the web page.
Senator sericea.
I don't know is it sounds like
if he's waiting for meeting he's
not on the right side just told
me is on the wrong side but.
But apparently nobody's watching
or listening so let me make up
an answer for you Senator.
Who is also named whose initials
are the same as mine so we could
probably communicate better.
Maybe by.
Okay
If you'd like to answer the
question.
For if he's texting you some.
Not yet.
So he he missed.
Not if you could if you could so
he's not listening probably so
if you could tell them the
utilities on the wrong website
what would you tell them that
it's on the bottom of the
today's agenda.
We did okay.
So madam chair.
I'm willing to make up answers
for the questions if you want.
No I think this Senator sold
wants to understand the bill.
I understand as to the rest of
the move on.
The madam chair if they don't
want to talk.
I don't want to talk.
We temporarily Tableof utility
of can figure out what the hell
they're doing okay can just
carried over Senator will just
carry to carry it over so you
can be first of tell them that
they ought to get on.
Thank you very much thank you.
Do what works for.
More than that for.
Twenty the last okay we plan
okay Senator Pirtle.
We'll go ahead we're taking my
bill less incentive to be here
anyway.
Madam I appreciate that.
Okay Senators launches Senator
Pirtle game and fish outdoor
youth programs Senate bill three
ninety two.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members thank you for
having us here today for Bill
three ninety two this bill here
will
So when everyone anyone purchase
a game and fish license whether
hunting or fishing if they want
to make a donation at that time
or another charge state it's
twelve dollars and eight cents
and they want to round up to the
nearest dollar this bill here
will let them do that rounded up
to the nearest dollar or
whatever donation they would
like and all the these this
money would go to the youth
programs for fishing hunting
training any kind of
in turn training and educational
programs at the game and fish
provides now.
So that's a brief on the bill
all it's really doing is.
Being able to let you add a
little donation when you
purchase these license I can't
take all the credit for this
bill had a young man come to my
office to visits Senator Pirtle
myself Braden McIntosh and this
was his idea and he loves
fishing and hunting and so we
ran this with his idea and this
is what we came up with your own
products today and all that
Senator Pirtle talk now thank
you senator Sanchez and thank
you madam chair and
unfortunately the rating could
be with the state had some
excuse like school or something
like that being in the I believe
is in the fourth grade but
really well spoken young man has
a lot of concern you he enjoys
hunting and fishing with his dad
and he wanted to ensure that
other children in the state that
are as fortunate as him have
those same opportunities these
programs used to be you quite
quite a big thing before COVID
and we're hoping that maybe
through these donations because
game and fish is funded solely
through license fees that this
is a way that we can get those
programs back to the robust
level that they were at before
COVID thank you madam chair that
will stand for questions thank
you is there anybody in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this bill.
Anybody online either way.
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair Senators I'd love
that bring came up with this in
Lee County every year we have a
fishing derby that the fishing
game put on and I always donate
to it it's really good deal I've
been out there to watch it in
these young people come out
there excited they all get to
fish they have take fish in the
lake they do giveaways during
the whole day this money that
you're going to collect Madam
chair Senators is it can go
statewide or you have targeted
areas around St.
Madam chair and senator Gallegos
a statewide so all the programs
within the state that are there
now which is piece of receiving
additional money.
In in madam chair if you look at
up on page one
line twenty four shall provide
for youth programs in each of
the five state game commission
districts so the the the intent
madam chair Senators to ensure
that it's not just in one locale
but it is statewide okay and I
appreciate that and have what I
was trying to get to is the only
thing that bothers me Madam
chairman Senators is that I
don't know that this amount
would fulfill needs of I think
no later in life it might be up
there for us this legislative
body should fund money towards
that because when you back to
you you really change our state
operates but hello the idea
because the kids need something
to do this because of something
of value of what is it the in
feed a person but when we teach
them to fish and they can feed
themselves I really think this
is a strong basis what our kids
need we had in our generation
but like this it's going forward
so with that again thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Gallegos
Senator Hamblen and then Senator
cels thank you madam chair I
think mine's more of a very
simple question just because I'm
sure the Sanchez very aware of
the outdoor equity fund and this
is a perfect opportunity also
for them and so it it's not like
a big heavy lift is a book of a
question but I'm wondering
because of this and anytime we
have opportunities of getting
people outdoors I I think we we
need to take advantage of and
and really support that and so
I'm wondering do you know if
these youth programs understand
are aware of the outdoor equity
fund and that they can also
apply for that to help them
support their their love of
fishing and getting outdoors.
Madam chair Senator I'm not sure
if there were I I would hope
they would be yeah sure I'm not
positive they are aware of it or
not Madam chair and senator you
know after the committee I would
be happy for a little education
on my part because I I was not
aware of that and so if you
would be
Willing to educate me on that I
would I would be happy to
absolutely out that and spread
the word very quickly I can
madam chair it's it's through
the other economic development
department and this is an
opportunity I actually gave
junior money to the so I know
there's money there because I
strongly believe in it but it's
an opportunity for them to get
gear purchase you know because
that's a lot that's expensive
for a lot of people in our state
and this is an opportunity for
that and so it's it's strongly
recommended so I'm glad that
you're doing this and and thank
you madam chair.
Thank you senator Senator souls.
Thank you again I think this is
a fine idea it says the the I
state game commission districts.
Does the money to each of the
district's pump just from the
money how much was put in from
that particular group or does it
all get pooled and set out
equally to each district or is
it on a grant type of basis when
there's a need.
Madam chair Senator
Two men have to defer that to
Senator Pirtle and madam chair
and senator we're trying not to
be too
Prescriptive to the game
department The the idea here is
that they're already in charge
of this they're already doing
this we're trying not to tie
their hands per se this is
really just to add money to what
they're already doing and
leaving it up to the game
Department to insure and
hopefully with the language
understand that we we expect at
least some activity with in each
game commission district but
there may be some that there's
just not a lot of hunting
opportunities because of lack of
game or something so then
they'll do fishing state up in
in one area in Farmington and
then do more of a bird hunting
because we have tons of upland
birds down in my district and we
have a lack of fishing so it
will leave it up to them to to
just kind of molded and do what
they need to do in each area
based upon the the specific
circumstances within the area.
Thank you madam chair yeah this
is lots of small amounts is
there a mechanism for them to
separate that part out from the
license fee and how much
additional money they got so
that it goes into this fund
rather than just into the
general fund how how are they
going to be able to to keep from
co mingling funds and madam
chair Senator I'm I'm not a
computer programmer and I don't
pretend to be but they do it now
between the habitat stamps The I
mean the whole program if you
purchased a of a fishing license
or hunting license I mean
between the habitat stamp the
approval stamp all the different
stamps that you you are forced
to purchase they pull that money
and so this will be the same
thing when you click this box
that amount will then just be
ear marked automatically sure
somebody out there's lots more
to me we will be able to do that
and then they'll they'll have
that specific money to add to
what they're already doing so
they they already do this but
this is going to be an add on to
what they're already doing and
so madam chair and and Senators
up that was kind of my next
question is how do we make sure
that these monies coming in
don't supplant monies they're
already putting in the youth
programs freeing up money other
places that this actually is in
addition to we're how's that
accounted for with a mechanism
so we're not supplanting money
is already spent being spent.
And and madam chair and senator
you know I I think right now
we're just trying to add
Something involuntary and then
we'll just have to watch them if
they're not doing what the
legislature wants then then
we'll have to put in more strict
language but I think for now
will extend the freedom to the
department to do what they
should be doing which I don't
think there would be any reason
for them to to not do the these
programs and add to it the the
legislation I think it's pretty
clear that in that aspect but we
don't want to tie their hands
and then did not spend into it
and say oh well we only did this
many youth programs because we
only brought in fifteen thousand
dollars from the box check so
this is definitely a us
supplication to add to what
they're doing.
And madam chair thank you I I
always worry that we wanna make
sure we're supplementing not
supplanting and I've seen too
often in too many places that we
find a different funding streams
and that means the other finance
committee or whoever's making
decisions in an agency says this
is funded now different way we
can move that money somewhere
else and that's always my
concern on things of this sort
that again we want to supplement
not supplant thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Senators souls.
Anyone else so I I don't know if
you do you cut the significant
or technical issues for no.
Action or this analysis is but
it says that the department of
game and fish noted the
department's licenses are
currently full dollar amount
there for rounding up to the
nearest full dollar amount would
only work in instances for
discounts military and veteran
discounts are applied their
suggestion is custom donation
amounts may best serve the
purposes of the bill my question
is does it go to finance or
where does it go.
Madam chair I I believe it does
go to finance next all my
question is whether you like to
fix that here.
And madam chair the pleasure of
the committee is the pleasure of
the committee I I don't have any
issue with that I would I would
consider that a friendly
amendment.
Okay so.
To donate of the so on page two
of the bill.
online eight to donate money to
youth programs.
I guess you could lead by
rounding up the dollar amount.
For donating a testament.
I don't know if it's up to you
whether it because it this the
people who will round up the
dollar amounts are just has with
mentioned here just the veterans
and military discounts.
And then if there's a custom
amount and if they're both
promoted I guess it's fine it's
just up to you and madam chair I
just assumed since the New
Mexico we tax everything that
with there was gross receipts
tax whenever you bought a
hunting license I never put been
putting in for twenty some odd
years and had noticed.
Came to an audit and but it came
to an even amount.
Yes on that point four on that
point if you fall that line
eight hundred and for donating a
customer fifth does that so it
it's got the two options could
you just eliminate running
dollar amount District.
Would that be acceptable to the
to the Sanchez Madam.
I believe it's a from them I I
don't think that's a problem
that's already on the website
they routinely with other
donation things that they do.
The vet other veterans whatever
you can just click the box
roundup and it'll do it and you
don't have to it's not a it's
not an issue toward program
which can have to insert a new
category in their system is
there anyone from giving
Fischer.
I just wondered if they cared.
The manager we can check with
them.
Madam chair if it if it helps we
can work with game and fish from
this committee to the next and
if that is a huge issue we can
work on work on that in finance
that's that's fine with me.
I I just wondered if you'd taken
that into account.
All right of with no no other
questions or comments.
All right we have a motion for
two thousand guidance and the
second from Senator Stefanics.
Madam secretary will call the
roll Senator Sanchez yes Senator
does this budget Senator Hamblen
yes Senate Bill yes center coast
yes communities yes that our
souls yes.
Yes I yes.
With the nine two zero a vote
you have a do pass
congratulations to chairman
thank you committee members
thank you for.
Thank you we will now go to
Senator Sedillo Lopez for Senate
bill three eighty.
Shakers.
Thank you.
Karen.
L. F. you pass that up one down.
Okay Senator Sedillo Lopez
please proceed thank you madam
chair this is an agency bill and
it's just such an excellent idea
because his you know water is
going to be the most significant
issue facing us and the office
of the state engineer is charged
with the stewardship of that
water and accounting of that
water and with this bill does is
it does two things it allows for
an inspection.
Of of a permit and license
holders to inspect records a
permanent license holders and it
authorizes of the offices state
engineer to
Or it requires.
piece of it but it allows a
state engineer to wreck request
and inspect records relating to
authorized and unauthorized uses
of water and then the second
thing it does is it increases
the civil penalties up from one
hundred dollars a day to two
thousand dollars a day
And this this the penalties not
enforceable until caught
compliance orders finalized but
this would this increase in
penalties is really important
because a hundred fifty dollars
a day is just not not much of a
disincentive and I have need
check it is here who is to keris
I'm not a took care is here who
is the expert on this bill and
would like to see a few words
about.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Sedillo Lopez
Hear me okay.
Yes we we have finally what if
you just.
And then we if you want to do
the amendment now yes let's go
ahead and do the amendment now
because I think it may alleviate
some concerns about the bill.
We need a motion.
Yes.
Madam chair that a motion to do
not pass on so that no it's just
an amendment okay so I make a
motion for on the amendment.
Yes please thank thank you madam
chair with the amendment does is
it protects but it requires a
state engineer to to pass rules
will protect confidential
business information and trade
secrets which was a concern that
was expressed about the bill and
it is important that the state
engineer take into account the
seriousness of the violation
good faith efforts to comply
with the applicable requirements
and other relevant factors so we
put that in the bill so that
it's clear that the state
engineer has some flexibility in
the assessment of the penalties.
And of course this is to address
some concerns that were made
about the bill and that with
that I will go ahead and turn it
over well I and we got a we have
a motion on the amendment we're
going to have a discussion on
the amendment okay okay so
committee members discussion on
the amendment.
I do have a question if no one
else does Senator Cervantes
please note though well as love
to hear your thoughts first
madam chair I well I think of
number two on the amendment is
suppression will but go ahead
please you know the so on the
amendment I guess the first
question Senator it really
relates that section one so what
you're really doing is you're
creating what is effectively a
subpoena authority in the state
engineer and over that section
once as the owners and lessees
of educated to clear permit or
license shall allow the state
engineer the water masters I'm
not gonna read through it but
just as she gives them the right
to inspect copy records
usually the way this works in
the law you have to have a
subpoena and you have to service
subpoena and then you go to
court and quash the subpoena or
limit the even we're this kind
of gives just a like a forty
doesn't explain how that's going
to work or how you would do it
so this is going to lead to a I
am sure and then the amendment
says here the request shall be
made in writing with reasonable
particularity that's lawyer what
language we use up a word a lot
doesn't mean anything of course
we have no idea what that means
what is regional particularly
well what you think it is is not
what I'm going to think it is
and so when you ask me for
records with regional
particularly I want to say I
don't understand what you want
in the national regional
particularity and then we're
going to go of a lawsuit will
proceed to so that's what we
have to be this and that's what
we have you know the rules of
civil procedure so that you have
to go through the process and
procedure there's timelines in
other words when you service
subpoena you have so much time
to file a motion to quash as
much time to comply with the
subpoena yes which had to do a
number of things none of that's
in here so when you say you make
a request for ready with
reasonable particularity how
long do I have your bill to
respond the state and I would
say have forever because you
because there's a lot of what I
have to do the.
It was a state senator shall
adopt rules to ensure the
protection of confidential
business information and trade
secrets that's gonna be a big
issue that's why we have so much
tightness on subpoenas Authority
is because yeah that's usually
the objection when somebody
makes a subpoena as well I'm
gonna tell you.
some of the stuff because it's
it's a trade of practice or the
confidential a bit of
information and so forth so I
just don't I don't think that
the amendment cures I know we're
on the amendment chair but again
I I I would have freezers
problems with all of that whole
concept because it really takes
is outside the rules of civil
procedure they exist for a
reason.
That's what we have point that's
what we have subpoenas okay
thank you like if I can just
just is going to Judiciary.
Yeah so this okay there madam
chair I'm gonna go to support
the moment we'll support that
part of the bill but we'll deal
with different time and place
probably well then I'm up I mean
thank you out Senator Cervantes
Senator Sedillo Lopez would you
or your expert witness address
that concern because it I'm sure
other people would like to hear
funds yes we have we have
similar language in other areas
like the air quality control act
hazardous waste act so what I'm
going to turn over to my
experts.
Yes thank you madam chair start
by introducing yourself.
Yes my name is not shakers on
the general counsel to the state
engineer and
We'll get into the back on the
bill in a minute but the
Air quality control the NMED
already has very similar if
already here
in in a number of the statutes
the they administer so what we
were trying to do here is not
increase sort of the government
you know authorities over sort
of permit holders and then there
are the subject to under other
statutes so seventy two four to
thirteen the air quality control
act seventy four four of four
point three the hazardous waste
act seventy four six nine the
water quality act all include
the ability of NMED to inspect
the records of the regulated
entities the reason why this is
important to do before the
formal proceeding either an
administrative hearing or
judicial proceeding has begun is
because the agency does not yet
know what the what what the.
But insisted to support
commencing a a civil enforcement
proceedings so so under our
environmental statutes this is
already an established
practice and established legal
regime this this mimics that and
it's
the the language with reasonable
particularity actually it is a
legal term of art it actually
constrains more what the state
engineer can do then for example
what NMED or EPA can do with
with their license holders which
which don't contain that
limitation that was something
that some folks to review this
bill suggested so we we included
that so that's
Most of the time if it's just
your Gators we can go out and we
can see from the fields what's
being irrigated and that's
that's our proxy for knowing you
know we're waters being used and
then we get me to reports it's
really when we have larger more
sophisticated more complex
operations where
the media reports don't make any
sense people are swapping out
meters without telling us or we
don't understand how other your
occasion systems or or water you
systems in an industrial process
are being utilized that we found
in our enforcement actions that
we don't have the the real
ability to understand what's
going on and then our only
option is essentially to file an
enforcement action can somebody
and then you know essentially
try to subpoena I mean it's it's
it's it's really get a good and
investigation going there and
that's even more intrusive and
violative of you know the the
interests of the of the
regulated entities so we're
we're really trying to track
what has already been
established and already works
pretty well in environmental
enforcement context thank you
madam chair and the idea here is
perhaps with their provision of
records
of that in there.
And and so they don't have to go
forward.
Senator Cervantes used of the
fluctuation of the committee I
think of again I appreciate the
answer we hear that all the time
said well this is already in law
someplace else so that means
it's a good idea of that United
never works with me and Italy we
get smarter and better over time
and we learned.
We've always that way that's why
New Mexico's fiftieth
everything's we we do everything
the way we've always done it so
that that's usually of more
answer for me the the the you're
right I mean I agree I
appreciate that you will agree
that what reasonable
particularity is that meaning so
we don't know what that really
means and so it'll just be a
fight let me just ask you though
on a specific matters as well
you're going to want inspection
of copies of records in the
council you mentioned media
reports again remember little
bit always a little change to my
tone of voice you want me to
records because those of us
Maria ran meter middle Rio
Grande detonator you're smiling
broadly right so.
It's a game you all play in
state engineers office you don't
force metering on anybody
between coach in the and Sapporo
and all the water users and
Bernalillo county the lead in
Los Lunas the people we have to
compete with in farming they
don't have to meet her so you
want to you don't have to
inspect their records because
they don't have any but those of
us lower river and we have to
monitor every drop and and you
know we would be happy to always
produce those to you but it's
not a fair game and and I I use
every chance I can to point that
out to folks is that it's a it's
rig right it's right for the the
northern part of the state and
someday somebody's gonna have
enough of it and to the middle
Rio Grande save you guys have to
meet a.
Or you guys have to Lisa
judicata release you have to
start to adjudicate
and now that's happening with
Albuquerque right four
Bernalillo county or any that so
I understand why everybody wants
the records from those outside
because we we have to have what
we have to keep them and so most
of us don't have a problem with
producing those but
again when you you you you open
by the door when you so what we
want to have better records well
you know that it's kind of rings
the bell in my mind yep be nice
to have those meter records from
everybody in the middle Rio
Grande which doesn't keep up and
doesn't require so when we start
playing on a level playing field
you might get of you might get a
more sympathetic here from the
council so madam chair again
we'll we'll deal with the
specifics another time and place
I think thank you thank you
senator Ortiz we are on the
amendment and I have Senator
Schmedes thank you madam chair
and senator you know when I when
I read this as you know we're
gonna protect confidential
information and trade secrets.
Pretty big words they're pretty
serious stuff and why we're not
just going to put whatever it is
in statute why are we gonna let
and executive agency make rules
in in a pretty big matter.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Senator
that usually the agency has
detailed knowledge about what's
confidential which trade secret
in that context of the rules
will be more developed in and
more specific
And.
Madam chair of center if I may
so the duty is in statute these
the agency must protect the
confidential business
information the trade secrets
there are processes that that
again we're patterning this on
on the way NMED's already done
it so that you know regulated
entities understand sort of this
isn't a new a new process there
are detailed regulations in
place that NMED has the state if
you submit records subject to
one of these one of the statutes
and you say this is all
confidential.
That doesn't go anywhere there's
been a process that the NMED
will review the documents if
they need to use them in public
for and things not all of them
are are confidential there's a
hearing that the that the
parties entitled to and they get
to they get to essentially
educate whether there's a trade
secret issue or confidential
business information
issue those the details of those
administrative hearings it was
are you have again intention to
follow the way NMED is on it and
its use usually the details of
those procedures are are laid
out in regulation we would be
you know
yeah I think I guess I live
there okay thank you madam chair
center yeah I I and I'm not
gonna pass more questions on a
life of this of the state that I
I'm wondering if there's been
any disagreements there any
anybody said well we'll we'll
NMED we'll see in court you know
I don't know but
okay and then lastly just on the
second section we've we've taken
a lot of time to go through the
inflation stuff.
Is is is this it is a kind of a
catch all food is is the the the
this state engineer they're
gonna be able to say well this
is what inflation is doing but
you know we're gonna look at the
seriousness of violation are are
that does that kind of give just
give them freedom to just choose
their or they still gonna be
following by statute are they
can still be restricted to
follow inflation the time about
the statue that will be the cap
within the statute is a cap and
so the the number of the second
amendment is designed to reduce
the taste on these factors if
they if they think it's
appropriate okay thank you that.
Thank you so we are only on the
amendment to this point
I think anything else on the
amendment with the secretary
please call the roll on the
passing of the amendment.
A sense of this.
Senator Gallegos.
Center happen the.
Senator Neville.
no.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Thanks committee.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes that's
the phonics back to the past
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Stefanics.
No.
All four of the amendment does
not pass so could we go on to
the explanation of the bill so
that we can get into the depth
of the bill and your supporters
and opponents.
Thank you Madam I do want to say
with regard to the amendment
we're perfectly happy to work on
a better amendment of.
As we move toward Judiciary
should we be looking up to do
so.
Okay the building.
I am turning that over to my
experts to explain the details
of the bill.
Thank you madam centers madam
chair members of the committee
so you heard earlier today about
the statewide water policy and
infrastructure task force that a
number of senators here we're
we're legislative advisors to
this the.
This bill is one of the priority
recommendations coming out of
the task force report
recommendations two point one C.
I believe if I can find it is
strength in the ability to
practice to do enforcement
crackdown on illegal water use
as water becomes more scarce
there's going to be greater
incentive for folks to use water
in excess of what they're
legally allowed to do and our
agency well it has some
the ability to to.
Training that use we've
identified some holes in the
course of attempting to to
actually enforce against a
against illegal water use the
purpose of this bill is to tar
is targeted with respect to
those holes nobody really enjoys
giving the government agency
more power to to come after
people who you know our our
water rights owners but we've.
We found that if we can't
enforce the law again some
people everybody else who's
trying to follow the rules think
they're suckers and we're we're
again trying to make sure that
we we can stay abreast of folks
who have you know it's an
incentive to to cut corners we
need to as I already explained
be able to check records there
are it's not just in the lower
grand that people are subject to
meet our requirements their
permits all over the state the
require of folks to to Meeder
their water use and sometimes
the me to repeat Reports the
they send in our our our
gibberish we can't figure them
out there's also.
Sometimes as I stated the water
use configurations that that we
just don't understand and we
can't figure out of people are
complying with their permit
without looking at their own
internal records.
The second aspect that we've of
identified is a shortcoming is a
civil penalty for illegal.
Violations of the water code
the one hundred dollar cap was
instituted in nineteen oh seven
it is never been increased and
the value today of one hundred
dollars of one hundred nineteen
oh seven dollars about three
thousand three hundred dollars
the again just patterning this
off of other sort of
environmental natural resource
statutes
Max cap penalties in other
statutes that we have range from
about two thousand five hundred
dollars a day the the oil
conservation commission can
assess up to in excess of fifty
thousand dollars a day for
certain air violations by NMED
we think two thousand dollars is
an appropriate level we
Right now essentially have zero
incentive and and folks have had
zero fear of a one hundred
dollar penalty the way the
statues right now the one
hundred dollar penalty starts
running after hearing is elected
so to sensually just one hundred
all penalties not even one
hundred dollar per day penalty
that is not just an adequate
deterrent for for on call
wrongful conduct and again we
have of.
What people want to follow the
law come and tell us why should
I.
Bother to follow the law if you
have no penalties for people who
don't so that's that's what
we're trying to do and we're
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you very much we will now
go to the audience and online
could I please see the hands of
all the supporters of this bill.
Okay there about six people in
the room could I see the the
opposition to this bill.
I see one hand in the room
online years of.
One person supporting and one
person opposing.
Okay so could we hear from to
supporters and then we'll hear
from the opponents.
The committee chair Mike Hammond
state engineer
thank you the committee members
and also want to thank the
sponsor bringing this bill
forward it is an executive
supported bill from the
standpoint that
the state engineers tools for
enforcement are haven't been
updated since the nineteen
fifties the finds that have been
developed to come from that era
so if we're going to continue to
work to
prevent over diversions by a
select few who decide to utilize
the complexities of their system
and and hide behind the fact
that it's difficult for us to.
Thoroughly investigate of the
tools that are necessary for us
to fully understand what the the
extent of the diversion of water
uses of of of the sophisticated
large water users and then to
thumb their nose essentially at
the at the state engineer of
because of the lack of of six
of significant finding capacity
on par with what's going on with
the environmental regulations as
well so we we believe it's time
to update our enforcement
capacity and I've shared support
for this bill thank you thank
you very much someone else
please go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee at the top you
have to hold us down in the
entire time okay.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee news
going to with the circle program
with half the representing
thirty five thousand members and
supporters across New Mexico and
el Paso this bill fills the gaps
in the water cooperative
providing the state engineer
with enforcement authority
equivalent to those currently
available from the New Mexico
environment department oil
conservation division for
enforcing the requirements in
order for the state engineer to
manage and preserve our scarce
water resources here she must
have the ability to record and
of course water rights and water
permitting this stand in support
for this bill thank you.
Thank you very much would not go
to the opposition in the room is
there anyone who wants to come
up to speak on the microphone
please.
You have to hold the button the
whole time full time yes
is it afternoon or morning still
but anyway morning yeah please
identify yourself for the record
good morning madam chair and
committee members money lives
Jason king Donna I am the
president of the loan and grant
and the president of the Islamic
Water association
Forgive me I have not looked at
this one hundred percent yet but
as Senator so serve on this as
stated earlier it seems to me
that
this.
Yes there's going to be an
increase so is that increase
going to cover those farmers
that are out there just point
water we on the side of the road
I see that in our county all the
time a lot of those don't seem
to be under that same scrutiny
the that of others are going to
be is this bill just kind of
allow those.
Those that have small wells and
things like that are these going
to be the subject of this those
people are not the the main
violators of the of of the water
gets these farmers the test of
at least from what I've seen
that water out of the ground
continuously all year round in
just let it just flow I think
those people are the ones that
really need to get that the
state engineer wants to to do
something about this that's
where we're having issues of our
our county right now the people
that have the small wells are
going dry because there's so
much water being pulled from
deeper levels and it's just
drawing that down so I do if
this was to take on some of
those issues I would be more of
for the bill but as of right now
it just seems one sided thank
you thank you very much online
we have
And you can correct me we have
one supporter Oscar Simpson and
one opponent of Liz Taylor.
And I want to thank you both
very much for participating by
zoom but we're not going to take
tests money at this time we're
gonna go to questions and
comments from committee members.
Senator bill.
I have one concern because I
don't know if his portrait right
the two thousand.
As we discussed in my office
concerns me about small farmers
gonna maker land or something
like that but they're not
metered anyway as senator
Sanchez pointed out so I'm not
sure that's going to be an issue
that.
The inflation adjustment factor.
People screw up the CPI and
process all the time they take
you got a CPI a hundred it goes
to a hundred and five such a
five percent then you the next
year goes to a hundred and ten
well the first year you adjusted
it by the I and then the next
year you multiply it times a
hundred ten that's a double hit
it's not right and we have I see
that all the time and people
using the CPI for adjusting I
don't know if your wording does
that or not but I want to make
sure that if it does I have I
can't quite process about but
that's a serious issue you're
talking five ten years down I
think you said it can go over
fifty percent more of it.
Looking over what three percent
three thousand or something like
that so with the.
S. progresses.
But it it concerns me that.
That maybe you have a clerk
doing these kind of things are
doing the process whatever's in
your numbers for the next year.
Entities could grow exponential
if you're not if you're not
doing it properly.
Madam chair of Mr Senator so the
the.
The process here again you know
we're trying to mimic what what
other agencies assessed
penalties already do and this is
exactly which that are actually
NMED follows.
You're you're right if you don't
know what you're doing you your
second increase is going to be
over the wrong time period it
should be just from the end of
the first period to the end of
the second period that the
second increases this language
would require that and in the re
and and it's not a just trust us
the reason why folks will be
able to check that is we do need
to put we under this language
the to publish those
calculations and if they're
wrong there you know that that
can be that can be challenged
and so it is an issue we do CPI
calculations a lot and we've had
to you know make sure that folks
folks do them correctly but the
check on it is that it does need
to be out there for the public
to to make sure that we're we're
not getting it wrong it it's
published in people can can
challenge.
And get back to my small farmers
if if you were penalized two
thousand a day of putting out of
business and we you know so
that's
I don't necessarily envision
where you would be doing that on
the small farmer because it's up
to two thousand.
You may not be the guy this
thirteen years now and that's
that's what concerns me I don't
know who the next guy's going to
be that's enforcing these with
the small farmers we got a whole
bunch of them from here north
and
summer ten acres or less of
state most of my counties that
what.
I would certainly hope that.
I guess I'd like to flesh that
out to where there was some
graduated number something
that's all madam chair thank you
bye responsive.
Okay I have next Senators
mediation center Gallegos.
You madam chair and and etcetera
and just to a comment on the the
the penalties part I I think you
know it looks like those
probably need to go up I I
wouldn't mind going for a flat
increase if we tied inflation we
also I think have to tie to
deflation we have to think of
wealth the the two periods we've
had an American deflation was
actually after the Spanish or
the the nineteen eighteen flu
pandemic toward in World War one
the other one was as interest
rates rose the Feds rose
interest rates through the Great
Depression at Capital One way I
mean you know the story so we're
in a deflationary spiral so for
me to support that idea and if
people are gonna disagree you're
gonna challenge and say will you
all didn't do the financing
right we're gonna sue just
because of the a math problem
once again take all that away
just but the but the fees and
their
but my my one question really is
is not on that Center is is on
authorise uses so the very first
section one here.
Who who decides if this is an on
authorized use of water who gets
to say it isn't Word isn't.
Madam chair Senator that's the
job of the state engineer.
But the senator is asking.
And if I may madam chair so we
have permits and we have
declarations from and and
education so file orders that
describe folks water rates if if
there are
No water uses out there the the
the look inconsistent with what
people are supposed to do under
their permits or under their
subfolders are under their
declarations
or if they have no water right
all on file.
That's with that that would be
an unauthorized use of water
again there's no there's no you
know penalty against somebody or
pay back requirement or anything
until we
the folks have a hearing and
they're they're entitled to to
present their you know they're
evidence that everything that it
is legal but if we if we don't
have the unauthorized use
language in that in that section
one then if somebody didn't have
a water right
they said why don't you know.
I'm not subject to this because
because my water uses authorize
you can't inspect my records
that would that would be a big
hole so that's why we needed the
unauthorized use language in
there is to incorporate people
who are using water outside of
their permits as opposed to just
use of the water within the
permitting of met madam chair
etcetera I mean that that's my
exact concern I feel like
someone is half being forced
into it in and admission of
guilt like they're testifying
against himself like there's
they're saying you know the the
the of state engineer saying
will you this the state statute
says you have to give us these
records that are on authorized
and the the farmer ever says
okay I'll give you my on
authorized whatever it is in the
hi there I feel like the way the
statues were it is the the
person that's being investigated
is being forced to admit that it
is on authorize that they are in
fact subject to the statute so I
I would recommend rewarding that
somehow we're very clear that
the person that subject to the
inquiry is not admitting that
they are in fact on authorized
because they may be challenging
that overseas saying you're on
authorize with the pharmacy I
know I I am authorized.
So I I it's it's a that's a
that's a problem for me because
this this whole testifying as
yourself I mean I know this is
not necessarily I in a courtroom
at this point but it it almost
seems to push an admission of
guilt on to the water user at
early phase so that's all state
chair Senators.
The it is it is the initial
inquiry isn't is just an
allegation and then it needs to
be proven up through the hearing
process so that it would not be
binding if they legislative
records that's not an admission
of guilt and the hope is if this
is wrongful the or if the if the
if it was actually okay and they
have the documentation it would
and there they would have to go
through the hearing process.
Thank you
you still the for centre
Communities after nine I didn't
want to take up too much time
but I think you think I I like
to listen to the rest of the
session thank you okay we have
center K. goes and we're gonna
hear anyone who wants to speak
on this but we have been asked
to be timely today on the floor
since is we have a joint session
and a busy schedule so Senator
Gallegos insurance center thank
you I do have just a couple of
questions what things that came
up in the FIR that I'm wondering
about under other substantial
issues in touch button Allison
from offices during general
inspection for of the many years
section seventy two twelve
fourteen have you read that and
and you have a thought on that
because they have a.
an option there the upon notice
after the pre for hearing it
sounds like this would be
something that would be a
friendly amendment that could be
done here in order to offset the
Attorney General spears and
chairman Senator.
Senator that would be a friendly
amendment.
And madam chair center and and
the wait reach here and I don't
know if you would want to fall
there's but it's as easy as a
page six line twenty one after
and and and after the after a
opting for a.
because in the hearings already
in place
I didn't know if we wanted are
Judiciary chair to look at that
see if that's something that
would be fair and compelling.
Yes you have been yeah okay.
So out.
You're asking for whether or not
this is a friendly amendment I
am but I I wondered if you
Senator Vontaze had chance to
look at that to see if you
thought that would be as we go
to Senate Judiciary with this
bill next okay well he was just
walking out the door
that's okay we'll give you the
respect of your question Senator
so.
Could could you could you give
me specifics again so madam
chair and etcetera etcetera I a
just in the FIR of the Attorney
General office gives an option
in a on page twenty page six
line twenty one and it reads
upon notice and then after the
and we would add the item after
the opportunity for a and then
it goes on to and with hearing
To me it looks like it would
just clarify what the fears the
attorney general's our offices.
So it's a good idea.
When then chair center if that
be a fairly a fairly Affairs
amendment to you
That's a good it's a good catch.
So
would you like to make that is a
motion I'll make the motion we
change to the attorney general's
revisions okay is there any
opposition to the motion for the
amendment.
In on page six.
Line twenty one it would say
upon notice and.
Opportunity for hearing correct
Would have to add the after
opting for you after opportunity
for hearing.
So everyone catches the
amendment.
Okay is there any opposition to
this amendment.
Please show that the amendment
has been passed unanimously.
Madam secretary okay we are back
on the bill Senator Gallegos
thank you madam chair center so
just a couple more questions so.
Thank you man I know Sir sure
about this let thinking about
the metered and unmetered verses
I had propping Colorado not had
arguments with state engineers
office of.
Our our water rights for
judicata but they weren't
metered and I'm wondering in in
these violations of.
Do they do they occur statewide
there certain areas that you're
looking at in the state that
these
occur and care center the
gentle.
Madam chair Senator.
There are different enforcement
issues in different parts of the
state so in the northern part of
the state it's it's as as
senator Neville stated smaller
farms
you know smaller ranches
there tends to be sort of
illegal diversions are illegal
pods that we're seeing are a big
or a big issue those generally
are not the types of things we
need to go search someone's
records for we see that on the
land we also are going to be
looking for big monetary
penalties for those kinds of
things already in the statute is
you'll see there's a provision
for the pay back of water and
that's that's those are sort of
the the enforcement issues we're
seeing there but if you have
larger more sophisticated more
complex operations industrial
operations somebody running five
or six different dairies those
get really hard to track just
from us visiting the the
property and those aren't
specific to any one part of the
state I mean we have industry
and in the middle valley we have
industry and this and and
various parts of Southern New
Mexico various parts of you know
northwest New Mexico those are
really the kinds of places where
we've seen our and consisting
enforcement authorities are are
are short now I know as you you
know as senator Neville said
these are gonna be rules of
statewide applicability but the
the need for getting records you
know we we it's really if we
can't figure it out from from
visiting the property who is the
only time when we need records.
Thank you for that madam chair
and etcetera and gentleman so
then that goes in my next
question so understanding the
large dairies
madam chair and senator
who would be impacted the most
would be the partial ranchers
municipalities
I guess who's a big.
Madam chair Mr Senator.
I think that the larger
industrial users are probably
the most likely the that we need
to we need to be getting records
from and also the more likely
ones where pay back of waters
not the appropriate penalties of
so with the civil penalty would
be would be on the
You know on on the list of of
possible remedies but it's it's
impossible to say in the
abstract I mean there's there
can be you know municipal
municipalities have have you
violations to it's it's really
I can't give you just a
definitive answer right now is
who's going to be hit most but I
I would not expect that for the
monetary penalties for sh for
certain and really for the for
the inspections that that sort
of the more traditional
agriculture ranchers would be
the one to do who'd be most
affected I think that probably
the one to be least affected
thank you for that madam chair
center my last question which
leads into in Artesia they have
a huge marijuana grow and I know
there's always been discussion
about the waters to them would
they be affected are they part
of the problem Mr chairman
center.
And madam chair Senator I'm I I
don't know the specifics that
and I don't want to.
For any particular entity is
isn't as part of a problem but
the transition to cannabis
growing in particular can lead
cannabis growing in greenhouses
or indoor setting does make it
more challenging for us to use
our our normal methods of
figuring out water use and so
you know we want to work with
with entrepreneurs in New Mexico
who wanted want to profit
from legal growth of cannabis
but we'll we'll probably need to
to get a bit more information
from those types of entities
than just sort of driving by and
okay we can see how many acres
are being irrigated there so I I
certainly don't want to imply
that any any particular industry
a problem we want to work with
everybody but those kinds of
uses are harder and there's a
lot of concerns about those
kinds of uses those are harder
for us to figure out without
being able to see record.
Thanks for that Mr Chairman
madam chair etcetera and
gentleman are you thank thank
you all of that talk to you
offline about my concern Senator
Hamblen.
Senator as amended as amended.
So Senator souls seconded it.
Could the committee secretary
please call the roll yes Senator
boxes excused Senator Gallegos.
Yes.
Senator Hamblen yes senator bill
is.
Senator pope yes Senate
committee the.
Senator also yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator phonics test.
That six or seven.
Seven.
Committee okay I vote of seven
to one you have a do pass thank
and as amended thank you very
much committee members the
committee is in recess please
note that at eight thirty eight
AM on Thursday will be on the
Senate floor and Mr Esteban
Lopez will be presenting on the
Colorado River he is the state's
designees to negotiate our water
here in the state of New Mexico
so he has been given about an
hour for that presentation then
we will go to bills thank you
