And um
Senators, would you do that
offline in the back?
We're ready to start with Senate
Bill 384 and Senator Jamio is
sitting in for Senator Gonzalez.
And welcome. Why don't you go
ahead with your bill?
We went on the singyu. Good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, Senate Bill
384 is an appropriations bill
which would appropriate $100,000
to New Mexico State University
via and then via the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture to
plan develop and create the Rio
Hondo watershed of the Rio Hondo
is in rural Taos County in
northern New Mexico. And so the
watershed district would create
a framework that transcends
traditional jurisdiction
boundaries and and enabling
local state.
Colter's directly address the
balance of the needs of the
watershed and its stakeholders.
There would be currently 2000
northern New Mexicans that would
benefit from the watershed and
nearly 284 households in
communities that are real small
in rural northern New Mexico. It
would also help us with the
secas in the area and joining me
this.
Chairwoman is Carlos Meera. He's
a commissioner of one of our ass
in the Rio Hondo area, and I'd
like to yield to him for a few
comments.
Good morning and welcome. Please
identify yourself for the record
on the mic, so it's picked up.
Thank you.
Uh,
OK, I'm a commissioner with the
this month's ditch Association,
which is one of 9 seconds that
draw waters from the Rondo.
Um
Pro rate is a small little
handout because you understand
that some folks may not know for
this month this might be,
but uh the Rio Hondo starts out
above at the headwaters of the
Towski Valley and its south
southwest through the
communities of Valdez Canoncito,
and Arroyo.
The the smartest community draws
our sick as the first diversion
at the mouth of the canyon and
it.
Travels up to the mess of the
community of this month is,
which is located between Aroseco
and Arroyondo it's an
agricultural community
primarily.
But uh it has seen a lot of um
development because of its
proximity to the ski Valley and
we have like over 1000 or more
domestic wells, we have 4
domestic water systems in the
area, the
Viase they irrigate over 2,0447
acres.
They uh
And they have been there since
the surge as 1815, if not
earlier.
Uh, so it's uh it's an
agricultural community that has
seen a lot of change.
Without the residents of always
been concerned about water
quantity and water quality
because of the sche valley and
so working with the ski Valley,
uh actually they assisted us in
getting a grant to do some water
testing on the Rio
and since then we have
established a watershed.
Uh, coalition, uh, that has been
working to determine what is the
current state of the Rio Hondo.
Along with the water quality
testing that has been done by
New Mexico State University, the
water resource.
They determined that the waters
of the Rio Hondo are high
quality.
And uh.
Our goal then is to maintain
that high quality of water
within the Reondo because we
rely on for livestock and for
domestic purposes, so we have
come together, we are putting
together a region, a watershed
management plan.
But with the once the plan is
done, if we don't have another
vehicle to implement the plan or
to monitor over it, then it's a
lot of work that
You know you end up with a plan
on the shelf.
So that is the purpose of
creating the watershed district.
And uh just trying to be brief I
guess uh I'll do it at that and
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. How many in
the audience are here to support
this bill?
3, and how many in the audience
are here to oppose this bill.
Is there anybody online for this
bill?
One in support online, so let's
have the supporters come who
would like to speak right to the
middle and uh say a few words.
Good morning. Good morning. My
name is Floyd Archuleta. I am,
um, currently the past president
for Lourdes Montes Neighborhood
Association are concerned about
the watershed management is uh
we irrigate our waters. There's
1400 acres that we irrigate uh
that are farm.
Land
Uh, and, uh, our concern is, uh,
water quality and quantity, of
course, but um
Making sure that that,
especially now that we're in a
drought, I think this is very
crucial for our community that
we need to start, step up and
see if we can get some funding
for this program. I think we're
we're one of the first that are
doing the watershed program in
Taos County.
And this will be um um an
example to the rest of the
community how important water is
for everyone, and we are
concerned about the ski Valley
because we know if uh there's a
billionaire owning the um
The ski area, they're gonna uh
start doing more development, so
we need to keep those um
Water testings um available for
the community so that we can
make sure that um that we're
doing the right thing for
everyone.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else that's
gonna speak?
It's in the room?
Please.
Thank you, Senator, um, in
committee. My name is Rose
Ressa. I am uh from Valdez, New
Mexico. Uh, my family settled in
the late 1800s, and we've all
been farmers, uh, I also very
much involved in education and
sustainability both agricultural
and housing and and really
creating an opportunity for our
youth to grow and live and
succeed in our community.
Water is at the core of
everything we do, and I feel
that as a farmer, I still, uh,
you know, water through the Asea
de San Antonio, my grandparents'
orchard. Um, I still teach young
kids how to make juice, water is
key, and it is a real concern.
And as, you know, we ask as
representatives of New Mexico
that we have to focus on these
key resources and support the
communities so that we can
continue to, to strive uh and
protect our community from
possible shortages of water. Um,
I, you know, I had a call
recently, actually yesterday,
uh, water is, is challenging
everywhere. Superintendent
called me, uh, they don't have
water, uh, and so I was able to
work and mobilize with some
individuals last, yesterday
evening.
But we have to really see what
we can do and we'd appreciate
your support on this matter.
Thank you very much. Online I
have Zi.
Ideas
Please go ahead, see you.
Uh, yes, thanks for, uh, thanks
for hearing me and thanks for
being there today. Uh, the Rio
Hondo acts as a tributary to the
Rio Grande here for us. And uh
on any given weekend, I can go
down there in the summer, and
you can see kids splashing
around in little kiddie pond
that's been arranged there. So
literally, these are our kids
who are swimming in this water
on a regular basis, uh, that
area acts as a recreation area
also for the rafters to put in,
um, this river feeds our
livestock, and then also our
animals.
drink my dogs drink from this
stream regular, um, and we use
this water for our apple
orchards in the summer, so I, I
appreciate your support on this.
Uh, I believe we can't change
what we can't measure, and this
bill allows us to do that. Thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Um
Committee members, uh,
questions, comments, Senator
Uzel.
Madam, thank you very much,
Senator, thank you for being
here.
Can you give me, Madam Chair,
Senator, his name is Carlos
Meera,
and that's M I E R A.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Meera and
senator, I was kind of confused
whenever I first read this bill
because.
6, OK.
Yes, ma'am.
Um
I have a in my area, OK? And I'm
kind of
I, I wish that people have.
That make
Our analysis and our FIRs would
understand that Chavis County is
spelled with an S at the end.
And the gentleman's.
Statue that is downstairs.
This county is named after his
last name is C H A V E S, just
like Javis County is. Therefore,
the correlation there, but yes,
I thought this was in regard to
the upper and lower frio fondo.
Oh, soil conservation district.
Mr. Meera, you said that there
are 1400 water righted acres
that are now currently being
irrigated, is that correct? Mm
and Senator, it's 1400 acres
just on one this month is ditch
totally it's a 2,447 acres that
are irrigated through the 9
seconds. OK, thank you very much
for that information.
So this isn't a psychia
association that we're trying to
get the funding for, is that
correct?
Madam Chairman, Senator Eel the
uh it's a coalition of uh.
The stakeholders that have been
meeting for 2 years now, which
includes the ski valley, the
Taos Pueblo, the Forest Service,
the 9
full water conservation service,
so, uh, rather, we couldn't make
the money to go to the coalition
itself. So, but since we've been
working with the New Mexico
State University since 2008. We
Talking to them, we agreed that
we would channel the money
through them because of our
continued work with the water
resource Institute.
OK. And Madam Chair and Senator
and Mr. Meera.
You said that the Forest Service
was involved in this exist in
New Mexico.
For serve service. It would be
the United States Forest
Service,
the the the ski alley, uh, is
within a wilderness area and
they are part of the uh uh and
so they oversee the permitting
for the ski area itself, so they
are an active partner in this.
OK, so, Madam Chair and senator
and Mr. Meera.
Are these, uh, acres that are
being irrigated right now, is
all that water adjudicated
Madam Chairman and the senator,
yes, the
The Aventa Ariana adjudication
has taken place, and they are
basically working out on the
settlement agreement under
Abeta. The real Hondo is the
Arellanos section of the
adjudication and that we went
instead of doing a complete
adjudication, we did a water
sharing agreement.
So we are pending this the
finalization of the of the
settlement agreement before the
bills are the two adjudications
are brought back together for
finalization. OK, thank you very
much for that.
Madame cheer and senator and Mr.
Mira on the FIR and I'm assuming
you have a senator.
Under the significant issues the
second paragraph.
It said the current political
process to form a new watershed
district starts with 50 or more
landowners.
Or 20% of the landowners and the
proposed district filed a
petition with the board of the
supervising soil and water
conservation district.
Do you qualify at this point?
Oh
A man with German senators, the
um.
The process of forming a
watershed district requires and
that we form a petition to the
to the towels, water and soil
Conservation District at that
point, then we do the process
of.
of
Of in and that's part of why we
need the money so we can go
through the educational process
to reach out to the residents of
that area, so, uh.
The in order to form the
district you need to do that but
that is a step in the process
that will be done.
OK. Well, Miss Madam Chair and
senator and Mr. Mayor, I maybe I
misunderstood you.
Uh whenever earlier in your talk
to the committee, you said that
there were 20.
Uh, you're 20 people that did
have irrigation, right? So I was
kind of confused there,
especially whenever this says 50
when it starts with 50 or more
landowners. So if you're
throwing everybody in there, I
guess that would qualify.
Oh, let's see.
And I understand what you're
trying to get done to help with
the flooding aspect of it with
erosion and water quality
degradation.
And also it helps.
Fun projects for that that area
or drainage and everything else.
Madam Cheer.
I, I would
like to see.
This bill
If senator thinks it's needed
and I really do think it needs
to be clarified here.
That which Rio Hondo, this is
going to affect.
Because my people were really
excited to hear about this.
Senator.
Um, if it's OK with you, Senator
CD Lepis is preparing the
amendment.
Thank you very much. If, if you
want to do that, that's fine.
OK, I just think that there
needs to be some clarification.
Madam Chairman, Senator, thank
you. If it does clarify Tao
County, that would be perfect.
Thank you.
Or if you want to share that
it'd be fine too.
Thank you very much as well.
Thank you. Next, I have Senator
Sadia Lopez.
Thank you. Um, I, I raised my
hand because I, I thought it
needed clarification, and I hope
that this is a friendly
amendment, um, and, and this is,
I think also I tried to and and
I wish that the chair of
judiciary was here. I think it's
unnece well, OK, on line 19.
OK, start with line 12.
Oh yeah.
On line 12.
Insert
In
Taos County. Is that there's no
part of it that's outside of
Taos County.
No part of it, so OK,
Senator County, are you striking
the period?
I'm, you, I forgot that.
And then adding in Taos County.
Period. Thank you.
And you guys know me, um, and
then on line 19.
Insert
In Taos County, but then I
thought of the other thing in
the fur that says, you know,
talks about the process and this
is when something that Senator
Azel was talking about.
There's a whole process. I, I
actually, I wish the chair of
judiciary, I actually don't
think it's necessary to add in
accordance with law.
Um
But it does answer that
question, you know.
But of course it would be in
accordance with law. So I'm
actually not going to suggest
that because then Judiciary will
just strike it. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman Senator, so if I hear
you, it's striking the period on
late 19 after the word district,
adding in in Taos County,
period. Yes.
And then on line 19 after uh
striking the period.
And then
And online, OK.
Yes.
You don't think so?
Cause it's in the title, then
that's it.
Uh, and I don't think it's
necessary to put in accordance
with law, because, of course, it
would be in accordance with law.
That's an assumption. So that's
the only uh suggestion, Madam
Chair.
OK, is that a?
I, I make that motion. well I
want to find out if it's
acceptable senators.
So
You're now on the proposed
amendment for if seeing no
discussion, could I have a
motion in a second for the
amendment.
OK, I, I move the amendment.
There's a motion in a second,
uh, to place the amendment.
Uh, is there anybody
Please show all of present
members so committee members, we
are now back on the bill,
Senator Townsend. Oh, I'm sorry,
Senator Sidil Lopez, you saw the
floor, um.
So, uh, thank you. Um, I guess.
Uh, I was thinking about all of
the other entities that deal
with it and, and this is just
for my own information, not it
support the bill.
Um, but I'm just kind of curious
about when you create a
watershed district, um.
There are a bunch of other
entities within that, and how
does it, how do the
relationships work, like with
the soil and water the soil
conservation district and the.
The the county commissions, and
how do they all work together or
do they?
Madam, Senator Lopez, um, the,
the towns soil water
conservation District is working
closely with us on this as they
are the
fiscal agent for the clean
energy grant, which we received,
which is doing the water
testing.
And Taos County, of course, the
funding went through Taos County
and then Taos County to the
saltwater conservation and then
we contracted with uh New Mexico
State University to to do it.
So, so we've been working very
closely together uh for the last
2 years or so.
That's excellent to hear. And
then the other uh little
question I had, and again, I
support the bill, but um a few
years ago these women from
Dixon.
Uh, came and they had um
There had been runoff from this,
the ski valley.
I believe it was the Toski
Valley.
That had um
Really uh messed up the water
there, um, from the cas and
caused all kinds of cracking and
and whatever. Is it this
district?
That would do something about
that, Madam Chair. Madam
Chairwoman Senator, that was
from Si Pau, which is near
Penasco, and it was their
man-made snow that was creating
the issues. And so it's a
different area of the county and
so Dickson is in Riba County,
whereas
OK, so, so it was above.
So Rondo would be above that,
but it would still take care,
but the question still remains,
would this be something that the
district could work on if should
that happen from Taos into the
farms there cause it was really
awful. It, it made the, the soil
crack, it was terrible. Madam
Chairwoman Senator, yes, if that
would be the case with Towski
Valley, the creation of this
watershed would then work with
the conservation district in
Taos to mitigate that issue.
Excellent. Thank you. Well, I'm
delighted to support this
appropriation and happy that.
So, um, thank you, Senator.
Before we go on to Senator
Townsend, uh, you all have a
handout from uh the uh requester
uh that says Senate Bill 384
that was handed out and was
presented by Mr. Meera, with his
name and some details. Senator
Townsend.
Yes, ma'am. Um, I move a do pass
on
bill.
380.
Or, is that right?
384 as amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator and Mr.
Miedra.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and,
and Senator Charlie,
the
The Watershed district with uh
the the real Hondo itself does
not cross into tribal lands in
El Pueblo. However, the
watershed is part of Dos Pueblo
is part of the watershed. So
Taeb has been an active
participant
in the meetings during the last
2 years, and, and they are very
supportive of it because they
understand that the waters that
come out of the roof pre the
Lucero are.
Just as pure, if not better, and
they too are looking at.
How they can manage and maintain
the water quality in those two
rivers.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Mr. Miedra, um, and senator.
Would any part of this $100,000
allocate, um, would any of the
money go to houseblo.
Madam Chairman, again, Senator
Charley,
House Pebble is will have a seat
on the table when you do the
district, and we have to make
sure that we
Uh, cover all the
Um
Precincts
That are within the water
district and so toss bubble
would be there and so they would
our anticipation is that they
would have a seat at the table
and on the board.
Because of that uh proximity to
the Madam Chair, Senator, Mr.
Medra, thank you for that. I,
um.
I'm very happy to hear that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry I I missed you were
kind of light on your speaking
at the end. What, what were you
saying your last sentence?
I will be able to support this
because Taub has a seat at the
table. Thank you very much.
OK.
Before we go to the vote.
OK, we have a a motion for a do
pass as amended by Senator
Townsend, second by Senator Ael,
could you please call the vote?
Yes, Senator Cervantes.
Excuse Senator Charlie.
And Charlie, yes, and hersel.
Saorel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. And our pope, yes, and her
Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez, yes, Senator
Stephonics, Senator Stephonics,
yes.
By a vote of 8 to 0, you have a
due pass. Uh, congratulations.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman is out with that
amendment, sorry that we can't
send money down to down.
You, you can share that they
would let you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Oh,
Senator PD, are you in finance?
OK.
Oh, not till 10.
Is it, is yours a quick bill
that acceptable, Senator Scott?
OK,
please go ahead.
Uh oh.
It's gonna take a while then.
Thank you, madam.
I am a
while then. Thank you, madam. I
am
Senator Michael excuse me, for
the public.
Uh, we have jumped down to
Senate bill 418.
Uh, Senator Padilla qualified
microgrid tax credit.
OK. Please go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice chair
and ranking member. I am Senator
Michael Padilla. I'm here on the
Senate Bill 418 qualified
microgroup tax credit I have
with me. I'm Jennifer.
Brad, thank you very much. She
is an energy expert that I've
invited in to help, help, help
me with this conversation.
Essentially what we're
attempting to do here is create
a tax credit for something
called a qualified micro grid,
uh, essentially the legislation
incentivizes the construction
and installation of microgrids
and underserved communities
across New Mexico by offering
this tax credit, um, taxpayers
who are not dependents of
another individual and who
construct and install a
qualified microgrid in an
underserved community in New
Mexico.
Prior to January 1 of 2031 are
eligible to claim the credit,
taxpayers are ineligible if they
are have already received the
credit or another credit of a
similar nature. The tax credit
is $100,000 per microgrid, the
application process will require
some promulgation of rules, but
eligible taxpayers would apply
to the energy and minerals and
natural resources department
within 12 months following
installation, there is a
transferability clause here and
they carry forward a provision,
um.
Why we want to do this is again
it encourages renewable or
renewable energy portfolio that
we've been working on here in
New Mexico quite a bit, um, the
economic development aspect of
making this happen in
underserved areas. We are moving
toward energy independence and
then the environmental benefits
are again our environmental
goals by facilitating the use of
clean energy technologies and
reducing greenhouse gasses.
Um, so essentially what you have
here is if you can generate your
own power, go guns, go do it.
Um, there's no requirement that
the surplus must be investor
owned utilities here in the
state and um
The ETA that we all got together
and and uh worked on for several
years and passed here in New
Mexico, all of these that
supersedes energy generation of
this nature and any other type
of energy generation. So I just
want to make sure we have that.
So I know that you wanted me to
be quick. I'm gonna ask my
expert only to would like to at
least introduce herself and give
her a minute or two on what she
does.
So this isn't a quick bill.
Sorry, um, you don't have to be
quick. So, uh, go ahead and
introduce yourself, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Bradfield, I'm
an attorney in Albuquerque, I'm
from New Mexico and my family's
from New Mexico. I am working
with a project um that wants to
install large digital
infrastructure facilities in New
Mexico, some down in the border
plex region and some around the
central part of Albuquerque near
his.
Weblo, um, our development is
focused on solar power
generation, um, and so that's
what we are, are targeting for
this. Um, this development would
bring in numerous jobs and great
investment to the state and the
flexibility of using microgrids
that could be developed sooner
than some of what our public
utilities can provide would also
provide power solutions for some
of our Native American areas
throughout the state that have
not been able to be served by
our public utilities so far.
So we are looking for solutions
where we can put power in place
so that New Mexicans can have
greater economic opportunities
and we can diversify our economy
and a really meaningful way
while we capitalize on our
renewable infrastructure that
continues to build.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Great. Thank you. Is there
anyone here in the audience
supporting this bill?
A couple of people. Is there
anybody here to oppose no one in
the audience, and I have one
online that's a supporting. So
the supporters, if you please
come to the middle.
And uh let's hear a few comments
from you.
Madam Chair, members were strong
supporters of this legislation
when it comes down to microgrids
and the technology, it, it helps
a lot better. It takes us a lot
of strain off the power grid and
then it, it's dispatchably more
intelligent to distribute power
to where it needs to go, and
it's just economically
beneficial so we support this
legislation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, excuse me, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Charles Goodmacher,
registered lobbyist for several
groups including NMBC Action
Fund, and we support.
This measure, along with other
measures for increasing
electrification and the use of
renewables in our state. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, and um although it's
Wrong timing. Uh, we'd like to
thank Charles, uh, Goodmaker for
the breakfast this morning. OK,
online, we also have Michael.
In support
Madam Ja remembers
first and last name. Yes, Madam
Chair Members Committee Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. We
serve electricity to the eastern
part of the state. Uh, we are in
support of the bill and we think
that it's really important to
start thinking out of the box in
order to allow New Mexico to
compete with other states for
economic development projects.
We think this is a tool, uh, for
bringing new jobs and investment
into New Mexico.
Uh, it gives optionality for
large customers to get power
sooner than currently can be
provided and for an example in
the Southwest Power pool is the
regional transmission
organization where we serve
power, there's at least a 4 year
time delay or time wait for
interconnection study work when
new loads of that magnitude 20
megawatts greater, uh, are
connected to the system.
which puts New Mexico at a big
disadvantage if these customers
are allowed to build their own
grid and, and or generation and
then have the opportunity to
allow the utility to build up
its, it's, uh, infrastructure.
There can be a switchover where
we could then serve those loads
at a later date, but it doesn't
preclude those jobs from coming
to New Mexico. So we see as a as
a positive opportunity for the
state of New Mexico and we uh
appreciate it.
Uh, support for the bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. D'Antonio. Um,
There was no one I would like to
ask again, is there anybody in
the audience opposing this?
OK, we're now going to questions
and comments.
From committee members, and I
will start um
So Senator, uh,
This bill does not really
relate.
To
Residential projects. That's
correct.
So Senator, uh, do you give an
example?
Of a project.
That this might include, we have
several projects under consider
different counties across our
our state.
Some that are already built.
Could you describe a type of
project that this would relate
to. Ah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I'll give a brief, uh, so I
would say that it is likely that
this would be maybe for a data
center.
Um, something like along those
lines, but I'll ask my expert to
comment further.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, so there are
companies right now looking for
sites um in multiple states
throughout the Southwest for
digital infrastructure, and what
they're looking for is the
co-location of a a bunch of
different facilities together,
data centers is part of it, but
manufacturing and so you have
some very complex manufacturing
sites going in place in Was,
you're gonna have some of the
best technology developed right
across the border in Mexico and
folks want to develop a
technology core.
door just moving right up into
the border plex region that
would house um top notch
manufacturing jobs to build upon
the manufacturing that's
happening in Mexico, and then
how software and then how's data
centers there, um, that would
bring in an influx of high
paying jobs to these locations
where jobs don't currently
exist. It would bring in new
technologies that we could all
benefit from like carbon black
technologies to pave roads, um,
and it would bring in new
Um, modern infrastructure, but
the, the microgrids are to
provide the power to the
manufacturing and to the
software and the data center so
that you're not taking away
electricity capacity from locals
who live in the area and
parties, these parties who want
to come in and develop it, they
want to pay for it. So that's a
very key component of this bill.
And so these these builders,
they want upfront the cost
upfront, and this bill would
allow them to do that without
having those costs passed on to
the ratepayers.
And Madam Chair, the estimates
for New Mexico are that this
could, quite frankly generate
approximately $1.5 billion in.
So, um, thank you for that
response. So Senator, um.
If
An entity were to seek.
Um
This credit could they also uh.
Receive an industrial revenue
bond.
Believe they can't. Yes, they
can because unless the only way
they couldn't is been rated type
credit.
all the other credits
incentives, deductions, etc. to
get a company to do expand if
it's OK, I'm gonna stop and
listen to my colleagues and I
have ener C.
And Senator Hamlin.
Uh, thank you. I think that this
is a really a great idea.
Um, and it's kind of many, uh,
many flowers bloom kind of
thing, dealing with our, our
future energy needs. So I'm, I'm
really happy to see it. Just
have a little, um, couple of
questions more out of curiosity
than anything else, um, on page
two, it talks about, includes a
self-source generation resources
capable of generating not less
than 20 megawatts. How, how big
is that?
Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair.
Expert on that one you don't
want me talking about that.
That is a fairly large facility
and so I think it's enough um to
power about 100,000 homes or so,
so it's, it is a fairly decently
large facility, but if you think
about manufacturing sites, um,
those power sites are big, um,
power consumers. And so they
require more power as they go
in, um, yeah.
Thank you. And then the other
question I had was this
definition of underserved
community, um, I'm really am
thrilled that you did it toward
an underserved community because
that's what we need to really
focus on, um, and I the um
The definition where the median
income of the area is at or near
the federal poverty level. I I
like the idea of a clean
definition without all kinds of,
you know, um.
Analysis required.
You know, people of color in the
area, you know, all, all that,
it's just clean.
But what's a little bit um
concerning is near the poverty
level, who would make that
decision? Would that be tax and
rev? It makes a decision of how
near the poverty. I, I mean, I'm
glad it's near. I, I wouldn't
care if it said 150% of the
poverty level, but um.
But near is just a little thank
you Madam Chair and Madam Chair,
I, this would be sort of a new,
they would have to take all
applications into account, and
dicing and whatever they're
gonna sign off on and approve,
but I think that would be the
best.
Oh yes, it is, sorry. I
apologize, Madam Chair, Senator,
members of the committee,
um,
we took this definition from
another provision that was
recently enacted in another law
um related to utilities, so just
for consistency, the drafters
recommended um that we use this
definition, but we would be open
to amendments or changing this
definition as the bell moves.
I'm not changing it to like 120%
of poverty level or anything,
uh, because I think that's.
Um, something that needs to be
thought through, like how many
people would that effect, what
difference does it make, but I
think this near.
Giving discretion to the tax and
rev.
I mean
It just makes, I think tax and
rev nervous that they have to
make.
Um, a substantive decision, my
experience with them and working
with the alcohol tax bill, is
they like absolute clarity.
You know, just give me clarity.
Um, but I would discuss that
with them. I would just suggest
you discuss that with Texan rib.
Maybe they like it, but my
experience with a percentage or
something. Like I said, I like,
oh, and my final question was,
and I talked a little bit about
this before, is I've been really
concerned about housing.
Issues in the state and so this
is actually specific question
about the the project that this
bill is uh.
I kind of focused on, um, what
are the
Adam Chair Senator, members of
the committee, um, we are
working with the departments in
New Mexico on low income housing
solutions. Um, we don't have a
solution that we've landed on
yet for that, but we want
affordable housing and this
project will support affordable
housing that goes in around
these areas. Madam Chair,
I think we all know that it.
Jumping through hoops on fire,
you know, this is how we're
going to fix this problem, but
this will certainly help.
In a really big way.
Madam Chair, the reason I ask is
some of the maquiladora on the
Juarez side, the housing is
pretty, um, uh.
Spare, shall I say, I don't
know, not, not substandard.
That's the word I was trying to
look for. That housing is pretty
substandard and um I know it's
not appropriate to put something
like that in a tax bill, but
it's something that I, I really
hope is is addressed, because I
would hate to see, um, you know,
the building of a slum area for
workers, um, like you see a
little bit, and I was trying to
avert a word, avoid the word
slum, uh, but I used it, um.
So that's, that's a concern I
have, um, but that's not gonna
stop me from supporting the
bill, but I just, I really hope
that this company is somebody
who lets but where they want to
really create communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Madam, I'll be
making it available for folks
who want to bring in microgrids.
I was just speaking about the
example of the company, Madam
Chair, and or with reference to
future, um, you know, cause the
maquiladores, I mean, I
understand the whole rationale
and generally the housing is
better on this side than on that
side, um, but it's still not
great.
Thank you. Uh, I'd like to
identify that we have Senator
Hamlin and Senator Charlie on
the list. Anyone else?
And, uh, possibly Senator
Townsend. OK, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
mine is more of a, of a comment
and just kind of um some insight
uh into this opportunity because
um I would recommend Madam
Chair, that um members of this
committee go down to southern
New Mexico and Santa Teresa and
Selmon Park, where there's the
Border Industrial Association
there and so much activity
happening and I look at this is
like the, the wheel of a bicycle
tire, and we've got the issue in
the middle and we've got all
these spokes. And I feel that
this is kind of addressing some
of those folks, um, you know,
and talking with, with folks who
would be impacted by this, you
know, this, this creates a
foundation for some sound
approaches to helping create an
industry in our state, and
especially in Southern New
Mexico where there's a lot of
that infrastructure that Jerry
Pacheco and his crew crew have
been really working on and
housing is one of those and so
when we're seeing just, uh, uh,
you know, a surgeon in home
building, um, of various
different levels of
ability, um, and having
conversations with the folks who
are supporting this is one thing
that myself and my colleague
Representative Ray Latta are
really good about asking to make
sure that New Mexicans get
priority. And um because so
we're so close to Texas, uh, and
somebody who grew up in El Paso,
um, I want money going to New
Mexicans. I don't want money
going to Texans. And so, you
know, this is, this is also this
opportunity because there's this
infrastructure already, madam
chairs, to work with the
community college to create
these programs that will
will help provide the training
for New Mexicans in specifically
southern New Mexicans and people
in District 38 to be able to
have an opportunity for these
good paying jobs. And so, you
know, I, I, I look at this as
something that is going to be
addressing the issues. One of
the other things that was the
biggest highlight about this is
the carbon black technology
because in southern New Mexico,
we have 36 colonials that have
issues with roads all the time,
and we are struggling as a
county to be able to address
those roads because many of
those roads.
privately owned in the county
cannot maintain them.
So when we talk about this and
talking with my constituents,
they've got holes in their roads
that they would just like to
patch up.
And so it was like a light bulb
that went off with all of us. We
were having this conversation,
is that this carbon black
technology to go from a private
company to help the community in
which it's it's based to be able
to make some of those
infrastructure repairs that the
county just legally cannot do
unless they take ownership of
those private roads. And so I
see this as an opportunity to
provide just a numerous things
and just understanding that
there are so many collaborations
already happening, and this is
really just enhancing those.
collaborations, and so, um, I
look forward to this and, and we
always talk about the
infrastructure and we talk about
the water and we talk about the
electricity. When we talk about
the ability to provide all of
those things. And I know those
are conversations that BIA is
having that you are having the
Donatta community.
We are all talking about is to
make sure that it is something
that is not depleting our water
source or putting the stress on
our electricity. So I feel that
this is something that will be
really helpful for that. And so,
Madam Chair, I'm happy to
support this and as I see this
is something that will directly
and positively impact District
38 and the residents. That's
all, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
I appreciate the intent of this
bill and um absolutely.
When I imagine we pass this
taxic that it, um, credit
exists.
Data centers to southern New
Mexico. Where are we going to
get the water? I'm gonna ask my
expert to speak on this also,
Madam Chair and senator,
excellent question. I think that
we are now at a point because
we're being identified as sort
of a data center capital, if you
will. We're going to be able to
be a lot more selective with
which type of data centers come
to New Mexico. I think that you
couple it with this type of a
proposal and it really is, I
think achieving what I think
you're you and I both want to
have happen here. I will say
that I am privy to, um, and I
have been, I have toured, you
know, I chaired the Science and
Tech Committee for a long time,
so I get sucked into.
These different types of
projects, uh, there's a company
called Addison and a few others
that have come into New Mexico,
you would be surprised their
data centers now are the size of
the tail and the water usage
they drop into the water and the
water is actually um reused, I
think it can be reused like for
800 years or something. And it's
no more water than what you're
seeing. I wouldn't say that, you
know, I'm not guaranteeing you,
Senator, Madam Chair, and
Senator, that that's exactly
wow, what a solution, right? And
I think that we're going to be
able to be a comment from my.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, so
right now technology is is
expanding, especially in quickly
what you use in industrial
manufacturing or in data
centers, um, there is a lot of
innovation for air cooling units
instead of using water cooling.
And so as you see that shift and
that is definitely my client's
intent is to move to more air
chilled coolers than water
chilled coolers, you do not need
to use as much water for water
resources, um, we are primarily
looking at bracket.
treated water for those
industrial uses so that we're
not pulling on fresh water
tables and that fresh water is
left for freshwater uses for our
communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
have any more questions.
Thank you, Senator Townsend. Do
you have anything, please.
Thank you. Um.
I
If I understand that you're,
you're
Your bill will
Hopefully create some jobs in
New Mexico.
And helps um
Communities that have
power issues and opportunities,
is that, is that the driving
force?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, I,
I, I think I should have.
Well
As I
Maybe the first bill I've seen
this year that creates jobs in
New Mexico and so.
Um
Not normally one I would jump
on, but I think I'll vote for
it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Pope for the
first time and then we'll go to
the 2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, you
know, I support this bill. I
support this technology. I think
the question from Madam Chair
starting chair and Senator,
excellent question. I, um, this
potentially serve large
subdivisions when it's built
that this would be the power
source, this would be the
electric source.
that helps at all with
understood and I, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, I understand it
would also uh Senator Charlie
already mentioned the concerns
on the data center, water.
Um, now brackish waters.
Well, so that's what we're gonna
go down, but we just got.
Constituents with salutes are
in.
Mhm
think this is a great bill. It's
great technology.
But I also see in the future
that
Or this
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you.
And I apologize, I just read um.
A concern and I thought, no,
that's not the case, and I read
through the bill again and I
think that's true. Um, this bill
is not limited to clean energy.
Is that correct, manager? Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Vice Chair. One of the comments
I made in my opening remarks, I
should have been a little clear
on the ETA that was passed
through the legislature, lots of
work. I know you, you've been a
big um this would have to adhere
to the ETA standards. So, so
that's
It well it might have been
misunderstood in the FR, we can
clarify that and I'm glad you're
getting this out in the open
here, but um whatever, whether
it's a microgrid or it's a this
or that, they all have to adhere
to the ETA. So that supersedes
whatever.
And so the ETA will OK excuse
me.
All right, and
Well that um reassures me a
little bit, but it, it is true
that it's there's nothing in
here limit.
And we, we were reading through
and just scouring the bill last
night and when I was doing my
bill prep, uh, to be in front of
you today, and I had the very
same question and thankfully we
were able to, to, to work with
the Secretary Kenny and a few
others, and we clearly clarified
that it didn't need to be
mentioned here because it
Because it rolls,
you're in the,
well, they, they.
Of course, they have to comply
with the ETA, but his, um, our
chair of judiciary said over and
over again the consequences of
failing to comply are less than
clear.
Um, so,
I, um, I mean, I'm going to
support the bill.
Just
Cause I understand it's cheaper
now to use solar and to use
wind, and that's kind of my
expectation, and also
understanding that they do have
to comply with the ETA.
Um, and that, that is absolutely
true.
Um, but it did freak me out
cause I just assumed that's
that.
That it would, um, so.
But there is no specific
language. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, if there's no other second,
I have another.
Comment. Um, and this was in the
FIR and in our committee
analysis of this sets a
precedent to put something
outside of the purview of the
PRC.
For rates.
And that concerns me.
And Chairman asked my expert,
but you are correct with your
your analysis there.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, as far as rates
go, it's is set by the an
electric service agreement, so
we worked closely with one of
the utilities to help us make
sure that we put in the right
language there, um, that is
commonly uh something that is
negotiated for industrial power
parks at first, so it's an
existing mechanism for setting
those rates under New Mexico
law, um, so that is part and
it's part of the timing issue.
And how do we get these
facilities built in time to get
the jobs, um, you heard Mr. Dan
Antonio talk.
Uh, about it taking 4 years
right now to get power online
for some of these big projects,
so, um, they did feel like the
electricity service contracts
was the best mechanism for that.
So, I see it as an end run.
Uh, I just want you to be
concerned about that as you go
forward to
tax and business. I'm gonna
support the bill, but I think
that's a big issue. And one of
the things is we have a good PRC
right now, Senator, and I don't
think um.
Setting up another path for
rates.
Um, really wanna do, but, but I
appreciate the bill very much.
Uh, any other comments or
emotion. There's a motion for a
due pass manager.
There is a motion for a due pass
from Senator Hamlin and a 2nd
from.
Could the secretary please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes, excused
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Zel.
Then, yes, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
Yeah
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend, Senator Townsend, yes,
Senator Dia Lopez, yes, Senator
Lopez, yes, Senator Stephonics.
Senator Stephonics, yes.
You have a unanimous due pass.
Thank you very much, Senator, on
to your next committee. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and we will
work through the items that did
come up. Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Scott, thank you for
waiting.
We are now on Senate Bill 391.
Air quality control Act civil
penalties, Senator Scott.
And Townsend.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
I'm bringing this morning,
Senate Bill 391.
Air quality control act civil
penalties or
Modifications thereof.
This bill came about.
As a consequence.
Um
What I thought were egregious
penalties.
To accompany
That was trying to do the right
thing.
Actually
Was doing the right thing.
These folks acquired.
Another company
They
acquired that company.
With perhaps less due diligence
than they should have used.
But at the end of the day, there
were no.
Environment Department notices
of violation.
In effect
time of the acquisition.
They went through after the
acquisition and did an audit.
And found a number of issues.
That they felt required.
Remediation
Spent significant dollars.
To effect that remediation.
And at the end of the day.
We're fine.
A significant number of dollars.
By our environment department.
Or failure to reply or.
Failure to report.
And the with the failure to
report most of that.
Being from the previous owner.
So this bill does a couple of
things. Yeah.
It does not allow.
The assessment
Of civil penalties based on
ability to pay.
Basically what we're looking for
here.
Is the punishment
Should fit the crime.
A 5 barrel water spill.
It costs
Company X
$1000.
Should cost company Y.
Also
$1000.
Rather than
Facing those.
Finds
They are the size of the
company, which is.
Current practice
The other two things it does.
is if the violation is self and
the company is taking.
The appropriate action.
To eliminate the problem.
Mitigate
Environmental damage.
And
And basically restore.
Environment to its condition.
Prior to incident.
They should not be fun,
basically if they're trying to
do the right thing.
They should not
A subject to civil penalty.
And then the second part of
that.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee is if there is a
mishap.
an equipment failure.
As if they are operating the
equipment.
Within its design parameters.
Maintained according to
manufacturer's recommendations.
And again
are taking steps.
To mitigate and remediate any
damage that might be caused.
Caused
They would not be subject.
You're civil penalty.
And now stand ready for
questions.
Thank you. Uh, is there anybody
in the audience here to support
this bill?
Is there anybody in the audience
to oppose this bill.
Is there anybody online for this
bill? OK, we are now going to uh
questions from the committee and
Lopez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
start with the most um.
dangerous thing about this bill.
To the state and that is um the
EPA.
The the
As you know, Congress has
delegated authority to the EPA
regulate nationally.
Then the EPA delegates authority
uh to the states to regulate.
It's the states and then
counties and cities if they
choose to, to regulate on a
local level.
And in accordance with that, the
uh, the state has a
responsibility of creating a
what is known as a state
implementation plan or SIP, they
often call it, and that is the
collection of all of the
regulation regarding air
quality.
And those laws have to be at
least as stringent as federal
law.
Congress requires that, that
that any
State laws, and if not, the
consequences for having
regulations that violate the EPA
guidance and and standards is a
loss of federal funds and they
start with transportation funds.
And we get a lot of
transportation money, and so we
would be violating.
What the EPA requires, and thus
setting ourselves up for an
automatic, it's not a
discretionary thing, they
automatically terminate federal
funds if your SIP, well, I
shouldn't say automatic.
There is a process, um, they at
first they do a federal
improvement plan because they
don't like your state
improvement plan, so then they
impose their own air improvement
plan called the FIP.
And then if you violate the 5,
then there's a consequence. Um,
so saying all of that, it, I'm
really troubled by by this. This
is, this would.
Oh my gosh, um, this would
Right now, the the companies are
supposed to self-report.
So basically this would give
everyone a a pass. The problem
is a lot of companies don't
self-report, and I don't, I
mean, maybe this would make some
companies.
Um, report a little bit more,
but it's giving all of them a
pass for doing what they're
supposed to do under law anyway.
So that's, that's a, a problem.
Um, cause
You know,
And then this ability to pay
thing, that's that is in the EPA
guidance, that is part of EPA
guidance, and it's interesting
because a lot of times people
are real concerned about the
small producers and so.
I don't understand why we want
to get rid of that.
Um
A, it's EPA guidance, and again,
you don't want to risk.
Losing federal funds, but also.
That's kind of a principle that
we have in our state about
ability to pay being kind of
relevant.
Um, to
To the consequences, um, because
it's proportional, right? It it
Chevron.
Nothing, uh, a little be like
this is nothing but to a small,
a small uh producer, it might be
very significant, so that's a
problem and then.
Um, the.
Um
and the mitigation too, that's,
that is something that you have
to.
Um, this will create a lot of
litigation about what is
mitigation right now, the what
happens is that ED works with
the, with the emitter.
Uh, on what mitigation might
mean, including just uh
installing technology, and I
would hate to.
Have this be a litigated thing,
I'd rather have it worked out
with the agency and the
And the emitter because those
those negotiations are usually
better for the state and better
for the emitter, instead of
going to court, paying a bunch
of lawyers and and basically not
having any impact on air
quality, but just making a lot
of lawyers rich. So for all of
those reasons, I, I oppose this
bill, Madam Chair.
I, I, I guess I'll just say, I
mean, I welcome if you have any
response, but I'm very sure of
my analysis about the.
Man.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. It it needs to be
noted.
The current statue.
As May.
Take into consideration these
other factors.
With the assessment of civil
penalties.
This legislation merely codifies
that to say.
They shall take into
consideration.
These other factors.
And, and in addition, I mean we.
We passed a constitutional
amendment that said we can't
hold people.
In jail just because of an
inability to pay.
And
There are 8th Amendment issues.
With
With respect to trading.
Everyone the same way.
For the same crime.
I mean, that's a basic tenet.
Of, of
Not just our Constitution, but
The United States Constitution.
And
Facing fines.
Not on
Knock on the.
The infraction
But rather would seem to run
aground.
On those
Eighth Amendment issues.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh thank you, madam chair.
There's a huge difference
between she and May and would
make all of the difference in
the EPA evaluation of this, and
then umunitive damages are.
Um, is a concept in law that is
specifically based on what would
change behavior. So punitive
damages to McDonald's are very
different from punitive damages
to a. Um, so that, that's just
not persuasive. Um, but the
biggest problem is this, this
really threatens.
Um
Well, I, I have a lot of respect
for the EPA. It's an agency with
a lot of experience and um a lot
of knowledge.
And
I know because as I told you, I
used to represent the air
quality control board. It is our
responsibility to comply with
the EPA guidelines and the EPA
and, and the federal law.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Before I go on, um,
Uh, the department is not here,
uh.
Environment department because
number one, they are opposed,
but that's not the reason
they're not here. They are in
litigation about this matter.
And that is why they are not
here.
So, um,
And that was from the secretary.
Is there anybody else who'd like
to speak?
Uh, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I would,
I would argue with my, my
good senator.
The Elopas on the antenna of the
legislation.
Just to make a cleaner world.
And, and when
What happened in in this
particular case that we
are talking about is a company.
Who purchased another company,
did a
The audit.
And in the process of that self
audit, they reported to the
environment department that we
found an issue.
And that we're going to address.
They spent significant money,
about $100 million I'm told.
a mediate the problem under the
direction of the department.
And after they had
Alleviated the issue.
Under the guidance and with the
direct input of the
environmental department.
They received a fine.
The same thing happened on a
water district down.
Uh, in southern New Mexico a few
years ago where
A sewage plant had a an
accidental discharge into the
rig ramp.
And uh reported that.
It went down the river.
It was cleaned up under the
direction of the
Um, environment department.
Um
And in that case,
There was a litigation in in
under uh TECQ, the Texas
Environmental Quality Control
Board.
And the
Luter, if you want to call him
that, in in New Mexico, a fine
was levied.
Subsequent to the cleanup,
subsequent, all that, then the
Mexico came back in and said,
oh, we, we, we missed that. We,
we want to find you too.
And in fact, in that case, the
EPA, I think sued New Mexico and
said you can't do that, we've
already had a settlement.
So, with all due respect,
Um, I don't think this changes
the law at all.
It just directs the
Environment
Board
Um
To consider.
processes.
I don't think a younger man.
should spend more time in prison
than an older man.
Just because he has more life.
And that's exactly what this
does. It looks at and says a
younger man.
This is exactly what's
happening.
A younger man.
Under this
Um, guidance.
Should have a more severe
penalty.
Because he has more life to
give.
And that's not what America is
built off of.
And that's, that's my point.
That the penalty should be the
same for
Younger, older.
You know, one race or the other.
And
And in this
What this company could have
done.
is not self-reported.
Because this
The plant had been
Inspected by the environment.
Board on multiple occasion.
They had missed this.
It was only because of the self
audit that that it was reported.
And that's my point.
I'm not, I'm not.
If the environment board had
gone into the, the plant and,
and discovered the
The uh engineering mishap.
And had fined the operator, so
be it. That's the way it's
supposed to work.
But when one finds.
Get through their own initiative
and self-reports, it should have
some, um,
It should carry some weight, and
that's all this piece of
legislation is asking is if you
self-report.
And you're doing it right.
You ought to have some leeway
because of it.
In the end, a cleaner world
existed because of what they
Found under their own initiative
that the Environment department
they self-reported, and that is
why I say in the end a cleaner
world existed because of it, and
I think that ought to have some
value. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Listening to some comments, but
reading the bill and
I
Really don't see that in the
bill.
You know
If this was a situation where
An individual
But a company or
was in this industry and that
situation happened. I, I'm not
reading that in this bill, how
that's going to correct the
issue.
What I'm reading in the a
violation of self-reported and
the media is taking the
appropriate action to eliminate
or remediate or otherwise
mitigate the environmental
damage resulting.
From the Permit's operations or
the violation.
As a result of a mishap, or
mechanical function.
And not gonna go on and on.
But reading that.
To me, opens up that.
Anyone can have an issue of a
violation, self-reporting.
Everybody really gets off Scott.
The way I read that.
And so
For me, this is.
A road that we can't be going
down. Once again, I'm not an
attorney. I don't know the
language.
Looking at the FIR.
Understanding what's coming from
Senator Sio Lopez, like I always
say, I'm not an attorney.
us better than most of them.
That's what it is.
Um
But I think
This is just important that we
don't open this up, I, you know.
Accidents happen. We want the
self-reporting. Unfortunately,
we're not always getting it.
But it's what's at stake here.
You know, we talked about prior
bills. You can even look at,
look at the FIR so.
I guess I just have one
question.
It says oil and gas production
produces varying levels.
of methane
Particulate matter, nitrogen
oxide, and other chemicals.
These chemicals from fossil fuel
production have been linked.
Increased risk of asthma, lung
disease, and mortality with the
risk of these diseases generally
found to be increasing with
closer proximity to production
centers.
That produce air pollutants.
Would you agree with that
statement, Madam Sheriff
Senator?
Madam Chair and senator, I would
not.
And the reason I would not is
that
Virtually
Every
Company.
In the oil and gas business.
And
Well
Both in the southeast and
northwest.
Try to operate.
To the best of their abilities
in an a prudent.
And an environmentally
sensitive.
What this piece of legislation.
tries to do
Is make the punishment.
It's the crime
And
And recognize.
That most of the folks that are
in the
In the petroleum business.
In this state.
are out there trying to.
They are not
Daily getting up in the morning
and saying
Let's go pollute the environment
and.
I think, I think this body.
The state
Recognizes.
The benefits that are accruing.
To
Who are children
You
Our budget
That this industry brings
2
To us
The benefits that it brings to
us.
And I can and I can.
Of course I've lived there for
40 years. I've had mishaps.
I've had a spill.
I've reported the spill.
Cleaned it up
At
The area
Inspected
Are the appropriate authorities.
And moved on in most cases I
think maybe virtually all cases.
With minimal penalties.
I was out there trying to do the
right thing.
I don't think
The Chevron or Devon or.
Newer
Or any other outfit that's out
there.
I
Is doing things any differently
than I did.
And
Our fine structure, our penalty
structure.
should recognize.
Folks
Trying
To do the right thing.
And encourage.
Self-reporting.
Encourage environmental cleanup.
Mitigation of whatever damage
may have occurred.
Rather than
Create
Oh
A confrontational, we need to be
trying to work together.
Not
Against one another
Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, you know, I don't think it's
a question of people in the
industry are all bad actors. Bad
actors, good actor, um, I don't
believe that's
What this is about.
It's really about the safety.
of Mexico. I think whether you
self-report or not.
The science is clear on.
What the impacts are, some of
these.
Fossil fuel
Substances and
Extractive industries and what
it does to the health.
Disagree on
The path of this bill.
I'm all for self-reporting. I'm
all for.
folks out there trying to be in
the industry. I
I respect
The
Resources and the financial
prosperity, the at the same
time, this is the resource.
New Mexico
So we cannot go, you know, we
have to work together.
Where there's an industry, but
we're also and for me, Senator,
Madam Chair.
Um
This is just a direction that.
I cannot support
Thank you, madam.
Uh, next I have Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um, I'm curious,
the company that you keep
referring to what what company
is that?
Park of resources.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, could you repeat that?
Targa, Madam Chair, senator.
Arga
Resources
And Madam Chair, Senator, it's
not the company that purchased
the smaller company or was that
the smaller company?
I was fired.
Company, Madam chair.
I think, uh, thank you, madam
chair. Uh what was the smaller
company?
Senator.
Uh
I believe the smaller company.
was named Lucid.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
In the process of.
Acquiring and self reporting.
Um, it shows her in the FIR that
um self reporting excess
emissions.
Have access to affirmative.
The fence.
Can you talk about Targo or
Lucids, probably Targas.
Um, experience in
Um, there in their affirmative
defense.
Uh, Senator Charlie, are you
asking about the lawsuit?
I'm, so it's saying here and it
relates Madam Cha saying and has
essentially a process by which
if you're if you're violating a
penalty.
You have recourse through
affirmative defense. So I'm
asking because um the senator
brought up the specific um
company here.
What their experience was going
through the affirmative defense.
OK, so that is what is in, does
that answer your question?
No, madam chair, because I
right, we're here correcting,
um.
Um, we're amending a law based
on their experience, so I wanna
know what their experience was.
OK, so Senator Scott.
Madam Chair, that is not been
resolved yet.
And I am aware of
A 125.
Ageloser minus response.
To the documents levying the
fine against.
Uh,
tariff or the.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
pulls it all together for me,
um.
Madamarian Senator, do you value
accountability?
Madam Chair and senator,
absolutely.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you, um, because.
I think what this.
Bill would do.
It's actually
Eliminate or lessen
accountability for people who
are in violation of um the air
Quality Act. I, I actually think
it's letting the fox into the
hen house.
Um
But even more so I'm, I'm
thinking about the communities
that are disproportionately
affected by unsafe or bad air
quality or FIR, um, Madam Chair
points to Eddie and Lee County,
which Senator Scott, you
represent having the worst air
quality in the state. Madam
Chair, could you tell us what
that is from.
I, I guess the only response
that I have.
Madam Chair and senator is.
I'm not aware of any foul air.
In my community. OK, Madam
Chair, um, Senator Scott on the
2nd page of the FIR. Do you have
that in front of you?
Uh yes, senator, I do.
OK. On that second paragraph
there, it says Eddie and Lee
County are both in the 95 to 100
percentile of national levels
for ozone and in the 95th to
100th percentile of state
levels, um, for particulate
matter. um, and that's a report
coming from the New Mexico
environment department and Madam
Chair, what I'm trying to get at
is that, um, if we do not have
account.
and recourse, um.
The air for your constituents in
particular, I, I was looking
over at your um.
Your placard there and you
represent.
Um, Eddie and Lee County sir, it
could get worse.
Um, under this bill, um.
And, and I'm concerned for your
constituents, um, as well as all
of New Mexico, Madam Chair, um,
and, and while I appreciate.
The thought and argument around.
Applying equality and wanting.
Equitable response for
violations, we cannot pick and
choose when and where we apply
equality, Madam Chair, thank you
very much.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
Senator Cervantes.
And then Senator Russel.
Uh, good morning, Senator, good
morning. uh, your bill goes to
Judiciary gets out of this
committee so I won't belab too
much, but I always think it's
useful for
Um, everyone.
Who doesn't get a chance to
serve on judiciary as well too
to maybe understand some of the
concerns that we would have with
the bill.
To, uh, this is the new
language. It says a civil
penalty shall not be assessed
based on ability to pay.
I'll come back to that in a
minute. I'm not really sure why.
We would ever do that. It seems
to me that a lot of our fines
and penalties take into effect
the resources of the company the
find that may have a meaningful
impact on on aco Phillips may
not be the same as a
One of the intermediates or or
smaller companies, and that's
kind of the nature of litigation
in general when we impose
penalties on companies I do that
when I ask for what are called
punitive damages.
And what it takes to try and
deter part of the purpose of
that kind of thing is to deter,
which is the point, uh, Senator
Charlie is making, which is
we're trying to do that, what it
takes to deter.
Maybe a company your size or
something's not gonna be the
same. So, so we usually do take
into consideration the ability
to pay.
Um, I do also have some concerns
when the, when the immunity,
this is essentially an immunity
bill.
That there's there's immunity of
the violation self-reported, I
think goes on to say, and if the
permittee is taking the
appropriate action.
Well, that's meaningless, of
course, uh, what is the
appropriate action to you as a
producer is not going to be the
same thing the agency is going
to decide in some bureaucrat in
the agency who's going to be
making those decisions in a
cubicle is gonna decide what
that appropriate action is in
their mind and then you're gonna
go up the chain and do the
bureaucratic dance until you get
to a hearing officer and then up
through the courts and nobody
will ever know what the
appropriate action is and the
immunity here attaches when they
take the immunity appropriate
action. those are problematic
kind of terms for those of us
that.
have to practice in the law. The
same thing with the second
paragraph where immunity would
attach if the violation is a
result of a mishap.
Or mechanical malfunction.
So long as they can demonstrate
a history of maintaining it.
Uh, the equipment according to
manufacturers's recommendations
and they're taking the
appropriate action to eliminate
remediate, or otherwise
mitigate. So again, I hope you
can understand when, when any
law that we pass has language
like that, so indeterminate and
ambiguous.
Um, people like me are gonna
push back and say, hey, you're
just asking and we're just
passing laws that again,
generate lawsuit after lawsuit.
And I, I really may seem odd to
folks, but as a lawyer, I'm
really trying to avoid lawsuits
every chance I get. I, it's not
good for me to advise a client
like you comes in my office and
says, what do I do here? And I
said,
I can't give you any advice. I
don't know what an appropriate
action is gonna be according to
somebody in Santa Fe. So I, I
look for a chance to eliminate
that language too so we get
there, we'll get there. I, I do
wanna at least um point out a
couple of things too. One is
I think I'm the only Democrat so
far who's voted against Senate
Bill 4, although my
understanding is kind of stalled
and sitting around for about 3
or 4 weeks now because I think
folks are beginning to realize
the implications of us passing
it out of this committee, um,
and, and I bring it up only
because it's important for my
colleagues to understand, I
think that
Um, you, you're getting, I hope
you're getting support for the
industry from this committee. We
should be, but, but when I talk
to folks in the industry,
they're, they're loving the fact
that our budget has gone from 7
to 8 to 9 to $10 billion that
we're increasing fees and um and
government spending and frankly,
the industry loves it because
they know that as long as we
have attached ourselves to that
wagon.
We're gonna have to stay
attached to that wagon and we,
we, we've made this bed for
ourselves, so I, I don't think
we can afford to be um.
Uh, hard on the industry, uh,
unreasonably.
But at the same time, we should
be leading the country in the
best way to produce oil and gas,
but we, let's face it, we've
hitched ourselves to your wagon
and so again, that's why
something like Senate Bill 4
I'll say, well, I can't support
this because it would
essentially decimate your
industry and we can't afford to
do that anymore. We're, we're
relying on it so heavily. So I,
I want to disabuse you or any of
your colleagues with the notion
that I, I want your industry to
fail.
Uh, I just want it to be as
cleanly operated as we could
possibly do. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, any further
questions, comments, oh,
senators, oh, I'm sorry, you
were on the list.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Uh
I, I do want to point out to.
The panel up here.
That uh
Has Eddie and Lee County become
like the poster child for
cleaning up their air problems
down there.
And this was decided by the EPA
and the Environment Department.
Madam Chair and senator.
I believe the industry will
represent that in spite of.
Record levels of production.
In the last few years that
emissions.
have actually declined.
So
One could make the case.
And operating much cleaner
manner.
And Mr. Chairman, I think that's
very important for the panel to
understand that these emissions
have declined in spite of the
growth in production because the
industry wants the same things
that everybody else in New
Mexico and the world wants
cleaner air, cleaner water, the
list goes on and on, and they
are making great strides to get
that done.
I have a a.
Whenever you were saying that
some of these companies and the
reason this bill is for coming,
come forward is because if there
is a problem that they do
self-report the.
Uh
The reports that are coming in
from the environment department
after a company is
self-reporting.
They understand that.
There is a need there to do this
reporting.
So that the environment
department and the uh
environment department and the
EPA can't both.
Say, OK, what is the problem
here? We can help you get this
problem fixed and tell you what
you might need to do to mitigate
the problem in the future. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair and senator, that is
exactly correct.
This bill
The intent of this bill.
was to encourage.
Cooperation rather than
confrontation.
And Madame cheered to me that.
Madam chair
Uh, to me, that's very important
because the confrontation aspect
of it whenever there is a
company.
That, uh
Chooses not to self-report,
because maybe the.
A confrontation aspect of it.
That it means that that is a.
That actor in my opinion.
Whenever this company that did
take over this.
Company that was formerly owned
by Brand X.
There was no disclosure, was
there from the first company
that was selling to the 2 over
the problem. Was there any
disclosure done?
Madam Chair, there was some due
diligence done.
But I think
It was taken at face value that
because
There were no violations.
Currently active.
During that acquisition that an
assumption was made, perhaps an
incorrect assumption.
That the operation was in fact
in all of the current
regulation.
Well, thank you for that
explanation there and to me
that's very important.
So anytime that there is an
infraction of problem, a, a
mishap, machinery breaking down
beyond the operator's control,
and it is reported, shouldn't
there be some sort of.
Satisfaction in this company's
self-reporting that there will
be.
Even though they reported it,
they're not gonna get hammered
just because they might be a
major or just because they might
be a minor.
Player in the industry, is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator.
It's important
To me
And in a with a a any concern of
a set a company.
Engaged in their business trying
to do the right thing.
And
We live in a mechanized society.
Things break.
And
Sometimes the consequences of
those things breaking.
are so minimal as to escape any
kind of
They would escape notice.
Yeah.
Perhaps a good long while.
But when they are discovered.
And reported
And the problem is solved.
That seems to me to be.
What the New Mexico uh people.
would be looking for with we're
getting to a cleaner
environment.
If you've got somebody out there
trying.
They should not be hammered for
the effort.
Madam Chair and Senator Scott, I
agree with you.
Completely, and it's all
summarized here, madam chair,
and members of the committee.
In the analysis that was
prepared by the Department of
Justice, and it's on the 2nd
page and whenever you read bill
summary.
That's where it stated right
there.
Uh, this bill would provide that
no civil penalty would be based
on a permitte's ability to pay
and that self-reporting
violators and violations caused
by equipment malfunction could
not be subject to penalty
provided that the polluter was
actively pursuing appropriate
measures to prevent future harm
and to correct any environmental
damage, and that's what this
bill does. Is that correct,
Senator Scott?
Madam Chair, and Senator, I
believe that this piece of
legislation is enacted, we
actually get a cleaner
environment as a consequence
because companies will be more
willing to come forward with
Even modern mishaps.
And Miss
Madam Chairman and Senator
Scott, I agree with you.
Completely because if we're just
like I said earlier, if they're
being hammered.
There will be no self-reporting.
Those companies will move out
just like the uranium and
whenever we are talking about
actively pursuing appropriate
measures to prevent future harm
and correct any environmental
damage.
That's what you're striving to
do here.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
thank you very much.
Thank you, um, Senator Townsend
for the 2nd time, but I do want
to make a comment.
First, um,
It was identified that the
department, where did I have
this mark.
They do, uh
Allow an affirmative defense.
And they do um.
Adjust
The penalties
So I just wanted to point that
out. Senator Townsend.
Yeah, man, I was just watching
the
Um, dictation.
And I don't know what.
It was throwing the F-bomb up
there.
is what
Uh, Senator Scott was saying.
And I looked at that and I
thought that is not what he
said. So, for the people that
may be watching.
Um, yeah.
That's what it said. Go back and
look.
I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.
The language and uh.
No, I'm not kidding.
OK, so we need to make sure they
need to go back.
And
OK, you're, it's gonna take some
going back into the archive to
do that.
Thank you, Senator, for bringing
that up. Madam Chair, I am
passionate about this piece of
legislation, but would never.
I'm sure that somebody would
have stopped you. But anyway,
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, uh,
Me
that that was my main point. I
was looking up there and I
thought, wow.
I hope so public.
I haven't been watching it and I
just happened to see it when it
popped up there and I thought,
I wonder who else has been, uh,
Reported in saying that what.
But my point is you're exactly
right. There is a process.
This is not an oil and gas bill.
It, I mean, we're a couple of
oil and gas guys and you guys
think we're doing it for a
little gas. This is just a
I think a good business bill. It
doesn't make any difference
whether you're picking cotton.
Sweeping pecans.
There's, there is impact for the
work that we do, building on the
highways, whatever.
My, my point and signing on this
bill was to try to make it to
where it was a.
process where industry and the
A regulator could work together
to clean up the world. That's
the intent of the piece of
legislation.
From my perspective. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
Senator Cervantes Madam Chair,
again, I appreciate the
opportunity, but same question I
asked, it seems like every time
when this
Mitty, is there anybody here
from the environment department?
Thank you, uh, Senator
Cervantes, I did text the um.
Secretary, he indicated that
they are opposed to the bill,
but they are not coming because
they are in litigation and if we
uh uh testify it, it will be ex
parte.
Yeah, that's an excuse. It
really doesn't ring.
True to me, uh, but anyway, I,
they, they don't have been
showing up and I guess the, the
reason I asked that is not to be
too harsh on them, but to
reemphasize the point made this
would probably affect
Farmers, uh.
Ms. Barncastle over there in the
corner Miss Hamblin knows this
from our part of the woods when
you're harvesting pecans this
time of year, you're kicking up
a lot of dust.
You got fires burning and so
forth, and sometimes that turns
into an issue too so we had this
issue also in.
Let's keep there, uh.
With dairies and with uh
fertilizer company that I know
the name.
Yeah, well again I I you you all
have heard me say this before.
We have a constitutional
provision that says we're not
supposed to pass laws that
affect litigation, and we do it
all the time and we ignore that
part of the constitution when
we, we want to pass the bill and
we don't want to pass the bill,
we invoke it to excuse why we
can't pass the bill. So, uh, I,
I don't see how this relates to.
Ongoing litigation.
I understand that it's nice to
sleep in on Saturday mornings.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I think we're ready
for a motion.
Madam Chair, I moved the table.
Uh, a tabling motion is
non-debatable. Uh, let's take
the vote and see what happens.
Cervantes.
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator.
No, Senator Hamblin, Senator
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
Now Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
Townsend, no, Senator Dia Lopez,
yes to table. Senator Dia Lopez,
yes, Senator Stefaniks.
Yes.sephonics, yes.
And uh Senator, I'm very sorry.
Madam Chair, truthfully, that
was the expected outcome. OK.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Eel, Senate Bill 412 equine
dental maintenance.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank.
I do want to make out, OK, thank
you very much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
here.
Uh, today,
Wanting equine dental mats, as
you know, I'm an.
Horse owner, I have quite a few
horses and what we are asking
here is.
For them to be able, if they are
licensed.
And registered.
Um
That they do be allowed to work
in the state of New Mexico,
joining me today is my expert
witness, Mister Wayne Needham.
He is in Amarillo, Texas right
now as we speak.
Mr. Needham, if you would like
to go ahead and introduce
yourself.
And tell what your
qualification.
Um, hi, uh.
I thank you. Um, can you guys
hear me?
Yes. Yes, we can hear you.
So, uh, my name is Wayne
Needham. I'm president of the
International Association of
Eine Identistry. I live in
Kenya, Texas. I personally like
to thank, uh, Madam Chair and uh
Senator Reel for allowing me to
testify on this bill, uh, to
introduce, um, us and what we
do. I know a lot of people may
not understand about equine
industry or teeth floating, but
horses in the wild, uh, the way
that they eat and the things
that they eat, they can um
maintain their own teeth. When
we bring them into captivity.
they have large overgrowths,
very similar to that their feet
have. And so with that, they
need annual maintenance, um,
where when you're working with
their feet, they need it every 6
weeks to a couple months, but in
dentistry, 6 months or a year,
they need maintenance. And it's
just filing down some
overgrowths that occur because
we bring them into captivity. So
I kind of want you to understand
what we do, um, in other states.
As far as our certification and
our qualifications with the
international.
Association and we're the ones
that, that certify people, um,
where the recognized body all
over the world. It's the
International Association. We
require 240 hours and 150 horses
around that to be able to
attempt certification. We
require 12 hours of continuing
education every year, um, and if
you
Think about it, that's a lot of
hours, um, close to 300 hours,
uh, uh, before we're even
allowed to start practicing, um,
legally and be certified. To put
that into perspective, that's,
I, I recently got my pilot's
license and it's 5 to 6 times
more hours to get my dental
certification that it was to get
my pilot's license. So you can
see that we put a lot of, of
time in this. Um,
So, if you want to compare that,
uh, the, the veterinary
community, um, right now in New
Mexico is responsible for doing
that maintenance and there's a
couple of reasons why we want to
help them and we want to aid
them, uh, for one, we, we take
education in, in a specific
field, very serious. Again, we
require 350 hours of
equineenttal education. Um, if
you, in the curriculums in the
vet schools, they don't require
any. Um, there are a few vets
that want to specialize and I
speak with these vets often.
They, um, they get very little
like, um, they don't ever work
on a horse by themselves. Um,
they split it with 10 other
students. They may do 2 days,
but a lot of that is more on
anatomy and the, the science of
equine dentistry, not the actual
procedure and effort. So we were
required 350 hours, they're
required 0. Again, we require 1,
12 hours annually of, of equine
dental continuing education, and
they are 0. We are
hard to work on a 150 horses
before we're certified, 150
head. They aren't required to
work on any. So they get very
few hours and, um, and then they
don't have CE requirements. Um,
they, they're like, we work with
veterinarians in other states.
We, we work hand in hand, um,
we're legal in a lot of other
states, but it's really um about
education is one of the things
that we like to talk about. Um,
in the IAED were legal in 4 of
the top 54 states were
recognized in.
were recognized in Oklahoma,
Florida, or recognized in all of
the states that recognize equine
dentistry. Currently, there's a
large animal vet crisis in the
US and New Mexico is no stranger
to that. Um, where 1500 vets
short, especially in the next,
uh, in the next 5 years, we're
gonna have to be 15 100 large
animal vet shortage, and, um,
and they're feeling that more
retiring now in the large animal
veterinarian, then they're
adding through colleges. Um,
currently in New Mexico, there's
a
100,000 horses, um, and, uh, and
all the other states like Texas
that have really big horse
populations, they're getting
ahead of the curve. I feel like
New Mexico, I'm from New Mexico,
I'm from Artesian, New Mexico.
It's one of the top 4 states in
the country. We have guys in NFR
every year. We, we compete with
our horses and um I think that
we need to get ahead of the
curve in New Mexico as well. It,
it's really about animal
welfare. It's more about the
horse than it is about the
veterinarian.
or about us.
Um, half of the vets in New
Mexico will probably oppose this
meal, uh, bill, and the other
ones that, that really see it as
a competitive threat, won't like
it, but we do have half the
veterinarian community or more
in New Mexico that will support
this bill. And but everyone in
your horse owners will love it.
Your horse owners, they want a
choice. It's their animal, they
own it. They want the choice to
be able to decide who does this
maintenance on their horse. Um,
again, our qualifications of
veterinarians, I kind of
explained that. Uh, we
Work with veterinarians in Texas
and other places. We work hand
in hand, and we know which
veterinarians are savvy and
which ones have done the extra
homework to become really savvy
and equine dentistry, and we
know the ones that are not. Some
of the ones that are not that
come out that choose to do
dentistry, uh, again, they
probably have to learn it on a
YouTube channel or learn it the
same way that any, any layperson
would earn it. They learn about
the anatomy, but they don't
learn about the mechanics. Um,
the next thing you'll hear is
about sedation. Um,
In other states, the way the
process that we do sedation is
completely legal. We are not
addressing the sedation laws in
Texas or in New Mexico, um, the
there's a current pathway I can
fill you in on that pathway if
you're, if you're unfamiliar,
but there is a pathway that the
veterinarians prescribe it. It's
a prescription drug very similar
to penicillin. Um, it is not a
controlled substance. It is not
a narcotic. Um, they're gonna
say that we're out there using
narcotics, using controlled
substances, we are not. We use a
prescription drug that is
equivocal to to uh penicillin
and um it's very safe, and we,
we work hand in hand with the
veterinarians, the other half
that would use this. And then
the other reason that we want to
become legal because in the
states that we are legal, we can
be insured. So if you have
practitioners out there right
now that are not, they can't get
insurance in your state until we
are legal in that state. So that
is another huge benefit of why
we want to be legal in New
Mexico and help these
veterinarians service the, the
horse community, um.
Needham.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for being
with us and you're, you're gonna
stay on in case there's
questions.
Mr. Needham, did you hear the
response from the chairman? You
will stay on in case there's
other questions.
Yes, ma'am. I will stay on.
Thank you.
So let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in support of
this bill.
Is there anyone here opposed to
this bill?
Is there, there's one person in
support online and uh let's hear
from that person.
Um,
hi, yes, this is Zachary Rhodes
for the record, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I want
to thank you for taking time to
hear this bill and allowing us
to speak. Uh, I am in support of
this bill, um,
I am an IAD certified ecoin
dentist. I've been practicing
for about 14 years now, and I
actually ran the government
relations Committee of the IAD
for about 7 years and
successfully passed legislation,
and Utah and Nevada and have
currently helped uh work on
legislation in Kentucky, and
South Dakota, and recently
testified in Oregon.
Uh,
as my colleague stated earlier,
Um, I just wanna reiterate the
fact that uh this bill does not
change current laws surrounding
the use of prescription sedative
drugs, um, you still do have to
possess a valid VCPR or
prescription from a veterinarian
in order to even procure those
drugs or use and administer
them. Um, one thing I want the,
the committee to understand is
that uh equine dentistry for a
long time was viewed as
as, uh, animal husbandry and no
different than being a farrier
or a horseshoer and
Uh
For the longest time, failriers
have existed with any
regulation. And so that's all
we're asking is to allow us a
legal pathway to practice and
give us the opportunity to work
with veterinarians and provide
um the utmost care for horse
owners of New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We will now
go to questions, comments from
committee members. I have
Senator Hammond first.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I don't, uh, I, I, I do want to
explore a little bit more on the
sedation and the tranquilizers,
but I do want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward because you get nipped
by a horse and you'll never
forget that. Uh, that's for
sure. And there might be some
triggers, uh, here on this, but
I certainly appreciate this
because triggers.
You got that before I did. Thank
you. And, and Madam, I'm sure,
you know, and I think this is
something that also the equine
shelters that we've been talking
about would greatly benefit
because they're also operating
on limited funds and so
many opportunities to cut those
costs to help take care of
those, those animals and make
sure that they have an
opportunity to eat their food
and be able to be nourished and
uh and all of that and also just
for overall health, because we
know that if their teeth start
decaying, then it, it can
certainly go into the rest of
their system. And I also
appreciate the opportunity that
this has in terms of like
growing our own because we talk
about shortages, especially in
these industries and we talk
about the shortage of people to
uh to shortage of farmers,
shorters shortage of
veterinarians, shortage of
Of uh of butchers and meat
processors in the state. And so,
um, I do appreciate this because
I do think that this is
something that is an opportunity
to help a number of things in in
our state, um, and, and I think
your expert talked a little bit
about it. The thing that, that
I'm wondering about is, is, are
there, you know, anybody does,
you know, when, when a horse
gets a procedure, you don't want
it.
Anytime somebody goes under
anesthesia, an animal or, or, or
a human, there's always
Concerned about whether or not
they'll come back out again.
And so, I'm wondering, are
there, are there consequences
and maybe your your expert can
talk about this if
Or giving some, some more, a
little bit more guidance on
If there are consequences for
somebody providing sedation, um,
and the horse doesn't make it.
Like what happens with that? I'd
just like some more insight on
that, Madam Chair. OK, madam
chair and Senator Hamlin, yes, I
would like for Mr. Needham to
respond, but also you have to
keep in mind these horses aren't
totally knocked out. That is a
numbing type thing just for the
mouth region. They are on their
feet the whole time they are
monitored the whole time they
reflexes, all that is.
Monitored the whole time and
within.
That all of these equine better
uh equine dental.
People the practice.
Whenever I'm going down this
road.
They are recommending to their
customers, do not let this horse
eat for about 4 or 5 hours and
then after that they're fine
too.
So it's it's very simple and
whenever you're talking about uh
the sinners for some of these
horses do go mainly sometimes
people do give up their horses
because the horse has started
losing weight and it's poor and
just doesn't look like it's
gonna make it.
And whenever the horse's mouth
is assessed and then taken care
of.
By an equine dentist.
That horse starts thriving after
that point, so there is life
after the.
Assessment by the former owner
that it's gonna die, that's not
always the case, Mister Needham,
would you like to respond to
Senator Hamlin's?
Uh, questions regarding the
sedation part of it.
Yes, thank you. uh, Mr. Hamlin.
So with the sedation, uh, like
mist Yel says Senator Gel said,
um, they are standing sedations
and um we're basically just
calming the animal as if they
were really drunk and that's a
term that we use. Um, the
sedations aren't uh like the
veterinarian that I have here on
staff. He says it is the safest
type of sedation that you could
possibly use like 0.0001
occurrences, but that is where
If we get legalized, we have
direct contact with
veterinarians. We have a
veterinarian right in our back
pocket, and we have insurance.
And so if something did happen
that was out of our scale, they
would be easily reached by
telephone because in Texas,
we're generally supervised by
veterinarians. We, when we sign
up for this certification, we,
we have a veterinarian in the
state that we have to be in
direct contact with. So we do
work hand in hand with
veterinarians have never had any
problems with sedation, but
always have that back.
to play with that veterinarian,
um, in direct contact
communication with.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Senator, I appreciate
this. Thank you for bringing
this bill forward.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
Senator Townsend, Madam, I'll
make a motion for a due pass.
There is a motion I sent.
OK, we have a motion by Senator
Townsend.
And the second
by Senator Charlie.
For do pass.
on Senate Bill 412.
Could the secretary please call
the vote.
San Cervantes.
excuse in a charity.
And Charlie, yes, and Joel,
yes, yes, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. And our Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senor Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez, yes, Lopez, yes, San
Stephonics, Shonics, yes.
Uh, senator, you have a
unanimous due pass from this
committee.
Madam chair, members of the
committee, all my horse friends
out and stayed in New Mexico.
Thank you for this.
Thank you.
So, uh, committee members, we
have to revisit an amendment,
um, when we did the very first
bill, the Rio Hondo Watershed
District.
Uh, the senator was convinced to
only insert in Taoas County in
the title.
But we actually need it in the
body as well because the title.
And so, uh, if uh I could have a
motion to strike, well.
Let's I can read it.
Well, we don't have to read it.
It's the proper motion.
Try it.
Madam Chair, I move that we
insert in Taos County online 19.
Um
Yeah, line 19 after District
insert House County in addition
to, to what we did before, which
is insert idle.
OK, is there a second?
Is there any opposition to that
correct?
I'll remember that.
Uh, thank you very much and so
we're going to make sure the
correct amendment gets in to the
uh body. So committee members,
uh, we are finished for today.
We have received a few more
bills, uh, for next week and we
will start doing if we get to
them after the bills, we start
wheel sales, but we have some
bills to finish. We have a
carryover from Senator Hamlin
either Tuesday or Thursday, and
then we have some other fresh
bills. We have um.
123.
Bills so far, but if there's any
more that are read out, we have
3 bills and 2 memorials.
So if there's any more bills
that are read out, we might add
it on, but otherwise, um.
We will be ready for the House
bills after we finish Tuesday.
Thank you very much for today
and uh please enjoy until the
floor we're in recess.
