And
please understood proceed thank
you so much madame chair before
you as a senate bill one sixty
nine this is a a redoing of our
land and water conservation fund
I I believe the water and
interest committee heard of
presentation on this the summer
at the meeting I was not would
not able to attempt so
this is an incredible program I
really didn't know very much
about it before that
presentation and before a people
started talking to me so the
land of modern conservation fund
by partisan federal program it's
been in existence since the
early seventies and in those
first two decades new mexico got
a lot of funding through it and
we did a lot of projects just
give you a few examples chavis
county thirty nine land water
conservation fund projects since
nineteen sixty six casting one
point four million
eddy county thirty nine projects
costing two point six million
and it goes on and not we've had
this in every county so it's
designed to help small rural
communities tribes and nations
at develop a land and water
conservation programs like parks
open space etc so this last year
will in twenty nineteen congress
passed the great american
outdoors act which revitalized
the land of water conservation
fund I think this was led by
sooner hindrick and he got nine
hundred million dollars added to
this program we are guaranteed
at least three million if we'll
put our promises in place
this requires it's always
required a local match and we've
always had.
The local entities required to
come up with the match in this
bill we're undoing that we're
not going to require a local
match
and we have a prioritised tribes
weblows and rural communities
so
we
we have sale to spend money in
the past we have reverted money
in the past because our process
is not set up very well so this
bill will add technical
assistance to rural communities
at tribes and quiblos
and then the state the hope is
the state this has an
appropriation of ten million
dollars for over three three to
five years of state will provide
the local match
you want to do your amendment
yes.
I could stop talking about sorry
well we usually do the
amendments first and then we get
into the explanation but all
right I think the explanation of
relevant
proceed some amount of chair.
We really want to try to fully
leverage the sponsored that's
the point of no local match and
having a staff assistance we
were concerned about staff
capacity and we've also put in
the bill that.
The
state parts can use up to seven
percent of funding because state
parks and the revitalisation of
state parks is part of land and
water conservation
so
this bill traces to.
Expand the scope of the
supplemental funding it's called
a supplemental funding because
it supplements it was usually
supplementing the other matches
but now it will be the funding
mechanism
so
I have with me three experts who
know a lot more than I do at any
of those i'm in a call on one
first a doctor bob stokes who is
the program support eminer to
to talk about the amendment.
That's this is doctor bob
stoke's program support fear of
emerge to explain them and.
Right into that and don't kind
of touch it and
good morning
so we had a two primary
amendments
the first one is that we would
like to insert
formula greens specifically
on number two here on page two
line nine after assistance
because the program actually has
two branches a wind is the
formula grants which is designed
to help the small communities
and that money comes out of our
yearly appropriations from the
national perk service.
The other one is the outdoor
recreation legacy partnership
that is a nationally competitive
uh l w c upgrade that ran by the
national park service itself and
it has a cap of fourteen million
dollars in its designed for
larger cities after help
revitalized
areas that are disadvantaged
within it.
And so if our goal is to provide
some funding for our small rural
communities and tribal groups
and so we just want to make sure
that somebody applying for an
oral app wouldn't be eligible to
apply for the
state.
The.
Walk through them on page two
line five after I
insert the.
The.
On page two line nine after
assistance and formula grants.
The.
And then on page two line ten
straight funding.
An aunt page three
loans six
after applicants and service
paragraphs technical assistance
pursuant to this paracraft will
not include a compliance
procedures conducted by the
state purchase division of m
note on behalf of apple cancer
federal national environmental
policy act.
Okay so i'm gonna ask
i'm gonna endless do we want to
make this
and page three nine six do we
may want to make it a number of
four or do we want to add it.
Question.
For the analyst.
Did you see their manner
okay i'm asking if on the number
four
if you look at the where it is
it's insured whether we want to
have it added to that paragraph
or we want it to be number four
of that section.
She'll think about that for a
minute.
This.
So we're going to make that
we're just search much better
number four.
Okay so questions comments from
the committee on the well first
of all is there anybody just on
the amendment is there anybody
who wants to comment on the
amendment in the audience.
Okay questions comes from the
committee just on the amendment.
Okay we have emotion and the
second to adopt the imminent is
there anybody opposed to the
amendment
your amendment is a doctored
thank you so now let's go back
to the bill
manager I think i've explained
it sort of overall if you'd like
to hear from a couple of my
experts I would appreciate that
but we have a chance that hadn't
was executed director in the
mexical land conservative
please definitely hear from your
expert to check
the extended share members of
the committee I job and I could
director the next go.
Led consurance
so
said stewart mentioned elderly
sieve commercial in this golden
era of community recreation
projects back in the seventies
the last the nineties.
That coincided with this
supplemental find receiving
appropriations from the
legislature that covered.
The local match for a lot of
those projects and allowed
communities who went otherwise
be able to come up with the
funding to apply.
So this bill really does you
know three things first of all.
Making appropriations to that
fund so communities again have
access to matching funds they
need it also expands the
eligibility so it raises that
population threshold of
communities were eligible for
supplemental funds it expands
access to tribes published other
unincorporated communities that
would normally have to go
through a county sponsor because
a lot of those are already
existing some divisions of the
state we figured that doesn't
really make holiday sense of
them to find a county to have to
sponsor their their projects
in education's priorities to
rural communities travel
communities
but I think perhaps most
crucially.
It allows the seat parks itself
to leverage additional federal
industry capacity grants to do
things like outreach and provide
technical assistance to those
communities that might not have
the knowledge of this program or
the technical capacity to apply
for grants by themselves.
Thanks thank you in your second
expert
madame chair doing huge deputy
secretary at the new mexico
energy minerals and natural
resources department
I think that the protem mister
behaden have covered the key
issues from emergency
perspective this address is one
of the key challenges are for
small for smaller community
munities in new mexico
applying for these programs
namely providing a predictable
and reliable source of match
funding to meet the lwcf fifty
percent match requirement and I
look forward to discussing
ability further
thank you very much well
anything else send it before I
go to the audience no you can go
to the thank you very much i'd
like to see hands of those that
are supporting this bill.
As amended is there anybody
opposed
okay let's have there is an
opposition okay so we'll hit
let's have the opposition come
up first you talk besides this
gentleman is there anybody else.
Okay it.
Yeah.
Morning manager members of the
committee howard touching soon I
live in the southwestern part of
the state.
I am not necessarily in
opposition to the intention of
of the sponsor and of the bill
itself.
A my objection goes back to the
enactment by the US congress and
the signature by the president.
It would seem that that the
nation would be better served by
having the nine hundred million
dollars a year going into paying
down our national debt.
With that matter of terror I I
say I I do support the intent
certainly our communities have
benefited from the recreational
development that has come from
these funds thank you manager
thank you very much for being
here is there anybody else
supposed.
Okay let's go to
two supporters from this side to
please come up and two
supporters from the side please
come up and I just want to know
for the public that the majority
of people in the room were in
support
ralph coming up
everybody introduced yourself
through the record and for the
audience madame chair members of
the committee ralph behavior
chairman mexico secure
commission or in support of this
as it can help our second
traditional communities and
language communities relieve
some overbird in some
barriers that they had to go
through before and get some of
these moneys into our smaller
rural communities and dumb so I
e
ask that you please support this
legislation thank you thank you
very much next.
Good morning chair committee
members my name is a then
accrees to do lou besides being
an environmental and energy
engineer i'm also the
chair of the environmental
justice caucus we were in full
support of this however I do
want to point out that are we
actually subsidizing the oil and
gas industry by doing this and I
would like to caution you
further on about doing that
because they a bit brought us to
this position in which we are
spiraling down in our planetary
systems I fully fully support
this and we need to have better
I enjoyed car camping this past
summer in my electric vehicle in
our state parks and they do need
a little assistance so very much
for it thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
is carry robin brenda
actually well please look at his
boti
actually i'm a poor excuse
my name is scott scanlon on
behalf of carry robin brunder on
behalf of western resources at
the land and water conservation
fund has been a bipartisan
effort to fund outdoor
recreation projects since the
nineteen sixties unfortunately
new mexico stop providing a
monetary match for these
projects in the nineteen
nineties and his lost tens of
millions of dollars and federal
funding to support recreation
projects in our local
communities ever since senate
bill one sixty nine revives the
state supplemental fund by
providing local communities with
ten million dollars to match
federal lw c f you can tell that
i'm carry robin brunder right
now dollars it also expands
community eligibility and makes
technical changes so the state
can support those communities as
they apply for projects like
rodeos shooting ranges
baseball fields parks and
playgrounds who doesn't want
more rodeos and play grounds
please support this bill and
little baby shilo is doing just
fine
please send her our regards.
Yes sir.
Good morning
good morning madame chair.
It members of the committee my
name is mapa borney raised in
the him as public.
A public on this typically my
hands when you're foot of an
audience however.
This morning I am humbly
grateful to be in front of you
in your committee
as the traditional song maker my
songs carry prayers for an
abundance of life.
Are brazilian sea.
And a different stating but
holding the sing feeling at
hearts I am here on behalf of
the semier project.
To express our own yielding
support for speech one six nine
the land your water conservation
fund changes.
Since time the memorial in the
nations tribes impobose have
used and continued to use water
to support our cultural
spiritual ceremonial and
traditional rates the two value
waters often unseen though most
people unfortunately take water
for granted however for us
natives in trouble communities
water secret and water's life SB
one six nine is an important
bill that would allow us natives
to press a beer our heritage
lineage and we have life it will
help ensure that we continue to
protect and conserve natural
resources for us leaving a road
communities I urge you to please
pass the bill which will not
only save guard our
environmental but also continue
to support thriving generations
to come thank you for the
opportunity to speak and most
important thank you for your
leadership to continue
commitment to native nations
thank you thank you so much
online we have two people who
wish to speak would go to adrian
and not navoro first.
The.
The.
You have a.
Are you an unmuted address and
could you please speak.
It's wide open if you're there
were ready for you.
The.
Okay let's go on to patrick
killing is our second supporter
online patrick.
Good morning man chair can you
hear me ok yes we can.
Man care of members of the
committee my name is patrick
killing registered lobbyists for
chevron as you may know the land
and water conservation fund of
the national level collect
royalties from federal option
oil and gas
and invest those earnings to
protect and promote public lands
water resources and a provide
matching grants for state and
local park and recreation
projects at the date level new
mexico and now received more
money from the federal lwc of
fund that never before roughly
three point two million dollars
and twenty twenty three to the
bill one sixty nine revives the
states the lwc have support
middle fund by providing local
communities with ten million
dollars the matter is the
incoming federal dollars to
support public parks
recreational facilities and
community centers bitter that
great bill we stand in strong
support a senator one sixty nine
and we appreciate that it was
stewart and senator nevel for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you very much do we have a
honor or not.
Please go ahead and reanne.
The.
Are you unmuted address.
Okay I think we need to move on
committee members questions
comments I have sent her hamlin
anyone else
and center city a lot as free
center hammond thank you madame
chair i'd love to take you on an
l w c f road trip if I may
because it impacts all of us in
this room you can go down to
clovis and ned halc park where
that program that parked there
serves the military basic can an
air for space has many
activities there a lot of five k
runs I believe the last time I
was there they also had a couple
of vice and there there were
there were
improvements they wanted to make
but they couldn't because they
couldn't get the application
through freld wc app then let's
go down to the soberlet
recreation area on the mascular
patchy reservation that provides
twenty four jobs for the
mescaler patchy reservation then
you got a smoky bear state park
which provides tourism
opportunities for that area I
meta owner of a hotel it just
for full transparency I worked
on this for my job and we did an
lwcf road trip to show the
economic impact of what these
public places they were funded
by all wcf provided then there's
the skate park in element border
that where it's got all of the
different different obstacles
that skape orders can go on and
enjoy and where young people can
go in columbus there is the
punch of via state park which
brings a lot of money to the
community and especially the
border lands cafe which is owned
by young woman and if it weren't
for the punch will be a state
park her cafe would not be able
to exist much less provide back
into her community then we go to
my home town of young park where
we hold the annual renaissance
craft spare every year that
brings hundreds in hundreds and
hundreds of people to our
community to help support the
dunion arts council and then
lastly there's piner women's
park for my wife and I were able
to get married in two thousand
thirteen all of these projects
were funded by the line and what
a conservation fund the
challenges is that all of these
communities want to do more
improvements to their different
areas.
And the roadblock has been that
they can not apply for those
monies that are now fully funded
to nine hundred and eighty six
million dollars as was intended
in nineteen sixty nine.
So we need this this bill is
long overdue because communities
have opportunities for these
quality of life projects that we
can expand on.
Or the communities can go ahead
and start all me to state park
element of park in alamo gordo
is also one of those and it
clearly says funded by the land
and water conservation fund
we're not using this to our full
as capabilities we're not using
this so that our communities can
benefit from this very grateful
for the sponsor for bringing
this bill and obviously you know
i'm a cheerleader for this as
well so thank you for this
matter madam chair and thank you
senators to it for this because
this is where all communities
benefit are in a variety of ways
and they get to pick those
projects.
Let's move on.
Thank you center him on center
city lopus thank you obviously
this is just a fantastic bill
and thank you for bringing it I
just want to clarify on page two
I love that we're expanding the
eligible nations driving public
state parts and other pop
political subdivisions is a soil
and water conservation district
a political subdivision that
could receive this perfect great
okay and we didn't hear a verbal
well I don't know i'm going to
turn to my first expert over
here they're all notting their
heads we have to remember that
there's people online so waving
nodding doesn't catch it for the
people watching
madame chair said as yes
Thank you that's even makes it
even greater thank you for me.
The.
That's it okay
anybody else centered a bill
before I make my comments might
close sponsor matter yes I know
mountain interest in this bill
had to do with one of those
plenty little articles we all
see about our community the
worst place in the world
there was there's four year
missas in the state new mexico.
Albuquerque cruises sanity and
farmington.
Farmington's msa is san one
county so any time there's some
statistics about how good or bad
things are it's the whole county
which includes the navigal
reservation to hatch he way down
toward crown point and we were
rated badly as an msa not
farmington are not as sick or
bluefield because all of the
things that this fund will do
that sooner senator hamlen was
talking ab.
They don't exist outside the
city limits so because of the
priority for tribes and smaller
communities I thought this would
be a tremendous asset to not
just my community but the rest
of say as well so that's my
testimony as far as being
sponsored to thank you thank you
very much for being a sponsor
my comment is that when I first
moved to the state of new mexico
I tutored the university new
mexico and purchased recreation.
And
the students went statewide to
identify all the projects that
had been completed with land and
water conservation fund and we
used to caught lock on at the
time it was the slain and it was
exciting and so I didn't keep
track of this until we had some
reports during the interims
talking about what happened with
our funds and I am very grateful
that this is coming forward and
that this is shining the light
on helping or assisting
communities thank you very much
both of you for bring this
forward
committee members do we have a
motion.
Yeah there is a do pass motion
by center hammond and a second
by senator novel.
Could this secretary please call
the vote.
Senators wanted excuse.
Santa hamburn
my country
sent an avail
center pop yes center source
yes.
Senator deal opens yes sanista
fonics yes and are before I
announced the boat i'd like to
point out to the members that
one of our interns did one of
the analysis for this ela
hatfield thank you very much and
we appreciate it you have a
unanimous do pass on this bill
thank you very much thank you
very much and chair members the
committee and i'd like to point
out that my intern cameron has
done an analysis in your book on
the sequence ration bill with
both are analysts for the
committee and with aunt who
works for the minority so when
we get to that you will see his
analysis okay we are now on the
next bill use of environment
fees and funding center pidea.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee and I see the
secretary with you yes
the protect may be coming back.
Whenever you're ready will start
please go ahead thank you very
much madame chair members of the
committee I do have experts here
secretary james kenny department
of environment and he does have.
Jonas arm stronger.
Director strategic initiatives
alright
thank you manager so I do want
to let you know that this as you
know it's not my primary swim
lane that I am always looking to
make a government or efficient
and fine ways to build economies
of scale on its really all this
built as it plans eight words in
a couple of different strategic
areas within this particular
act and it also allows the
department to use fourteen
permit funds in in a manner that
becomes much more efficient for
the work that they do in it that
they purport to accomplish
things like vehicles furniture
you name it they have to sort of
take this really weird approach
to there may be all these
resources in this one fund and
the other portion of the
department is starved for
resources but they are not
permitted are allowed to do that
so essentially that's what the
legislation does it allows them
to work much smarter not harder
and be a heck of a lot more
efficient with the type of work
they do the economies of scale
don't do anything in terms of
the general find all they do is
allow for much more flexibility
in how this work is performed at
how these dollars are used
I do have a playby play on the
various sections but I that
essentially what the legislation
is i'm gonna ask my expert here
secretary and drop a few words
and then we'll take some
questions or how we like to
proceed
please secretary good morning
chair and members of the
committee it's good to be before
you thank you for this
opportunity
this bill builds off of what we
did in twenty twenty where then
I need to representative small
bright a bill before both
chambers that was unanimous
unanimously adopted the combined
four of our funds into one
this is a similar style bill in
that it allows fourteen of our
funds to basically help as the
senator said
leverage economies of scale so
this is no diminishing of the
int.
Ended services that those funds
were set up for it is merely for
us to improve our operations
things like leases phones
computers I can tell you story
after a story I know I want to
have time and and share all this
with you but there's been
moments where our ship your own
had people but not computers are
surface water bureau had people
computers and no phones are
environmental health bureau has
had people phones computers no
cars and it's not I think the
body's intention that I don't
think it's anyone in government
legislature legislature or
executive agencies intention
that we work harder in that way
it does not make sense for
essentially need to buy fourteen
cars when there is you know
people in offices who could
share that vehicle but the way
the store type of our funding
has evolved over time at no
fault of anybody's is is sort of
singular in nature I think
really this is a good government
but this is using the fees that
the regulated community not the
general fund pays to us to
leverage those outcomes leases
cars computers phones cameras
copiers room reams of paper
pence in a way that is is just
smart
the amount of back and work we
do to track all this would make
experts and expert excel
spreadsheets confused but we
track.
Every dollar we get right now
in those fund balances so that
that's the first part of what
this bill does is it really does
help all of us to work smarter
there are three other phones
in which the legislature has
established you know somewhere
between nineteen and thirty four
years ago that has been
limitations in them so it may
cost us we can we can assess for
a public poll inspection a
hundred and twenty five dollars
for for that poor inspection but
it costs the state of new mexico
about four hundred dollars but
go do that porn inspection so it
is a sinking proposition for us
to go do those some of those
poor inspections similarly with
solid waste permits and utility
operator so we're proposing to
strike those legislative
limitations but at any point in
time if we wanted to raise any
of those fees there are
governing bodies and roll
makings we would have to go
through so I can't nobody in my
position or in this department
can arbitrarily raise things
without a stakeholder process
and a role making
I have data on all of our states
around us as to what their
charging if you're interested in
hearing about those three
particular fees but as jonas
pointed out to me and talking
about this bill yesterday those
three funds that have
legislative restrictions are the
inaquity to the other funds they
don't have those if you
understand what i'm saying there
are most of our funds do not
have legislative restrictions
the legislature has let us go
through role making to set fees
there are three funds in which
the legislature nineteen to
thirty four years ago set those
restrictions into into the funds
and and therefore we can't sort
of.
Gain economy of scale we lose
money in in working with those
regulated antities again solid
waste.
Pools and spires as well as
utility operators
with that
madam charity members of the
committee entire sponsor again
thank you for giving us this
opportunity to need to work
smarter thank you and mr i'm
showing did you want to see
anything
okay it's going to thank you I
was just going to wrap up with
just reiterating.
We will have to this department
will have to come back year
after a year after year to fill
the bucket up appropriately
through the general phone
through appropriations whereas
why wouldn't we simply allow
them to be the professionals
that they are to manage these
funds you heard from the
secretary utility operator fund
nineteen years since it's been
up the updated public school and
spot program twenty one years
solid waste.
Which even the people you know
what I do for a living even the
people that pick up your trash
have a call center of the solid
waste of thirty four years since
that has been updated we need to
modernize this manager thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone in the
art insurance is support this
bill.
Is there anyone against our
posting this bill okay we have
support an opposition so let's
have the support come first
please.
Five thousand members and
supporters we support this bill
I believe the environment
department more than any other
agency realized on funds
collected across fourteen
permanents to pay for shared
overhead like leases of vehicles
and other things a secretary
kind he has mentioned this is
just a way to allow the
environmental protection agency
to be more fiscally affected
without using any additional
general funds so we just assert
you will support in when I think
the sponsor for this bill thank
you thank you very much any
other supporters
okay we'll go to the opposition
in the room
is there anybody online.
Okay so I think we have two
oppositions
run opposition.
Hello good morning my name is
sara per find out the executive
director of the new mexico
recycling coalition where a
member supported nonprofit with
members throughout the state
about two hundred members
representing public tribes
initialities and to say that
we're opposed to the bills a
little extreme we support the
agency being able to access its
funds more efficiently we know
that it's important to have
funding to be able to do their
work i'm just concerned about
the recycling and illegal
dumping fund and that adding
operational expenses to the use
of that fund might have
jeopardized the recycling and
legal dumping grant this is the
only funding source in our state
that gives communities access to
money to clean up legal
dumpsides recycle tires build
recycling infrastructure it's
about eight hundred thousand
dollars per year since two
thousand and six they've awarded
over three hundred and sixty
small grants include about
twelve million dollars to our
communities and our members so I
just asked the lawmakers in the
sponsors consider safeguarding
that ground funding for our
communities thank you thank you
well her response from the
security later about that that
next opposition please
more to madam chair members of
the committee my name is.
I have the sweetspite there
my name is tjacher heal number
registered lobbyists for free
port mapper and this particular
matter I apologize first of all
the sponsor I did not get a
chance to talk to him because we
just find out about the bill as
well as the secretary
report deathly supports the
intent of the bill
and I before the rest of my
comments are so will be the
first ones to step up and
support the secretary's budget
request double the phillies gaps
unfortunately
for those you the may have come
back to two thousand nineteen
that have been around
to the pedford bill was a bill
that very much so similarly
matches this bill the problem
with this bill is that by
removing or adding the language
to allow them to move the funds
to other particular portions of
the department you're the fee
becomes an illegal tax
the pet food bill to give you
some background on that the
petrol building basically
exactly and thing it's been
later gated right now it's
pending in the first judicial
district court we do have a
ruling by the united US district
court for the district of new
mexico that such transactions
are improper in other words when
you assess the fee it can only
be used to administer the
program which the fee was
assessed for this bull
effectively uses excess money
and uses it for other programs
and that because makes it an
illegal tax so without a
fortunately we opposed the bill
not but not because of its
intent but because of the way
it's structured you're gonna
have a similar bills and the
session goes along the
attacks the partner you can hear
a bill and I don't have to go
off home ahead but there's one
dealing with I mean as part is
in counties being assessed a fee
and it being used for other
purposes of being accents
excessive so this is not just a
problem that's occurred to one
department this is a problem
across the state government
continues to be a problem.
So we wanted to raise that
and make sure the sponsored
discommunity aware of the the
illegal nature of the way the
fees are being used by no
thought that the secretary is by
any mean this has been issue
that traditionally is I I would
say it's been looked at the
other way
but unfortunately a fee that
success needs to be used for the
program in which it's an in
which it's assessed for a
ministering thank you
thank you very much.
Anybody else in opposition okay
mister secretary could you
address some of those issues
before we go to questions and
comments yes thank you madame
chair and appreciate the public
comment both in in both
directions actually and with
respect to the recycling and
illegal dumping fund that is a
fine that we absolutely don't do
not want to take services away
from and maybe just broadly
there's no reduction in services
only economies of scale to gain
from this bill
and with respect to recycling
and illegal dumping you know
that's a pride enjoy of our
program of our department to be
able to hand out those grants so
having more.
Administrative operations to
support rade as we call it
recycling and legal dumping is
exactly what we're trying to do
here there has been moments
madame chair and members of the
committee that are solid was
bureau struggled and maybe even
wasn't going to hand out those
rate grants one year because we
just did not have the
infrastructure to be able to do
it both people are as well as um
you know that the systems in
place to be able to monitor the
grants and their effectiveness
so
I think this is insuring rate
survives and continues to thrive
and manage her members of the
committee with respect to you
dj's comments we we did look
into that we're aware that
they're that you know that there
could be a allegation of that we
have somewhat sure plus money I
somewhat laughed at the idea
that we have surplus money
we don't have to surplus money
the money that we're collecting
you know is is like if you look
at our mark has building where
we have osha and air quality
people here in santa fe
you know there are times in
which those cubicles and that
that area goes open or they
become open and I would love to
be able to play additional staff
in those cubicles but because of
the way the funds are set up I
can't do that so if a fund is
paid by the air quality program
I can't put somebody else in
there maybe it's a rate employee
that we'd want to put it in
there so
you know I get that we are not
in the businesses the government
to sort of make money our fees
are for the purposes of
implementing the services we
provide we get that this is
this is the ability to use the
fees that we have with no
increases in those fees per se
to be able to pay for that that
hard architecture.
Okay yeah so thanks I think that
if people went further
clarification they'll ask okay
okay we're going to comments
questions from committee members
we have first center a hamburger
center gagos.
Okay sorry him thank you madame
chair and and secretary i'm i'm
not in your position but I I
would imagine that if I were in
your seat I would be pulling my
hair but I have worked with hard
on this
to not do that but it is
frustrating when when you know
it's is I continue to serve in
the legislature on how there are
systems that we place to keep it
make it difficult for you to do
your job
there are reasons for some of
those in them there are others
that I think there are a really
ridiculous and and
it just doesn't make sense it's
it's like we're making you walk
through mud
to do your jobs to do the basic
parts of your jobs
so i'm i'm glad that the senator
has brought this forward and i'm
glad that you addressed the the
questions from sarah purponents
nice to actually put a face to
the email I get emails I get
from you through my job and you
want to talk to you about tire
recycling and bottle sanitation
plants so thank you very much
and thank you for bringing this
forward senator I appreciate
this and i'll be in strong
support of this and that madame
cheer can I just make one quick
comment thank you ma'am thank
you madame chairman madam and
senator hammond so you know
along those lines I think it's
also important to note that and
I appreciate pro and con
feedback I think it's all very
valuable for us to produce a bit
better work product here when we
finish some of these pieces of
legislation but I did hear a
comment in the opposition that
this would be an illegal tax and
what have you and I hear you
loud and clear I mean that
that's the purpose of the
legislation to make it
permissible so I just I don't
want that to get lost in the air
out there somewhere that.
Whatever if we if we elect as a
legislature to do this then it
makes this permissible advice
would not be an illegal act if
you will so want to make sure
that's underscored there thank
you so are you going to
judiciary or just straight to
finance this go head head
straight to finance even though
it were we're working on this
and madam chair because there is
no fiscal impact this is simply
allowing that the department to
be the professionals that they
are as I said when I introduced
this bill and do the work that
they need to get done and and
avoid all of the silliness of
having parts of their office
vacant a vehicle that can't be
used any number of other things
paperclips can't be shared from
one part of this building to the
other it is just kind of I would
never run a circus that way
would run my business that way.
Thank you thank you center him
when you stop before.
I'm at home term finish thank
you very much thank you center
gagas
thank you this is sector so when
mister hill brought up that
illegal tax brought him
concerned so currently would gs.
B looking at your needs of.
I would think to his general
funds do they not oversee like
you're saying if you have a
cubicle that you need do they
not not look at that at that
lever set your department
itself.
Madame chair and senator you're
correct that most of the speed
most of the least space occurs
at the department level to
manage it we procure space with
the.
With gsd but we manage it in the
department okay man turned
serena then my next question is.
On fees does gst have any
recourse that would I think be
interdepartmental only is that
not right.
Madam chair and senator know all
of our fees are managed within
the department by statute.
So.
Man chairman center.
As such as so currently.
Who will receive what you do
with your fees as they're
are their checks and balances
with in the department to look
your madam chair and senator
multiple levels so on an annual
basis we submit our budget
requested.
The eva and then this body
approves where those fees are
used you you actually allocate
those fees back to us to be able
to use them in our operating
budget to the extent that we use
them or revert thumb for
whatever reason they would go
back into the find if we don't
use them then you reallocate
those fees back to us in the
next year
every year we have a fiscal
audit of our use of all of our
funding all a hundred and twenty
five funding sources most of
those are federal but we're
talking about the permit fees so
here we're talking about
fourteen different funds we have
a fiscal audit that's conducted
every year on those to make sure
that they're used in the proper
way which is why we don't
combine those fees for economies
of scale because of the stove of
the sky cheese that say they can
only be used for this
fund or this you know this
program.
Under current statute thank you
for that in and chairman center
set a mission I guess now my my
fear is um.
And I know you're correcting the
language so that it makes it
permissible but the current law
suit it's gone on.
Does your department pay for
that or who pays for that law
suit as it goes forward.
Madam chairman and senator that
the environment department is
not part of the lawsuit that was
mentioned in public comment.
As I as I did mention earlier we
are able to use some of those
fees per.
House bill three twelve the past
in twenty twenty where we do.
Administered because as senator
video indicated when it's
changed and states you then it
is permissible so that changed
in statute for four of those
funds that was our test drive if
you will and that has proven to
be a better smarter use of of
our of our refuse for
administrative operations.
With no diminishing of services
so again if if the body if the
legislature adopts this in and
passes it and the governor signs
it we would be in the same
position in that it is changed
in statute and.
Thank for that that is little
clarity mentioner sender my next
question then as if this doesn't
have financial implication why
did it not go to judiciary if it
has a
to me there is there's a large
group of attorneys that would
like to know why needs to be
permissible.
Is there rationale for that man
chair and i'll take this when
senator thank you for that
question i.
I'm trying to figure out where
this this is not in letting this
is not in litigation at all
there's nothing about this
that's in litigation then return
the trying to make it
permissible so that tells me
that you've found a loophole
that we need close would they're
not going to judiciary
certainly
I don't believe so I mean this
is this is.
It should even go to finance I
mean this is this is.
There's nothing that's.
Requiring judiciary oversight
over this.
There's no longer there there's
no crime involved here there's
no.
Well thanks missionary medan as
chair I guess my thought is when
you are talking about litigation
that has something to do with
this type of work I would feel
more comfortable.
With the attorneys in the
capital looking at it so I could
have come from right now I
don't.
And so all have been opposition
to it but I appreciate the idea
in would love clarity when we'll
get on floor on why it's good
policy so chip madam chair and
and senator I guess the only i'd
say there is anything that we do
here could wind up in litigation
so therefore every single bill
will therefore have to go to
judiciary and that's just not
the way we do this business
under our current constitutional
framework.
Well thanks for them is terrible
I guess.
My thought is if we are already
given pre noticed there's issues
i'd hate to do something with
one of my bill.
Think military thank you center
thank you is there anything
else.
The.
Okay do I hear do I hear motion
from the committee I moved for
due pass do I hear a second okay
thank you motion from senator
hambling second by senator pope
as men sector would coloral
center savantus.
Senator hamburg.
Santa marketing.
Senator novel.
Center pope.
Yes senator souls yes.
Senator deal opus yes search the
financ.
So that's the six to two vote
you got your
you're going forward thank you
very much madam chairs and
members of the country you can
blast out of finance or
something.
Okay so the next item.
Is senator share
no what's next
or black fire okay
sb two thirteen black fire
recovery reporting
the ads
editor diamond brantley.
Thank you.
Okay ready to go thank you
madame chairman members of the
committee this is a very
straight forward appropriation
request you guys may know the
black fire was in the healer
mister willis brought forward
again by a myself in senator
crayon him pill who brought a
similar bill last year asking
for a financial relief to
respond to the impact of the
black fire the black fire burned
over three hundred thousand
acres in the healer and the
difference between this fire and
the fire that we are
experiencing both in the read of
so area certainly the cafcanian
fire is one the federal
government has never accepted
responsibility for the black
fire and as a result of that he
mexico has never received
federal funding to respond to
the the rehab needs that that
devastating fire left in the
healing so because of that we
had come to this legislator last
year we appropriated two million
dollars to respond to the black
fire and I have learned as an
appropriator that perhaps as a
fiscal response you know
conservative I made a mistake
because I need sure that our
local soil and water district
had had shovel ready projects
since I knew we had two million
dollars that were shovel ready
projects and so we didn't ask or
request any more than we need to
get out thanks to the credit of
the sierra saw and water
conservation district under
jenny burner's leadership.
All of that money has been
encumbered the projects were
ready to go and we don't see
that often a government in fact
that took not to put our ability
to spend money compare it to any
other but none of the fight none
of the fire money has been spent
in response to what happened to
the linking county area in which
they got five million dollars
and I would arguably say that
the same amount of damages in
the healer and so we are coming
peace by peace to make sure that
we are accountable for this
money and so we returned with
you today with a list of
projects of which we have
identified one million dollars
and shove already projects to
finish the good work that has
already been done there in the
healer i'd like to turn it over
to jenny burner who has an
excellent job working with do
you dfa to talk about the
specifics of how we plan to get
this money out.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee I want
to think sender roundly for
carrying this bill in for the
opportunity to present this
today just a little background
on what we're looking at in
terms of damage for the entire
fire area the forest service has
come out with their assessment
that estimates over sixteen
million dollars and damage and
that does not include the
downstream effect none of that
has been assessed yet we
currently have fourteen hundred
miles of stream two hundred and
seventy seven trails a hundred
and seventy five miles of road
of various greeds that was
destroyed five camp grounds over
twenty water sheds fourteen of
those which are exclusively in
the sierra district seven to
eight of those are shared across
ah district boundaries with san
francisco so and water and grant
sixty five miles of fence and
various damage to certain asset
is that were affected downstream
from the post fire flooding so
we had the catastrophic fire and
then we had an up that above
average monsoonal events that
happened on the greatest
flooding that i've seen.
In sierra county so we certainly
have our work cut out for us I
will say that we are partnered
very closely with forest service
they are guiding us most of this
work is on federal land they're
helping us to you know identify
the projects that don't need
clearances so that we can get in
there get this money on the
ground and get some of those
recovery efforts going
so something that we've really
focused on is trying to for one
thing because the roads are in
such bad sheep we've got to get
access to the places that we
have to go to actually complete
projects some of the other
things were working on his
spence infrastructure you know
fincing off there some stretches
there by the highway they needed
to be repaired and we also are
concerned about our natural
springs in the healer and those
are utilised heavily by the
public hiker's bikers bird
watchers permanentees so we have
a kind of a wide variety of that
and then also again assist
university as downstream and
then needed some help i'm with
engineering event and so we're
really hoping that the prep work
that we have done is gonna you
know hopefully with this next
allocation will continue that
work i'm towards recovery so i'm
with that I would stand for any
questions from the committee
members they know madame chair
i'd also like to point out
there's been great very very
productive group of stakeholders
that are involved in where this
money needs to be spent jim and
burner also serves as the
president of the local assic
associations she's brought those
in and they've identified what's
happening upstream but impacting
our sake he is downstream and as
we know in water **** this is
all connected if we don't fix
what the damage that was done in
the in the forest what's coming
down on to our farm lands below
is there just they're still
dealing with the damages that
was never uh repaired and so
what that was never any
questions on specific projects
thank you how many in the
audience or support of this
bill.
Is there anybody opposed.
Okay well just for for a rub the
sake of of speed can we have
three people stand up in subaru
to make some comments in support
since we have none of post.
Good morning matter chairman
members of the committee my name
is that if you hill registered
lobbyists for the new mexico so
and what a conservation
districts also serve as a
Sold and water conservation
district thank you.
Hi my name is kate and diamond
i'm here today with the
hotsprings at the chapter we
have been personally affected by
some of these issues and
therefore we stand and support
of this bill today thank you
miss diamond any relation to the
center there may be some bias
and that lobbyist.
A good morning madam chair
committee members for the record
dan robert with trade unlimited
at the health region as a
priority
and where very familiar with the
impact of the black fire in many
ways this fire was overshadowed
by the hermit to be cafcained in
fire of the same year I would
say in some ways for good reason
that fire cause extensive
devastation to communities but
that same year the black fire at
a hundred at three hundred and
twenty five thousand acres the
second largest fire in the
state's history cards are very
real impacts for the people in
the three counties of southwest
new mexico that were impacted by
this fire these are impacts to
your gation infrastructure to
fencing on grading allotments on
federal lands extensive damage
to stream and water shed health
I think the expert witness
mentioned the sixteen million
dollar figure we could spend
sixteen million dollars on any
one of those things alone in
there is just simply not the
same level of resources
available from the federal
government to do this work I
think it's really important that
the states that bob in help
these communities so thank you
thank you
so do you have anything else no
matter with temperature
questions
anything from the committee
senator mccatchen
just once more come in.
Which ones more c.
We're discussing problems too
late in the sequence of problems
and we need to start
trying to figure what we can do
a solutions and log in and
maintain.
As natural resources which we
have the earth is a crop and it
has to be managed and if not we
end up with devastation like
this and affects the pollution
downstream and and various
various items so i'm in full
support of fixing the problem
now and in more support of
prevention in the future thank
you thank you center mccatch in
senators to found it
thank you madame chair i'm in
total support but i'm going to
build on center mccutchen's
comments last year there was a
bill that I sponsored in its in
the house this year about
putting money into the
department of health for
assisting small communities and
preparing for disasters before
from the climate before they
happen so that they could then
prepare whether it's flood
drought fire etc and
it's I don't know if it's going
go anywhere on the budget but
the
department of environment has a
climate bureau.
And they have offered in the
future to work on not just air
pollution from federal money but
also other issues that we would
wish them to work on in our
small community so that might be
an opportunity for the future
that question madam chair
senator rented that I would like
to ask is could this report also
focus on.
Public health affects from the
fire.
Madam chair and senators defense
also matter of chair I
I don't just agree that that
needs to happen and that we also
need to be more proactive this
particular source funding of a
million dollars is really to
address critical infrastructure
that hasn't been responded to
you and that the funding of that
is to go to dfa who by the way
has been a phenomenal and
getting money out of the black
fire and working directly with
our local fully on water
district and and health would be
very far out of their scope of
work they are they are really
just soil air so i've been doing
a health report would be
completely out of out of the
wheel house and really for for
this particular money it's it's
critical environmental
infrastructure thank you manager
center I
I understand and I think that
the probably their other parts
of state governments that need
to step up when we have these
catastrophes around the state
thank you very much.
Senator hammond thank you madame
chair and think you senator for
bringing this forward you know
when you talk about the health
wilderness I have many fund
memories as a child my mum who
was a single mom taking myself
in my brother camping out at
like roberts and stopping dock
johnson store for some amazing
ice cream homemade ice cream
you know and camping and fishing
and recreation and so I I just
have one question is one million
enough
madam charity for being honest
yeah no but but we've got one
million and gently as a visco
conservative in which she knows
she can get one million out on
the ground and she scared to
death to ever be sitting on
money and while I understand
that i.
You're in in kind of peace
millingness um just just so that
we're accountable for this money
and so right now we have a
million.
In dollars done and we'll see
what remains I I appreciate that
madam chair I appreciate that
response and and certainly
wanting to make sure that you
stretch the money I mean it's
unfortunate because we're all
trying to figure out we're all
in the midst of capital outlay
conversations right now and how
can we all stretch our money the
thing that I worry about though
is that you coming back year
after you're just kicks the can
down the road for you rather
than giving you the money so
that you can just play straight
into those projects and so I
appreciate that you want to be
very wise in terms of the money
used but I would also encourage
like go for it because every
year you're you're you're
waiting for us to pass
legislation.
That we may or may not pass and
that's just not a really sound
way to run so so I appreciate it
but I would also encourage you
like ask for what you need i'm
so that you can get those done
because that it's just there's
there's so many trickle down as
you've mentioned there's trickle
down effects to this and was not
taking care of this and kicking
it down the road and waiting for
another year to take care of
some other big projects so I
would I would just incur
separately appreciate your
efforts and and really i'm very
happy that you're doing what
you're doing.
Madam chair senator thank you
for that comment we have
considered a bigger ask you know
in conversations coming you know
to the table for this I think
the stop that we had to that is
that these large scale like the
watershed restoration projects
and some of the bigger scale
work that needs to be done all
of those things are now wrapped
up in the pun art clearances
with the forest service and so
unfortunately as the wheels of
government turn we do not have.
Much of an indication of when
those clearances will be
available so just trying to be
responsible in our ask you know
madame chair and senator to that
point one of the challenges that
we have with our local
government as we know is that
these are reimbursible and so
for a small government entity to
let's say you know it's been
sixty thousand eighty thousand
dollars and then not be
reimbursed in a reasonable time
really puts their their tiny
little department in jeopardy I
mean there's there's just that
you know three employees they
they have to pay bills and what
happens is there expending a
large amount of money up front
and waiting for government to
reimburse them which is we know
is the challenge in a concern
and all of our local government
yeah thank you senator madam
chair it's it's just really not
an efficient way to run a
department or an agency and
we've we've had conversations on
that all over the board so I I
do think you're doing to give a
shot out it looks like a bunch
ffe young folks are here so
thank you for being appeared to
the capital we appreciate you
being here and that's all I have
manager thank you thank you
center hamlin anyone else.
Or a question I guess more of a
question the the state land
office if I read this correctly
in their analysis suggested that
section online twenty amended to
include state agencies so it
says that the fay will work with
local government entities and
federal agencies is there a
reason state agencies were left
out.
Manager.
That's me
ok
our state entity well and I and
I really appreciate the support
that are state land office is
also given us responding but our
state entity is dfa and so this
money will go is as if you see
online eighteen local government
division of the department of
finance that is the state agency
who will be overseeing this
money they'll be overseeing it
but but do you want this report
to um to include any assistance
from like the state land officer
or any other state agency
involved I just it seemed like a
good idea to me and I just
wondered why it was left out.
The.
I don't think we we necessarily
need any other state agencies
the only state agency I could
think of to find when money
would be dfa who we've
identified as as the proper
entity to move this money down
to our local maybe i'm just
understanding I thought this is
what the report well yet
department of transportation me
when but I understand that this
is about the report and so for
from be that's why I thought it
was such a good idea is this
report should be comprehensive
about what is going on on the
ground which would be helpful
for the next time you ask for
money so it it just seemed like
a good idea
madam share we'd be open to any
other state agency that you
think that would want to track
and has the you know bandwidth
to follow this out right now dfa
is someone who would be.
Providing that report to.
Legislators the fa would write
the report but they would be
working with the local
government entities and the
federal agencies.
To gather the information indeed
it and so this actually might
take care of the question that
madame chair had about public
health.
So I I was just thinking about
what this report would look
like.
Um I mean if if you don't want
to accept this amendment his
friendly but I I would suggest
adding um comma state agencies
and federal agencies
for the report I mean I I
understand that you'll probably
be the lead and it's really
impressive that you're able to
spend a million dollars with a
three person agency but I guess
I just wonder if it would be
helpful to have that additional
support with the report the
intents madam chair of the
report is to lfc to make sure
that we are being financially
responsible and they want to
know that we're getting the
money out so I would consider if
you want to add that a search
still a friendly amendment but
the intent of that report is to
provide lfc with a financial
update so they know where the
money is more than anything I I
see but then if you see what the
like the public health impact
that the department of
transportation is giving
information that might help this
money grow.
Faster over time.
Um you know if you're intended
to come in year by year it might
give you justification for
bigger **** year after year I I
don't see a new to add madam
chair state agencies for this
particular bill but I will tell
you that I would still accept
that as a friendly amendment to
broaden it if you like ok and I
just got a note that this could
also include um a second
association's special district
to include a second association
would be good as well for the
report
yeah I I think they're covered
by local government just reading
this but III think stated it
might be helpful to you
so I
I get again well i'm suggesting
it if I guess it does somebody
else want to suggest it to just
add comma state agencies.
The.
Or yeah comma state agencies.
Comma and federal agencies.
Manager I would would you like
to make it not I would prefer
that a hunt finance and they do
it.
Let finance do it.
But if you're you can do it a
minute
perhaps you would like to think
about it more than on the fly I
know you read the fire in
probably thought about it um you
know so I will just make that
suggestion as you go to finance
but I do think
it will help you in the future
i'm not going to.
A slowest down with the
amendment now but i'm just gonna
make that suggestion for you
thank you madame chair I think
it's good one.
Um
I oh I did have a motion senator
yet you moved to your second
okay
madam sector will call them
or we had two seconds.
Okay.
Okay
yes since it was a senator got
giggles will have a center and
wouldn't be the second madam
secretary will be colorable.
Senator savantes excused senator
gagos.
Yes.
Same recurtion.
San noville
center to pope yes center
source.
Excuse me to deal office yes
there is the finance.
Men by staring center was a
really a note till I saw your
lobbyist in the wash
presentation
at one my vote thank you thank
you for bringing her and all the
kids.
Thank you madame chair thank you
members thank you.
Okay we're going on to our next
bills and the bill two fifteen.
And it looks like we have an
amendment from home
centrals
share at the moment I don't want
to run that amendment because
i'd made a mistake you don't
want to run the minimum want to
run that amendment i'll explain
why all okay error is no we
won't even pass it out
okay so you don't have to go
there
so so just.
So there is a hand out not an
amendment I hand out is coming
around that we received
regarding this you know we do
receive
comments online through email to
the committee secretary that we
distribute to committee members
so that's coming through so
senator.
You have the floor.
And I see you have
representative dickson with you
great yes thank you madame chair
I just so representative a dixon
and I have been working on this
I don't know how that happened
but here we are anyway okay and
so before we get started could
we make sure that the sponsors
receive our analysis from the
committee
please.
Camera did it and so are intern
did it
this week and so we'd like you
to have it so you can look at it
as well okay.
So I would also like to
introduce a doctor balls from
new mexico tech and mark pedrodi
who is a direct air capture.
Got okay you want them to speak
as you're
they will certainly give brief
statement I believe but but they
were.
When you ask me question still
answer them okay great please
proceed so madam churches out.
This really comes from a
director capture which is of co
two so these are
machines to policy o two out of
the air right
but then you go to put it
somewhere and solve we want to
see question in the ground.
The.
This this industry is already
happening in the world it's
happening in wyoming and
louisiana in its problem in it's
going to happen here
but what we need to do now is
make sure that that we're doing
it right when it starts
happening so you know new
mexico's kind of unique we have
state land in federal land in
private land and.
The space between the granulars
of sand underneath our feet
don't stop when the property
line stops so we have to we have
to take all of that in
consideration and sold this
build as two major things one it
clarifies ownership
we've been told and I everybody
been told we don't need this
because.
The surface owner owns
everything from the surface to
the center of the earth.
Unless they've severed their
mental rights they still know
everything else owned everything
else except for whatever they
are middle rights they've sold.
Okay.
But the industry wants.
Clarity.
Are the other things does is it
answers the long term liability
issue so in this case whoever's
putting the co two in the ground
as liability until they've
done certain things and I think
you can see those things on page
eighteen the last section here
so there's several things they
have to do after that then the
states are becomes responsible
the amendment that I had
that is wrong.
Makes one critical thing
and it sets up a
carbon docks at carbon dioxide
sequestration fund soul people
will pay into this fine to step
as they put
a ton of co two down in the
ground and then that fund will
be a separate find not in the
general fund of the bill says
general fund but this this does
display just there's another
mistake in it we have to correct
but that's what this does so the
money will be itself sequestered
in case the state needs it to do
something in the future.
So.
The.
What we're going for here and
what I believe we have
completely achieved after a lot
of people telling us about what
to do is surely for the industry
so that they're encouraged to
come here as a new industry but
also surely on how we deal with
with the co two and as we as we
do the director capture.
So with that madam chair.
They will stand to answer the
questions.
Well represented dixon would you
like to make a statement.
We have we reserved all this
time for you all
thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee.
I think what I would add is.
A different perspective that
compliments what
a response sir and senator share
has said.
And the perspective that I would
add is that carbon capture is a
multi billion dollar industry
and over the next fifteen years
in the united states alone we're
looking at the creation of sixty
four thousand jobs just to retro
fit.
Uhm
greenhouse gas emitters like
steel plants cement
manufacturers so just a retrofit
existing operators we are
looking at a capital investment
of three hundred and thirty to
five hundred million dollars in
the next fifteen years and that
will result in sixty four
thousand jobs
that are created for the retro
fitting and then forty three
thousand jobs for operations so
this is a great opportunity for
new mexico to be at the
forefront of an emerging
industry
in this legislation will help
provide the clarity for
operators thank you.
We already have.
Thank you and your expert.
So a doctor balls you can
certainly open this up but he's
the.
The expert from new mexico tech
on how all of this works and he
can probably answer most of the
questions
if it's a direct air capture
question than mister prodradi
can answer it but you want to
make an opening statement
certainly welcome to guys.
For the record just introduced
yourself so people online know
who should doctor robert balls
and new mexicotech I had the and
the director of the petrol in
recovery research center.
Uh while we have a drawing in
our name over the last twenty
years are our mission is shipped
to sustainability of oil gas
operation that includes c two
water and hydrogen.
This this bill I think is goes
hand in hand with current
efforts that are under way at
the sed to create a classic
primacy for new mexico that's
basically laying in mexico.
Run an operate permit permits
for co two storage while see it
too storage is not a new thing
there's a billion tons of cr to
that have gone into enhanced or
recovery projects in the region
there's also twenty plus against
disposal wells that are putting
see a tune of pure storage.
They're also a number of permits
under a process right now the
federal level here's already
federal regulations and statues
which allow this sort of
development.
So what we can do in the mexico
is is given the appropriate
twist and several states have
done this nor to go to my own
louisiana and about a dozen more
in the process of doing this.
I think the clarity that you're
looking for as someone who wants
to get into these sorts of
projects is long term liability
you want to make sure that
that's not a burden to the state
in any way.
And i'm also the ownership of
the poor space which by calm and
law goes with the surface but it
is useful to have that clarify.
Uh thought to say that this bill
may not be changed by the
classics premise the process of
october will be going through in
the next year to but I think
it's great great way to make a
statement that new mexico is
interested in being in car and
management and being part of a a
solution.
Thank you
answer would you like to make a
comment
thank you madame chair
market roddy president and see
you of a ceo to rescue and
I support this in the sense that
direct your capture is essential
for us avoiding going past one
point five degrees elsius and we
can go over some money against
arguments in in begin to talk
about that it's a new industry
that is exploding at this point
and the deal is in a support of
getting getting this on board
and in ramped up so the the
issue really is scaling this up
quickly because we only have
like ten fifteen years to do
this in a timely manner in new
mexico has about seventy five
gigatons of underground storage
they can be utilised for this so
this is the industry that's
coming so I would starting up
it's in texas is too
five in a thousand ten plants
being built in texas as we speak
and so I hope that new mexico
with its storage capability can
be part of this process.
Thank you very much reading good
going to go to the audience now
could I see a show hands for
those who support this bill.
Okay we have a couple of and for
those who oppose this bill.
There are few so let's take
three from each side let's take
the supporters and you can ask
online there's nobody so far
annoying okay it's a three
supporters please come up
we would like for you to
introduce yourself by name and
then make your statement
a good morning chair vice chair
committee to members my name is
delan huge on the deputy
secretary at the energy minerals
and natural resources department
i'm here to stand and support of
speed to fifteen and one I think
the sponsors for their work on
the measure including the
amendment presented this morning
which responds to suggestions
made by eminer in our inner fire
more importantly this bill
provides an important compliment
to the process that the new
mexico oil conservation division
is beginning this year to obtain
primacy over classics well so to
the wells used for two indiction
in addition to obtaining primacy
over the permitting of those
wells we need tools like those
contained in sp two fifteen that
will now allow us to manage the
underground poor space whether
reservoir including questions of
surface owner compensation
spread and sort of other
components the tools laid out
here are into tools we already
provide in the pooling of
mineral resources and the like
thank you thank you next please
madame chair members the
committee jason weeks registered
lobbyists for target resources
targets the largest gas process
are in the state target stands
and support the legislation
we're working with the sponsors
to resolve a couple little minor
minor issues but we do think
that this creates a workable and
reasonable framework to promote
carbon sequestration and capture
in new mexico we think it'll
have both environmental and
economic benefits for the state
thank you thank you any other
supporters
okay let's hear from three
opponents please if you come to
the middle introduce yourselves
please make your statement.
Good morning madam chair of vice
chair city a lopez and committee
representatives my name is
afrahadmer I come from the
public of do I and gustar and
i'm representing youth united
for climate crisis action.
We are an environmental and
climate justice useless
organization with thousands of
members and supporters across
the state I urge you all to vote
no on sp two fifteen this bill
would actively invest and
develop carbon capture and see
question technology which is
known as a fall solution ccs
technology is delaying a just
transition for our communities
and actively deploys plenty of
risk for our communities in
november of twenty twenty three
the white house environmental
justice advisory council
published a report advising
against this technology the
global indigenous community
including our organizations
members have demanded
protections against the
commodification of the secret
air water soil force it is
critical for our policy makers
to center the traditional
knowledge and stewardship of
indigenous communities and your
mexico ccs projects will be
disastrous for communities as
they were extend the life of the
oil and gas industry this
technologies counterproductive
to comprehensive climate action
according to food and water
watch if all call plans you ccs
they would burn thirty nine
percent more natural gas and
forty three percent more cool
new mexico is currently in a
drought experiencing and
increase in wildfires and hotter
days which is exacerbating
pressures on already
marginalized low income front
line used and indigenous
communities as a prospective
infrastructure for ccs products
classics injunction wells in the
state pose the risks of
polluting our ground water and
air this does not sustainable
for our futures environment or
community health sense it relies
on possible fields and
contaminates already scarce
resources our members living by
the four corners power plant and
close and one generating station
are still plagged with the coal
combustion residuals that have
not been cleaned up or
remediated these folks live in
fear of the risk of developing
cancer heart and by roy disease
reproductive failure and
neurological harm from call ash
pollution how could be trust of
the contamination from ccs will
be actively monitored to avoid
for the pollution and to protect
public health please about no
against sp two fifteen.
Thank you thank you very much.
Good morning again madam chair
members of the committee I
always get it with the sarah
club door on the chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in new mexico we stand in
opposition of this bill we just
want to flag our deep concerns
about sp two fifteen in carbon
secretary the bill does
something not and outside even
deep estates which is to give
near automatic liability for the
secretary to the state rather
than having industry hold the
liability for a certain term of
twenty to fifty years also
carbon secret ration requires
huge acridges and the bill out a
very low percentage of land
owner
so the sixty percent ascent of
from owners could force the
forty percent to accept these
projects where just kindly
asking the will vote no on this
bill today thank you
thank you very much
madame chairman members of the
committee I am charles good
marker lobby is speaking this
morning for earth works with
respect for the sponsors please
do not pass this bill
earth works has two new mexico
four time staff people experts
in their professional field they
trek courageously travel our oil
and gas regions to monitor and
report appropriate to the
appropriate state and federal
agencies many sources of
pollution created by the
industry in our state they do so
using hytech devices creating
footage called legi optical gas
images imaging
you'd be shocked to see what
what is going on the public
interest is not sure by lying
liability transfer immediately
as this bill does it may create
certainty for the industry but
it creates enormous uncertainty
for the public and for our state
doing so would mean the public
taxpayers would be on the hook
for these speculative projects
which often lead to more
pollution not less the answer to
for energy economics of
financial analysis notes cs has
been around for decades mostly
serving the oil industry through
it enhanced oil recovery round
eighty to ninety percent of all
character captured carbon in the
gas sector is used for that.
Purpose which had soft leads to
more carbon dioxide emissions.
Carpent capture technology is
not new and is not now a climate
solution thank you very much for
know on this bill.
Thank you still no one online
okay we're going to questions
and comments from committee
members standard novel
thank you madame chairman chair
wyoming has gone.
Oh hard ones currency groceries
and sees it is a methodology to
enhance their extensive wind
energy resources and and so
forth and it baffles me a little
that some of the environmental
groups should be opposed to this
this is offers a solution we're
not going to be able to do the
wind and solar in all that in
any time soon we're not going to
get that those industries ramped
up enough to meet the energy
needs the country.
Without something else we we
talk about nuclear we talk about
some of those other sources
we're going to have to do
something and if you want to
reduce carbon this I can't speak
to the legalities of the bill
and whether it the liabilities
and all that i'm not an expert
in attorney to do that that.
The facts are we need to address
its if you've some of you may
remember I don't know if any of
you were hearing senator harden
clinton was was trying to do
poor space legislation in
fifteen years ago year after you
have year never got it passed
but he was more of a visionary
and what we needed to do we have
to do something for going to do
some real impacts on reducing
carbon we've got to have some
other tools and this.
Probably offers a tool that we
could use there's that there's
companies like I get letters
from companies before the
session of wanting to just take
carbon run and it through
machine tech carbon straight out
the year and put in the ground
and there are geological
formations and we have a lot of
them in new mexico that would
allow us to do that.
Not just for oil secondary oil
recovery but just put the carbon
get it out of the air and put it
in the ground if we can do it in
an relation with industry with
them all kinds of various
processes that we do in the new
state or joining states I see it
as a tremendous and it's going
to happen to some degree anyway
it's a tremendous asset standing
mexico in terms of employing
people and at the same time
trying to resolve the
environmental concerns and
issues there maybe technical
issues with the bill that i'm
not aware of but I think the
overall concept we've got to sw.
Thank you I have center soul
since interested.
They came out
as I went through a couple of
things yeah I got some broad
concerns about the bill but some
specific some page five at the
top on c
says the commission republic
lands in any state agency may
grant to an operator rights for
geological sequence rational
land subject to their to its
jurisdictional.
But the state parks.
An agency that has just
dictioned over the lands.
So i'm sure i'd like to let
senator neighborhood
senator neighborhood.
We couldn't um center share take
that overseas please.
As the sponsor we went there the
reason so was setting her
neighborhood are you here as a
senator is a technical expert
I think i'm i'm here as a
technical expert i'm not a
sponsored bill i'm not okay I
just wanted to clarify that
you're bringing your expertise
to the table thank you
madame chair
I am an oil and gas total lawyer
so some of these things they
bounced off so this provisions
here because in the state of new
mexico.
Oh we have
state trust lands administered
by the commissioner public plans
we also have the possibility
that other state age own.
There.
Land.
There are some deeds into the
state highway department there
are some deeds into other state
agencies where they would own
the land on which they occupy
they're not state trust
it was crafted a little bit
broader to make sure that you
captured all state agencies that
have an ownership interest in
real property that could
potentially will be effected by
it so madam chair our state
parked lands are those owned by
the state and thus administered
by
never been mister state parks
madame chair and center so is
you'd have to look at the deeds
that went to the agency to
determine the ownership issue
and and they're across the board
some state lands some state
parks are located on state
lands.
They'd still be state trust
lands there are some state parks
that were acquired uh bottom of
state park the first day park.
Was a gift from phin and feather
club is a gift to the state and
I haven't looked at the
conveniencing language in that
particular
gift deed but but it would
depend on the d that went to the
state to establish that part
manager my point with this being
that it's not just the
commissioner of public lands
there may be other appointees of
the administration that could
say we're doing it here.
With without going through the
public lands commission.
And put it in according to how
this reads so any.
Agency head that has lands could
say we want it at our state park
we wanted add and i'm i'm not
sure whether they are or the
land underneath but the school
for the blind in almogorn you
know it's like we want there's
extra money but a sequence rate
well on our land and we have the
ability to say
madam chairman and center souls
that that's not exactly how it's
coined operate you're talking
about bast acridges when you
deal with these units.
It's not just the forty acre
tracked.
It's it's going to be fairly
large substantial tracks of land
and generally
score the visually handy capped
would not be there because
that's.
In the middle of almogoro but
there would be highways state
transportation department may
have some lands across that that
area that's been proposed you'd
need to deal with them could be
a state part a bit could be
others but you are correct that
there could be other.
Ownership interest that happened
to be a state agency that would
have to grant their permission
or inner into an agreement to to
allow that to move forward and
we would be part of the uh
parties who have granted the
rights to the operator to.
Have the unit in place.
Mr future want to make a comment
a madam chairs senator I agree
with a senator neighbor I think
i'm the question of I identify
yourself for those who are doing
huge deputy secretary at the
energy minerals and natural
resources department as to the
senator's questions about state
parks surface facilities so
injection wells in other social
equipment would not be permitted
and stay parks because that
would not be permissible use of
the state park surface.
However as representative
neighbor was explaining if i've
got an injection well right here
sorry senator
the good thing i'm awake this
morning
if I had a well here the plom
could spread over the entire
context of the table and so this
bill is insuring about the plume
underground any entity that owns
that poor space is entitled to
compensation so state parts
is participation in that example
would be compensation for use to
the poor space we own last
answer state parks does not own
most of our lands we typically
operate on lands it's owned by
game and fish the federal
government various agency is the
majority and the state land
office in a couple of instances.
So bad chair are you just
indicated game in fish has large
tracks of it so the whoever is
head of gave and fish
would be able to say we want to
do this year I mean it does not
say it has to be others it says
the head of any agency.
Excuse me it could we bring up
us standing chair for him
please.
And and and i'll get off at this
point madam chair but it's just
this is awfully broad that any
state agency that has any land
could say completed here without
a whole lot of that they're
oversight for it and not
necessarily
ocd or any of the other
particular ones this allows you
it is written any.
To any operator rights for
geological on subjects land to
its jurisdiction you and so
that's it very broad it is not
just a trust lands.
A.
We see.
On page seven I am always
bothered or concerned by peace
seven nine seven.
Section d when will it we put
qualify words if available it
has to have all of these things
i'm trying to do things yeah i'm
not gonna go out of my way to
look for stuff as to whether
it's if available or decides
that that you I always want
things to say these ought to be
part of it not well if it
happens to show up or we happen
to find it in our surge I don't
like we go room words like that
so just more of a comment.
The.
I as I was looking through this
I didn't find anywhere where it
talked about surready bonds for
putting in these facilities
putting in these above ground
ones whose responsible for
reclamation of the land fifteen
years from now when somebody
walks away and there's been no
shirty bond to protect the
public
madam chair a senator the
bonding and other requirements
for the wells are regulated
under the classics program
safe drinking water act program
which is established by e p a it
has rigorous surely bonding
requirements and other things
like that as the ocd works
through the process to obstain
primacy over that program we
will mirror those are forecast
bonding requirements for those
wells which is why that question
is beyond the scope of the bill
but the amendment does provide
funding and other a long term
source of resources for
management of those after the
liability transfer occurs so
there are resources of available
to oversee the wealth
manager thank you I hope that's
the case we deal with in this
committee
where there are abandoned wells
and high out of fix those
company goes out of business
class bankruptcy walks away and
all of those remediation costs
fall on to the public because
the shirty bonds were not
sufficient to to meet the full
cost of plugging wells
remediating restoring the
surface lands and things and
that typically is something that
is left off
madam chair.
Currency question from what I
have read in understand is very
energy it intensive when is the
source of energy going to be
used.
Manager senators also looking
talk in the wake at the same
time not being disrespectful
you also can use the hand mike
as well
if you're like feeling too
crowded there at the table we
can invite more people to the
table to
is that better
sorry I was comfortable talking
to something i'm not looking
right out of the weird things.
I have to yeah
I do have to eye so when I on
the chair
there's a burying cost for for
carving capture and that that's
going to be different for a
company like target who does
minstream processing they
separate co two for a methane
and other gases that come to
them from producing companies.
That that costs for them as
relatively small it's done on
sight.
A on the other side of the
spectrum you have at all plants
we don't others in new mexico
you have a monum plants things
like that that are around twenty
dollars per time to capture and
then you have call plans which
are around forty or forty five
dollars per time natural gas
about sixty.
All the way up to director
capture which can be a thousand
dollars per time.
The primary cost for current
capture as you noted is energy
you need to be able to have
energy to do that
so four things like dack they
really only make sense if you
use renoble power doesn't make
sense to take energy from a call
plant and use it but could you
from the atmosphere into the
ground.
The economics of these
operations are impacted by
federal tax credits the eighty
five dollars per tonne tax
credit for pure storage of
cotion.
Um
it isn't is that forty five q
so
those tax credits are offset
that the infrastructure cost
so
there's also an intangible cost
of leaving the car to going to
the atmosphere saying in the
atmosphere that has to be wait
as well.
So big organizations
international energy
administration g h g group.
And others even this year a club
I believe that a national level
they'll support the co two
capture and storages and this
necessary to make climate calls.
So to kind of depends on costs
thank you a manager that that I
kind of knew of somebody what
the answer was want to point out
that forty five dollars that
that earth them.
You got a get one of the right
not forty five q but that is a
subsidy the government is
paying.
For the industry to clean up the
carbon dockside that they
produced which means yeah that's
another cost being born on the
public dollar not on the dollar
of those who are producing
the pollution that the carbon
that needs to be cleaned up and
so yeah I want to make sure
people recognize that at the
federal level we are subsidizing
it forty five what is the number
on how much
madam chair it's forty five
forty five k forty five dollars
a time that would eighty five
dollars for your storage one
hundred eight one hundred and
eighty five dollars for a direct
okay so we're subsidizing a
hundred and eighty five dollars
per ton of carbon capture at the
federal level through this forty
five u program and so that's a
direct subsidy to clean up the
burning of carbon so thank you
madame.
The.
Thank you very much next is
center city o so i'm gonna send
a note to the sponsor and you
can answer me whether you want
to end this by eleven and have a
boat or whether you want to have
a full discussion about this and
if we don't both by eleven then
we would roll it over to
continue at our next meeting so
think about it and i.
The.
Thank you madame chair so mr
padron is one of my constituents
and he talked to me very early
out well there's a bit a couple
years now it's been talking to
me of a lack of because of his
company and his vision for this
and the concerns about climate
change which we all share.
Um.
And so when he started talking
to me I didn't know that much
about it so I started looking
into it and.
And i'll just start by saying
whatever when i've seen with new
mexico over.
All my years in their many years
here is that we keep being
treated like a sacrifice zone
for the rest of the country
and so what bothers me is the
storage risks of seventy percent
of our state has the poor space
available the stores drists are
well failure during injection or
blowouts that result in massive
releases of co two.
Storage leagues can contaminate
ground water awkward first and
soil
co two injections have been done
to cause earthquakes and add
injection sites.
Those risks are something that
would be born by the people of
this state.
In the interest of making money
off this.
Technology and and it its new
and would it would tends to
happen here is these companies
try to make money here.
You know whether it's by
extractive industry or whatever
and then leave when they you
know the uranium we have so much
history of this over and over
again in the state
so you know as I learned again a
little bit more about this after
talking to
um my very esteemed constitute I
started becoming more concerned.
And I felt i've looking at this
bill and reading this bill
and understanding that the epa
is trying to get into this in
doing this I just don't feel
this bill is ready and a scheme
to protect the public to
identify the land I really think
this is she needs a lot more
study specifically in protective
protecting the health.
Of our people um I think that
this um.
There are lots of arguments that
this would help the development
of blue hydrogen so that we
could we could use this but
blue hydrogen.
At all of this all the sector
requires energy and we was
pointed out with senator souls
question is we it's totally
unclear where the energy for
these processes are going to
come from.
Um.
I.
I don't think this this bill is
ready if we are going to go into
this I think we need to have.
Regulation.
In a plan.
And more specificity about where
this is good occur what
communities would be affected
whether the communities would
consent to this whether the
communities understand the risk
to their communities there's not
anything even in this bill about
me measuring size size mission
size
says missity family mine says
missity and and that's that's
um.
I don't know and in this whole I
mean poor space I I understand
it's been something that's been
explored but the rush on poor
space and what that's going to
do to our communities um I add
like I said I just there's so
many issues
especially and I guess a bottom
line is I think that this
technology requires would end up
requiring further emissions and
further use of power.
And it hasn't been proven so III
I appreciate that the sponsors.
Interesting working on the
problem and it's a significant
problem I don't I think that's
why became so interested climate
changes are real problem.
And this is perhaps one one tool
in our toolbox but I think it's
a dangerous tool that we should
not rush into with more study
and
the the this legislation I think
some of the sum senator soles
pointed out some of the problems
but I think.
The when this botheringly the
most is placing all the
liability on the state in effect
subsidizing this industry
I just I can't support this
I was gonna ask some questions
about this but given the time of
deep senator did indicate he'd
like to have before discussion
and if we need to roll it over
we will to the first thing so
that we don't rush and that we
can really vet this
appropriately so
okay well then I could ask which
is going to make a speech well
you're going to make a speech
okay so I can I mean I I did not
take you out to wind up but I
could ask so could you hold a
minute it is now five minutes it
too
eleven committee members if
you're are amendable to this I
think we will break so everybody
has a little break before the
eleven class floor session I
haven't been notified of its
later so we would pick this up
first thing on tuesday morning
so we have a full discussion and
better so we were welcome you
back and we will put you number
one on the agenda on tuesday
is that okay
madam chair absolutely I do
think that the collective weeks
here can address almost all of
those issues.
Um well we have a people on the
list well
we want it because we need that
time I am I mean because we need
the time to answer those
questions yes please move it to
tuesday okay so thank you very
much for coming today we started
the conversation we will
continue and you will be number
one yes center mccation
maybe we can have the amendment
that was that was proposed as
well that did you want the
amendment madam chair I will
bring.
A corrected amendment on tuesday
because the one that we have
here
does not work in simply it's a
simple there'll be a different
amendment on tuesday then the
one we received okay thank you
very much we're going to be.
Is not meeting on saturday so we
will be back here on tuesday
morning and then next thursday
you're going to expect another
breakfast
thank you.
