So we have everyone else here so
we will start good morning
senator Sir floral senators.
Us with Senate bill eight
geothermal resources
development.
Who would like to go first madam
chairman Madam chairman members
of the committee of all started
Is here as well Senator Griggs
has also signed this bill is a
sponsor as has Representative
but the CEO Roybal Caballero in
the house
we we we have this bipartisan
sponsorship because during the
summer we made presentations to
several committees and after
each committee people came up
and said I just I'd like but
look to co sponsor this this is
such a great idea we would love
to co sponsor Senator Stefanics
among them determined but.
What we're presenting today is
really a step and the next step
in the development of New
Mexicos.
Third great renewable energy
source after solar and wind
which which we know the wind
doesn't always blow and the sun
doesn't always shine that the
earth is always fun.
And if we tap it for able to tap
the heat of the earth itself we
can complement the other two
renewable energy sources and
find New Mexico with a hundred
percent renewable energy all the
time.
Three sixty five twenty four
hours a day seven days a week
and so this resource that we
have available was of the I'd
identified about three or four
years ago and senator Griggs and
Representative Townsend.
Put into place the first legals
structure for geothermal
development and make the donor
built of created an office in
the
department of energy minerals
and natural resources
and we're building on that bill
on the ground floor that was to.
Actually right now the state's
capacity for geothermal
development is one quarter time
of the bureau of the bureaus of
the staff so we have one quarter
time of one FTE working on geo
thermal the bill proposes
several things to greatly expand
the capacity of the state we
would add several new FTE
positions to the.
Through the energy minerals and
natural resources department
creating a bureau that would be
in in in its totality devoted to
a fully exploiting New Mexico's
geothermal capacity.
The second piece of the bill is
that we would create a center of
excellence and with me today is
Dr sherry of Kelly who is from
New Mexico tech our plan is to
create a center of excellence at
New Mexico tech and to have New
Mexico state which is also been
highly involved in geo thermal
activity and research over the
years collaborate with them and
doctors Patricia Sullivan and
we'll go live over from the The
New Mexico tech faculty of both
been active members of our
working group.
And and and they've agreed that
New Mexico tech is the is the
right place to to to locate this
and Dr Kelly is available to
answer any questions you might
have on the notion of a center
of excellence the idea there.
Is that we would use some of the
resources of the state to
further the research and and and
development activity that goes
on in the center of of of
excellence but also the training
and the education of the next
generation of geo thermal
engineers that could work in the
state.
The third part of the bill is to
create a way in which that.
resource might begin the
development of that resource
might begin to be fully
developed and that would entail
two things one requests that
could be made from the fund that
we would create here to.
Other universities to to
academics working in in this
field to further their research
when they need money for a
matching for example to match a
federal grant to fully utilize
the available federal resources
that are now available for
geothermal we would like to
capitalize on the availability
of those resources
the those requests could also be
maybe not just need to to
universities but other up of
state departments if they have
the for example the Economic
Development Department might
fully we might want to fully
utilize the potential of the
tilapia farm the the such as the
one that exists now or of a
greenhouse such as the one that
exists of radium springs now or
of the spot for tourism that
might be developed all of those
might also be.
But it would have to be public
entities that utilize the this
these requests.
Private entities would be able
to avail themselves of the
fourth piece of this bill which
would be the loans that would be
made for private companies
wanting to to fully utilize New
Mexico's geothermal resources
and those loans would be repaid
it would be a revolving loan
fund low interest but repaid so
that was the initial investment
by the state could be read
re used many times over over the
years hopefully in the future
might even be expanded to
include more money but but at
least to get it started we would
do this.
We would like to in this bill
take advantage of both kinds of
geothermal energy the the the
the the readily available that
that we can have a Ag says now
from from shallow relatively
shallow hot springs or hot wells
but also in the future and and
I'm gonna ask you Mr Solomon my
my co presenter here to to speak
about the potential for
geothermal electricity
generation which is in a long in
the long run probably.
The real opportunity we have
here so with that I'll I'd like
to ask Mr Solomon who who has
from the beginning worked as the
facilitator of our working group
we he brought together private
companies the research labs at
both Los Alamos and Sandia and
and some of the private
companies that are developing
things up but before we go to
Tom I would like to ask Senator
Woods if you wanted to add
anything to these introductory
comments.
Actually I think you did very
well Senator Ortiz.
We have to look.
To Mother Earth to provide for
the human race.
This is kind of a no brainer
when it comes to geo thermal
individual house owner can bring
the temperature their house up
to fifty five degrees or so just
by the use of a circulating
system going into the ground so
if every time you turn on your
heating and cooling or Kooning
your ductwork is already at
fifty five degrees you've got a
great energy savings right
there.
So the other items that we're
talking about today there's
needs to be further research
done as many of you know Los
Alamos did some early research
at at Fenton lake that that was
Not so successful because of of
several factors but those were
starting research projects that
we need to do further research
on so with that
appreciate the opportunity madam
chair thank you centers please
Mr sun.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee yes my
name is Tom Salamon I'm a
retired engineer and been very
happy to facilitate the working
group that Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
launched he asked me to talk
about the possibilities longer
term of expanding the use of
geothermal resources to produce
clean electricity in New Mexico
and I'll note that of the
national renewable energy
laboratory as of the New Mexico
is number six in the nation in
terms of its potential to
develop geothermal energy
resources has a lot to do with
the fact of the geology of New
Mexico in the Rio Grande riff
that allows some of the hotter
questions inside the earth to
come closer to the surface so
it's easier and cheaper to
access
geothermal electricity is
already providing about three
point seven gigawatts of
electric power in the United
States but that's using existing
no hot underground aquifer is on
a lot of that's in California
and Nevada
what we're talking about here is
the exciting long term prospect
for advanced geothermal
electricity is to actually just
drill a deep well
Just call it twenty thousand
feet deep where you would access
temperatures you know three
hundred degrees Celsius or so
and to in use no and capable
horizontal drilling technology
to drill a series of underground
loops well bores there that you
within connected their tips and
then from the surface pump the
fluid that you would find a so
you're not relying on an
underground existing reservoir
you'd find the surface injected
down into that underground
series of radiators at depth and
access the very high
temperatures that are available
nearly everywhere on the planet
but
closer to the surface in New
Mexico so a little less
expensive to tap into and then
you just recirculate that fluid
it gets hot at depth comes back
up to the surface and it is hot
enough to run a steam generator
and generate electricity at the
surface and it's a closed loop
system you're not you're not
consuming the fluid might be
water you're not consuming the
fluid when you circulated
there's a separate close look at
the service that generates the
electricity through the steam
turbine.
And that is an exciting
technology it's called advance
you thermal and there's a
company called ever attic
to Canada and they actually
drilled a test well this year
near lord's very little bit
south of Lordsburg in the boot
heel and it was very successful
it was of the highest deep as
well that's every been drilled
and they are excited about the
possibilities and this is a this
is an advanced you thermal
technology that will probably
come online in the next decade
or so so they've demonstrated a
lot of the initial capabilities
of the technology but it could
be something that would allow us
to build advanced geothermal
electricity generating plants
clean no missions of the service
you know maybe at the
incremental two hundred
megawatts each per power plant
in you could locate them near
the cities where the powers
consume so that gets kind of
hops over one of the major
constraints of generating or
implementing clean electricity
which is transmission line so if
you can build the power plant
with few to no emissions net
right next here load Senator.
It is just an exciting
possibility for clean lecture
city and could back up you know
the more intermittent nature of
solar and wind renewable so
maybe that's good enough in the
turn it back over the Senator
thank you and madam chairman of
that committee we do have an
amendment the amendment was was
brought to our attention by your
committee analyst.
But also by the university New
Mexico tech.
That you want to go through this
yes.
And really what it does is in on
page two line three.
We're the original version of
the bill included of a second
center of excellence at New
Mexico tech but it made it sound
like it was linked to the first
center of excellence that
already exists there the one for
cybersecurity.
We're trying to make clear that
we're talking about a second
second the center of excellence
this one devoted to geothermal
and it would in no way affect
the existing center of
excellence so that's that's why
we've we've simply taken
geothermal out of.
Of the line of three.
Those online three.
And I'm sorry but.
We have the lowest rate.
The online three and and
Created a second paragraph and
then remember the others
accordingly.
Okay is there a a motion for the
man.
Is there a second.
Okay is there any opposition to
dropping the amendment.
Okay so are you ready for
discussion yes we are mentors
out in the audience are could I
see first a show of hands for
supporters.
Could I then see a show of hands
for opponents.
Do we have people online for
this bill.
due to how many.
Nine nine okay so let's hear
from three people on each side
and then we'll hear from a
couple people on the as soon
about this so let's start on the
side who would like to speak
first.
Okay trust.
Charles.
All the recent state that which
is that also are aware that the
drilling rigs that are involved
with the.
About the.
The drilling rigs and the crew.
Before they did that or started
that job they were in the south.
It's an oil and gas drilling.
Also.
there's a future for folks who.
Thank you anybody else yes go
ahead.
This girl group through done
here Representative.
Here.
We strongly support this bill
but also give a personal tire I
work at all so.
Comparing the technology we use
them with what's available now
drilling has increased
tremendously
since that project.
So we strongly support this
bill.
Thank you anybody else on this
so I would like to speak okay
move over to the side yes go
ahead.
Committee my name is first.
Thirty six years.
Either we also have.
Part of this bill thank you
anyone else on this I'd like to
speak yes go ahead.
I.
No we're gonna take come on up
so we can hear a little bit.
my name is sue brown madam chair
members of the committee and I
will just wanted to say.
there's a really incredible
video that's on this I think
it's on the three.
And I didn't quite get.
But it doesn't.
I need to watch the great thank
you for being here yes ma'am.
My name is that we partner.
one.
And that's your own mission.
Santa Lucien free and.
Your support this bill.
Thank you and I understand from
Aron that there's Jean logs logs
stin on the other assumed who
would like to speak.
The.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the Senate
conservation committee my name
is Jean Loxton and I represent
the league of women voters of
the state of New Mexico we
support a Senate bill eight
which would develop geothermal
resources as consistent with our
long term position to support
legislation related to climate
change we believe that
geothermal energy is a clean
renewable energy source and it
will be an excellent alternative
to of fossil fuel created energy
thank you madam chair and
committee.
Thank you we're gonna here for
one more person on soon her name
is Maryland.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Maryland Hidalgo I just wanted
to say I support SB eight thank
you thank you very much Paul
you'll be the last person.
Go ahead.
Share with all your.
For.
We are.
State.
Thank you Paul I won't could now
go to the committee for
questions comments.
Okay Senator Hamblen then
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senators for bringing this
bill as a a somebody who is
considers themselves an
environmentalist and very
grateful for this
one of the questions I have
Mister Solomon and this is just
understanding that water is a
very precious resource in our
state and when you talk about
using a fluid to pump through
the systems that we create what
are other options that we have
so that we're not using fresh
water that is desperately needed
for our farms and our land and
our folks.
thank you and then if you're in
the center Hamblen.
Water is of course a very
critical resource in New Mexico
and with the long term drought
driven by the climate crisis it
becomes increasingly difficult
we know that I would answer it
in two ways one is that as we
proceed through the clean energy
transition we will be moving
away from existing power plants
that generate electricity which
are you know primarily coal
fired and gas fired and it is
actually the case that those
thermal power plants that's the
category they're called
is one of the major users of
water fresh water in the state
already and clean renewable
energy solar and wind especially
use no water but do thermal
energy as currently defined is
dramatically lasts in terms of
its water consumption just the
existing types
the advance to thermal systems
that we're talking about would
loot use even last because it's
a completely closed loop system
so while you may need to charge
that closed loop system with
some limited amount of water
it would be a net benefit in
terms of reducing water
consumption as you go through
that conversion to our existing
systems to these much lower
water users you asked is there
an alternative of fluid that you
could use and I think there have
been proposals to use things
like compressed carbon dioxide
or liquid carbon dioxide there
are other possibilities for
fluids besides water please non
potable water as well
Yes let's let's get to I think
it's very at the end here so
madam chairman and and senator
Graham and I think Dr Kelly
would like to respond to that as
well.
Please.
Senator Hamblen
It it could be non potable water
of because what will it with old
systems of we'll get our waters
by their very nature are hot and
contain.
Hi total dissolved solids and
one of the shortcomings of
conventional geothermal systems
is that they were interacting
directly with turbines and
scaling things up and so on in
in the
Ninety State early two thousands
there was a more a major change
in the way deal thermal power
plants work at the call binary
plants so you have
You have cold water going down
into the ground getting heated
by the earth coming back up and
it's in a in a loop that does
not come into contact with the
air and us sitting above that
loop is another loop that
contains a different look what
it an organic liquid that has a
lower boiling point than water
and that's what boils and that's
what turns the turbine so it
doesn't necessarily have to be
fresh water great thank you one
other question madam chair if I
may
one of the things that I think
we're seeing a lot of rural
communities especially where
there's a lot of oil and gas
drilling is just the
after effects of fracking and so
I'm wondering are we expected to
see anything similar to this
when we start talking about geo
thermal energy solutions we can.
quite to say that I am gay
so in the.
In the case of the of.
Of oil and gas they are
producing so much water that
they're having a hard time.
Getting rid of it and it's and
if you know has organic material
and so on to it has to go back
down to the ground in the case
of of geothermal you do it with
careful reservoir management you
can keep the pressures to a
point where it it will you'll
pick up the heat and you can
keep the power plant going but
you won't necessarily increase
the pressures to the point where
you start triggering earthquakes
if you're it you just got to be.
Careful with your reservoir
management.
Thank you thank you very much
that's all madam chair thank you
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair
those those were really good
answers to questions that I had
in my mind and I guess I'm
building a little bit about on
that what is is there any other
risk of interaction with the
other drilling going on in our
state and
And if so you talked about.
You talked about the closed
system and and using alternative
sources of water but is also a
risk of impact on our ground
water existing groundwater so
that it's really the interaction
with what's going on in our
state.
madam chair and and and senator
actually delete Lopez
What do thermal wells are manage
are are built in pretty much the
same way as oil and gas wells in
the course of oil and gas wells
have to be built in such a way
to protect our ground water
resources so it's it's the very
same technology the path have
the same casing schedules and so
on to keep are the fluids from
interacting with fresh water
okay so using the same
technology because one of the
things they do is they go well
this would do the same thing go
below the ground water and
through the ground water okay
exactly yes right we would it we
really are drilling it at that
daps we are way below a typical
water wells what most water
wells are only about two
thousand feet and the the well
that was drilled and Lordsburg
was eighteen thousand is that
right yes that's correct
eighteen thousand feet okay.
Excellent well I I'm very
excited about these
possibilities again I'd like to
consider myself an environmental
mentalist and this is really
exciting and it looks like you
already have all the bill's
sponsors you need but I'm I'm
thrilled to support this and to
vote for.
Thank you Senator great of.
Madam chair thank you centers
just a few questions so going
back in history unicycles we had
a swimming pool at one time or
mandatory and we looked at this
at that point time as using
geothermal for the heating pull
we had envisioned would you
never get it done technology
back then wasn't what it is
today we look at poly lines on
the roof to create the heat that
we needed for the poll
afterwards we found water in our
conduits of the ceiling level
should now gymnasium but just
wondering because you guys have
talked about the tilapia farm so
what I understand madam chair
and actually drive is the clue
closed loop system in the
tilapia farm that you guys were
talking about that would be a
closed loop system so we still
have operation but it would be
for fresh water only for that
type of use is that correct.
Madam chair and and the centric
I it goes
The tilapia farm.
He hits the fresh water.
To cut with the loops
with a closed loop what is yeah
and and I guess in it at some
point at one point in time in
there.
Development they've been around
for thirty years
they may be I did they can they
can actually directly use the
geothermal water but they
decided to to use a fresh water
and that that tilapia that they
grow it is that they they only
grow fries they did their little
thank you fingerlings that that
that are shipped to other farms.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and Dr I had had a a
The statement that asked me
years ago because he'd like to
get into this now this has some
benefits as far as grants and
loans did have just a another
thought another question mentor
center drive is on talking about
the going underground we in the
southeast and I the kiss I live
in the oil and gas we don't know
where the seismic thing comes in
because I know California has
the same problem and they don't
creating but my thought was in
the offers we don't use because
we have some Brian awful first
with the prying cause a problem
in the use of the geothermal.
Madam chair and and senator can
I get I'm.
So what we can to Brian's madam
chair CERN and doctor so we have
water is not usable for human
consumption because of sailing
the ten so in the fall but we
have a large areas of water that
if this were used in it did not
have an adverse effect here quit
my.
That that could be a really good
use of something that right now
is not usual yes.
Chair and senator
Sailing waters are often warm or
warm to hot and so they could
potentially be used is that you
have to be careful about
exposing into the atmosphere so
that the all the the buying
doesn't all precipitate out but
it yes certainly that they are.
Resources thank you for that
madam chair and senator Dr I
guess my mind real concern was
if you're a Quitman you know
just thinking through the
stainless steel the poly to
whatever the closed system is if
it would be adversely affected
by the sailing content that
potentially
Center just reminded me to
highlight some research that a
colleague of mine is doing at
New Mexico tech there's a
gentleman named ginger you that
is developing of hollow fiber
membranes to clean up water.
And it turns out that these
membranes work at work best when
the water is about forty to
eighty degrees C. so you can
actually desalinated water and
then you could turn that sailing
water into something you usable.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator Dr years ago of the
investor grammar came to
Albuquerque actually to give us
some technology from Israel in
order to do that so I think
you're housing this in the right
place a New Mexico tech's well
known for their technology I
just wondered how that was might
that my theory on it to sailing
with her but I like the idea of
the deceleration would not
figure out what we're gonna do
it sailing but that's just a
another argument for another day
so concentrate yes it does
you're worried about concentrate
yeah that that's something that
is still the subject of quite a
lot of research.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much it is are there
any further questions or
comments.
Yes thank you is there a second
second and there's a second.
This call the roll.
By Senator float this.
Senator that goes yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator yes
industry's use of souls yes.
The vote yes Senator Stefano
yes.
Affirmative.
Thank you very much madam
chairman.
I would like to.
I would like to.
The.
On the enabling motion of the
number twenty one.
The move to.
From the.
We have the for a week.
Both of my.
There is a second.
So with the secretary of state
the role on removing Senate bill
twenty one.
Yes.
Is Center.
And I believe he is with a
committee substitute.
Work with many different parties
including some of our.
I need to.
And was seconded by Senator.
Yes Santo Domingo's.
Yes senator bill is senator yes.
Centers Senator souls yes
sensitive okay yes Senator font
yes okay so it is passed
unanimously so we will schedule
senator bill twenty one.
On Senator souls
third.
Let's center returning.
I have to be here in the okay.
Her work.
of funding maybe should be quick
thank you madam chair this is
Senate bill fifty seven and
it basically makes an
appropriation into our water
permanent fund our water trust
fund how we created the water
trust fund back in two thousand
six I believe it was forty
million dollars at that point we
added an additional fifteen
million in our twenty two
thousand seven and then we ran
out of money and basically have
not put any money into that fund
sense
as we have a discussion the
session about non recurring
money in places to put it
I thought it was particularly
appropriate that we don't forget
that we have this permanent fund
on and what's important is this
the constitutional language it
currently makes annual
distributions to the water
project project fund which is
something the water trust board
appropriates about four million
dollars comes out annually that
of course is meant that this
fund is depleting others also
language in the constitution
that allows us to pass
legislation to potentially use
this money for other water
purposes so it's a really
important
kind of long term planning as we
discussed water in the session
it just seems that this needed
to be in the mix and so I'm
hopeful that
We move through this committee
and then the real challenge
becomes the discussion about
that nonrecurring sources of
funding in Senate finance and
trying to get some money parked
into this fund for future I will
say madam chair in visiting with
the folks administer the water
trust board.
There's also questions about you
know there may be legislation at
some point that they proposed to
change this allocation they've
actually got sufficient funding
now coming in so again it's a
good discussion to have and
that's the purpose of the of the
bill.
Thank you very much is there
anyone.
Is there anybody in opposition.
And we have one person.
Okay so
We can have a couple people from
the sign.
Madam is the morning John
Thompson reserve this for the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
districts stand in full support
of the bill reviews of water
Trust Fund successfully for some
major projects and hope to do so
in the future thank you thank
you anybody LCS.
Members my name is.
Long term water projects.
Fifty nine percent of New Mexico
voters want to see the budget so
I just want.
Water project.
Watershed restoration.
Treatment and.
Infrastructure such as roads
rail energy and water.
Good morning just a registered
lobbyist for the public service
Lara okay one day Santa Clara
simply billions any support the
legislation all my clients use
this to help leverage federal
dollars and support across.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee norm dom and
president of the Middle Rio
Grande water advocates and I
served as a member of the state
engineers waterfall scene for
structure task force.
One of the task force strategies
used to leverage current status
windfall revenues to help secure
New Mexico for future.
We asked the water hasn't been
to pass a FINS ask you to
support this and other water
funding it's just central for
New Mexico's future we have the
legislature in general will
think water and active sessions.
Thank you very much I'm gonna
take further COVID because
everybody is in support of the.
Committee members thank you
comments.
Are there any questions Senator
great.
Madam chair and senator just a
couple of questions so
I'm wondering well first off
what why is this necessary with
us already having the account
built up what are we doing
different to what we've always
done.
And I apologize being gone have
not researched a lot of this but
I was just wondering well the
necessity of this at all so
madam chair and senator guy goes
I think that goes to the
fundamental issue of water and
our future in the state of New
Mexico basically when we created
this under governor Richards and
back in two thousand six and two
thousand seven it was a
recognition that.
Water issues were so important
that we were going to create a.
Permit fund which this is a Mrs
managed by the state investment
council a like our land grant
permanent fund and I would just
use the parallel to you know for
example we all have had lots of
discussion about the land grant
permanent fund and what it does
and for education well I think
this is a similar.
On of lane for water and moving
forward and I just think that
would not put money in since two
thousand seven and as we discuss
ways to spend the nonrecurring
dollars that we have available
this particular session it just
seem particularly important to
me that we.
Show you know the importance of
water and do that by putting
dollars into this Fund to make
it sustainable because I
understand here's the other
thing right now it's spinning
off and amount every year that's
in excess of what it's earning.
And so that's why our choice in
the statue seventy two for a
dash eight we basically spend
our money off to use for the
water the water project fund and
it's the basically says four
million dollars each year until
that amount is less than an
amount equal to four and seven
tenths percent of the average of
the year and market values the
water Trust Fund well that
balance is going down and
essentially.
This effort would put a
significant amount of new money
into this fund and again also
allow us as a legislature to put
potentially figure out others
ways to use this fund for water
moving forward.
Thank you for that explanation
insurance center so with us
having the abundance of money to
do now what happens when we
don't have the extra revenue
shares will this be a it'll be a
continuous
amount energy just so madam
chair this is just a one time
appropriation yeah and I think
and that's a great point I mean
this is this is we have a window
right now in our state to.
To such a wide array of things
and again this would be a one
time appropriation and I
suggested a quarter of a billion
dollars here
Again we're gonna work hard to
get whatever we can to to this
fund and I will I will say
Representative that there's also
I know in the LFC proposal
there's discussion of putting a
billion dollars indoor severance
tax permanent fund same kind of
discussion you know we've got
this money let's use it in ways
that are going to help us down
the road I just think when it
comes to.
Where we are as a state this
would send in a.
Very important signal about
being on water and what we need
to do on the waterfront thank
you madam chair center thank you
for that I I was gonna ask about
Trust Fund B. U. X. plane that
my last question concern then
chairman center is in the trust
fund as it used to acquire all
Water Rights we've got the
second in the back and I just
want to make sure that we were
going to do anything to hurt our
ranchers and farmers here in the
state.
So this what is doing is
spinning off dollars into the
and we have a bill every year
that comes from the from the
water trust board and it's got a
whole list of projects that are
in there some of that money is
coming spring Spahn out of this
this particular fund also I
think there's a distribution out
of this severance tax bonding
capacity every year for the
water trust board to use and so
it becomes a whole range our our
ray of issues and there's
absolutely nothing that adding
money here would do to change
how that's currently allocated
if we came back we could
legislatively kind of tweak some
things but that's not what this
bill is to do this bill just to
put in place a much bigger
corpus hopefully so that down
the road when we do run into
those those dips when it comes
to water there is a place to go
to help kind of across the board
and no intent to in any way hurt
farmers I think we're gonna have
a real good discussion the
session about.
You know what's happening on the
lower Rio Grande and that whole
taxes The New Mexico settlement
were dollars are going to be
needed.
For the year thank you thank you
any further questions.
Questions but observations are
well there's a question to Sen.
We appreciate that Senator Wirth
and I've been
of the benefit at the benefit of
meetings with the some of the
attorneys involved taxes The New
Mexico litigation trying to get
an idea on the status of that
part of the.
I think I can say this publicly
and I think part of the
negotiations that are ongoing.
Between Texas and Mexico provide
for certain commitments to funds
for infrastructure projects I
think it's the best way I can
probably describe them I'm
pretty unclear the engineers
here but I I'm a little unclear
what that obligations going to
be at night like any other
lawyer I'll believe it when I
see the writing and see the I
started so with that but it with
with the of the funds here in
your mind so with with with
these funds.
Out of the water I trust when
would they be available to
satisfy that component of the
settlement so madam chair and
senator I think it's we could
by statute make that happen I
don't think that's at all what's
being proposed and I think state
engineer has a series of special
requests and and certainly
outlined those as to where those
dollars are going to come from
but it's not from here at this
point but I got that's right I I
think there's no question that
that we could have the ability
at some point down the road to
be able to you know use the
water project fund in in
different ways and perhaps
perhaps that could be one of a
and I'm smiling because you and
I have paid enough attention
water over the years that the
what that this fund and checked
with members has over my strong
opposition many times on the
Senate floor been been tapped
into when we run into financial
problems and it's it's a good
reminder for ourselves that we
have boom years went bust years
when it comes oil we had of
those of us have been here for
twenty plus years of seeing a
lot of those best years and
this is the place that would my
colleagues in the Senate tapped
into right when the when the
when the years were short within
the money we went into the water
of long term plan funds to meet
immediate needs and and you you
all probably know me well enough
to know why I would strongly
oppose and fight on the floor
when those efforts remain
unsuccessfully usually Senate
finance committee usually
prevailed
over over my efforts but the
fund is intended to have some
permanency in some protection
and some commitment to water
projects and and.
Unfortunately water no I think I
think most of us would agree is
probably one of the issues get
short changed the most up here
and and.
Scary to should be scared all of
us the the only other point that
I I'd like to make managers and
when it comes to these projects
will be carrying the companion
bill that provides for the
projects right we've reform how
we do that quite a bit of for
the projects funded every year
but.
I think I think we have to use
the opportunity of this bill
senator Wirth and and talk on
this committee about.
The fact that a lot of the water
we have here today was the
result of a lot of foresight and
some hard decisions made years
ago and I don't know we have the
courage to make those decisions
today Santa Fe gets its water
from the San Juan Chama project
which was a pipeline created for
them from Colorado to come to
the Santa Fe right and and
worked his way down and
Albuquerque I guess that water
probably works his way down to
our part of the state centers
will do know so
I wish I was around we should we
we talked people who put that
kind of a project together
because those are visionaries
let's be honest and and they
probably had to overcome a lot
of opposition I'm sure there
were a lot of conservation and
environmental concerns about
that project
the the other example is where
we come from Santo Hamlin
Senator souls and I Los crucis
existed was south valley exist
because the real Grumman project
because of elephant Butte
irrigation channels canals and
so forth they were visionaries
in the early part of the
twentieth century no working and
then with the federal government
who put in the damp in the
reservoir put in the all the
conveniences intent of we didn't
have that there wouldn't be
anything like what we know as
our valley
and I don't know that we would
have the vision to do that today
and I don't know we have the
courage to that and I don't know
we can overcome the opposition
that would be clear opposition
to doing something like that
damming up the Rio Grande and
and carving up channels and
ditches and canals.
And I think we have talked about
that and this is a lot of money
but it takes it takes a lot of
money through a grant project
was enormous it took decades for
it to be paid off
the federal government to
farmers we should recognize the
farmers pay for that project
they pay for it with assessments
here if you're going back to my
grandfather's generation so.
It it's a big it's a big number
it's it's the the right thing
that we have to do and if if we
don't start thinking about
things like San Juan Chama and
Rio Grande project and.
And I'll throw it out there this
gonna just like the whole place
on fire but we have to be
talking about projects like this
do planes
and I say that with the state
engineer here that may not be
the project I know that's a
controversy one another's a lot
of opposition I know very little
support for it but the concept
is the same which is taking
water word exists and moving it
to where it's needed and that's
that's the story of the west and
the reality is from Los Angeles
to San Diego take every major
city Utah Nevada Vegas New
Mexico West Texas all of us get
our water from someplace else
that would that we had to move
here and and that always should
blow people's minds you know Los
Los Angeles gets its water from
Colorado right Phoenix gets its
water all right of we move it
from where it exists to where
it's needed and we're going to
have to at some point in time
except that that's going to
require a lot of money and a lot
of vision and some encouraging
overcome what we know will be
opposition for reasonable
reasons but the I I I use up to
have your bill to maybe have a
start thinking along those lines
thank you madam chair thank you
any further questions or
comments.
We have
a motion.
This is the second.
There is a sex offender and.
Secretary the phone.
Yes
bank of.
Senator have yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes explain my vote.
Senator Stefano yes.
And before I love the vote is
eight two zero so you do have a
affirmative both the we have
some people to explain their
vote and I'm sorry it was
Sedillo to anybody else okay
please I I just want to thank
you for bringing this bill I
think water is going to be the
biggest challenge facing New
Mexico in the next decades so
thank you.
Thank you mentioned appreciate
it for coming today yes Senator
sells.
As we.
I.
You madam chair thank you Senate
bill fifty six is relatively
simple as far as what it does in
statute is it removes the very
arbitrary cap on the size of
distributed generation from a
hundred twenty percent it just
removes that that people if they
have the money and choose to put
in a larger system they are
allowed to do so the reason for
bringing this is as we are
moving towards electrifying
everything and are putting
electric vehicle charging on the
hundred twenty percent cap does
not work based on what they've
done in the past is they are
trying to move off of natural
gas for cooking and using
induction electric for cooking
and particularly putting vehicle
charging on removing that I've
read through the fiscal impact
report in the various other
things and the concerned about
the grid we passed a grid
modernization bill already it is
in process this is not something
where every system that's
currently there is suddenly
going to add another hundred
percent capacity these are
mostly new people that are
putting things on it will happen
slowly as they put additional
capacity on their the grid
modernization requirements we've
already passed for utilities
should continue in order to
cover that a need for the extra
capacity with that'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much.
how many people are in this for
fiscal.
There any opposition is the.
And.
Anybody online House Bill.
I'm sorry I'll keep my mic on.
So
At this time for supporters will
take to from each side and then
we'll go to the opponents so the
supporters on this side.
Anybody you raise your hands
nobody wants to speak.
Any supporters over here whether
speak yes please.
Members of the committee my name
is Jim duration at.
Many folks three a.
About sixty numbers and we are
strongly in support of this bill
scenarios we operate options for
you looks cases fillings as we
have the.
Solar.
This bill of a hundred twenty
percent.
Has been a.
It is becoming increasingly
apparent that this is going to
be on this.
This is.
Concern expressed that is for
safety but I want to point out
that there has been in place
since two thousand and eight it.
Of guidelines.
That basically every solar
system plus.
By the way that is current.
Basis so.
Strokes thank you very thank you
any other supporters who would
like to speak.
Okay we'll go to opponents the
policy to come in front of this
year on the back row so you have
to come in front of that post so
it the mikes can pick you up
please.
We madam chair members of the
committee approved mode New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association and the
need limits have been put in
place to protect the reliability
and reliability and stability of
the grid.
by not allowing it to overload
and capacity is obviously
becoming issue and will continue
to become an issue on our
fragile with that we have.
And more importantly.
Of.
Electrical contact across the
United States have increased in
twenty twenty two.
And we have some safety concerns
of back feeding occurs when a DG
system produces more energy than
the hostess is using and so this
presents an unanticipated hazard
to our alignment and our
equipment that are on the Great.
Thank you so much yes Sir.
Madam rubber Amerisur lobbyist
re kicker similar to call up kit
Carson today through through
solar arrays that are
distributed around their entire
area provide one hundred percent
solar power on a sunny day like
today so we can do cannot really
that have.
They can store it so for that
reason although we do support
solar power we just don't have
the capability to store anymore.
Today.
Thank you.
Okay
Questions comments for from the
committee I'll save my comments
to last Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
When did you put your my kind of
place they're having trouble
hearing us on the webcast and on
the system so we need to make
sure we have our money when we
speak.
Thank you madam chair so
Removing the cap doesn't mean
that of that they have to do
that right they would follow
guidelines isn't that good
insurance Senator that's correct
that allows people to have put
in a larger system because of
anticipation of increased
electrical uses due to us which
to total electric on everything
and they may be changing out an
entire gas system for heating
for water heating and things of
that sort of it's based on their
prior year usage and hundred
twenty percent of that they may
not be able to put enough do
need on their roof to meet their
needs well especially if the
house was vacant or if they were
really conserving or like as you
said expanding the use
and with regard to the the
safety of the event there are
clear his you stated very clear
guidelines for linemen about
what would be unsafe in any
different connection is that
correct madam chair and senator
I am by no means a
Electricians who climbs the
polls determine how much goes on
each line or anything of that
sort of that is some of the
responsibility of the utilities
to make sure as they modernize
their grid as we passed other
legislation that these are the
kinds of things that need to be
taken into account for the grid
modernization not just putting
smart meters on each house so
that they better count the
amount of electricity is being
generated is there any other
purpose for the cap of what the
stated reason we heard was
safety which they do have other
safety guidelines to protect the
linemen and and the people
working is there any other
reason for the cap.
Madam chair and senator not that
I'm aware of it was arbitrary
when it was first put in so that
utilities were being required to
buy back a large amount I'm I'm
speculating large amounts of
extra electricity particularly
when there were when I first put
money on I was getting twelve
cents a kill or up to always get
the units wrong for each one
that I put back in but those
have been decreased over time so
that there's no with vantage to
somebody to putting in a large
system it less they planned to
use that much electricity
directly on their grid they're
on their household.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair thank you Sir thank
you just a few questions and and
I guess I was.
Shock to kick Carson being the
opposition because it jumped in
really really hard and I
understood his comments we no
state storage capacity but in my
thought my mind of trying to
figure out
right now the cap as it is two
hundred twenty percent how many
holes already meeting that.
Madam chair and senator I don't
know.
But Mr chair and senator I think
that would be one of the primary
things is if you don't have a
problem are we trying to fix.
If the cap is is already I would
say need to be lifted I've got a
bill later on of lifting cap for
construction and that's because
issues out in the field for
hitting that limit and I was
just wondering why that would be
a priority here to hit the limit
for we change.
Madam chair and senator rob let
me use when I put the solar
system on my house I look at
what my usage was for that house
and designed a system to ensure
that it covered on an average
basis the amount of electricity
that I was using.
My house still had gas heating
it had gas cooking and I don't
have electric vehicle to to put
it if I were now looking at
putting in a system on my house
I would probably size at about
fifty percent larger than what I
put in but I would not be
allowed to do so because of this
cap and and the reason I would
put in a fifty percent larger is
I would move off of gas for
cooking and heating and I would
I am currently looking at as
electric vehicles before come
more practical and have a range
you can get me from Los crucis
to Santa Fe I would need to put
in a much larger system this
would prevent me from doing so
it would be looking at my usage
over the last several years
averaging that said this is
because you can put in when my
actual need for system would be
substantially larger than that
this acts as a brake on
electrifying everything within
our communities.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator so just as last
summer at my mom's house I
looked at putting solar on and
they came in and they evaluated
and you're saying you need to go
ahead and think through the
future so this house is total
actor so they took every
appliance every need and
considered that what came up on
Facebook because the governor
would pay for the project what I
found out is forty thousand
dollars my costs it's we're like
did self free and I know they're
on subsidies and they there
things are needed because I
can't stand alone but my thought
was the the company is actually
out of Albuquerque that went
down there they looked at every
scenario and then they built the
solar array to fit mining hello
you're saying if you think
through your grow then that's
one hundred twenty percent comes
in is that correct Madam chair
and senator and that's exactly
the point is if this house is
not currently all electric and
is looking at future electric
needs that the that household is
going to have that's what they
need to size the system for
there is a economic disincentive
to put in a system large
currently not in the past but
currently there's a disincentive
to put in the system larger than
what you're going to use because
the cost of the system is too
expensive for any benefit you
get a producing excess
electricity.
Thank you for that Mr stern
madam chair and there again
going back to the scenario that
I had to lose my re reality
In looking at that they as a
company I don't think they hit
the hundred twenty percent that
they're looking at just current
needs of I'm never going to
build on that house my daughter
will actually move into the near
future but it's one of those
things that that was our
capacity was already figured out
the amendment and I go back to
the movie removing the cap for
moving it up you don't have a
problem the only that madam
chair and senator my next
question then is if what level
of
production of renewable energy
do you become a public entity a
you know a public utility
because if I as an owner of a
home produced more than what I
need to go back to to the sales
back online and I recoup that of
money back to me but at what
point time do you have too much
on the parade this coming from
individuals that it would be a
problem two for the utility at
what point am I not being a
utility.
Of because the excess on the
elector.
Madam chair and senator I don't
think that that really is what
this bill is a dressing and the
the reason being if you have a
system that's oversized in
producing more than is being
used you don't get enough back
from you don't get the same
amount back as if you were
buying the electricity from the
company you get substantially
less and so there's no incentive
to try and be larger and sell a
lot more electricity to the
utility because you think you're
going to make money and so
that's highly unlikely to occur
in this scenario so madam chair
and etcetera so I've got two
storage buildings on that same
house and I wanted capacity so
if we remove this I say okay
about both the storage buildings
I want to get to her percent of
my compassion then I'm not a
utility because I would be
making more than I use and
selling it to at ours it's excel
so there wouldn't be a problem
with that I think iterations the
topic at if it's not being
booked already is premature and
I'm just wondering if it would
be an incentive for me to say
okay everything I have is going
to have solar on it just so I
can reap the benefits and and I
know there again talking about
forty thousand I would it be
madam chair and senator would
increase because the cost of of
all the panels but I'm just
wondering at what point of.
We don't make me a beneficiary
using this bill or there's this
plot is more of an incentive to
me to start making electricity
and selling it without being a
public utility.
Madam chair and senator it at
the same thing is there the
current amount that they paid
back for excess energy.
It would be foolhardy for anyone
to put in an oversight system
thinking that they're going to
make money doing that you would
never recoup the cost of putting
in that biggest system.
Thank you for that because madam
chair center I don't think the
forty thousand that I could have
done again on Facebook to the
governor would pay it totally
but after they did all the math
I'd over forty thousand so I can
understand that I never recoup
it and I understand the
subsidies to get for the start
up of it and I just there again
I just have a hardship with
removing the cap what that you
Madam thank you senator Neville
I think I in this just last
discussion of program I was
trying to understand how the
process works I've got it thank
you very much Senator Hamblen
thank you madam chair and I
appreciate the opportunity just
to question before you have to
leave and read some of our young
students from southern New
Mexico on the Senate floor
just a kind of a clarification
one of the things that I
strongly encourage when people
are are trying to get and solar
systems is those ads that my
colleague here on the the
committee is mentioned is that
those are sponsored ads and
those are usually from predatory
solar companies so I always
encourage people to go local
where you'll get like you'll
have a person to talk to rather
than just a program that will
can't calculate how much you'll.
as somebody who has been
fortunate enough to own a solar
system we have been in the
process of slowly replacing our
appliances and the next is our
stove and to move towards
induction and so we we when we
purchased our system we bought a
little bit more we put a little
bit a couple more panels on our
roof because we thought we were
going to be getting an electric
car wanted getting hybrid but
the idea we've already replaced
a refrigerated air and our
heating system that's all
electric of Angeli we'd like to
be net zero meaning that we are
not using any resources except
the sun in our electricity in
our providing of of taking care
of our home so I appreciate this
because we are having those
conversations now about what to
do if we are not generating
enough electricity from our
solar system to provide for our
house and understand we're
fortunate to be able to have
that certainly we have efforts
to try and make solar a lot more
affordable to people and other
legislation and so I do
appreciate this because I do
think it's going to be something
that should you choose because
that's the key here you don't
have your not your hands are
tied that you have to do this
that this is an opportunity to
remove that barrier for people
who are choosing to move their
homes and their their buildings
and small businesses to be more
like tricks so that they can
benefit from solar energy so
that's just a comment madam
chair I appreciate it and
etcetera I think you for
bringing this bill to the floor.
Any further questions or
comments.
Well the comment I have is that
My experience is been that some
companies.
Don't want to move ahead.
They don't want to expand and
allow.
Further transmission from solar
and other renewables so I think.
You know I support this a piece
of legislation.
Because I think it's a message
and I think we have other bills
coming down the pike that are
also a message and I understand
that business and industry has
some setbacks in terms of the
supply chain but I think that if
we really want to move ahead we
need to start looking at some of
these issues.
So I'm ready for motion and
moved two plus there's a motion
for do passes their second a
second Madam thank you very much
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator pope.
Okay with the secretary please
call the roll agency contact
centers about this yes Senator
Gallegos no ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes Senate
available yes Senator pope yes
Senator also yes.
US secretary.
Thanks committee excuse Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator I yes.
By a vote of seven to one this
bill does pass thank you very
much thank you all okay next we
have Senator Correa helped
build.
Please come forward and welcome
to conservation.
Please go ahead thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for giving me this
opportunity to present Senate
bill seventy Senate bill seventy
is an appropriation bill for six
hundred thousand dollars to from
the general fund to DFA and that
would be for our southwest cog
to find
through that Priscilla etcetera
could hire an FTP to help with
water projects across southwest
New Mexico so we have the unit
funds that was part of the
Arizona water settlement act in
the early two thousands that
provided Grant County Hidalgo
County Luna County And catching
County what currently is fund of
eighty five point six million
dollars and there's another two
twenty million dollars that the
federal government still owes us
and that's for water projects in
that southwestern part of the
state and we need to have some
technical assistance and
somebody who can manage the
water projects in order to help
get access to the that match
those funds so Priscilla has not
had the technical support to
assist with the application
process and project management
so this will help to give
additional support and kept
capacity to the local call so we
can start to get these water
projects funded.
So the six hundred thousand is
over the course of four years to
provide that capacity additional
capacity to our local costs.
And that's pretty much the bill
and would you like your expert
to speak yes so I have I think
you know if director facilities
that are with me good morning
and good to see you all madam
chair members of the committee
just a little bit of background
so I've been working with the
southwest New Mexico council of
governments now working on my
thirty six year and so I've had
the opportunity to really work
with water systems effective and
municipal water systems in many
capacities I don't think it's
any news to you as we see it
this time that there is such a
capacity issue in the most rural
and frontier communities I've
dedicated my career to assisting
and handholding all of these
entities to be able to secure
funding for our region so I'll
just give you an example just
quickly to kind of show the
impact and how I work in trying
to assist our local entities is
that the federal government
issued the council the
government's two hundred
thousand dollars in economic
recovery dollars during the
COVID and during that time I was
able
to do additional work and
find grant applications for
federal dollars to this day as a
result of that funding I and
we've been able to secure in the
region that I represent an
additional hundred twenty two
million dollars in the funding
through some of our activities
through the southwest cog so I
think that's an indicator for me
I I only have a staff of four I
am primarily the only person as
a director doing all this work
around water systems and I can
tell you that I'm passionate
about what I do in my
communities and I just want to
be an expansion I think the
biggest struggle for us is cog
sometimes is I do a lot of the
application process but the most
difficult portion of that is
really doing the implementation
and the project management right
everything from requesting a
request for proposals to the
bidding in.
The design process all of those
pieces are extremely difficult
and when you see this tremendous
amount of turnover in
communities the whole goal is
people going to a level where we
can secure defining to really
bring the dollars that are
entitled to us thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you very much is there
anybody in the audience who
would like to speak in support
of this bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
opposed to this bill.
And I have somebody online
supporting as well so let's take
out two people from each side
and we'll start with the state
engineer.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee at this.
Appreciate the in addition cell.
Thank you
the New Mexico state engineer
yeah thank you for
of the Senator the for bringing
this bill forward because it's
very important that we find the
specific resources necessary to
fill the capacity and in the
rural parts of our state
and specifically for this area
to take full advantage of the
New Mexico unit fund
significant resources available
for the the committee's move
forward for the fourth whether
very critical of water needs
thank you.
Thank you yes hello go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my callers yeah
thank you.
Expenses consisted shin and
we're.
This legislation that will
benefit given the region of the
state and we transfer the line
to do a good job for our bank is
in that area there's grainy
footage.
Thank you thank you Sir.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name's Tony
trio I'm a registered lobbyist
for of Freeport background which
is largest important
southwest New Mexico in the
copper miners down there why
government or setting up your
support of this bill because
they are because we got a great
sponsored or local Senator but
Priscilla is just amazing down
there what she does she's
everywhere she's she takes care
of all of kinds of needs for us
it specifically Freeport has has
partnered with the Priscilla in
the might be district mayors are
in do and I a water project
we're we're trying to get all
those little communities are
tight to Water System and the
company has already donated the
you know we'll go through the
laundry list but just as an
example four hundred acre feet
to the community so that they
are I have sustainable water
supply is going into the future
for economic development all
that kind of stuff but with a
personal guidance that she's a
one person show limit to and she
does it and we rely on her a lot
this would be magnificent of it
we couldn't get our some
assistance like this so we stand
in full support of a thank you
very much on this side of the
room yes north.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on norm gone on
here as a water investor which
is the name for task force
members to advocate for task
force recommendations
This bill is totally in line
with the task force
recommendations of strong
recommendations that we have to
build local capacity we have
earmarked funds in southwest New
Mexico that are already there
available for infrastructure and
they can't spend money because
the pipeline from planning and
and the proposals and all the
way through financing the
construction of.
Needs more local resources more
local capacity and this is a
great example of the task force
believe that councils of
government may be key in
improving local capacity across
the state in the future I heard
you to support this bill thank
you.
Thank you anybody else yes we'll
take one more.
The following.
Parker and I am the waters of
conservation or.
Legislation thank you thank you
and Allison's side wick civic
civic is online would you like
to speak.
Yes I would madam chair good
morning I'm Allison civic
executive director of the Hilo
conservation coalition and we've
been involved with the Arizona
water settlements Act planning
process since two thousand four
I agree with everything that has
been said and I just want to say
we're really pleased that the
Interstate Stream Commission and
water trust board is going to be
initiating a process to start to
get the eighty million plus
dollars in the New Mexico unit
find out to introduce here in
southwestern New Mexico and as
as has been said.
Our small entities do not have
the capacity to develop
develop projects capital
improvement plans and ensure
compliance with requirements for
state funding
and one other point I just
wanted to make is that SB
seventy asks for general fund
dollars since the New Mexico
unit funding it it sounds like
my understanding is can't be
used for technical support or
capacity building so we believe
that this is a great investment
as funding for technical
assistance provided to SB
seventy will be critical to
getting water projects shovel
ready for New Mexico unit
funding so we urge you to vote
yes for SB seventy thank you
thank you very much we're now
going to the committee for
comments questions and I have
Center guy it goes.
Chair thank you Sir thank you
and Purcell I am so sorry I
didn't get your last name
the federal Senator I should
remember that and I just want to
thank you bye the six years of
it's hard to find someone that
works that long in one area so I
know you're gonna be as great
source now knowledge only have
two questions so one of the
question I have is is why is
this necessary right before
earlier we have center worth and
he's looking put in and of.
Two hundred fifty million in the
water trust is there not a
mechanism to get madam chair and
senator money from the water
trust for staffing.
So what what
Miss madam chair.
It's been awhile since I
introduced a bill.
In committee so a little rusty
and Senator thank you for the
question so we are also going to
advocate for getting three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars out of the unit fund to
provide additional support
through the office of the
engineer the state engineers
office for additional support
for the water transport to the
vetting of the applications so
this is in addition to that
support so we need additional
capacity at the state level as
well to help with the vetting
and managing of the projects at
the state level and but we also
need boots on the ground and
somebody to provide assistance
to both Priscilla without as
well as the small is so she
ation selected association said
don't really have a budget
executive as we had a lot of
flooding as well this last year
and there's a lot of repairs and
recovery our efforts that we
just don't have the the funds to
be able to address right now so
providing the support there in
that actual southwestern region
of the state will give the
support to those entities that
are
requesting the funds to help
with the application process and
the coordination of the projects
and managing the projects as
they get funded.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator and and I guess I've
not spent enough time in your
area of the state I didn't
realize I understand nor New
Mexico and southern Colorado the
second so I didn't realize you
had
that type of irrigation also my
last question is just knowledge
pre for me madam chair in center
The New Mexico regional pant
Planning Commission you know
when it was established.
So madam chair members of the
committee so the Economic
Development districts we're
actually started under the
federal government under eighty
eight and so that was started in
nineteen sixty nine and then
when it became part of the state
statute in New Mexico that was
in nineteen seventy one nineteen
seventy one so just as a little
bit of history because I've been
around for a long time is that I
think I'm the third executive
director in the history of of
the council of governments I
feel very painful and privileged
yes Sir my committees and serve
all of you in that capacity
because I think there's nothing
more that we can set regards as
we see communities that are
underserved.
There's nothing might more
fulfilling to be able to find
and what is your basic need and
that is water has heard my
passion comes from so in regards
to a comment or question
regarding water transport I am
governor appointed to the water
trust board and so I'm learning
the ropes of the water trust
board so I truly understand
funding mechanisms on the state
side as well as the federal side
and one of the comments that
they made to the senator is it
is my goal to be able to double
or triple that many based on my
knowledge and how we X. axis
additional funds in as far as an
leverage of dollars right
because I think anything that we
can expand on is only a budget
not only to the state but to the
region and I do know that one a
particular question that and
that has been answered for me
from the New Mexico unit money
is that the New Mexico you might
think does not require
legislative authorization such
like as the water transport does
so I think there's there's some
differences right in regards to
how how it's label as far as it
requirements from each one of
the funding sources thank you
for that madam chair center.
And and guess my final comment
is there's gotta be a way to
look at this as growth known
about the errors on the issue
there we already should have a
portion I don't know if it's in
statute or rule but some way to
give you some support as your
needs become greater than what
you can handle because to be
able to those grant writing
stuff like that our budget is
state New Mexico and if you
don't have that person in place
and it is a hardship especially
for one person to have to do all
that so I just want to think
through that and create for the
history lesson because I'm not
there again I understand there's
on a piece in the hill part but
I don't understand the whole
project that you guys have so of
those very very beneficial for
me and with that you Madam thank
you thank you Senator Cervantes
thank you madam chair of I was
amused because assume Allison is
still on the phone that right
some places can anybody confirm
that so I'm amused because I was
told it Allison and Priscilla
have both won the sponsor that I
would be a problem on this bill
and.
And you know unfortunately
sometimes my reputation is is
different than the reality but
you know you don't have any
opposition that also I found
that amusing I assume the reason
that that there was some concern
about that though is a serious
point madam chair I think that
this committee ought to consider
what we do in Judiciary bit
which is less focus on just
passing bills and really trying
to have an opportunity of the
committee to understand things
and somebody just mention the
history I think it's terrific
and warms their way back to
normal so there yeah so fair
enough norms here Priscilla is
here I'm trying to I'm looking
around the room Allison is on
the line I'm trying member who
was around for what was a train
wreck and that's really what we
need to call the Arizona water
Madam and looking for normal it
not is that yeah this was a
train wreck and you know Senator
Hemphill you weren't around for
it but but as legislators we
watch that train wreck in slow
motion over about ten twelve
years and when I say train wreck
we lost tens of millions of
dollars because we did around
for that period of time with
meetings and hearings and
discussions and studies in
engineering and lawyers and in
the end it was all for not right
in the end we didn't use any of
it.
We in the interim committee for
years every year that I chaired
the interim committee in water
natural sources I would go to
Silvercity and and for the
hearing because I saw what was
happening.
And what we were doing was or
using all of this money as part
of this Arizona water settlement
for.
I'm not gonna use that language
that get an ethics complaint
against me but you know.
It was just wasted it was just a
what a waste of time and money
and we for years and years would
have those hearings and say
you're getting close to the
deadline this is ten years out
the gate you're not going to
make the deadline you know
making enough progress and year
after year I would sit there and
tell the folks you're not making
enough progress to mutilation of
they did meet the deadline.
and it was that it's a sad thing
to do the reason I bring it up
as I think it's important for us
to maybe go back and do a review
of that some of us used to play
football but you know you
wouldn't think of playing the
game without watching the game
film the next day to figure out
what went wrong and we don't do
that very much in the
legislature we don't go back and
look at what the lessons are
from an experience or process
that could have been done much
better and I'd like to do that
in this case because for a
couple reasons was these they're
still substantial funds they're
available and and we wanna make
sure they're used well which was
the whole point of that ten
years of study and research and
engineering.
And and again not used at all so
you know I I'd like to that
manager I'd like to have us
maybe do a review particularly
because we have your members
here in particularly because
your new the Senate from the
area and a cause for us to to go
back and look at what works and
doesn't work and and the the
only other point that I think is
important is that oftentimes the
solution in Santa Fe to a lot of
the interest groups that are
here today and others as well we
need to appoint an independent
commission we need to appoint
independent task force we need
to have somebody else doing our
job because bill do it better
and we should recognize that's
always true
in this case the I think this is
a classic example of where we
put together and authorize and
empower hello a lot of task
force and study and an issue
initiatives and so forth and
it is not always better than
what we can do ourselves so
thank you madam chair I think
that I think that's one lessons
and again I really wanna
appreciate norm it would almost
part of the warning system right
for many years this is going
back and
Representative thanks with that
tough was a personal.
Thank you senator anyone else
Senator Neville thank you madam
chair just real quick
is there a line item in the
budget.
R. as that process working with
the either the house side of or
are so it's just I I believe
will be able to do that that's
that's always crucial items
these bills go there and if
there's no law if there's no
capacity to fund on that it
doesn't it doesn't make much
madam chair Senator yes I spoke
with chairman smaller yesterday
adding that in house bill thank
you thank you thank you Senator
also Gerald moved past.
is there is a motion and a
second.
Today Lopez was the second.
And if the committee secretary
would please call the roll.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Gallegos is but Senator Hamblen.
Excuse excuse Senator Neville
yes Senator pope yes thanks
committee excuse Senators souls
yes.
Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Stefano yes.
Five seven zero you have a due
pass from Senate conservation
thank you for coming thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Okay we are now back to Senate
bill seventy four we'll get it
started will see if we can
finish it and if not we'll will
of rolling over.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
be very brief in the
introduction it's up what this
does is.
It prevents in the construction
of any new fossil fuel
generation in New Mexico a
couple of things it does not do
just to dispel the myths from
the very start it does not take
any fossil fuel generation
offline the currently is there
it does not take any nuclear
offline that's currently there
we have enough capacity now with
the in our
Natural gas generation in New
Mexico to cover the ups and
downs of solar and wind they can
be easily turned on wind solar
and wind are not providing
enough for baseload we don't
need any new generation there
also would be the concern if we
were to put new fossil fuel
generation online now that the
technology for battery storage
for renewable energy would take
over that long before that ever
reached its useful life and we
would be dealing with stranded
assets that are then a cost to
society and to do all of the
other people
With that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much is there
anyone in the audience here to
support this bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
to oppose this bill.
Okay is there anybody online for
this bill.
Right now okay let's start with
the supporters Paul the man of.
Okay.
Okay welcome actor also had
we're doing supported first.
Last year.
All of.
This.
Thank you is there anyone else
on the side who wants is for yes
please.
Her approved Sierra Club we
support this bill we think it
should apply.
Thank you very much anybody on
this side of supporting the bill
yes Sir.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
we believe that this bill is a
critical four four.
And for that reason.
Yes thank you thank you very
much any other supporters from
the side.
Is that a personal supporter and
the name is GM Law.
one of Jean long long X. then
yes okay go ahead gene.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the league of
women voters of New Mexico
supports this bill because it's
consistent with our position on
climate change is extremely
important to move away from
fossil fuels and we are
encouraged by the statements of
the supporters in line with this
position as well that this is
part of the transition and that
it's consistent with league
policy and it's consistent with
what's good for the welfare of
New Mexico thank you thank you
very much
now the opposition yes ma'am.
Committee members initials
because.
Support of the.
The wind doesn't always blow
stories.
But industry.
Need to be replaced.
This is not only expensive but
that for the environment you
too.
Energy rely.
Okay so apparently people cannot
hear on the webcast or the
system and let you move to the
middle of the room so that the
microphone to pick you up okay
so we'll remember that for the
future so going to come ahead
Katie.
Thank you yep thank you madam
chair my name is JD Bullington
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce today New Mexico is
unique in its potential and
ability to produce a diverse and
robust energy portfolio energy
is a competitive advantage area
for state and we should embrace
and encourage all forms of
energy production over time it's
a laudable goal to produce all
types of energy and a cleaner
and cleaner way of putting in
place structural barriers to
certain types of energy
production is detrimental to New
Mexico economically and fiscally
and would result in higher
energy costs for consumers as
has been pointed out by multiple
state agencies thank you thank
you very much is there anybody
else opposing this bill that
would like to speak.
Okay let's move to the
committee.
Questions comments etcetera
renewable center guy a ghosts
Senator mantas.
Thank you madam chair
I guess I'm concerned but when I
do the math look at the math
from IOC sees the the folks that
are the credible renewable folks
of we're not gonna be able to
get their own totally renewable
somehow we've got to come up
with something especially
nuclear seems to like it out of
the mix and I see this bill is
probably saying we can't do
nuclear.
and it may be that we wouldn't
be able to provide you know the
problem in the world is there's
about eight about nine billion
problems and that's us first to
many people in the world for the
renewable situation to to really
be able to meet all of the meat
so I'm a little concerned that
this would put a barrier in the
with.
Make it where we couldn't
possibly meet the energy needs
of the state of New Mexico and
that's my concern do you have
any comments along those
thoughts.
Madam chair and senator rob.
I do I actually am a supporter
of nuclear and small modular
reactors up it was purposely
left off into of that we get to
those discussions of how we are
going to be the last twenty five
percent we are there right now
the the purpose of this bill is
really to limit the fossil fuel
burning in new generation.
And and I would be happy madam
chair and senator when we get to
that point actually sponsor
legislation that specifically
allows nuclear in small modular
reactors Authority reactors
which are new generation nuclear
energy to be that last part of
clean energy as opposed to a
carbon based what about the
transition with the airplanes
that fly on batteries that's one
of the problems you've you fly
airplanes I fly airplanes their
little and I could do that
electric but I can't for the
seven forty seven the year
without some kind of a thermal
fuel hydrogen that's the thermal
fuel that would meet the needs.
for those kind of things how
does use our high hygiene for
generations how does that fit
into this particular just madam
chair and senator this is only
for electrical generation it is
not for fuel for transportation
for heating or any of the other
types of areas specifically it
through things like as you have
the bio mass there green
hydrogen would certainly fall
under this but blue hydrogen
that is fossil fuel based would
not be considered within this
even blue that uses.
Put it down on the ground with
but the carbon sequestration
restauration
those kind of things madam chair
would not if it is fossil fuel
based.
Thank you madam chair thank you
next we have Senator Gallegos.
I'm sure thank you senator
going down same time line with
the with your bill and I noticed
FIR sos no fiscal impact and I'm
trying to understand how we
have.
Fiscal impact so for instance in
Lee County were I live
because of our.
Paperwork to we would have to go
through.
Before your bill it's easier for
them to build facilities in
Texas and so they moved seven
miles over we lost all the
revenue off that so I'm trying
to understand in in you may have
inside how your bill in stopping
opportunities in New Mexico for
employees and all the
infrastructure it does house
and have no fiscal impact.
Madam chair and senator I'm not
sure I understand your question
this does not turn off any
current gas generation if there
were still call it would not
turn off any coal generation
within the state you just can't
build a new generation of that
sort in less it is wind solar
various other ones which are the
cheapest forms of energy now to
put on at to the great as new.
energy construction right and
and I understand that madam
chair and senator I was talking
about natural gas facility that
moved seven miles to get out of
our red tape and that would have
brought jobs to New Mexico I
remember when
former speaker house one of
prostate jobs jobs jobs in his
position at that time any job
was good for state New Mexico
what I'm seeing here is your
limiting opportunity for jobs
and and going back you madam
chair and senator I think that
we're looking at the wrong thing
going back let
couple years ago senator or
representative years Scott said
we are one one thousand.
Warming issue at that time in
sixteen we're looking to help
China reduce their footprint.
Discover would not allow that we
won the contract she would not
sign it because she didn't want
our oil and natural gas going to
China was resolved Cole thanks
so I'm I'm thinking we're
talking on both sides of our
mouth saying let's reduce it
well we're nine days into the
session that has given us
of revenues from oil and gas to
the point that the year forty
four percent higher than they
were a year ago but we're
willing to devastate them by
saying okay you can no longer
generate anything if it's got
any kind of false fuel so I
think it's limiting us in going
for for jobs and opportunities
for New Mexico and I'm just
wondering how that relates back
to this has no fiscal impact if
we take away opportunity I think
it hurts the state and has
fiscal impact but just going up
the FIR it says there are no and
so I was wondering if you had
any clarity on how we reduce
opportunity reduce jobs and have
no impact the state madam chair
and and senator I think it best
it's going to be a wash it may
reduce jobs in one sector but
across the country and across
the world moving to renewable
energy has been a net increase
in jobs in those areas and so I
don't see that that there is a
change in all of that as far as
if you're talking about the
actual jobs and again this isn't
going to shut down anything this
is you can't put in new
generation capacity so you can't
build a new gas turbine that is
going to become a stranded asset
on the backs of the rate payers
before it reaches its useful
life.
Thanks for that madam chair and
center and going back to the
original discussion new jobs
what Texas because of our red
tape already so but all I
understand that our is already
did not stop treatment but my
next question Madam chair and
center is is.
Is biomass considered in this as
far as.
Yes it is madam chair it is
specifically page one line
twenty four.
And that is considered a clean
energy.
Yes.
And.
If that's a clean energy wise
natural gas not.
Madam chair and I'm not sure I
understand it's bio mass is
something that is not being
extracted out of the ground it
it is already there and we would
be collecting for instance the
methane from the dairies and
things of that sort for re use
but that's very different than
drilling and bringing up fossil
fuel.
The energy and burning that into
the atmosphere Madam chair
Senators go back to your science
teaching methane methane and if
you get it from animals or if
you get it from natural gas
would not be the combustion be
similar.
Madam chair then Senator up
certainly at that point but it
comes a lot more any gets to I
mean you could always use the
same argument that blue hydrogen
hydrogen portion of it is
incredibly clean but if the
generation of it comes from
something that is not claim that
it it would not fall under this
and so this is the house are
already there and if we can
capture the methane that's all
the better rather than producing
more methane for the specific
purpose of generating energy.
Madam chair center I.
Appreciate that I I just think
we're looking at it limited
resource versus a large resource
we already have that's already
ours but but that are you and
thank you very much Senator
Cervantes thank you madam chair
madam chair I I think a Senator
will raise the first question I
had this this bill seems to be
clearly
well it may not be your
intention Senator but it clearly
prohibits nuclear and that I
think that was very noteworthy
to read this would say you can't
use nuclear in New Mexico and
and I don't I don't know enough
about the subject to go that far
yet but your bill with your bill
would prohibit prohibit that not
well I appreciate you sound like
you're open to the possibilities
of nuclear energy and seem
almost supportive of it I
appreciate director open minded
to that and and I am to and so
I'm not prepared to support a
bill that would say no we're not
gonna have nuclear New Mexico I
think that that price goes too
far for me today and and I don't
have enough reason right now to
say we're never going to have
nuclear energy generation in New
Mexico and so thank you and are
aligned on that but your bill
seems to be do everything it
doing the opposite of that so
that it would be hard for me to
support it I I know in the
analysis this bill is the same
as as we're being told as it was
introduced in twenty twenty one
it but it did not pass where did
it I twenty twenty one.
Madam chair and senator I don't
recall
That was the the COVID lock down
here and.
Yeah I tend that memories by
where I was when things happened
and yeah we were all sitting in
front of a computer for hours
and hours of the day so they'll
blended together I don't recall
I want to me to understand the
reason I ask is so where does it
go from this committee I believe
it goes up madam chair and
senator I believe it goes to of
Business transportation.
Well it you know it almost makes
sense that would be heard over
there to to me and so I'm I'm
wrestling with that'll but the
reason I ask you where went last
I was I've got to believe that
this bill ever got to
investigate it would have to be
to it I would assume
but you know I want to presume
what she would do or not do I
know I know the reason for that
part is that again I I look at
the fiscal impact report I think
was a point points made by
Senator Gallegos earlier the PRC
says this will have a
significant impact on the cost
of service in the rates paid by
customers Energy mineral said
the same thing that this would
to substantially increase the
cost of electricity electrical
bills the PRC's conclusion is
this would likely affect the
rate consumers pay for service
in New Mexico and of that's why
sitting may make sense for this
bill heard that committee
because as you and I both know
it we we we live in addition
part of state were our
electricity unlike most of state
is from el Paso Electric Company
and so what house electric
companies able to offer in terms
of rates differs quite a bit
from perhaps with PNM can offer
in terms rates and its intention
deal because from from one of
from one perspective of this to
be really good for your in my
district I mean this would be an
economic boom to Senator race
into my district because
businesses in the state with a
locate in the area of el Paso
of public service area I presume
to avoid the prohibition on on
higher costs if you of all these
agencies in the appears you're
all correct this will result in
higher rates than the rest as
they will have higher rates will
have the low rates because we're
getting our power out of a
possible to go with that's great
for me in my district so it's
it's a really interesting
challenge for me to to know
where to come down on this bill
and and I I try not to ever act
up here in Santa Fe for the pure
interest in my district at the
expense of the rest of the state
but I hope you know my analysis
right money else right now is
this would be really good.
Thing for us down south and well
it's not good for everybody else
in terms of rates in turn just
purely on the issue rates of
course I'd like you have no
nothing but full support for
renewable direction for our
state but but I I had the same
concerns initial lease initially
was senator bill that we not tie
our hands by prohibiting nuclear
as a source of thank you madam
chair thank you Senator Matt
Matt respond quickly wait for
yourself no that's fine and I'll
give you to summarize Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair so when we
moved when we made the PRC
Wanted rather than elected we
took from the people.
And so what this does is it
gives the people has there are
elected to Fishel's sort of a
voice in a direction to the PRC
and so limits their power to to
in in some ways for for a goal
and the goal is environmental.
and I guess you know what the
polls that I've seen and the you
know talking to people all
around the state the environment
is of critical importance to the
people of the state and so I
think that
this statement by the
legislature of the direction
that we want to go this is state
which is the the ETA since
nineteen seventy this actually
puts teeth into the ETA and so
for that reason I'm gonna
supported.
Thank you very much I think
we're at the point of a motion.
I move the department manager
I'd like to I'm sorry I'm sorry
just I'm a pa I apologize ace
offered you time to summarize
yes madam chair thank you and as
I look through here I think the
the analysis from the PRC got it
wrong they are their analysis
sounds like this is shutting
down current generation this
does not shut down any current
generation and they even
indicate in their analysis that
the integrated resource plans
for the utilities none of them
have additional up.
Fossil fuel capacity in those
plans so it would only be going
into the future for additional
capacity this does nothing with
what current capacity is
and Senator about this about the
the nuclear and I would not be
opposed to add an amendment to
put nuclear in their I I'm not
one who's afraid of it I
understand how nuclear energy
works and I think as we get more
small modular reactors we ought
to be looking at that I don't
know whether the state right now
is ready to be fully endorsing
nuclear energy and I think this
is important with or without
that on there so madam chair on
that thank you okay thank you it
was more of a COVID as a member
rather than the sponsor I think
right and I appreciate that and
I'm sure yes Representative I'd
like to support your bill no
you've invited me that nuclear
to the list of allowed nuclear
meant manager I'd like to make
that motion that nuclear to the
list and you'll get my vote not
matter to you but
The Sanchez indicated that
differently then I would
consider that a friendly
amendment and so Committee
members do we want to do that
today are you with we want the
sponsor bring back.
With the amendment it's one word
okay and could you tell us what
rate quit line.
And madam chair it would be that
page one lines twenty three
twenty four where it lists the
specific things that count as
clean energy for the secretary
could you so like twenty three
pick a comma but after solar
heat comma nuclear comma solar
light.
Thank you.
Is that acceptable to the
committee.
The addition of the word nuclear
the that's part of the issue I
would I would support the
amendment.
But I would just suggest to be
after hydropower just because
you're splitting up full.
The I'm sorry the after after
hydropower before the period
just because you're split
splitting up so he was full of
life it's an editing thing for
me but.
So madam like maybe I care what
it feels I don't know how
nineteen language by Senator
Cervantes dementia I would I
would suggest against that
Senator bill it was if you put
it at the after party to power
you have the or and which is
wouldn't fit the also so you for
hydropower you have to do that
or your.
You have to go biomass comma
four comma nuclear or you could
put it where you're putting it
out doing other changes as well
to the or would not work but you
can put any number of other
places your place would work I
was just looking at the parking
of the solar with no to me but
okay so I think I'm line twenty
four after biomass we've
included a comma and the word
nuclear.
And then it's gone on too for
hydro power so is there
agreement about the amendment.
I would love to have some even.
Okay I think it was there is
consensus on that one so now
we're back on the amended bill.
So this will be amended bill
that we pass is there a motion
on the amended bill.
I'm over the past madam chair on
the amended amended bill thank
you and a second.
A second.
And there is a second.
With the secretary please call
the roll.
Yes Senator boxes yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen excuse senator
bill.
Note explain my vote.
Senator pope yes this
maintenance is excuse Senators
souls yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator said the phonics yes
center renewable to explain his
vote thank thank you Madam one
of the things the energy
transition act did was the when
it shut down the San Juan
generating station
it again PNM Reese recourse to
recoup their dollars to the
bonds he did not give the city
of Farmington which is the
primary electric provider for
the northwest corner of the
state that for they don't just
provide the city limits I find
the whole county and and much
better if they own nine percent
of leave of that power plant
that was their primary source of
power now they've got to expand
their generation they've got one
gas plant they used for peaks
now they've got to expand the
generation there isn't much wind
and San Juan county compared to
Los crucis when I lived down
there are places like that but
and solar can happen over time
but that short terms of someone
can is going to have to build R.
via flickr they're going to
build a generator are by a
figure it and it'll be natural
gas and I don't know how this
affects that the timing and so
forth but this would basically
put does the San Juan County
area it extremely high
electrical rates as compared
with the used to be which was
one of the lowest in the state
or region so that's my primary
reason for objecting I think
it's short sighted in terms of
the in the immediate future I
don't have any problem with
nuclear I mean nuclear and and.
Generation from wind and solar
and all those other sources but
the timing is not
is not good and it's it's too
fast too soon and that's my
biggest projection thank you for
thank you by a vote of five to
to your bill has passed as
amended thank you very much
thank you committee thanks for
state a little extra we are in
