To
has it have we ought yes we've
all received the young member I
can't even talk this morning I
guess.
Yes the senator would like a
please said.
I'm sorry.
Thank
you but we're going to go fast
for our.
Thank you madame chair I don't
seem to have the bill up here
it is
oh okay
so where
where I did if everyone will
look at.
The.
Making appropriation they
approach okay.
Thank you so many chair when I
became concerned about is one.
Um.
Well I guess i'm page two line
to anyone.
If you look at that page it
seemed to provide a it worked
exempt liability
for any one participating in the
seat and in a cloud.
Proceeding project and when I
asked the sponsors if that was
or intent because what I find is
maybe they're trying to make it
cheaper for the companies doing
it or whatever and that was not
their intent what they said
their intent was is that the
state should not be liable so I
rewrote the amendment I rewrote
the line so it it leads the
whole subsection e and
substitutes what you have only
on the white sheet which says.
The state of new mexico shall
not be liable for participating
in a cloud seating project
funded in hole or in park by the
state of new mexico
and the reason I did it that way
so I moved the change I moved
this second for the motion
there is a motion and a second
and a brief discussion when
moving first okay
I did it this way to be clear
okay thank you are there any
questions for the sponsor of the
moment.
We discuss this bill extensively
yesterday.
List marine chair senator mayo
quickly to the yes
I told he rejected men thank you
I believe I believe this is
adequately worded in here an
amendment will kill this bill.
I do not want to have to go back
to the house.
To get concurrent we are very
clogged up there and negotiation
every bill over there you are
going to kill my bill if you do
this if that your internet vote
it down.
So the motion and voted now
senator
thank you I appreciate your
passion on this we did check and
the house is moving concurrences
without any of three hour
debates so there might be a
little debate but concurrences
are moving and they go to the
top of the list.
We checked that out yesterday.
The.
Go again.
There's not enough difference
between this amendment in this
bill to amend it.
Okay let's see how it goes we
are you know it might go down it
might go on but let's see how it
is we is there any
questions for the sponsor of the
amendment yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It causes a flood just
hypothetical I don't know what
whether that's even feasible to
happen but there isn't and
then somebody gets their house
washed away and they start suing
everybody and they are going to
sue the airplane guy you're
amendment would not protect that
person and that person's acting
on behalf of the state in new
mexico who asked them to go and
fly and then do a cloudsetting
project
and that's I think the reason
why the language is as it is if
so that anybody whose pit
participating is not liable and
I think it would be reasonable
yeah if he crashes explain into
the house that's one issue but
if he's just doing what he's
told to do
he should not be liable and I
think the language is better
than exists currently in the
bill but thank you thank you any
of further discussion on the
amendment.
Quickly
but you might.
That same guy could like you
said crash into a house or that
same guy could be very negligent
open in a fuel there that same
guy and this would shield him
and I don't think that's prop.
And that's what the sponsors
yesterday said was their intent
the current language would
expert would protect that pilot
and that company in all
circumstances and their company
should have insurance so I I
think this is very very
important to protect our state
and like I said yesterday they
agreed to it
okay so we are on emotion and
the second so the secretary
please call the vote.
Senator savantes was excused
center guy goes
so okay goes no center hambling
center hambling yes center
mccatcher excused santanaville
centerville no senator report no
center pop no center source.
This.
Services.
Excuse centers to deal up as yes
yes.
Sounds too deal with us yes and
it is a pinics yes.
Yes
buyer three three it's tabled.
The moment.
The.
We're back on the bill is there
motion on the bill.
We had a four hearing yesterday
there is a motion for you passed
as their second.
There is a motion my son and a
bill.
And a second by senator goes on
the bill on amended.
That.
I this committee it was amended
by another committee okay with
the secretary please call the
vote yes sarah savantes excuse
senator verges
senator goes yes center habit
center hambling yes center
mccatchen.
Excuse seven avil santa ville
yes center pop.
No senator pope know center
source no there are soles know
center city lopez
no and explain my vote there is
a deal opus no.
Centers to finance yes there is
the far excess for and center
city a lot to explain her vote I
don't think it's responsible to
the state coffers to pass this
with firm with this level of
protect of liability.
Thank you certainly and you have
a chance in the floor to mend as
well but you have a dupass thank
you very much okay we're moving
on to the next bill and
we're only going to hear from
his rebecca here.
Is anybody from the governor's
office here.
Jim
you have the new substitute.
Okay we're moving faster sister
on the floor at nine.
And so for the record you might
want to
re introduce yourselves for the
public.
And I appreciate everyone who is
here
we have heard your comments we
had a full hearing yesterday
what we are going to do is we're
going to go over the changes to
the committee substitute based
upon comments from this
committee and then we will see
where it goes.
As one of the.
Spouses of this bill i'm going
to stay here.
Because it's really your bill
when what changes you made.
So
madame chair members of the
committee secretary can in
mexico environment department.
Forty nine terror members
my cameran state engineer.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
rebecca roose infrastructure
adviser in the governor's
office.
Okay so we like it.
Thank you.
The.
And committee member.
Yeah.
Okay.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee and the point
for a committee substitute but
in front of you this morning has
two changes changes in two
places in the bill from the one
that you heard and reviewed
yesterday the first change is
iron page two.
In paragraph b.
After.
The one hundred million dollars
and the semicolon new language
is provided that the issue is or
sell of the bonds and
specifically authorized by law
by the first session of the
fifty seventh legislature.
The intent of this addition is
to ensure if this builder to
pass that none of the one
hundred million dollars
appropriate from the summer's
tax fines
availability would be able to be
spent or expendite and tell
further action by the
legislature in the twenty twenty
five session or any other
session during that time period
of the first session of the
fifty seventh legislature.
So that's the first change.
And yes go ahead
and matter before we get to the
second change members of the
committee though the purpose of
that really allows the new
mexico environment department to
continue with its request for
information.
And continue to solicit
proposals so that industry will
provide the information we need
so that when we get back
together in the next sixty in
the next session.
That we would have information
that both the advocates the
legislature and many of you have
asked us to collect so it allows
us to continue with that
administrator process if you
will to gather the data.
That that would then potentially
be funded in the next session.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee and the second
change is in the
last section on the last page
where we had definitions
so it's now section subsection
each.
We removed the definition of
brackish water and amended the
definition of treated brackish
water so essentially combined I
revised definition of rackish
water into the tree dead
brackish water definition to
simplify the definitions but the
changes in the definition of
treatish pretry to brackish
water
does two things
for one in response it's
responding to a number of number
of comments questions and
concerns raised yesterday
the first is that.
In some paragraph wind sourced
from an aqua further top of
which is at a depth of two
thousand five hundred feet or
more below the surface of the
ground so that speaks directly
to existing
that
provides for a certain type of
permanent process through the
office of state engineer for
those wells of that depth.
So paragraph two
is a change the definition
before had one thousand to ten
thousand
parts of a disall solid so salts
essentially and this says any
water that is one thousand parts
per million or higher that is in
these arch offer is twenty five
hundred so you've got a depth
component built into the
definition and a minimum of your
tds levels but not a maximum so
there were some concerns
yesterday about what if a
water tests at ten thousand and
one parts per million or eleven
thousand parts family and it
would not be able to be included
in the program now water of that
solidity would be able to be
included in the program so long
as we're below twenty five
hundred feet and then the last
part parts of paragraph three
provides the treatment part of
the definition which is
substantively the same as the
prior treated brackish water
definition.
So I could take any madam chair
and members of the committee.
You know I want you to know that
we heard you we heard also the
people who spoke in favor and
opposed to this and and you know
they're a great
comments made center guy egos
you brought up some good
comments that we incorporated
senator pope you brought up some
comments that we incorporated
and I think what you're saying
is a real time evolution of the
bill in a way that continues to
facilitate the industries
engagement with the state of new
mexico but will not commit us to
any.
Projects any dollars going out
until we can get back together
through the interam and into the
next session so that we have as
much information as you're
asking us about and it and
inheatedly we don't have all the
information which is why we're
in a request for information.
But we can not go to the request
for proposals fully and fun
those because we heard the
concerns and we know that this
is going to be
probably the best that we can do
to continue to engage industry
continue to engage advocates
continue to work through the
interim without using moment tom
because we need to protect our
fresh water so that this is that
bill that were trying to bring
back before you thank you.
Thank you committee members
questions about the amendments
to
committee subpoint for center
novel
just for quick manager this does
not incumbent the next
legislature does.
Yeah.
So madam chair and center in the
bill your question is does it
incumber the next legislature
yeah I think the answer is now.
And a manom chair senator
in fact I made sure when working
with the drafter and legislative
council service that this would
not tied a hands of the
legislature based on the
language there it just means
unless you act the
appropriation is not authorized
so that the net result of this
is that if um
if we don't like to whole
program there's no money
let's let's say it always
eliminate a lot of it anyway
this could go away or be
enhanced or change whatever
madam chair center that's
correct okay thank you manager.
Thank you senator souls thank
you manager
I think this is that much softer
version than what we saw
yesterday.
On page two
section b if I read that
correctly it allows the board to
finance the issue bonds but only
if the legislature next january
february march authorized so it
does not authorize selling bonds
at this point is that correct.
Madam chester saws that's
correct.
Then because I think that was
one of the concerns is going out
and spending money before we had
a chance to fully understand and
evaluate the guy lots of people
were concerned about we need
more information more answers as
to what this is madam chair
please assure me again this is
only going to be dealing with
brackish water at this point
this is not produced water.
Madam chairman center source
that's correct based on the
updated the updated definition
of treated rackish water does
not change the exclusion of
produce water same as yesterday
and this is limited to broccolis
water at this point in time and
for the program.
Military center souls this
really aligned.
With the current state statutes
seventy to twelve twenty five
through twenty eight the deep
well components within state
engineer regulations and it's
completely focused on your
brackish water below twenty five
hundred feet.
And madame chair my
understanding is we have huge
reserves of rackish water that
is mostly unusable at this point
without somebody.
And her senator sold such
correct mentioned the bottom of
page two the price paid for the
treaty brackish water
the only goes on is that their
market value of one of my
concerns is always that were not
going to be buying water from
this company at higher than.
Then you could get.
Fresh water by buying up
someone's water reserves is that
accurate that this is.
You were not we're not making
expensive water that then the
state gets stuck with.
Yeah madam chair senator shirt
answers your correct that we
wouldn't be stuck with that I
think the the slightly longer
answer and I recognize we're
short on time is that I believe
their market value is to find
yours used like thirty plus
times in state counts in state
are law without it being defined
however the constitution does
provide that we cannot purchase
something for
that we have to look at the the
fair market value and we and we
can't discount or over purchase
something.
In immediately and I think my my
concern is that we're not overly
subsidizing these companies
coming in by the buying
expensive water and selling it
to them that lower than market
value the i'm getting nuds okay
the last question on e on page
three
fifty percent of the state
proceeds is that of the gross
that we sell the water.
Is going back into the fund and
then fifty percent goes into the
general is this a mechanism for
taking bonded money and putting
it into general money or my m.
The.
Madam chair center souls that
state.
Where is this fifty percent of
the day proceeds
that's really capturing whatever
then
the net proceeds would be if
when we sell the water manager
so any profit any profit as
opposed to just any of the money
that comes okay correct crack
and then the
distribution of fifty percent of
any profit fifty percent to
seven tax and fifty percent to
the general fund is intended to
make sure to the extent that
there is any profit from this
program and implementation in
the cell of the water that we
would make a
infuse some of those profits
into those two different sources
are in given how the severance
tax bond permanent fund works
and the availability of
replenishing some of the general
funds over time okay and madame
jeremy might concern was are we
talking about the profits on the
water sale or just whatever
water gets sold where it would
look like we're taking bonded
money and trying to move into
the genera.
Thank you madame
questions that I had as I looked
through
it
thank you
center city all of us.
Thank you manager could you
go over again I know you did
this a little bit last time the
the role it seems i'm sure to
find a do is take it out of.
The jurisdiction of the office
of state engineers so could you
go over there officers state
engineer permitting process for
this.
The.
Thank you think you're out of
chair center city deal office
the statute I said it earlier
the state engineer has just
action over the actual
permitting and drilling of the
well
as a notice of intent well
and we also require metering so
that we would have
a consistent reporting from that
production from that zone but we
would also analyze it from the
standpoint of possible
impairment to
other declared equipments that
would be above the twenty five
hundred foot elevation so that
would be the role of the state
engineers office in this process
in that way it's on with
coordination paragraph in the
spill to make sure that there
would be no impairment or
concerns both of thun adjacent
water supplies
as well as
the lands where the world's are
constructed
thank you madame chair were okay
and I maybe the follow up will
go comparement usually means
impairment of of the quantity
and in my understanding
correctly if i'm wrong and
couldn't the apparent also
include.
Um
pollution or you know mixture of
the bracket swatter with the.
With fresh water manager centers
that's that's why we would be
fully engaged on the
construction of the world to
make sure that that though all
of the fresh water zones that
would be drilled through would
be adequately protected much
like happens in the oil gas with
ocd that that's their
responsibility
but there's there's overlap on
on the quality side once the
waters brought to the surface
that would be in the mexico
environment department control
in that in that case.
The.
Yeah a minimum chair and and
members of the committee center
city low beds you know the way
this amendment is cons or this
modified bill is constructed is
that.
Everything that's al water
that's allocated under my good
colleague here is is not the
water we're talking about so
this is the bracket water that
is outside of allocation is the
intention of what we're getting
out here.
And then anything that's related
to water quality.
Would still be fully subject to
the new mexico environment
department's rules and
regulations.
So there's there is not this is
not water that's already been
allocated and this is there's no
pass on regulatory requirements
and remember the water that
we're trying to develop is for
use is that would not be
discharged as well.
Thank you I I learned the little
I know about water love from
from professor el and also from
denise fort who had two
different approaches.
The quantity issue and then the
quality issue and it always
struck me his odd that they were
so separated in in the
regulation and I think that
separation kind of shows in in
in this you know the concern so
i'm glad that it has
collaboration.
I you know and then I just want
to ask the question is it is the
reason you're not waiting and
because we're waiting for the
distribution you're waiting to
get all the answers and
everything would interest you
really not be interested if we
waited to get the answers and
develop this during the interim
and how the
inhabit move forward during the
sixty day when we have a.
This is it it is you can see it
was really hard for.
Me I have won't be for anyone
else to wrap my mind around how
this is come commodifying water
I mean that that's the bottom
line turning something that is
in my view or right
I believe that people have a
right to clean water into a
commodity and that's
i'm having trouble with that.
So why couldn't we just wait.
And I remind people that were on
the amendment on the in not the
entire i'm sorry but we had a
very long yesterday we had an
hour and a half two hours
hearing on the bill we're going
get ready to go to the floor
soon where on the amended
substitute please actually the
question about
procedures was was relevant to
the amendment the second was not
that was just expressing my
personal concerts sorry manager.
Anyone else on the amended.
Substitute.
It's point four
seven yes it is it's a committee
substitute and it's point four
and the
changes are on the thursdal
sheet that tom kriske put in
okay committee members we have a
couple choices we have a due
pass we have a not move it on
with a no recommendation and we
have a tabling motion available
what is the pleasure of the
committee I move and no
recommend.
Okay there is a motion.
From sellers to deal operators.
For a no wreck in a second from
senator souls if this bill moves
with the no wrecker goes on to
finance senate finance with the
secretary please call them up.
Senator savantos
want us no center guarantees
no senator hambling
center hamburn yes and recurtion
excuse said in a villa
santaville yes center pope.
No sarah pope no center souls
yes to a no wreck
zero source yes santa deal opens
yes to no wreck yes sanity
olympics yes center stephanics
yes there is a finance yes
okay
we have we have a couple of
people who would like to explain
their roads will start with
several hamlin then center
civilized thinking madam chair
and i'll be very brief obviously
we've had legitimate concerns
that have been in conversation
over the last couple of weeks
and I appreciate the efforts to
make those requested changes and
listen to the concerns of the
committee
I would suggest and we've had
this conversation is to have
after this legislative session
is to have some deliberate and
focused meetings that include
not only legislators the
affected departments but also
the advocates and organizations
that are very passionate about
this and have also a deeper
insight into the water
discussion because I do be it
believe that there are
legitimate concerns and
apprehensions and we know that
when we have more information
than less information
it's it's a a lot easier to help
explain with what we need to do
and to get those solutions to
move forward in a way that is
best for the states I would
strongly encourage to have those
meetings that include those
three different groups if not
more thank you madame chair.
Thank you center circumstances
your mouth sure you know this is
the conservation committee this
is the committee that I think
should be the leader in the
legislature on issues of water
and environment and energy and
for us to take a no
recommendation essentially tells
the legislature in the finance
committee we don't know what to
do in this committee so we're
going to leave it to somebody
else I I think that's
appropriate when it's an issue
of finance when it's an issue of
money that we should leave it to
the finance committee maybe a no
recommendation here is
appropriate but I think we
undermine ourselves as a
committee and our authority and
becoming an authority on these
issues when we set out something
with the no recommendation it's
going to like to me saying we
don't know what we think and
we're going to have somebody
else think about it more than we
do and I I think that's a
mistake um I also understand the
the committee's desire to send
it on but it were were
appropriating money that can be
appropriated by some other
legislature in the future this
is really listening on this is a
memorial at this point time it's
nothing more than a hope of the
future and I believe in unicorns
and rainbows and fairy tales too
so thank you manager thank you
senator any other comments
okay so with the five
of five three vote this is
moving on with a no
recommendation thank you for
listening to the concerns of the
committee committee members we
do not have any other bills on
the module this might hopefully
be the last meeting
yes i'm sure you know I think
it's always appropriate to thank
you as the chair and your staff
and everybody who's been so
gracious and good to us but
nobody understands whether chair
has to do until you're one and
it's a lot of work and so for
those who don't appreciate me
understand I want to thank you
for
me and everybody else here thank
you
manager and once again let's
thank all the staff who have
been here we thank them
yesterday let's thank them again
please
yes center soul you had to come
in.
I was just gonna also thank you
for your leadership on this
committee and the amazing staff
that makes us all look good
every day
okay we are in recent or
adjourned
thank you.
