Authorization bill of this bill
authorizes in new mexico
finance.
My co sponsor and with that a
stand for cr.
Thank you first go to the
audience how many people are
here to support oh first of all
i'm sorry would you like your.
Man i'm sure thank you I think
the only thing I would add to
what the sponsor said is that
this list includes more
municipalities a broader array
of projects and we've seen
before they are projects located
in twenty four counties so it's
fifty five entities that are
seeking authorization for sixty
five projects and without him
certainly happy to answer to.
Twenty four counties in fifty
five projects fifty five
entities that are seeking
funding for sixty five projects
so there are a couple of
entities madam chair that have
more than one project thank you.
The.
As as
the water trustport chair and
and also serving early on as the
governors water adviser when I
first joined
her team back in
two thousand and twenty two
the top issue that I
had and received and has been
since i've been stated engineer
is a rural water projects and
the ability for rural water
communities to tap into both
state and federal money and
that's a super high priority for
our agency
I I
really appreciate the
opportunity to serve as water
transport chair working with
market and and and the water
trust board were hyperfocused on
trying to get real communities
worth.
Streamlined through the
application process in a number
of things and we're also very
pleased that
in house bill two we have
additional funding
to cover the funding gap of what
we have been able to approve
this year and and also what
we've been able to find so so we
we
super appreciate the support of
of the senate in the house on my
bed issue thank you madam
madame chair i'd like to add
that was.
That was a.
It's it's really a full court
press on all these issues
support.
Great and I think we might have
questions with representative
cases you want to.
Thank you is there anyone to
hear in the audience to support
this bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
to oppose.
Is there anybody online.
The.
Matter chair members of the
committee my name is debby
hughes executive director with
the next association
conservation districts we
support this bill and we are
proud that the soil water
conservation districts in new
mexico can work on restoring our
water sheds and also improving
with flight protection projects
through this program and we
appreciate their sponsors and
appreciate the fact that we have
the opportunity to work with the
finance authority thank you.
Thank you very much.
We'll start with senat.
Thank you madame chair
would have to happen for and
local.
Two apply f.
I'm going to let market a check
that thank you madame chair so
the process starts in august
where there's an application
intent form so that we can get
you enrolled into our system in
order to apply you have to have
a planning document that's
outlined in the water trustports
policies so you apply with your
planning document and you begin
that application process in
august it ends in september and
then you have an opportunity to
present your project to the full
water trust board there's
typically a two day hearing were
entities will make their pitch
directly to the water trust
board meanwhile a seven agency
team is reviewing your
application and planning
document and prioritising the
project
using the policies outlined by
the water trust board that list
is then a ranked finalist and
presented to the water trust
board they make a decision as to
whether or not to recommend
though that list to you as the
legislature this year was
presented to our new mexico
finance authority oversight
committee on november second and
those projects then appear
before you today a mean while
those applicants that are on
this list are applying for what
we call the readiness space it
doesn't change their priority it
just allows us to determine
whether they're going to meet
the executive order what the
appropriate phasing of a project
might be what where they are in
their timing if they have
they've applied for planning and
construction in a where are they
and that if they've just played
for construction do they have
their plans done so that we can
see that the dollars are going
to be uh expenditure efficiently
and quickly
and then and to see if they're
in compliance with certain
regulatory functions like do
they have their water rights
that sort of thing that list is
finalized again to that same
seven agency team and we may buy
past projects if they're not
compliant with the executive
order if they are trying to draw
a well but don't have their
water rights.
They may get by past and then
that project is ultimate with
that list is decided by the
water trust board typically in
may and by the finance authority
shortly thereafter so the
finance authority takes the
recommendations and the amounts
recommended by the water trust
board and then structures and
appropriate loan brant mix
that's
based on policies again by the
water trustport so it is a
comprehensive process it takes
about ten months to get through
and if you don't have a planning
document you're likely not going
to get very far through the
system
thank you madame chair the
reason I asked as I was
approached approached by our
website via.
For to clean.
And of course they approached me
after we had turn.
They didn't
you know if it just seemed very
disorganized
because they didn't.
Be better if somebody who could
help them
very specifically would reach
out to them they seem like a
very small community I don't
know if you're aware of.
The.
Ah.
Um
madame chair and represent I
mean
excuse me wrong wrong house
senator said the place I want to
say we all have small
organizations small mutual water
associations that they you know
they're all volunteer so so a
lot of them really don't
understand the process at all I
think animate has done a
spectacu.
If I have a small water system
same thing I have about forty
five mutual domestic wa.
I say you have to go talk to the
n m f a m and they also help
them with planning grants that's
what you need to understand too
so they have done everything in
their power to make the process
easier for these small
governmental entities that are
run by volunteers they really
don't an amazing job and they
totally done everything they
could with in there statutory
authority to to help these
people so for an organization
like that night our mind if you
don't notice the water trustword
first I can't you can't capital
outlay your way out of this how
did this situation the money is
too great so so that's what I
tell them I help them get there
they get a meeting they tell him
how they go about going through
this process it's all online but
that doesn't matter.
People and they assign somebody
that has a constant contact with
them that's another great thing
that they do so so they've done
a process is so just tell them
that that's what I do thank you
madame chair that that's
wonderful of course this.
So you take.
Yes okay santa fe all good for
your village is looking for.
Million dollars are the top.
Thank you they know how to go
through the process the county
center guy goes
thank you matter thank you
representative for bringing this
forward one installer by talking
about your husband so when
you're.
Due to his.
It is hard for some of the
smaller locations the final gr.
So it makes a little bit hard
but I did want to ask
so I don't like say I appreciate
you've got all of.
Uh.
Right
madam chair last year we were
able to fund everyone on the
authorized list that was
compliant with the executive
order so there were a couple of
or maybe just one
one or two projects that we had
to bypass because they were not
complaint with the executive
order and frankly aren't still
today so those were the only
projects and last year as this
year every project that was
eligible was recommended to the
legislature so we fully funded
last year with the exception of
those two that just could not
receive the dollars and this
year every project that was
eligible was also recommended by
the water trustport so we funded
everyone last year but to answer
the more than another point here
is that if they're not funded
this year they have to reapply
next year.
I guess my thought is what i've
been told these are shovel ready
said the once that her arting
compliance it'll probably just
paper.
Has.
Locations.
The.
Thank you other questions
comments.
There is a motion for you pass
second her novel and the second
from.
So could the secretary.
Yes.
Yes
yes
the phone yes
you have a unanimous dupass
thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the comment that.
So committee members now we're
going to send it memorial eight
and I bel.
And senders.
And if the senator.
Thank you madame chair
this is a memorial
that is designed to study
do the study.
Other read measures for oil and
gas facilities projected how
they might affect the
environment around the state it
has been worked out there has
been a substantial conversations
with emner with namoga with
other stake holders on working
out the language of the memorial
so that we can get real
information and real data into
the future and so this is just a
memorial to do those types of
things I think people are fairly
capable i'm not going to read to
you everything that's in the
memorial of but we're here to
answer any questions I had you
also just got a fact sheet about
this memorial and again.
Capable of reading it's a worth
available for questions I do
have an expert witness if it's
needed in its error not i'm
sorry taste not sir okay so
before we go to the expert
witness you reminded me I need
to thank the sponsor of our
breakfast this morning which is
the oil and gas association and
it is not a bribe
and I also you know provided
actually wagner a little
counseling saying you're not
always going to win
but the environmentalist.
Tanners miss fox do you have
already present.
You need the green light on
and chair members of the
committee i'm tennis fox no I
don't have anything to add and
happy to answer any questions
you have thank you.
Going to the audience could I
see the hands of those people
who support this bill.
Can I see anybody who opposes.
Okay and online do we have any
supporters.
We have supporters online how
many.
So because several people are
here supporting and we have a
couple of
opponents let's take three from
each side that are in the room
so which three would like.
The.
Going to speak please go over
charge search.
Yeah.
The.
And for the record please and
you're going to have to step
back we go.
So you're gonna introduce
yourself and then make your
statement thank you okay
hello my name is windiat city I
live in farming to new mexico
and the navo tribal member I
think the committee chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to provide comments
in support of smate in new
mexico oil and gas act does not
keep pays with the science and
does not give the state
authority to protect the public
health and environment through
set backs I do not say this much
but I have a degree in science
as growing up in this out on
basin made me question the
relationship between extractive
industry the environment and
health little did I know my
family became front line stay
holders as I observed the
increased health risk of living
near oil and gas facilities I
know the study is critical to
have set backs in new mexico as
emnerge can directly consult
stay colders on how to mitigate
the risk by establishing set
back to oil and gas operations
let's protect all their people's
health in environment and beauty
please support sma thank you.
Thank you next.
Thank you madame chairman of the
committee my name is ben shelton
and the general council for the
energy minerals and natural
resources department we began
convening meetings discussing a
broader rate of changes to the
oil and gas act in august of
twenty twenty three those
meetings yield that a broad
number of ideas including robust
discussion for the last few
months on the concept of set
backs for human health and
safety what we have heard from
just about all the state
collisions that there is a broad
desire for more information more
discussion and more ideas on
this concept and we are excited
about keep to continue to be a
part of that in the upcoming in
terms
thank you very much please thank
you and my name is camilla
fibelman i'm with the real
granddad chapter of the sierra
club but was asked to include
the support of n r DC and earth
works for this memorial we also.
One.
Included the concept of set back
send at the request of
independent.
You are oh okay sorry about that
at the request of independent
producers and others set backs
were removed from the bill and
so it seems that at a minimum uh
it should be thought out
together over the summer to best
understand the ways in which we
can protect our water our
wildlife but most importantly
our communities what is it mean
to have a school within a mile
of an oil and gas well why is
the american long association
showing our rural oil and gas
county is
getting upgrades in smart which
is usually associated with urban
environment so first then
foremost we're here to protect
our people especially our kids
thank you.
Okay so let's go to the um
soon in here from the.
The two that are there.
Okay we need to
having if you're speaking more
didn't hear anything so please
introduce yourself and then
start over.
Good morning can you hear me ok
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is give honoracy and today i'm
speaking on behalf of the almost
twenty thousand.
Mums clean air force members in
new mexico and we stand in
support of center memorial eight
air political associated with
oil and gas operations are known
to cause serious health impacts
in pregnant women babies and
children as well as other adults
children breathe faster and
spend more time outside than
adults which makes children
particularly vulnerable to
pollution.
With so many new mexico
residents and students living or
going to school within one half
mile of oil and gas facilities
including almost thirty thousand
students at over a hundred
schools throughout the state it
really is time to take action
numerous studies have found that
babies whose mothers live close
to natural gas wells were more
likely to have serious health
impacts including lower
birthrate weight which increases
risk of early death infections
and learning disabilities being
born preterm and having birth
defects of the heart the new
mexico oil and gas act doesn't
give the state authority to
protect the public health and
environment through setbacks and
new mexico kids need the state
to a valuate the risks work with
stake holders and recommends set
back legislation to protect new
mexico communities and iron
buyer meant which is what this
memorial will deal thank you.
Thank you one more person online
in support.
Yes can you hear me.
The.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay thank you a good morning
share and committee and a
sponsors my name is joan brown
and a francis consister and
executive director of new mexico
interference power in light and
we have members all of the state
work all over the state about a
hundred covenanted faith
congregations and over two
hundred who are partners and
thousands of members we work
very closely with communities in
the permian basin and I could
tell you many stories because we
take people a faith there to
talk to community members so
that they can engage in
solidarity work one short story
one of our faith leaders in the
heart of the oil and gas has
bronco problems and one of the
programs that the front like
community there works with and
that we work with when we can is
a high level air purifiers this
particular faith leader has
health problems a months we got
some air pure fires to some of
his mother's pregnant women and
children and their homes he said
I would I need one and because I
have such health problems he had
visitors come from back east
they war k ninety five masks the
entire time not for covered but
because of the air quality we do
need to look at set backs the
health challenges of our
communities live down there it
is an ethical moral imperative
and so we support strongly the
senate memorial to begin to do
work on that thank you very
much.
Thank you now we'll go to the
opponents on.
Okay if there is an opponent
online would you please identify
yourself to the soon operator
now we'll go to the opponents in
the room.
Intend they say your pa.
Yeah the opposition and we'll
hear from three or how remaining
there are
good morning man madame chairman
of kenmet thanks the opportunity
to speak today my name is mike
miller I represent the permian
base of curly association one
gas activity new mexico has been
tremendous especially over the
last decade this is provided
incredibly incredible boost the
local economies into the state
those local economies in the
state of benefit with additional
funding for education health
care and infrastructure we have
been able to track new business
to the state through subsidies
provided by all and gas revenues
in the world before possible
feels became a primary fuel
source for humanity over eighty
percent of the world's
population lived in extreme
poverty today with fashion fuels
and especially specifically all
in natural gas being primary
fuel stores you'd utilize by
developed and developing nations
around the world less than eight
percent of the world's
population lives in extreme
poverty the impact of women gas
development on people's lives in
new mexico should be studied so
both benefits and any drawbacks
can be fully understood we
appreciate the willingness to
amend the proposed memorial but
still find it false short of
understanding the true benefits
to health and safety and the
state budget that all gas
production provides in new
mexico thank you.
Thank you very much next.
Madame chair members of the
committee jim winchester with
the independent patrolling
association of new mexico our
members have been consistent
since day one of last august
first round of stakeholder
meetings first of all local
municipalities know their
communities best in a pad
extensive community input and
already existing setbacks and
place in those setbacks were not
willing nelly they were
carefully considered number two
we do not believe that the state
should have preemption for the
local communities that know
what's best for them number
three there is no language in
this memorial that calls for
studies on economic impacts to
operators or small in march
economic impact to the budget or
economic impacts to the local
communities and the ansulary
businesses that rely on oil and
gas workers and their families
in finally the language in this
memorial is based on the premise
that the state must establish
statewide setbacks we do fear
that that's putting the
conclusion ahead of the study we
do respectfully oppose but we do
hope that if this memorial
passes that I p a number
independence have proportional
representation on any
stakeholder group in that
collaboration isn't just defined
as finding in arbitrary distance
to close off lands were
resources could otherwise be
safely developed thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else in the audiences
that's not.
Anybody.
There's nobody.
Thank you madame chair other
than length what is the
difference between the original.
Madam chair and senators to deal
though pays I was not part of
that I did mast do you know the
differences between this fox if
you would please
madam chair senator the critical
components of the original bill
and original memorial
or retained in the
um
eh substitute
and then a lot of the details
supporting detail has been
eliminated.
Well for example on paragraph.
I noticed that the original said
air politics include pollutants
designated by the epa has.
Yeah.
Change.
It was.
Medicare and senator I believe
that the purpose of that is so
that the memorial doesn't
indicate pre determined
conclusions but it is to study
all of these areas in a
cooperative way with all of the
stakeholders rather than to put
in a goal if you will towards
the the outcome
I appreciate that I think that
that's great that the
stakeholders.
I'm always used about what is.
I mean what's in that second
paragraph is a fact but.
If if it's inflammatory.
Tonight.
So I I appreciate that and I
think it I commend you for
meeting with the stakeholders
and I commend the stake holders.
Thank you center mccuston.
Move chair.
Do many of the municipality.
An imagined i'd have to defer to
my expert.
Minimum chair senator some
cities and counties do have set
backs it say um
in some do not it's it depends
on the supp.
Dillen huge deputy secretary of
the energy minorities and
natural resources department
miss fox's answer was correct.
The.
But
all me this abilities to have
oil and gas that impact th.
Managed chair senator it's my
understanding that not all.
So maybe madam chair.
What would be the purpose of the
state.
What that regulation needs to be
if thems are in fact in pla.
Civilized.
Manager and senator if I might
have
I don't think that that's
necessarily the case what this
is is to bring everybody
together to see if the setbacks
are appropriate where they are
if there need to be other ones
or they may be fine where they
are now and so I don't know that
it's the state coming in saying
that it's bringing every went
together so that there's
agreement on what kinds of set
bikes need to be which is why
it's a memorial rather than a
bill saying that it needs to be
set backs.
Missing in this study like was
brought up by some of the
opponents of the bill
manager and center mccatchen I
think that's why in i'd have to
find exactly where it is but it
says and other measures and so
it's not just set back it's
other measures to protect the
public health and safety
recognizing that it this is an
important industry to new mexico
and to those communities and so
again trying to work
collaboratively for which things
make sense and have the biggest
impact in those communities sure
madame chair center so we
recently went through something
very similar to this in carl's
bad
and it was it was it was kind of
AAA good exercise especially in
preparation for this and and a
good opportunity for the city to
voice their opinion and be able
to to to show us what they feel
they need to protect their
citizens so the process in carls
bad
is they have an ordens in the
organs I believe is five hundred
feet and you have to be five
hundred feet away from
a resident or a structure or
something like that
there was a a portion of the
city and they were they were
just with the end a few feet of
the city of of city limits so
being there they said okay we'll
be going to go to the city
council and will get approval
well they were twenty five
hundred to three thousand feet
away from the closest house or
anything like that and there was
one
one
supply store that was within
four hundred and seventy feet
from where they wanted to draw
but the supplied store they were
in all filterplace when they
said hey we don't you know we we
don't we don't care and and so
what happened as they went for
the city council we said hey
look for three thousand three
twenty five hundred feet away
from from anybody all the
residents and oh hey we're we're
okay with it and there was this
one little loan building out
there and so and the city would
not grant him a variance so they
had to move their rig over
seventy feet to drill the well
which I was I was.
Pretty proud of the city cross
but they said they said okay
they said look this is the line
we're not going to amend the
ordinance you know and and they
said this is this is the rule
and we understand that this is a
safety so so in that I seem to
see a cross bed was doing their
very best to protect the
interest of their citizens now
if if i'm understanding
correctly if we go go through
this memorial and it's a little
bit my opinion in its focus in
saying hey this is really what
we're gonna this is really what
we're going to focus on is is
you know these are quality and
and things like that we can we
can you know discuss that at a
different time but it's a little
bit my opinion it's focus
especially when I see you know
the good citizens of city
councils say in hey we don't
care if this is one little
building they could have opened
up the ordinance and said okay
we're going to read a one time
variance because you know this
all field supply company that
has one or two employees it's
about
two hours a week three hours a
week something like that they
said we're just we we could
allow variancer and and they and
they wouldn't do it and so
crossbed is really heavily oil
and gas there there's a whole
lot of it there's a whole lot of
it there and every member of
that
about city council had something
had something to lose by not
granting that variance and they
refuse to do that and so I am
concerned especially with
supporting
supporting this memorial that
would be too my opinion in its
focus and that we would we would
have the state come in and do a
one size fits all for different
municipalities and especially
when around the casp of you know
talking about some of these
carbon wells that they were
doing and and and the ocd will
will do those as well that those
those locations may need to be
different in oil and gas wells
and they may have better benefit
you know
you know wherever those are
questionation wells could could
potentially be located and then
and then rolled into this as
well so
the I guess maybe one one final
question.
Madame chairman and center if
state if we come in and create
set backs the state would then
have primacy over local
cipilities.
Madam chair and center in the
catch and typically in something
like this the state sets a
minimum and vocal medicine could
be more restrictive local
medicalities would not be able
to be less restrictive now
that's how they have typically
worked this is not determined
yet that's what this memorial
will do is actually set up what
those would be and try and bring
in all of the stakeholders and I
appreciate your city council
that they thought that was an
important one to uphold the the
particular standard but it
dismemorial I believe also
brings you in some of the stake
holders that don't always feel
even represented by their local
city council
and their particular communities
and gives them a voice in
setting what those are potential
restrictions might be
recognized I I think it's fairly
open and brings all of the
people together and quite
frankly after haven't been up
here for twelve years this is
pretty unusual to have new
mexico oil and gas wanting to
beat with the environment
department and the
environmentalist to work out
something that that works and
wreck in managers because I
think in general most reasonable
people recognize the importance
of oil and gas but also
recognize the importance of
having some controls of
restrictions on the potential
environmental degredation and
and horrible effects on people
in trying to work together in
this really is unusual that they
are pretty much on board
together to let sit down to work
this out sure
madam chairman says that thank
you very much for that
I actually have signed on to
another send moral that's not as
my opinion is this but the bit
kind of broadens out and would
hopefully give you know the
stakeholders
and all the citizens a little
bit more input and little more
view and so i'm in a i'm gonna
recommend on this you know for
myself i'm going to be a no
because I know that we have
another one coming that's going
to include more and then just
going to benefit the people more
and give everybody a little
better.
View of potentially all of the
impacts you know so we want to
yeah air quite those things like
that we've got financial.
In in I agree with you you know
we need to be need to be good
stewards and we need to be
you know up front in in what
we're doing and I believe being
transparent is giving everybody
all of the.
Those decisions and madame chair
with that center thank you so
much thank you center mccatcher
what's the number on your memoir
yes i'm not seeing it here it's
coming up in a it's coming up in
a couple of days
and it is fourteen team.
Fourteen years it was already
introduced it was just members
read in.
Probably then on tuesday morning
yes ma'am so you know
what we would like to like to be
able to then and one one more
comment madame chair we we we
would like to see that and and
hopefully maybe have that maybe
have this discussion in as well
but these microphones are r.
So thank you I have I have
centered gay goes and said.
Thank you madame chairman center
thank you as part.
I was gonna ask and I just want
to follow the the substitute as
one.
Paid online twenty one it's
called talk about including
increased risk of cancer and i'm
just wondering as they're going
through to do all the study in
cancer state wide nationwide
worldwide i'm wondering if all
gas will get a black eye for
location of time yet so here's
my story my mom lived in plate
platinum mexico has no gas at
all.
I brought my mom to unless.
Because she had cancer she died
in.
Of all gas I live forty five
people more than all.
Been there for e.
In our community.
That had catcher came from a non
august sector i'm wondering if
you guys are going to look at
that or is it just on death rate
I don't know how yo.
Yeah.
The.
I know they're inflating a quite
a few of my.
And how you're using that to
target to include the risk of.
Madam chair and senator up be
careful I am the status dission
and understand this well and I
could probably tell you way more
than you want to know about how
these things these studies are
done they are very large
national studies there certainly
and that's parts why indicates
an increased risk it is not a a
guarantee it is not a
cause in effect directly but
there is a higher correlation
with that and so in your
particular story is about it
when individual that may have
moved there with cancer and that
would show as higher but just is
likely there may have been
someone with cancering in unis
who have done to clayton those
two ten to always balance out
and they do look at those kinds
of things when they're doing the
large studies usually these are
done with very very large
numbers where an individual
situation like that does not
skew the numbers much at all
thank for them and chair center
in reality and I don't mind i'm
glad you're so station I only h.
Fifty seconds left for you.
But i'll go to my next house on
the politician and I teach lots
of stands I probably could do it
but i'm not going to
accommodate center.
Went my next questions actually
on page two line eighteen says
establishing said back.
Senator mccartin did a really
good job of trying to show that
the communities are trying to do
that but the other measures.
For all ga.
Yes what i'm trying to find out
is what would be included.
Madam chair and senator that
language was requested by the
oil in new mexico oil and gas
association are rather than have
something specific in there so
that it is very broad for both
for industry it's issues and
environmentalist issues that
those are the kinds of things
that this commission or group
would actually look at in study
is what other kinds of measures
might be appropriate straight
set backs might not be
appropriate in a community where
and i'm making something up that
the prevailing winds always
below whatever away from the
population instead of towards
the population again I I don't
know why making that up on the
spot but it could be those kinds
of things that it's not always a
setback that might be most
effective it might be some other
measure some other way of
mitigating some of the risks
that are undetermined at this
point or be very depending on
location.
Thank for that member chair
center I guess my next question
then it and I have some comfort
with having.
My next question is is on
page.
You.
This report.
The.
Manager and senator I don't know
specifically which interim
committees may guess is it might
go to the science technology
committee it might go to the
energy and what's that
the act that has been could go
to radioactive hazards material
I I don't know all of the
different ones I we all kind of
right we all kind of know the
ones we sit on
madam chair and center and i'll
be watching for that I am on
hazard that material
in my my question for that as
i'd like to be able here the
results as we go forward
I do want to thank you.
All gases important industry so
I appreciate their piece of I
just as a comment them chairs
are a living in an old gas area
I really do think that the
communities should have the most
important and not state so but
that all you.
Thank you next I have a center
in the building center pos.
Thank you madame chair
you know as
messing around.
The statistics of a
what if this is pneumonia deaths
for whatever just one I I was
looking for some c.
Ironically two of the best
counties or someone can.
Uh as far as the money
the thing is with these studies
you can
we can take this kind of a study
and if its goal is to give an
industry a black eye you can do
it you can find the statistics
what happens like in s.
With a statistic.
I studied or.
Actually give us information we
have.
Yeah.
And statistically i've looked at
it enough that there's not an
issue with health
unusually high in someone county
versus.
Small and all.
I
I don't know if a study would be
that useful.
If I will use the money it'll
show good for several.
Whatever the study.
I don't think the state of.
We know at home.
The state depending on the
political.
Thank you next.
Senator pope.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you senator and sponsor.
To the other bill.
And so just a few questions to
confirm.
Right now this.
This is really to set up.
Madam chair and center pop
that's correct this is just.
You know I think this is a a
great discussion.
I applied for doing this to
actually find out
in this in this.
Of what the set back.
Arbitrarily.
And also looking.
Right because.
Um there's always the question
of
what happens locally what
happens at the state level.
And for me.
On something like this I think
it's important understand that
someone who lives in carl's bad
someone who lives in
albuquerque.
When we're talking about
carsnagenik substances
and the wrist a cancer and other
health issues.
It's not going to really be
where.
I would air more on the side of
getting.
The.
Is important in to find.
What was said here and that
people don't care about that but
that's why.
That out.
Will be supporting this.
Who knows maybe we come back and
we find.
And I think that's where the.
And I understand there's some
situations as sena.
Never ever got sick and.
Just like there's people who
smoke cigarettes every day and
never get cancer
that happens but there is a
risk.
And even though everybody goes
day to day might live near
oil gas operations and
albuquerque there's people that
live near concrete plans and
other industrial areas to wear
your right they don't even know
what's going on but.
They are being second they are
being harmed.
To give people the information
and do what we can to protect
them so that's just a statement
of their questions thank you
manager thank you before we go
to s.
Something you said senator pope
triggered
my memory when my father was
dying.
She went through a whole medical
record of many things that none
of us even knew about in the
family because he was of the
generation were you had to be a
strong.
And not passing your troubles to
other people so little did we
know and he had s.
He had long disease in many
other things but it was
interesting that different
generations.
And you know we're evolving now
because our elders are dying but
for the next generation this
might be important senator
mccatches.
Madam chair thank you
belgium me just one second time
as we're discussing
you know what this and memorial
does and and and the study that
it starts I just wanted to I I
don't feel like I communicated
exactly the extent that the.
When they
you know approved essentially
that the drilling that the a lot
of oil well they're in town.
So we're to the to the city
council meeting the city council
gross but has a real strict
statute.
I am afraid that if we did a
broad study and you know came up
with a set back of you know
whatever.
We could potentially miss
some of the critical components
of that I understand that we're
just opening up to study to
gain.
But.
The old company was required to
hire a company of the city of
carl's beds choosing so they
have it they have an
environmental company and I
believe they were I believe
they're out of california with
an office in denver and they
came in and they studied the
entire thing they studied like
you said prevailing winds they
studied the downhold pressures
they had well logs around they
asked for
all of the
all of the well logs and
engineered
engineer designed for the well
board they knew exactly what the
well had pressure was going to
be they looked at the blow up
prevented they looked at they
looked at the entire at the
entire project and it was an
extreme in depth analysis and
after going through that process
you know it took a lot of time
and there was a lot of care in
the city saying okay you guys
can drill a well.
I'm afraid that.
If we if we go out.
Have the end in mind with what
we're with what we're wanting to
do the.
And the state does create those
set back rules in the future
that we could.
Miss the mark in the quality of
surance in a quality assurance
that the cities are already
doing and so I wouldn't bite
somebody I would.
How they're doing that because
it was like it was like a
rigorous deal it wasn't like a
were in all town just jump out
there and get it done it was
like a these are our people in
that's how they were looking at
it and so when we come up with a
one size fits all throughout the
state
that that would negate the
responsibility from the city and
that they're saying hey this can
just the states taken care of
our people and we don't we don't
have to do it we wouldn't want
them thrown up their hands or
feel like all the hard work that
they have put in to make those
facilities safe would just be
null and boy and so with that
manager was just just more of a
comment but if we if we could
potentially keep our powder
drive for the senate senate
memorial fourteen wing include a
lot of this in there but get a
comprehensive view and then turn
that regulation back over to the
cities and.
In my experience with the old
field with the field
municipalities as they go above
and beyond so
with it
thank you I have center city a
lot person I have serious
I move a duphouse okay so center
gagasty of a brief comment
manager just mentioned a senator
just a question for depends
refuge
and I know other states have
done set back look at go to try
to figure this out I did not
texas.
Just to see if they had any
although a precautionary rules
and or like the ninety eight
percent gas capture have all in
any of these other states looked
at this in its entire day or so
just totally set back.
Mister chair senator
states have a.
Have
very real b.
Field management requirement so
you know what out there at a
state wi.
Five hundred and two thousand
feet in terms of what's on the
book.
Very.
Them chair and serena sector
appreciate that I just don't my
thought was going back to.
I appreciate that my final
question.
Thank you and we were still
working at the second memoir I
have a motion on the floor for
due past.
Could we please call the
center sponsors
saturday.
The.
The.
Senator in a bill.
Yes
senator resource yes
senator deal office yes centers
the.
Yeah.
