What today I have a bill and
that relating to the environment
creating a cloud weather
modification pilot project in
the new mexico department of
agriculture and it requires a
reporty and I have with me
my expert witness charity marcus
along with the mister bomar
george bomar who will be joining
us online I believe
if that's possible.
So.
Basically this is a
AAA program that will create a
cloud seating broad project in
southeastern new mexico we've
had it we clear see the clouds
twice before in southeastern new
mexico.
Um.
The texas has been doing it for
twenty five years.
Seven of our surrounding states
are do it all the time
consistently including
california most of the western
states around us do it.
It is brings about a twenty
percent increase in moisture for
them.
Uh it uses.
It can use salt sodium corride
sonium
for tassian chlorine is
and silver I did also dry ice.
So the stuff that they use is
not that serious of a saying
it's almost in what falls to the
ground is in such small
quantities they can barely.
Trace it they can barely find
it.
But shot into the cloud it
causes no cleating I learned the
new word whenever I ran this
will so nuclear as the formation
of a crystal from a vapor in
this case so it uh be ice
crystal forms around the that
particle in its starts picking
up more paper it becomes bigger
until the cloud cannot any
longer hold it loft.
Starts fall into the ground and
it melts and if I was his rain.
And.
We need more rain
so though the weather i'm trying
to think of some of the
questions that were asked me
last night we had a good
rounding browsing the way that
on the horror about it the
weather in the united states
are.
Generally travels from west the
east.
Sometimes southwest to.
Two northeast and so.
You near that more strong keep
new mexico not going across the
text as i'm all i'm all for so
many of your extent for
questions.
So mister bombard please go
ahead.
Yes thank you madame chair
members of the committee my name
is george bombard i'm a
meteorologist and i've been
working with the roosevelt soul
and water conservation district
the last several years.
To design and hopefully
implement a summertime cloud
seating program to nurge jan
tundrestorms to live longer and
rain more over larger areas
we've seen ample evidence that
that happens in a jason states
like colorado and kansas and in
texas.
Um.
And i'm happy to address any
specific questions that you may
have.
Thank you very much and the next
person online.
Okay
okay.
It so is there well do one less
flea is there anyone else online
who wanted to speak.
Okay so charlie did you want to
say something if so please
introduce yourself for the
committee.
Madam chair charlie markers
registered lobbyists for the
roosevelt solemn water
conservation district we have
been pursuing this effort for
approximately the last five
years it has gone on much longer
than that but under this
initiative we have only had two
very short periods of time only
because of the lack of funding
of they have secured all the
license same working with the
interstates for inconnect
commission
and the authorized area for
ceiling is an older say
approximately around the tier c
area although it down to the
southern border on the eastern
part of state.
So that's the area that were
targeting were hopeful that
through the through this effort
that we
improve the efforts see of it or
not and if it is proven to be uh
efficient and and produce what
we believe it will that we can
then expand it to other areas in
the state
and that's those are all the
comments that I have to have
thank you very much thank you
okay questions comments well
start with senator hamlin.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you very much I appreciate your
efforts to try and find more
solutions to our water situation
in the state
I notice in the
the FIR I I do appreciate that
in a media request the
opportunity to consult with
proposed activities just to
assess any potential water
quality impacts or monitoring
provisions and
mr mark as you had said you know
if it's not effective so what
happens if it's not effective to
that one point nine ninety eight
million dollars does that go
back into the general fund.
So many chair
generated this is a three year
project we did not receive one
point nine eight million we have
one million so we just will run
the project until the million
and then we will decide if we
gained water or lost water
stayed the same.
And if it if it's successful
will come back for funding in
today we have much better ways
of monitoring it with doctor
radar back in the old actually
just cutting go down streams
they forgot more rain but her
today we have a lot more
scientific ways of monitoring it
okay and so I guess my my
question is is that if any time
in that three years.
It's deemed to be harmful.
Then will it cease.
And then that money goes back
into the general fund if you
haven't used that whole million
madame chair yes okay thank you
so much I appreciate that's all
I have manager thank you I have
a third gago center city a lot
person center souls center guy
goes i'm sure thank you.
Representative
just couple questions so they
used to this
we had a rant I thought it was a
silver literature.
So
many chairs still right is is
what they use if they use silver
they also you saw they also use
dryers okay
and turn representative then my
other question was and I may
have heard this wrong where you
located where you don't actually
at that I heard southeast but
then I looked at it rose about
but I just wondering if I was
wrong is it just easy each
answer so man of chair its rose
well sold and water conservation
district but from to come carey
south to the border.
Might be around your house only
car and appreciate that those
mile questions I just thought if
you're struggling rosevelt it's
different than the salvy so
would that are you thank you
manager.
Thank you center city a lot as
thank you this is kind of scary
I am channeling senators
advantage.
It is then this isn't going to
judiciary so he's kind of
missing out of the chance but he
usually doesn't like purpose
clauses and this has two purpose
classes in the beginning and be
are both describing the purpose
of the legislation
I don't have such hostility
toward purpose closes because
sometimes they can help a court
interpret the the legislation if
there is if there's litigation
so I think you know i'm not
going to suggest you take them
out out I don't know you might
want to talk to before you go to
the floor.
The.
Part of my you know when you
also and I I don't know if
you'll have
the purpose seems all over the
place a little bit.
The.
So you know it's it's not real
targeted it looks like it could
be.
Interpret and water different
ways which gets me to the the
only part the only part of this
that I really do have a question
and that is e on page two
that is.
The.
Eliminating liability.
By the state or import by the
state of new mexico shell not be
the bases of any claim of level
so
that's I assumed that they will
be hiring a private company to
do the cloud seating secret.
Madame chair yes they will.
So
hypothetical let's say that that
company
engaged in gross negligence or
or even maybe was infiltrated by
some crazy person they'd put
some toxics in the in the.
Silver whatever does you use and
that and put some talks and sin
there and they were spread out.
That private company under the
way this is interpreted wouldn't
have nor worth the person who
intentionally put the toxins
have any liability so I just
feel that this is extremely
broad
I would feel more comfort said
she'll not be the basis of any
claim of liability for
negligence so madam chair lady.
I appreciate the bill drafters
that drafted this but I don't
know if there's any lawyers in
this room but I promise you you
cannot be worse yourself from
liability it's just not not
possible built by an used gas
station you will be liable I am
a lawyer and and eliminating
liability in a state statute is
exactly the way you limit
liability.
And cause it's it's very broad
shell not be the basis of any
claim of liability so all the
defendant has to do is raise
and then file emotion to dismiss
that's what I would to fire the
attorney would be very simple in
the case would be dismissed
would you consider the friendly
amendment for shall not be the
basis of any claim of liability
for negligence
excuse me senator please
identify the page and the line
number
page two subsection em in my
twenty three twenty four.
I understand what they're trying
to do their understand trying to
encourage people to do this and
reduce the risk and probably
reduce the insurance costs is
probably what they're trying to
do with this.
No so what well then i'll ask
what is the purpose of.
Subcession eon page two months
in my expert witness answer
them.
The intent with this endeavor at
least is that it should there be
negligence on the part of the
contracted agent.
They then would be responsible
for any lawsuits that would be
brought forward.
Thank you manager it's not
written that way
because it says.
The act of cloud seeding
pursuing to a project funded
part by the state of new mexico
or authorized by the new mexico
department agriculture shall not
be the basis of any claim of
liability his eyes said if if I
were representing somebody.
I would.
File emotion to dismiss and
slight this statute saying I
don't have any liability if you
want it if you intend for the
private company to be liable it
should say the state of new
mexico or the department of
agriculture shall not shall not
be subject to a claim of
liability.
Would you accept that as a for
my moment
manager half way through the
legislature I would gladly
accept that as brilliant
amendment
right now tonight if we amend it
then it has to go back to the
house
uh so i'm not sure there's time
for it I probably will raise
this again on the floor this is
a big exemption of liability
so I am concerned I mean it did
to me I understand what you're
trying to do and I really
appreciate that you you would.
Say that the private company is
liable for any mistakes that
makes.
Is there is sovereign immunity
so they may not be liable anyway
the department of agriculture
and the state of new mexico
because they have sovereign
immunity.
So.
I don't think that this class is
necessary if that is your your
intent I would honestly don't
research that a little bit just
to make sure that they are
covered by sovereign immunity
because they are exceptions to
sovereign immunity off hand I
don't know but I am.
Very concerned about this
clients.
Madame sure center steel operas
i'd be glad to take this up to
council and have them research
their clause.
So that it states what our
intentions.
Um.
As much as I hate to go back
through concurrence.
If we go quick enough hearing on
it it would be okay.
As long as we got that done
quickly so
madame chair that would make me
feel comfortable because less be
specific if this okay
so madam chair I move that
subsection.
Oh i'm gonna write it if you're
right and then the secretary is
gonna s.
Thank you madam chair
if we done cloud seating over in
that area in the past
madam chair you yes we are
so madam chair how is this then
a pilot project if we've already
done it in the past medicare we
didn't really keep very good
records of that we did I will
let my expert witness answer
that
more george.
Georgia george bomore can answer
that better than me but it's the
record keeping okay so mr bummer
is a ball mar or bob mart
madam cheer it's bomar b o m a r
thank you keep records here of
who speak so please go ahead
yes the very limited amount of
cd
did not have any sort of any
valuation attached to it.
There were certain data that
were collected.
A but those data were not
analyzed so we really don't have
a definitive answer as to
whether eastern new mexico
what limited amount of seating
that's occurred there has been
demonstrated or proven.
And so this effort would be up I
lead in the sands that in
addition to doing the seating we
would collect some very
sophisticated dopper weather
radar data from the national
weather service and there was
data would be analyzed to
determine the degree of efficacy
of the effort.
So monetary yeah we've heard
bills like this in the past
seems like they were designed to
collect the data yet i'm now
being told the data wasn't
collected in analyzed.
Why is this one different.
Madame chair center souls
the difference was this is that
we have engaged the extension
service.
Egg extension services at nmsu
the intent is to building a more
you between was well so and
water conservation district and
the animals you will
to insure the type of data what
type of measurement they're
looking for what analysis
they're looking for and then mr
bummer will be a likely part of
the expertise behind the to be
able to analyze it and so it's
it's just a different what
deserts are more complete effort
if you will
difference madame chair and and
representative and and charlie
it sounds like days I would all
over again because I asked a
very similar questions was told
oh yes we're going to collect
the data we will know
definitively the last time it
came through and I recall
looking up close eating in
general which has showed
very low correlations with the
actual changes in weather
amounts as to what that they
could say that it was due to the
cloud seating as post and
natural things most of the data
showed more.
Mountain snow during the winter
time rather than additional
moisture during the summer this
particular bill on page two line
three says it's going to be
rained snow and waste your yet
represented you said this was
just going to be a summer
program.
I'm confused
i'm sure I think her i've heard
my experience explain that a
little bit and I think he does a
pretty good job so if you don't
mind
mister bummer go ahead.
Yes madame chair george bomar
again.
The seating that's occurred the
last few years or just a month
or two months.
All of the fans that were
available for that program.
Were expanded.
In launching an aircraft in
doing this seeding a we did not
do any sort of statistical
assessment.
The perception that there was
additional rainfall on the
ground there was determined
using a raingage network.
What we envision with this
program is the use of some very
sophisticated right our data.
That will be analysed.
Looking clouds that are seated
and comparing them with those
that are not seated in order to
come up with something that's
quantifiable.
Get madam chair and and mr bobar
and others you this sounds
exactly like what we heard last
time for funding for these
and
I it's incredibly difficult to
pass out whether the actual any
rainfall is actually due to the
cloud seating outside of the
noise of the incredible
variation that we get just in
regular weather.
Patterns are
section seed there starting
online seven on page to the rose
boat soil water conservation
the mexico department of
agricultural enter a joint
powers agreement to conduct the
cloud seating modification and
design evidence based weather
modification demonstration
projects.
So through this it sounds like
there's going to be some sort of
a control and various methods
are going to be used who's going
to determine that if you're
getting an outside contractor
who does plough seating is in he
going to want to use his
proprietary method
so many chair general money it
would be the act science center
they they are staffed by
doctorate level folks are
overseen by doctor level folks
I would also matter chair if I
could I would like my expert
witness to talk about other
states how many other states
have has been done in what is
the evidence of for
effectiveness in some of those
other states if we're if you if
we could manage.
Mister balmart go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
Cloud seating is now being done
in virtually every western
state.
From nine from colorado wyoming
westward to the west coast
much of it is for winner times
no pack augmentation.
Uh the states of north dakota in
texas or
using cloud seeding to enhance
rainfall from warm season
thunderstorms.
The snow pack argementation
effort in the western US has
been going on for over sixty
years there has been an immense
amount of data collected and
analyzed the show there is a
reliable efficacy to there
ceding of mountainous terrain
we have a much more limited
experience working in the
summer time in the southwestern
united states and this pallet
program would undoubtedly
provide additional data that
would allow us to.
Demonstrate how effective this
approach can be.
The.
So
madam chair again is i'm looking
at the bottom of that particular
section
and it says there's about line
twelve projects using current
evolving scientific methods a
cloud seating and test the
relative benefits of these
methods and the potential
environmental rise so that
sounds like they're going to use
several different ones very
scientific and compare which
ones produce more rather than
just try to produce more
is that accurate that this is
going to be scientific papers or
is this just to increase the
water in rose about county soil
water conservation district is
that's very different if this is
a a pillar and research project
or is this to increase the water
in rose.
Madam chair center souls first
off back to your end of initial
question all this the initial
efforts did not include the
resources that university.
The intent behind this to
include them is to make sure
that it is more scientific that
it it does drive out the
the data that we're looking for
and although they are
contracting with.
A non entity if you will they
they're doing it import because
they don't have the expertise to
do this
and and they've stated that so I
wouldn't help them with the but
the intent is to drive a all of
these different aspects of cloud
seating because there's been
questions with regards to the
yet not only the efficient of it
but how safe is it and so we
want to make sure that if if
this has been pursued that it is
safe and it's done in the same
way
and and it's both a summer and
winter program so it's not
limited to the summer quite
frankly the winter programs are
probably more productive than
the summer programs so anyway so
that that's the intent.
Thank you madame chair is new
mexico state I don't think is
here which researchers who is
working on that at new mexico
state who has expertise in this
area.
Yeah.
Madame chair senator it would go
through the extensions of the
age extension service and that's
a doctor's john boran had set up
um.
It has a number of doctorate
level.
A scientist that head up that uh
division and it has a extension
excited center all over stated
in mexico it hasn't included it
hasn't.
In two thousand and
doctor what is going to doctor
lily wireless they knew person
in charge of that of those there
of those excited centers and
that's based we were.
Where the expertise will cover.
Thank you madame chair and my
last question is kind of along
the lines city a lopez
the last couple of summers
across the state we've had some
devastating floods where they're
not enough rain but then when it
came it came all at once and
several over in the southeast.
What's the protection for the
public that a cloud get seated
in instead of being a normal
thunderstorm becomes a
superstorm and causes wife's
damage all kinds of other things
whose responsible if when it
comes out that that was a seated
cloud that caused that problem
because that devastation made
telling my expert witness answer
that.
Mister bummer.
Madam chair george bombard
again.
Every cloud seating project
operates under certain criteria
we call them suspension
criteria.
And using the best rate are
available in meteorologies can
no.
When a thunderstorm is being too
prolific.
We have cases where aircraft
ceased to treat a cloud that has
grown into accomplice and is on
the burger producing torrential
rain flash floods
those suspension criteria are
important in that when adhered
too the public safety is
insured.
The.
Made that that really is my
questions I just have concerns
when you it sounds like this is
already pre determined how to do
it rather than a research
project on what's the the most
efficient one and so you know it
seems more like uhm.
Headed towards rose about county
so they get more rain without it
really being a pilot project
those just my concerns thank you
thank you we'll go back to
center city a lot as to explain
her amendment.
Thank you thank you madame chair
so they suggested an amendment
is on page two
why twenty one
delivered mine's twenty one
through twenty four and
substitute the following.
The state of new mexico and the
domestic code department of
agriculture sheld night and here
and put waves sovereign immunity
and then I put in parentheses
not be liable for participating
in a project funded in hole or
in part by the state of new
mexico does that express you in
ten.
This.
The.
Madam chair
senders to deal opens not being
an attorney
I believe it does.
But I honestly would like
somebody to look at it and make
sure that it's done what we
intend
I agree that's why I was asking
around madam chair asking people
to look at it because I always
even know i'm an attorney I like
to have a second part of
my suggestion is if you want if
you want to limit liability a
limit liability to the state of
new mexico in the department of
agriculture this accomplishes
that if there's better language
you could have it checked out
and then maybe if you get to the
floor you could fix it there
and i'd be happy to work with
you to to fix it but I would
raise this even on the floor
because this is a huge.
Huge.
Issue march
deal opens our intent is not to
make the state liable so i'd be
perfectly happy with that.
Okay
so I
I moved the amendment
just discussed is there a second
for their moment.
Senator never had a comment.
The.
The.
Senator said your locust
manager I know it's necessary to
me the question is when went to
is it.
Cause I mean if your intention
was to not put liability on the
state of new mexico that's
different from what's in this
bill so.
Here's my suggestion
since we don't have a second for
the amendment
we can roll this to to my
morning because I believe we
might meet tomorrow morning so
you might stick around for the
discussion.
And you might get the amendment
prepared so that we have all
have it in writing and that you
get advice from legislative
council and you share it with
the sponsor.
Okay well i'm happy to work with
the sponsored to make sure that
it's exactly what they intend
but it would be a very short
term room probably meet very
early so is there any other
questions or comments.
The.
Madam sure I do like that
approach I think that's that's
the smartest way to go and and
to ensure to ensure that the
language is correct okay so
representative of chatfield you
feel okay about coming back
tomorrow morning.
He has man okay think about her
thank you
so just hang out for a minute to
ensure that we're really going
to come back tomorrow morning
and if not we will come back to
this for an action.
Okay so hang on
so committee members we have
temporarily
put this matter aside.
We have been asked to
reconsider.
Senate bill.
One ninety four with a point
sorry
ninety four with a point four
version.
With that includes amendments
and if you are interested in
hearing it I would need a motion
in a second from those people
who voted against it to bring it
off the table.
Yes center in a will.
Okay is is there a second matter
share a second okay so
members is there anybody opposed
to bringing it off the table for
a review of point four.
Okay so madam secretary we have
taken it off the table so
the next question is
I was told.
By larrain that we were coming
in to the floor at nine am.
But i'm not positive about that
depending on how late we go this
evening so I would say and we
will wrap out contact you
immediately.
But I am suggesting we might
need you back at eight thirty or
nine
but at that time we were need
the amendment done and
distributed to the committee for
us to consider it okay okay
so committee members are
anything else today.
Thank you for coming up and we
will see you tomorrow morning
well announced a time as soon as
I know on the floor thank you.
