Good morning everyone the only
time I use the gavels to get
this started and I don't usually
use it throughout the meeting
but
I'm sorry Center souls made this
beautiful gavel on and
this part of town for all of the
chairs and I really appreciate
it I'm sorry this.
He does the.
Okay I saw yesterday
Act.
So good morning everyone we're
going to get started and we're
going to start first the C. this
one doesn't at all compared to
what he made but we're gonna get
started a committee members
remember you are invited to a
dinner this evening sponsored by
the New Mexico AG community at
the heard of a wine bar at six
PM it is for
the committee members and a
guest it is for all the staff of
this committee and attendance
and analysts and everything's
been cleared with our Senate
chief clerk to for people to
attend okay.
So we have invited director
Michael Sloan from game and fish
to share a little bit with us
this morning of all of our
speakers have been asked to talk
for ten to fifteen minutes and
allow us of fifteen minutes or
so for questions and answers
then we will go on to the agenda
with and we have to rollovers
from are carryovers from the
prior meeting and then we will
start our other of meeting as we
do bills for anybody in the
audience and on the webcast we
will let everybody know the bill
number and the vote as it occurs
that good morning director Sloan
the floor is yours.
And Jack morning thank you for
inviting me here today.
To talk a little bit about the
amazing accomplishments of my
agency many of you probably
recognize the department of game
and fish is the agency that
regulates hunting and fishing.
You might not think about.
Elk or deer trout or bass you
might think about the rules the
commission adopts for
sustainable harvest to manage
species you may know that we
sell in nearly half a million
hunting and fishing licenses and
generate approximately a million
dollars in economic activity
primarily in rural areas.
You may know that we support
approximately million hunting
days a year and almost four
million angler days per year
throughout wildlife management.
All of these things are very
important and public part of
what we and the state game
commission due to conserve and
manage wildlife.
However there's much more the
agency does that often occurs
without fanfare and make
substantial differences for our
wildlife.
Our agency focuses its
conservation efforts in really
in five areas species
restoration habitat restoration
species management conservation
education and wildlife law
enforcement.
The department of spend millions
of dollars and thousands of
hours restoring species like Rio
Grande cutthroat trout our state
fish Hewlett trout to which of
your callin leopard frog
ptarmigan oriel toads schools
Turkey desert bighorn sheep and
river otters I apologize for my
Aquatics bias here
we spend countless hours working
on pickles white sands pupfish
lesser long nosed bat pine
martens payments then
salamanders pinyon jays in a
variety of other species
identified as species of
greatest conservation need in
our state wildlife action plan.
We were collaborative Lee with
fish and Wildlife Service on
threatened and endangered
species with the goal of moving
the species off of the list and
creating stable sustainable
populations New Mexico's a force
fourth most biologically diverse
state in the nation and we work
tirelessly to conserve it.
Habitat restoration is another
critical focus area again we
spend tens of millions of
dollars in thousands of hours
thinning forests conducting
prescribed burns enhancing
grasslands restoring playa lakes
and undertaking stream
restoration.
We worked across the state in
places like mount Taylor
slaughter mesa Hey miss
mountains Sacramento mountains
Comanche creek.
The call enabling wildlife area
the sergeant wildlife area and
the eastern grassland restoring
habitat to create healthy
wildlife habitats capable of
supporting our state's
incredibly diverse flora and
fauna.
We understand that our wildlife.
And New Mexicans for our
wildlife and New Mexicans to
thrive we must have healthy
resilient habitats that resist
wildfire enhance watersheds
support diversity and produce
the resources upon which New
Mexicans rely.
We actively manage a large
number of species across the
state I'm sure you're all aware
of the work we do with big game
like deer elk and pronghorn as
well as fish like trout catfish
bass.
You know we fly surveys to
estimate population size used
GPS collars to identify habitat
usage and migration patterns.
And conduct genetic studies to
identify population dynamics we
use cutting edge science to
model populations and identify
management actions you may not
be as aware that we also work to
manage populations such as are
many imperiled bird species a
wide variety of bat species one
of our smallest mammal species
in the state weighing in at a
mere five grams the leash
through Rio Grande Chubb and a
variety of spring snails we
operate six state fish
hatcheries to dedicated solely
to native trout in one that
rears both warm and cold water
species we manage to large farms
that provide refuge for
migratory waterfowl and other
birds.
In fact our fireman Bernardo now
tracks and holds more birds than
Buscetta patching.
All of all in the interest of
ensuring that wildlife remain on
the landscape and part of all
New Mexicans lives.
We also actively engaging
conservation education last year
we conducted over seventy
conservation education programs
for aging nearly fifty five
hundred New Mexicans over a
hundred conservation education
programs reaching almost over
sixty five hundred New Mexicans
and we did seven hundred seven
hundred forty one other
presentations from classroom
presentations to HB safety
training.
We taught over three thousand
students hunter education we've
engaged with the public at
regional and state fairs we have
an active social media presence
that we used to both inform and
connect with hunters anglers and
those interested in wildlife.
One more technical note we
developed and support the
environmental review tool and by
NM the environmental review tool
is an online tool project
developers can use to assess
potential impacts of their
projects on wildlife and
identify ways to reduce or
mitigate any impacts by N. M. is
a comprehensive searchable
database containing information
on over six thousand of New
Mexicos wildlife species.
And includes information about
the history location and species
status both of these tools are
on the internet and available to
all.
Wildlife law enforcement is
another critical aspect of the
services we provide we have
eighty commissioned officers
across the state these officers
made over fifty thousand
contacts last year educating and
informing the public as well as
ensuring compliance with
wildlife laws.
Our officers spend many hours
talking with hunters hikers
anglers and landowners about
wildlife in their areas our
focus on name is on information
compliance and deterrence
additionally our officers are
often the only law enforcement
support available to other peace
officers in rural areas and are
called upon to assist.
As you can see we are in active
agency doing work in all corners
of the state with dedicated
passionate person over quarter
of whom have advanced degrees
and have the desire and will to
make a difference.
Making a difference on the
ground every day requires
funding.
As you know our funding is
derived solely from license
sales and federal grants.
We have nine funds eight of
which are restricted funds that
can only be used for expressed
purposes.
Came protection fund is our
operating fund and it is reached
a point where we must seek
additional revenue to sustain
programs.
In this session Senator Neville
and Senator Campos has sponsored
Senate bill two fifty four to
increase hunting and fishing
license fees to ensure we can
continue to do this important
work.
The last few increase the
department had was in two
thousand six.
The current proposal will allow
the department to continue to
undertake all these activities
plus address deferred
maintenance and take on new
capital projects for wildlife
for at least the next decade.
I have more time to discuss this
important bill as it comes
before you in the near future.
Other bills related to the
Department in this session
include a bill to make free
fishing days free fishing
weekends.
A bill to provide free fishing
licenses to foster children and
families a bill to require
edible portions of Havoline a
bear and cougar to be removed
from the field.
And the bill you heard yet at
last Tuesday the conservation
legacy Fund we're happy to
support all of these efforts.
There two other bills that are
out there want to transfer the
agency to the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
make the commission an advisory
board and consolidate all the
policy making and rule making
authority with the.
Rector of the division
we believe that would reduce
public transparency and
participation so stand in
opposition to that one as well
as another bill to make changes
to how the state game commission
is appointed again that's
problematic with believe.
And madam chair that was just
kind of a quick very broad
overview of the big agency doing
a lot of great work some of
their questions I'd be happy to.
Answered thank you very much
director you started with a
going over the main areas
of that you cover in maybe you
could just the topics you you
start I think the species
Management species restoration
duration habitat restoration.
Species management.
Conservation education wildlife
law enforcement right.
Okay committee members comments
questions etcetera renewable.
And then Senator Sedillo Lopez
please thank you Madam you you
mentioned and this is bring this
up because I'm sure some of you
get phone calls could you
discuss in the licenses the
increase that I'm caring Senator
Campos the situation with
veterans I've been getting calls
and we've we did the research
and we found out that the
veterans discounts are still in
place but if you could discuss
that make sure that the
committee knows that when they
get phone calls backroom are not
be insulated in the in the
upcoming legislation.
Madam chair senator bill thank
you for that question I really
appreciate that it is true that
The bill does not affect any of
the discounts that are currently
in statute the bill is solely
directed at
the fees that are associated
with each license type so there
is no affect the discount for
military active or or veterans.
I just want to make sure that
the committee had that
information so that if your
emails light up like mine have
since I'm on the bill the you'll
be able to answer questions and
and make sure sure the veterans
in your community that they will
still get discounts on their
lives.
Thank you for that question
is that often.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you director Sloan and
that the and and thank you for
all the work that your agency
does we've talked about this
before.
And and I'm just wondering if
maybe there needs to be some
kind of bill that make this
clear but my understanding is
that
The reckoning problem in City of
Albuquerque.
Is that the city could do
something about this station yes
all over.
All over again that my
understanding from reading the
bill and the regulations is that
the city could apply to declare
them a nuisance with your office
in the city would then get power
and authority to deal with the
nuisance population the City of
Albuquerque.
Is that correct.
madam chair center I don't
believe that they could have
authority we could certainly
enter into agreements to allow
them to work with work on it in
in tandem with us but I don't
believe that they could adopt
authority over the species at
and and I misspoke not
necessarily of.
Displace you but be able to be
part of the solution to the
problem have some and all that
would take would be to contact
your office the city to contact
your office and to enter into
some type of agreement to
address.
Well.
Would there have to be some sort
of formal finding that the
records are a nuisance I just
want to help facilitate this
process because I get calls it's
probably one of the biggest
calls again in the summer.
That madam chair at we we get
them to that there are number
one species that we get
depredation what we call
depredation complaints about
I know that would it would just
be an agreement between us
authorizing them to to do those
actions that were required to
address problem animals okay
thank you thank you so much I
will continue to try to move the
city toward this thank you.
Thank you Senator Gallegos the
gentleman director thank you
I've gotten calls often about
the ratio of out of state verses
in state care now do we have
numbers on.
The two sides you know the some
of the New Mexicans think that
were because it's a higher cost
higher volume going out of state
that we're not getting adequate
hunting for New Mexicans I just
wondered if you had a numbers
on.
Madam chair senator
So it kind of depends how you
look at the question right so
all draw hunts for.
R. eighty four percent resident.
And then six in ten ten percent
for
guides outfitters six percent
for nonresidents.
I appreciate that metal
give me some ammunition as we go
forward I do have meant chair
director question last year.
Time gets away from me but I
think last year we had a bill
that didn't pass that had some
appropriations to try to buy
some land for official all of
his ranch understood it did not
pass because still were able to
purchase at how does that work
if the bill didn't work how do
you get the authority in the
appropriation to do that.
And gentleman correct Madam
chair Senator the state game
commission is authorized in
statute to purchase land there
was five million dollars in our
money that was available to us
to help with the purchase we
have access to federal funds and
there was an additional
appropriation for land purchase
from the game protection fund so
by combining all those funds
were able to make that purchase
thank you madam chair and
director I I guess Mike and I
glad you clarified I thought you
were able get in general fund
monies that we would have
allocated towards us so with the
our permanent federals so
appreciate those were my only
two concerns I do want to tell
you we have mmhm chair and and
director one very good also in
Lee County I don't know how he
organizes time but I seem all
over the area he does that
fishing day of for kids and they
love it so thank you for having
me out there I don't know how
broad as areas for the I know
that he's the only one that I
know and we can so with that are
you thank you thank you Senator
any other questions or comments.
I would thank you very much for
coming this morning for being
concise and I know that we will
see you in front of this
committee again on the different
bills madam chair thank you and
I hope to that's an okay thank
you.
next we're going to our
carryover shows Senator
Steinborn and then I will
present the of my bill and then
we will go on to new business.
Senator Steinborn is doing
Senate bill one fifty six.
Which is the statewide anti
litter campaigns for the
audience and the those people on
zoom and the webcast.
Please proceed chair committee
Senate bill one fifty six this
is a one of the issues I'm
working on the session dealing
with litter recycling I'm just
kind of improving our outdoor
environment in the state and
the state of New Mexico has no
we don't actually spend a penny
believe it or not on statewide
anti litter education and is the
number one thing national
experts from keep America
beautiful to leave no trace that
the state has to do if they want
to teach
sustainability and preservation
and stewardship two new
generation so it's not even a
one time thing it's something
that you really have to commit
to go all out.
So hi this is an appropriation
to the tourism department who
manages the keep New Mexico
clean and beautiful program.
One of several intended purpose
in the state for local
communities.
to of find a campaign that
they've actually created called
keep New Mexico true.
And to to really create a
statewide brand that people
embrace can get around that can
be everywhere and cohesive with
all departments so that's what
this does I've been in
conversations with them also
department of transportation you
may remember we gave them ten
million dollars for roadside
litter clean up in a special
session a year ago we're talking
with them as well we have a
separate program called cost no
mas that exists out there so
part of our problem in the state
right now aside from not
spending any resources on any of
these campaigns is we have
different campaigns and
different you know so we we have
a need to consolidate them brand
one that fits so this is what
I'm working to do working on the
money pieces as an appropriation
bill but that's the goal and the
goal is that we can really teach
stewardship to any generation of
New Mexicans and the cleanup our
roadways and be better stewards
of the outdoors.
Thank you I did you have an
expert that you wanted to speak.
No ma'am okay thank you it is a
straight appropriations bill is
there anyone here in the
audience is here to support this
bill.
Is there anybody here to oppose
this bill.
Is there anyone online.
Okay so seeing has how there's
only support we're going to go
to the committee directly for
questions is and at a comments
committee members.
Senator gave us.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and I've noticed DOT's
here have they done a research
on how much trash we have I know
in Lee County are County has
inmates to do a lot of it in you
know go through the **** on the
road I just wondered how much
statewide I know of how does it
well I live the statewide how
big a problem it is and if
there's any research being done
on.
Madam chair center it's a good
question and I think actually
research research has been done
on it years ago and I think DOT
and towards we're talking now
about doing a research project
to estimated national research
has been done on it anecdotally
it is a big problem all over the
state and you know for what it's
worth the data from keep America
beautiful's as the number one
most littered item is cigarette
****.
But the probably the number one
item you see is a single use
plastic bags.
You'll probably see another bill
having to do with that madam
chair.
As a piece of important piece of
the puzzle so it is a problem
and and education is the number
one solution you could spend
money all day long to pick it up
we have to get at the root of
the issue which is don't throw
it out in the first place.
Madam chair center I appreciate
that and and you know as live in
southeastern we cross over into
Texas of the road you're better
there even their rest stops or
not sure there it is a cleaner
environment so people see that
they recognize and talk about
all time so could be really good
have those qualities here in New
Mexico so I appreciate thank you
madam chair I just have to say
Texas the liberal state of Texas
started years ago if you have to
throw that in there sometimes
years ago decades ago started an
iconic campaign called don't
mess with Texas.
And they have cap what football
players Stevie ray Vaughn the
best lot of money and I lived in
Austin to time with you you you
know they did it with a purpose
and you saw those ads use and so
now I encourage you to go check
out their website it's been real
successful and it's helped
reduce litter roots.
Senator Sedillo Lopez madam
chair I move it to pass.
Is there a second by second
chair okay there is a motion for
a do pass and the second with
the committee secretary call the
roll and anybody not not here is
excused.
Senator von yes yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen was the bell
centre pope yes Senator metes
Senator soul yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator defense.
The one.
Seven thank you very much.
The vice chair is going to take
over what I present Senate bill
one sixty seven the strategic
water reserves.
Madam chair you ready to proceed
I am thank you madam chair
members of the committee this is
a straight appropriation bill
for the strategic water reserves
last year we passed a bill this
bill on here and went into the
budget for fifteen million
dollars those funds have been
utilized and we're ready to
appropriate more so instead of
fifteen I put the amount in for
twenty five million this bill
for this amount of money is used
to secure water rights for the
state of New Mexico for the
purpose of expenditure
it does not contain an effective
date is so would go into effect
June sixteenth twenty twenty
three.
The
With me I have an expert from
the department who is not here
to support or oppose but can
answer the questions for what
the the purpose of the money and
how it is used and also with me
is Christina Fisher who is
another expert witness so let's
start with Christina.
Alright.
Thank you hear me committee
chair
as briefly for up for any of you
who aren't familiar with the
strategic water serve at the
legislature created this about
twenty years ago on a bipartisan
basis it's a pool of water
rights that are held in the
rivers for the purposes of
satisfying our interstate
compact obligations and
preventing conflicts over danger
species and the one big
challenge that it is had through
the years is insufficient
funding and so we saw the
potential of the strategic water
service last year when it Karia
pagination came to the state
actually couple years ago and
said we now have twenty thousand
acre feet of water it's no
longer being used for coal fired
power generation we would really
like to lease it to the state
keep it in the river in the San
Juan for nature species in the
Colorado River compact and we're
able to to engage with them and
fortunately they were willing to
wait for the state to
appropriate the money to to
close on a deal and so we now
have this twenty thousand acre
foot of water buffer on the San
Juan which is really important
now that the Colorado River
compact is in such a precarious
place unfortunately most sellers
and lessors of water can't wait
around for the state to
appropriate money after the fact
so it's very important for the
strategic waters are to have
some money in that fund to allow
the Interstate Stream Commission
to proactively engage in
negotiations to acquire water in
key river reaches for tet to
fulfill its potential to try and
avert those conflicts over water
protect endangered species and
hopefully save us money down the
road is a state by preventing
some very expensive lawsuits
thank great and Hannah would you
like to say anything about the
fund I'm thank thank you madam
vice chair and committee my name
is Hannah Riseley white on the
New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission deputy director I'd
like to take a moment to thank
the sponsors for their support
and and also many of you on this
committee for your support of
many really important water
initiatives that are moving the
session I'd like to echo
everything that miss Fisher said
in terms of the real importance
of this tool for the state of
New Mexico particularly as we
face and.
Using a budget cation
the funding that's used through
this bill is used to acquire
water to protect stream flows as
miss Fisher said for contact
purposes but also species
purposes we have a number of
leases in the middle Rio Grande
that have been very valuable to
us so it's important to
flexibility in terms of both
purchases and leases although of
course we prefer purchases over
the says all of those
acquisitions are with willing
lessors are sellers and at fair
market value it's something that
we see as miss Fisher also
alluded to is a real way to
prevent us from entering into
much more lengthy and costly
litigation over either compact
issues or species issues so it's
sort of an investment and
helping us avoid those issues
moving forward and I'm happy to
answer any questions thank you
so much.
Thank you thank you madam chair
how many in the audience are
here to support the bill.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the bill.
Okay and online we have Oscar
Simpson who supports the bill
because in the interest of time
I'd like to have three people
speak in favor of the bill and
if you could be brief and has
non repetitive as possible thank
you go ahead in terms of the
committee good morning John
Thompson Richard lobbyist for
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district as was
mentioned the middle Rio Grande
does take that benefit of this
program we support.
Thank you
thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is up it'll cost you a
and I am the political and
policy associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
we have the support at the one
sixty seven the reserves are
critical to for endangered
species and river Health and
desperately need additional
funding to operate also refer
you to the one here that you
should have received that list a
number of other organizations
will support this bill and as
well as more information thank
you for the opportunity to speak
thank you Mr concealed.
Senator.
Thank you we won't go online
because we only have one person
who stand in support of the bill
never mind we have a two people
I'd like to add to people a gene
Watson and and Joan brown are in
support of the bill so with that
I'd like to turn it to the
committee.
Yes Senator Ingle and then
Senator Gallegos David senators
about this.
Thank you madam chair
In my real life I was a real
estate appraiser a retired
computers in the office I did a
commercial work in agriculture
work and I had occasion to go
down in the Pecos and appraise
some property where the water
had been removed and to meet the
compact obligations downstream
one of things that concerned me
was the farm was just the water
turned off the farmers just left
with no vegetation or or
whatever is adjustable and has
this changed as of last year a
policy change to where the last
year Asian can be to establish
you know grasses or something
like that to make sure that the
properties are not a problem
instead of being.
just left bear.
If you understand what I'm
getting at so madam chair I'm
going to have Hannah racy white
into this Senator.
Madam chair Senator I think
you're referring to the
purchases the state made.
Related to the two thousand
three pickle settlement
agreement in which in a short
period of time we acquired water
rights associated with over
twelve thousand acres in the
rate goes we definitely learned
some lessons there about land
management Interstate Stream
Commission is not normally in
the business of land management
and we had to engage a number of
folks to address the issues that
you are flooding in terms of
ensuring that cover crops are
native grasses were established
and so certainly we implement
those practices moving forward
and would certainly do that with
it with any purchase is
associated with the strategic
water service well that that was
my always been my biggest
concern when you take the water
off you've got bare land and it
becomes a dust bowl for the for
the neighbors to put up with
it's it's unnecessary and and
you you could take the last
season and and water the place
and get it growing that's all
madam chair thank you senator
Neville Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and then
chair
I guess my question sort of goes
along that so I know you guys
can purchase lease or donate of
when the state purchases and you
made reference of fair market
value Q. have ought to up your
mind what that is now and does
that change in area of the state
as far as water very.
So madam chair Senator I'm gonna
refer that question to Hannah
rice and white.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I'm yes you know we have
to do due diligence associated
with any purchase which includes
an appraisal and water rights
values can change fairly rapidly
and our there is a range of
values throughout the state so
it's sort of really is specific
to to the region that we're
seeking to acquire water rates
and.
Thank you for them Madam
chairman chair so my next
question on the Water Rights
part do we acquire in just to
hold them or they used in the
compact my fear is that
expression talking about the
pickles if we take way too many
Water Rights then you're gonna
have vital lands the ranchers
and farmers can't do what they
typically do
I know in Lee County our county
commission brought up water
rights in order to sure hold
them for use for public use and
I was wondering if it's similar
thought process or are we just
using them just for the water
compact issues and not have
anything in reserve Senator.
Madam chair Senator pandemic.
Thank you madam chair and
senator the intent of the rates
that are required for the for
the reserves to ensure that they
remain in the stream system and
reach their intended purpose
whether that species are are
compact certainly we'd like very
much to work with communities in
terms of identifying where it's
most important or you know where
those purchases would make the
most sense so as to not have
detrimental impacts to those
those communities.
Thank you for that my last
question committee is
Senator madam chair
in the executive budget shows a
ten million dollar amount for
this of from twenty three to
twenty eight and your speed at
twenty I mean is there any kind
of conflict is that handled in
well we don't have the
governor's budget yet going on
budget yet that being that
you're looking twenty five they
already have ten
is that.
Looked at I guess at the end
time of the budget and they make
that.
If the governor gives ten years
comes out to fifteen I guess my
thought Senator and madam chair
and senator out you're correct
We don't know what's going to
end up in the budget but we are
trying to send the message that
twenty five million would be
appropriate because the fifteen
million was not enough and so
that we need to grow this fund
while we have the money
available and that there is a
need to continue to reserve
those water rights so that we
can address all of these issues
in the future so the ultimate
decision of course would be left
to Senate finance.
Thank you for that and Senator
just another comment I worked a
so I used to have a ranch
Colorado that had New Mexico
waters to second and I'd work
with the of state engineers
office because a lot of the time
we have
waters coming out of the river
that are not monitored measured
and at that time there looking
through we're system so they
could have of satellite
connection to be able to all the
of the water going out so we
can't for that and I would say
at some point and this could be
really important to us in the
work wiring Water Rights now we
want to make sure that the right
users are using the right
account right amount.
Thank you thank you senator dago
Senator serve on this thank you.
The there was some mention that
those strategic water reserves
already been used to lease some
water rights in the reference
was to the middle Rio Grande has
has industry need a strategic
water reserves been used to
lease any water rights in the
lower.
Sell madam chair Senator I'll
refer to him to by the way for
that madam chair and senator not
not yet but not certainly is an
option moving forward.
Yeah and for those of us from of
that part of state you know
that's always one of my issues
is that the middle Rio Grande
get such preferential treatment
in relationship to the lower Rio
Grande I'll go into some detail
in that there was a new agency
where you're identifies the
deputy directors director the
Interstate Stream Commission.
Yes and I should have said sorry
I'm here Senator Rolf Schmidt
Petersen would have like to be
here director he's over to
provide.
Thank you for that yeah the for
for those that may not be in
there and there was a there was
quite a bit of turmoil at the
Interstate Stream Commission
over the last couple years I
guess the number of board
members all resigned en masse
staff a large resignations in
mass.
And so is all that settle down I
mean this is the privacy got
everybody in in the positions in
the state have ward in in the
at the administrative level.
So madam chair center all
referred to the deputy director
for that madam chair and senator
yes we have a we have a full
commission on that's been stable
for over a year now and it's a
good good slate of folks working
for the state of New Mexico okay
I appreciate that it's not meant
to be critical but you got a
bill we want a proposed to put
them in charge of two hundred
fifty million dollars of that
new money in the fund you want
to know that there's some
stability there number one and a
good commission overseeing that
that kind of money it's a very
large proposal the other of the
other thing that I said I want
to come back to use in this
notion of the lower Rio Grande
you know again the advise of
Southern New Mexico
representative Senator I want to
approve two hundred fifty
million dollars to an
organization that's using that
money for the one part of the
state to the exclusion of the
other I have to give that some
pause and.
I think of most members of the
committee for this before but
remembering again middle Rio
Grande very different in order
to terms of the state's
oversight into state engineer
here right now but please
realize the lower lower in those
with Laura grocers farmers we've
been required to be metered for
over a decade now every drop of
water that we use those for a
meter and is reviewed by the
state engineer.
Bill Rio Grande no such
requirement in middle river and
everything from coach of the two
of them do what near San Antonio
I guess probably where we're
going to be pretty close to down
we pass a court.
None of those farms are required
to be metered.
We don't account for the water
the use and it's always will
troubling for me Senator I
you've heard me say this many
times those of us have to go
back and forth down that drive
there's a couple is on here
every time I make it the reverse
full the ditches are full the
fields are full of water you get
to our part of the state the
river's dry bone dry the ditches
of don't run but maybe a month
out of the year because we don't
get an awful lot meant to that
time of year of the Laura grants
under education meeting the
state engineers looking at every
water there's lawsuits against
everyone of us that are that are
down there using water was
lawsuits against us challenging
our historic use of water in our
water rights none of that's
happening in the middle Rio
Grande from again from Cochiti
down through Bernalillo county
bill in Los Lunas none of that
so there's there's a disparity
in the state in the way that the
state engineer historically
their station commission treats.
Everything north of the rules of
war and how it treats everything
south of those were in thank you
to our detriment.
You know we're a farmer were
farmers l'oreal grand luster's
we have to compete for crops in
the same market that people who
are growing in Sapporo in in the
linen listeners have to compete
in and we have to account for
our water in the middle Rio
Grande doesn't so I'm gonna
support your bill Senator but
it's it's an opportunity for me
to to make a few points which
is.
Emphasized by volume is white
which is yeah we're we're using
this water the strategic waters
are for the benefit of the
middle Rio Grande we're not
using it at all to date for the
benefit of the lower Rio Grande.
That's just not right
in a I hope that'll change also
support your bill but I'm going
to continue to raise these
issues over and over again in
the state of New Mexico treats
of Southern New Mexico very
differently and to its
disadvantage thank you madam
chair thank you senator thank
you senator Senator office did
you want to respond now thank
thank you Senator.
I just a quick question with
either yes or no and maybe one
example thank you madam chair
have you had to turn down
available water rights because
of the lack of funds madam chair
also referred you Senator to the
deputy director of madam chair
and senator yes and I just a
couple months ago we had an
offer for some pre nineteen oh
seven surface water rights in
the middle Rio Grande which yes
Senator savant does would have
been in the middle Rio Grande
but certainly the application of
the reserve in the middle Rio
Grande hopes more water reach
the lower Rio Grande but because
we didn't have the funds ready
and able to execute that
purchase that the seller moved
on thank you madam chair top.
Anyone else.
Okay what is the will of the
committee.
We have a motion for do passed
to have a second okay we have a
second.
Would you please call the roll.
Okay Senator Fontana yes.
The guy it goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes senator Paul yes
this committee.
Senator full yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes and Senator Stefanics
yes.
Madam chair thank you you have a
do pass on a two zero vote thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you ladies.
The next bill is Senator Greg's
Bill SB twenty one.
This.
There is further.
Yes so members of the committee
we had ten tabled this bill and
I moved to.
Just about.
And I had moved to
take it off the table it has
been a supported so it came back
to this committee we noticed it
and senator grace is being
bringing forward a committee
substitute so good morning
Senator Griggs we are on
processes right number with you
yes okay we're on Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one.
Senator Griggs would you like to
explain the substitute.
Madam chair I I would in and I
want to first of all thank you
thank you is specifically for
removing the bill from the table
so we can discuss it the
committee substitute is the work
of a group of Irish who Matt
lashed Wednesday or Thursday.
And we looked at the language or
in the bill was in the bill and
we changed it somewhat to make
it a little more specific.
And we feel like fits the fits
the needs better so I'll let you
read the language but in essence
it uses a prescribed burn will
not be conducted in the months
of March April and may when a
red flag warning has been issued
by the National Weather Service
for the date and time to burn is
scheduled to occur.
We feel like that
if the if the individuals or the
entity that wants to do the
burn does those particular
things we protect the public
better than we have in the past
and that's the purpose of the
change in the bill and and
hopefully hopefully the
committee will believe this at
sufficient to move the bill
forward show with that madam
madam chair once you know there
is no longer opposition from
those who were who expressed
that during the last meeting
they of all either decided they
will no longer oppose it or they
will support it show however you
want to handle that that's
that's what they've done.
Thank you senator and
Let's just go to the audience
how many just by show of hands
how many people are here to
support this bill.
And how many people are here to
oppose this bill.
Okay it's not evenly divided.
I online.
On the nobody online yet okay so
let's hear from
a person on each side to support
and then I'll go to a person on
each side who opposes this side
somebody who wants to speak in
support yes please.
Register.
I'm we are doing all that we do
support it now after the
amendment we do believe that the
change.
Restricting the burns to those
days were there's a rat red flag
day issued by the National
Weather.
The the a practical approach and
we do.
Okay I'm sorry if the if you're
gonna speak I have to have you
come to the middle and come
forward because the microphones
are not picking you up so I'm
sorry to ask you to come right
back up and redo it and whoever
else is going to make this site
in support please come up behind
her thank you senators and like
in the middle.
This was the right here is that
like this stuff thank you and
you have to push down the button
the whole time.
Yes I'm good morning madam chair
members of the committee again
Caitlin's broadly a registered
lobbyist with New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau I'm we
originally opposed the bill but
we do not support it because of
the amendment that the
prescribed burns would be
restricted on days where there
is a red flag day issued by the
National Weather Service and we
do believe this is a practical
approach and for those reasons
we ask that you support the bill
thank you very much thank you
and was there somebody on the
side who wanted to stand to
support yes please come forward.
And we're doing this so that
everybody on the webcast in this
room can hear what we're doing
here in committee.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
Kight listen up I.
I work with the listen
landowners of lance and also
with the national Latino farmers
and ranchers and up as the six
the farm bureau and and so some
of the other people we we would
have a propose that out the
amendments
I I I just I still think there's
at in some certain circumstances
that they're there besides just
the reply days because I I rents
for thirty years and southern
Colorado and I did have
very very calm the when when it
I started to bring our ditches
and and it's still got away from
us but I I think there's other
checks and balances and and a
lot of that that could you make
sure that farmers and ranchers
with just going started for some
of these fires so because of the
liability issues so we we do
support it but I think I think
there's you know there still
possibility from get out of
control.
Thank you now we're on to the
opposition one person
We have to hold down the button.
The madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity my name is a time
crystal of skim a deputy
director at the far Stewart's
guilt or national nonprofit
organization and we've been
practicing prescribed fire in
New Mexico for ten years across
all lands including a recent
pile burn in Santa Fe County as
a nonfederal prescribed fire
practitioner the guild worries
about red flag days before
during and after
before during and after byrd
windows so that when we use fire
it's safe and responsible what
we would never light a fire on a
red flag day and agree that
others should in either we don't
think this bill to amend the act
the prescribed fire act is the
solution the amendment would set
a precedent provided land
management from the round house
instead of being centered on the
landowner ranch manager burn
boss Forrester county and local
fire departments and state
agencies we appreciate the bring
this up for discussion as
prescribed fires important to
the future of New Mexico's
forests and watersheds thank
you.
Thank you next.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I
appreciate this chance to speak.
My name is Serra demes I'm on
the board of the New Mexico
prescribed fire council I am
also a landowner that burns and
wildland firefighter the council
is a nonprofit that supports the
safe and appropriate use of
prescribed fire our members
utilize prescribed fire to
mitigate the risk of wildland
fire on their lands I appreciate
the intention of SB twenty one
to make prescribed fire in New
Mexico in New Mexico state for I
believe that the proposed
substitute to ban spring burning
with the National Weather
Service has issued a red flag
warning would be more relevant
and better served within the
upcoming model permit
development process on page
factors such as fuel conditions
and contingency resources
availability etcetera may also
be considered.
my family and I have been
utilizing prescribed fire for
decades our house and most of
our trees still stand because of
this for us the risk of burning
is much less than the risk of
not burning.
In two thousand and eleven the
las conchas fire burned most of
our neighbors homes and our
beloved mountains to the ground.
Our whole our home survived and
more recently we took advantage
of a safe burn window in the
spring and burn piles in the
snow just one month later
firefighters would hold the
Serra palato fire on our road
because of the recent burn we
had the cold black and reduce
fuels to make our property more
defensible and safer for
firefighters the bottom line is
for those of us that live on the
front lines within the forested
lands in New Mexico we really
must be able to defend our own
lands against the effects of
high severity wildfire and to do
this we really need the
flexibility to utilize safer in
windows spring included and we
need support not restrictions
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Before you get to session I need
to pass on the.
Madam chair just a point of
order has the as the bills been
already moved off the table left
by a vote okay thank and then
placed.
Madam chair I move that the the
original Senate bill twenty one.
Do not pass and move the
substitute bill twenty one for
discussion purposes thank you
very much.
Thank you the of.
Center I'm of course as you have
to have just talk a little bit
about this I've I've voted
against the tabling motion
because I thought it would be
good for us to have the
discussion and some debate I
appreciate the fact you've tried
to work on the some the the
language of the bill refers to
Restrictions provisions on what
is described as a prescribed
burn and I realize that's
already an existing language is
what is a pro is a prescribed
burn that term is that defined
someplace in the law the the
prescribed burn law is defined
in.
Sixty eight I and the
definitions Sixtyeight I to have
of of the prescribed burns
Senator I got it here if you
would like it yeah could I have
somebody to I just like to say
to to maybe twenty times would
you mind grabbing that
the reason I'm asking centers so
for example.
Of you and I come from farming
communities you know it's not
uncommon you go out and you
maybe you want to burn a ditch
for example you know you want to
clear did so you take up the
torch get a butane tank
sometimes you get a you know
hosted the route there and
you've earned some of the weeds
that are that are dried up in
the wintertime is that a
prescriber.
Madam chair and and centers not
defined a million the prescribed
burn it as you'll see there is
is defined with a pretty good
level of specificity and
requirements that it takes to
initiate one and to accomplish
one.
So if you go out there with your
your torch you haven't met
anywhere near all the
requirements to actually do a
prescribed burn.
if you go even into the back of
the next page longer talking
about prescribed burn managers
and in other thing Senator and
vicious.
The prescribed burns when those
those occur at the the groups
that do all or whoever does down
has planned on and have it
intended to to initiate the burn
that would you know improve the
the surrounding lands but what
has happened is because when
they did it
the wind came up there was a and
some of these were actually done
during red flag warning times
which then created the the fires
that you've seen.
So what this is this bill is due
on with issue trying to just be
sure these fires these type of
fires are are better managed.
And I appreciate you having me
the definition centers so yeah I
see that the definition.
Exams more things that it
captures it seems really so
exams just about looks like any
burning associate with
agriculture in in Senator I've
been madam chair it does
exempt quite a few agricultural
activities as well.
Yeah from that from that
definition yeah my colleagues
from southern New Mexico I've
got two of them on this
committee which is nice we got
most of the all out number on
this committee which kind of
unusual you know have some Dona
Ana County southern New Mexico
really got the votes here so
that's pretty good pretty neat I
had thought about it all right
now we need to get together
but but but my colleague from
the south no and it may not be
good practice but it's the
reality is that you know come
fall
Stallman farms and others are
burning leaves in traction and
branches and so forth the con
and all that that's part of the
part of the management process
but anyway all that's exempted
here so that's good different
topic.
There when a prescribed burn is
conducted I don't know there's
anybody here is anybody here yes
I'm sure anybody will slide show
ends anybody here who actually
is response for administering
managing or schedule a
prescriber anybody here at all.
All right so maybe I can ask you
Sir of could I just you raise
your hand if you conduct a
prescribed burn can you tell me
how.
Far in advance a prescribed burn
is scheduled for organized.
Speaking or.
Up in the middle of the
microphone into hi madam chair
my name is Gail to start.
Hi madam chair my name is Caleb
stats executive director of the
China peatland Alliance and I
would say that the answer to
your question is that it varies
but most the time there's a fair
amount of planning that happens
thank you and I and I would
expect that I would expect food
since the magnitude of the
consequences and implications of
like that the that a prescriber
maybe schedule a days in advance
of weeks in advance maybe months
in advance.
In the the the chief the
challenge I think I have with
your bills etcetera even though
you made some revisions and try
to work through this but if
you're planning a prescribed
burn.
Weeks in advance months in
advance days in advance it's
impossible to know what you're
gonna have a red flag a
recommendation on a particular
day in the.
You know we're with some
amusement this last year we had
a lot of fun making fun of
whether men but
you know me you know their their
ability to project we whether in
my point is.
The doctor pretty close to
flipping a coin as far as I can
tell so I don't know how you
plan to burn days weeks months
in advance and then it's all
subject to a red flag warning on
that day but the weather
service.
We don't take comment from the
audience until into the.
Yes thank you madam chair and
yeah and I appreciate folks all
want to have a debate and
dialogue with us but but you're
right we don't do that so anyway
center I I still have some real
concerns about this approach
because again I I could see a
lot of planning to lot of
manpower women power resources
equipment moved in for something
like this and then that Dave you
have a no no run planned red
flag and your bill would make
that burned and have to come to
a screeching halt and and that
would seem to be very difficult
to to plan something like this
so listen more but but I'm right
now that would be one of my
concerns is tying our hands in
and madam chair Senator and
while I appreciate that and I
appreciate the work that goes
into doing them in doing
correctly.
When they get out of hand the
law which has shown to be
catastrophic and tragic show.
To stop a prescribed burn from
happening that day.
May well be worse the the risk
mitigation of what could happen
if it went for.
That's that's what I would would
comment thank you senator so
before I go to other questions
of did the state forester have
her hand up to respond to
Senator von to sue so I want you
to come for forward in identify
yourself.
Madam chair of Senator Cervantes
I'm Lara McCarthy the state
forester energy minerals and
natural resources department
forestry division director the
one piece that was missing from
Mr Stotts answer are I believe
every prescribed burn
practitioner in the room would
agree is that I despite the long
term planning that goes into the
prescribed burn there is always
a go no go decision the night
before and the morning of and in
fact on the morning of a test
burn is always conducted to see
if the fire behavior you're
expecting is actually what
you're getting so just wanted to
add that point of fact thank you
for.
Thank you miss carpenter I have
Senators soul Center pope Center
guy a ghosts please Senators
souls thank you madam chair and
senator I appreciate you
bringing this back I think this
is a much better bill than the
other one they just had a
blanket can't do it through
these months we have a sometimes
we'll have a week or more the
beautiful wonderful weather and
that.
In spite of what the Senator
about this as most times the
weather is pretty predictable up
to about four or five six days
out as to whether there's a
chance that it's going to be a
very windy day which gives lots
of time to to re plan I don't
think this bill says that
anything other than if that is a
red flag that day you can't burn
in most of the time it's not a
where you think it's gonna be a
calm day and suddenly thirty
mile an hour winds blowing that
you didn't know about the chance
of that several days out I'm
much more comfortable with this
bill than what we had before and
I'll certainly listen to
additional debate but I think
you you had to hit the the right
the right balance with this bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator pope.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bring this back
and thank you for also including
in this in the discussions and
working with the folks that had
opposition and some of the
concerns on this bill
Just touching on what Senator
brought to Senate center Seoul
said would planning and
scheduling this it's good to
hear that there is that go no go
you know most of my career in
the military worked on satellite
launches and it's the same thing
you just never know what's gonna
happen at Cape Canaveral or
Kennedy Space Center and what
the weather's going to be that
day you guys watch the news some
days are gonna is gonna be a
loss and just get scrapped and
it's something we just have to
deal with and you go the next
day but some days it's like will
there's not another window till
three weeks and it's something
that we just have to do so it's
good bills measures are in place
that we're doing that and I
think my concerns were with
knocking out the whole month.
And and it was just kind of
where we would not have the
ability to do the prescribed
burns and do we need to do
throughout the year and I think
what you've got here to strike a
balance to where we're being
safe but it's not knocking out a
whole month.
Or hold time of the year to the
prescribed burns so thank you
madam chair Senator thank you
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair Senators thank you
also thank you for working on
this I just have a couple of
questions and first one is Madam
center in your area up around
goral the Mescaleros have done a
really good job of managing
their for service do they use
this kind of a time line and and
red flag law to to be able to
know when to do their shrub in
the Russian their cleanups.
Madam chair and in center that
the Mescaleros obviously or
model for how for should be
maintained and I'm I'm not to
actually aware of whether they
use prescribed burn or they need
use use actual for standing
because you see as you travel
through their force a lot of
piles which appear to be more
fanning then then going back in
and and burning of.
Just a just a comment as relates
to endorsed as a whole what
we've done for years and years
is we've restricted the
opportunity to for service to
stand for variety for variety of
reasons and so the Four service
struggles with how do they come
back in today and and protect
our health
prescribed fires one staining
would be one of but those are
the challenges they face I
believe the Mescaleros would be
the model statewide to to
utilize to see exactly how they
do it and then make that
make that an example for all of
the state it been my my
understanding that a
representative of the tribe is
going to be here today and I'd I
haven't seen them so I'm not
sure they are but
they could have answered that
for better than I Senator you
want me to ask the audience if
you would that be sure if there
representative from the uh tribe
here today.
Yes Sir could you come on up
here maybe have it.
Would you like to introduce
yourself and make a comment on
the question.
hello my name the only little
not tribal council member from
S. club that you tried and.
There there is a lot of you know
positive and negative on this
issue but.
Done the tribe we do do a lot of
management of our force and the
thing about that is we do a lot
of logging and with the log in
New Mexico becomes you know you
have slash policy you got things
on the ground that does have to
be managed and prescribed fire
does help that a lot and but the
thing to is you can't you got to
watch when you burn you can burn
during the spring time because
due to the high due to high
winds I mean Mexico has that you
know the reputation of having
wind through March to may.
And those winds can be up to
about maybe thirty forty fifty
miles an hour as we all know
because we felt we all if you're
but those kind of bills don't
times are kind of you know.
Kind of scary for the you know
what the forced area but then
again it also could benefit you
know the lower section think of
you know the though that we're
fire can't really be you know
pushed it needs a little bit of
help through the wind for these
lawyers like to farming areas so
I can see the benefit of that
but you up in a minute now it's
it's kind of scary to you know
have a a force of a prescribed
fire into force because you got
a rural you manage that you
gotta watch your
Your times above when you're
gonna burn but they also have to
look out you know weeks in
advance for of a prescribed fire
in to enforce that area but on.
We usually try to do our due are
prescribed burnings during the
fall time so it's it's not so
windy in in that in that time
period and also during the
spring it's hard to get
resources together because it
does it does take time to you
know watch a prescribed burn as
you
burning in those times because
you know there's not a there's
not a high level of of.
Crews out there to you know help
you out but do not fall time.
Fire crews are starting to come
back in and you know you still
have your personal you can still
you know be able to do a a
prescribed burn at that time.
Thank you.
Are you still on the floor madam
chair and senator I wish he'd
stayed a minute but of in and
I'd I like the dialogue that he
had that you know there are
certain times and places Mr
Davis you brought up in southern
New Mexico where we ranch
similar area
our biggest problem was when the
brain of when the snow melts
came you would plug up our
second in if you don't clean it
out it'll break over and caused
damage all you know throughout
the property but my concern
there and chair and senator and
I don't know if the young man
that stood up earlier that's
done this for a living is if
there's any kind of specialized
equipment so for instance we put
out the I of the fire with five
gallon water bucket yeah I just.
Aged two and I'm wondering in
these prescribed burns to they
have other equipment just
thinking through for a
construction company we have a
water truck if something like
that would be required to be on
site to be able to.
Contain it if something did go
off of all right and I did
notice gentleman and back would
have time to give us some
insight just on equipment for
what tribe prescribed burn of
Quitman takes to do let's go to
the Senator of the system for to
see who we left recognize in
that and madam chair Senator I I
think in the definition of
prescribed burn there some
agricultural exemptions and and
one of those is to clear
irrigation ditches of vegetation
and debris in order to improve
and restore efficient water flow
and delivery sure that may that
may address the the concern it
does for for our use but my
thought is in in General
prescribed burn you have to have
any of jewelry click Whitman to
the sort of fight the fire if
something goes margin than
expected madam chair and and
senator prescribed burn has a
lot of required.
In order to to do it and it's a
controlled application of fire
to existing vegetative fuels for
fire burning the burning
vegetation vegetation over
predefined areas under
appropriate weather
environmental conditions for the
purposes of community protection
and it goes it goes on you know
ecological maintenance or
restoration but then does not
include
The cultural burning then you've
got liabilities you've got to
permits and and all the things
included in the model permit
fit to it's a process of that
age I believe even the state for
sure would tell you today
they're working more on
finalizing the actual approaches
to prescribed burns but it's
it's not just a a fairly
carefree go out and you know you
got a little good whether you go
after you go do something you
it's it's far more detail than
that.
I appreciate it madam chair and
senator
I agree that in in the March
winds that time frame the real
severe in southeast where I live
maybe not so much in about three
to all most area but of where I
live
it could take the fire long
distances in those diapers just
because of the way in but those
might a final question I
appreciate that and I yield
thank thank you Richard think
should thank you is there
anybody else before I ask my
question.
Okay Senator
How will committee substitute to
a twenty one
work in conjunction with the
National Forest Service
regulations.
Madam chair the and.
The national for services here
they're only here in a capacity
to listen to the discussion and
the and the debate the Four
service has our own rules and
regulations that they utilize
and our whole works my whole and
and those of us who support bill
like this is it as we go through
the process.
The Four service fees the
concerned if we have any of
their rules are not sufficient
and for services already
indicate that they're going to
make changes to the way they
operate due to the
the fires that have occurred as
a result of prescribed burns but
we don't know what those are yet
and we're here to a tissue
simply encourage them to
to do better to do it affects
others to do better and to help
others with a little bit
guidelines where they can do
that.
Thank you for that
US senators what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Also.
There is a motion for a do pass
and the second.
Okay with the committee
secretary please call the roll.
The do not pass on Senate bill
twenty but they do pass on the
committee so the force of the
bill to.
Thank you Representative okay
Senator Fontana no.
Senator guy it goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes.
Senator pope yes.
Ladies.
Senator soul yes the presidio
Lopes's.
Senator Stefanics no.
I up vote of five to two and two
excuse the bill has passed on in
you will go to your next
committee thank you very much
madam chair thank you and and
thank you members of the
committee because issues this is
what I believe that that the
folks needed was discussion from
all of you and I appreciate it
very much thank you thank you
moving on to of Senate bill
seventy seven new home build
renewable requirements Senator
souls.
The.
The minutes of a lease them.
Could you please clear the room
if you're not staying for this
next bill.
Probably pretty disappointed
with.
Okay Senator souls the floor is
yours thank you madam chair this
is a bill I have carried in the
in the past what we do is
require all new residential
construction to include
photovoltaic systems on them and
also receptacles for electric
vehicles as we're moving towards
electrifying everything we ought
of but our our our money where
our mouth is so to speak and
require that all new
construction this is not require
retrofitting any of them is to
require and it does have been
there how much it should be and
I think a reasonable balances
one watt per square foot of
heated area the if you're really
going to put everything electric
and with vehicles that's
probably not enough but it's
enough to make a significant
difference in someone's electric
bill in to reduce the some of
the concerns and problems on the
grid as there's more
construction going in
There's not a whole lot more to
that it would cause have the
electric bureau or change.
The COVID four towards
implementation but then also
gives builders developers.
That time to build these into
the initial construction which
is a much cheaper way than
trying to retrofit later on.
Fairly simple build with that
I'll stand for questions.
Thank you is there anyone here
in the audience to did you have
any expert witnesses the mentor
okay anybody here in the
audience to support this bill.
And anybody here to oppose this
bill.
Okay so let's go to the
supporter first.
Thank yes please come to the
bill.
That.
Madam chair that work in that
work in.
Okay members of the committee
thank you
I'm here on behalf of the Sierra
club my name is Dale during mass
and the circumstance in support
of this bill because integrating
solar charging facilities in to
initial build of new homes in
central for urgent response to
climate crisis the integration
also allows one financing
opportunity for homeowners in
addition to monthly electric
utility savings thank you and I
hope you pass yet the to pass on
this bill thanks thank you is
there another supporter please
come forward.
Hello again.
Madam chair and members of the
committee as I said earlier then
that that'll cost you I'm with
conservation voters New Mexico
the policy and political
associate and we also stand in
support for the reasons
previously stated thank you
thank you opponents please come
forward we'll take to.
If there's another part of how
to please come forward otherwise
we're going to move on to the
web good morning madam chair
members of the committee a Randy
trainer with the New Mexico home
builders association I want to
apologize first to the senator
here for not speaking with him
prior to
but
would like.
I I appreciate what Senator
trying to do here and I actually
have a suggested amendment of
the Dodd I'll just go out there
in a minute are our primary
concern here is with you eight
the Senators correct when he
says this will help people with
their electric bills the problem
is as we see it you'll never get
in the house because you can't
afford it it just makes a little
bit harder for people to qualify
to get in the home
you know in the last year or two
I've seen more discussion on
housing that in the previous
twenty eight years I've been
doing this
I don't really care why I think
it's it's great that we're
having these discussions we've
we have a crisis in housing it's
been a long time coming we've
been watching this for number of
years and COVID were there all
of a sudden if people are aware
of that that's that that's a
good thing the suggestion I
would make a is rather than
required an entire system being
placed on the home we should
find the con do it while you're
construction to just find the
conduit for the photovoltaic
system so with that person does
once they get into a home want
to put that system in it's much
much easier to do if you put
that conduit in place to begin
with so with that I just thank
you.
Thank you any other pundits here
in the room.
Okay online we have to
supporters I'm just going to
mention their names Merioles
Hidalgo and Oscar Simpson but
there's nobody online to
propose.
Okay thank you so committee
members of let's go to
questions.
Senator mantis of the thank you
measures I think senator
remember this might have a a
path for becoming a lawyer I am
an architect and remain license
as an architect the the question
that comes to my mind
immediately is how to meet the
requirement was we want to
generate a lot per heated square
footage.
how how much area of your yard
would you have to commit to
solar panels let's assume for a
moment I got put on the roof for
a moment I'm so we're going to
if you're gonna put this in the
yard.
How much area would you need to.
put into panels let's say for a
three thousand square foot home
what what are the are with that
today thank you madam chair and
I can answer that somewhat
through personal experience but
my system is not a typical or
normal system I did this at my
house I put in a ground mounted
system I did most of the work
other than the electrical of
which we electricity still magic
to me
My panels are sixty watt panels
so they are lower efficiency
than the ones that you now get
which some of them are up
towards three hundred twenty
watts each of my panels is
approximately one meter square
of my house I have twenty four
of those panels mounted in an
array of three rows that are
maybe twenty five meters long
each.
So modern high efficiency panels
it would be approximately a
third of that or yeah we would
easily fit across the back wall
here in one row for instance of
one panel high.
And you maybe ask a personal
question but that's that's to
address home of what square
footage I'm sorry it's about two
thousand square feet.
Yeah so my concern is always how
do you meet the requirement with
land the land that would be
required four or again if you
have to put up on the roof and
so forth
because again the I think all of
us have the same concerns that
we want to make sure homes are
affordable that's the American
dream really set how you get
into the economy is being able
to afford a home and so we have
to buy enough of a lot really to
put this into effect does that
begin to take things out of out
of that.
That price range number one and
then when you make when you
impose on every home it's it's
newly built
what are the what are the direct
implications that you mentioned
that that you for brought this
before what is it what words
they go bad for you.
Madam chair and senator usually
goes bad because things run out
of time because it's hasn't been
a high priority I don't I don't
recall that it's ever gotten
clear to the Senate floor and so
and I think from here probably
goes to Judiciary.
No no to go to the public
affairs at the tax and business
to business okay we did have a
discussion in here prior about
the affordable housing issue.
Yeah I I wouldn't expect us to
go to Judiciary I don't look at
an issue there but
Yep
I think madam chair you're right
the the issue for me comes on
affordability and cost.
And I you know I encourage I
hope everyone will do this it's
of course something we all want
to see happen I think the
approach we've taken in the past
with tax credits and tax
incentives to doing that or to
subsidize the ensure all good
reasons to do that but
essentially telling people you
must have these panels in your
yard or you must have these
panels on your roof.
As an architect anyway you can
probably understand you know
you.
I know for some folks having
solar panels on the roof of your
house is beautiful thing and
it's an exciting and positive
things an architect generally
speaking that's generally I'll
be also does not could be the
case and
so thank you madam chair the
gross but all I can really add
to the discussion thank you
Senator Gallegos.
The German Center appreciate and
I do remember this question I
had a couple of new questions
first off I really like the idea
that Randy trainer gave of the
conduct and put that in place
have you ever research that
looked at just affordability
aspect for of your bill to see
if this could give an option to
more of builders.
Madam chair and senator
certainly of all the need to do
is run conduit so that you can
run run the wires that's
relatively inexpensive in the
initial construction but it
doesn't get the the the system
up on the house and so it makes
the house more readily available
to do that but retro fitting
after the house is constructed
cost substantially more total
than putting it in as part of
the initial design and planning
of of the system and so and I
have carried ones in the past to
make House is readily available
to retrofit but that's a stop
gap measure and we're running
out of time for stop gap
measures thank you for that and
and center manager I just like
the idea of have an option out
there I tried to retro fit my
mom's house and is going to cost
forty thousand dollars after you
do all the bells and whistles
and get as many credits you can
for the roof and it took her
entire roof to handle of the
total after council she had but
madam chair and in center my
next question then is in it all
goes back to affordability of is
this going to go the way I read
this it'll be statewide it'll be
rural and native American have
they spoke to you on any of the
concerns I have because they get
to be really really rural if
they're going to build a home
out there I'm thinking this is a
lot more excessive to them that
it would be for me just because
where they live and I'm just
wondering if that's a hardship
that you'd heard from any of the
native American tribes Madam
chair and senator I have not
heard that from the native
American tribes but to talk
about the affordability
electricity is incredibly
expensive in some of the rural
electric co ops in the further
away for you get from the main
generating lines what this does
is actually makes it more
affordable because though the
initial costs are more to put on
the system the monthly total
cost of ownership of the house
is that.
No because off of that mortgage
you take off the hundred fifty
or so dollar electric bill
because it's now generating
electricity and so you might
have a higher mortgage but a
lower electric in the total cost
of ownership is reduced
particularly out in areas where
electricity is more expensive.
Thank you for that Mr Senator
madam chair and senator it goes
back to
May not be able to get into the
house I'm and then it we had a
bill just last night talking
about rentals in digital costs
going up on everything so people
revenue in our hard time to rent
I could see that would be even
harder them to buy or build
because it sat on I did have
madam chair and senator the
question on the it talked about
construction industry commission
I've got licenses through C. ID
but I've not ever had to deal
with the construction industry
commission do you know much
about them and have any idea of
were it's not in your bill but
it was five hours it talked
about it would be.
Overseen by them do you know
anything about them and what
they're.
Job.
Madam chair and senator I knew a
little bit in that they
typically are the ones that go
through promulgate rules on
building codes and other types
of things that are then adopted
by local municipalities or not
there's been some concern over
the years as to what cycle are
they on as they adopt new energy
efficiency standards and other
types of things they typically
are the ones that are
promulgating those rules.
Chair Senators and do they
dictate the licenses to see ID
on all the lecture shins or the
of the builders madam chair and
senator I don't know.
Yes.
They do
etcetera etcetera etcetera then
my concern is are they elected
or the
how how is appropriation bills
are you know Madam etcetera I
don't know Senator Senator
Senator Ortiz I'm only reading
about it construction industry
division right you tell us what
you know about it commission.
Well no so back to the
discussion really most
municipalities and local
governments adopt a version of
the building code there's
writers versions out there so
that's the points their souls
making is sometimes are years
behind on the current edition so
we have a current additional
code in the city sometimes is
two three four years back in the
addition made up so C. ID
doesn't usually impose that but
C. ID is responsible for
inspections and such in areas
where there's not a local
government to do that so for
example an example for us
proceed doesn't have a building
department to do too small so
they relied C. ID to do the
inspections of the plan reviews
and all of those kind of things
so Senator you're referring to
local governments having
building commissions.
no madam chair what they do is
the like the city council was
because will adopt the uniform
building code for whatever
additional may be so right but
it's local government it's not
we're not time at state
government as having a
commission.
Of your I don't I don't know the
answer that question with
there's a commission for its its
in regulation licensing right so
I don't know where they have a
commission per se that that
answers your question not sure
what okay for your thank you I'm
sorry.
And then on the floor madam
chair and senator I I was I got
an email or text actually and
just trying to look it up in in
the Texas shows that the nine
member construction industry
commission is appointed by the
governor and so my thought my
fear or
my concern is if it will affect
the builders you know I know
they're promulgate new rules
madam chair Senator but without
input from the actual builders
it makes it really hard for them
to be able to give a quality
product at a cost of people can
afford and that's where I think
this bill is going it's going to
have and and that may be and
what happened last go round is
when you start looking at that
total cost per foot all these
add ons matter to the to the
purchaser love the idea of the
conduit presented give me the
latitude later four some to come
in to do it and not her have to
retrofit the with that you Madam
thank you thank you is there.
Are there any further questions
if not is there a motion.
Better care motion to pass.
There's a motion by Senator pope
for the past Senator Hamblen was
second.
So could this committee
secretary please call the center
of all yes so.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Neville no Senator pulp.
Yes.
Senator metes Senator soul yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Stefanics.
Yes and to explain my boat.
for.
Okay have I have serious
concerns about the affordable
housing the same as last time I
think that the conduit is one
possible remedy but maybe not so
I think the next committee will
be looking at this as well I
voted four to three you do have
a due pass thank you I
appreciate it appreciate the
discussion.
Okay we are on to Senate bill
ninety four with Senator
Steinborn and Senator Diamond.
Welcome transference rel
administration.
And I told Senator Ingle we
probably of squeezes in right at
the end of today.
Okay.
Is the final but please go ahead
orient committee joined by my
state colleagues Senator Diamond
and this is a bill to transfer
the Rio Grande trail commission
to the Economic Development
Department to be chaired by the
outdoor recreation division.
the river entrap Commission as a
commission we created under the
previous governor to create a
new long distance statewide
recreational trail called the
real Grande trail going from
Colorado to Texas or as we like
to say for Texas Colorado
so where the starting point down
Dona Ana County but at any rate
they've done some decent work
but now we have an opportunity
to move into our new outdoor
recreation division who really
is better situated to lead the
way forward on establishing this
new trial and.
We at work with the
administration on the bill and
we will get to go in working on
transferring the funds and so
with that my coach good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee this trail was created
in in twenty fifteen and really
has the opportunity to provide
some good outdoor economic
impact the reality is I mean
it's a five hundred mile trail
you from throughout the entire
length of the state it goes to
three wildlife refuges six
national monuments six state
parks ten counties the idea was
to make sure that priority was
given to attach on to current
trails all the way at the bill
was passed in twenty fifteen
very little was really done
since twenty eighteen also
during that time the outdoor
recreation division has receive
some some large investments from
the legislator over the EDD
office and so this is just an
attempt to take it out of energy
to move it worse better suited
within the outdoor recreation
department they're EDD both
agencies are Griebel with us in
support of of this there is an
appropriation on the back page
of two hundred twenty five
thousand dollars a one time
money to to complete this trail
there's a master plan and not
much is done since then I do
want to draw your attention for
those that have some concerns
going through private property
lands are impacts to commercial
development to page five lines
six through nine we also have a
lines twenty five which required
and to consider impacts on
private and commercial interests
there's a system because it's in
the back of their online page
eight lines eight through ten
that specifically say that
eminent domain shall not be used
to establish our contracts
construct the Rio Grande trail
or features facilities or
enhancements and associated with
the trail and so with that I
think that we've done a pretty
good job of meeting all the
concerns and and we're ready to
get this trial going.
Will stand for any questions
madam chair thank you you all
have any expert witnesses before
I go to the audience no ma'am we
are experts okay.
I like that.
From a strong woman
okay we're at the audience let's
first go to opposition is there
anybody here to oppose this
bill.
Is there anybody online
opposing.
This bill.
Is there anybody in the audience
supporting this bill.
I see for hands is there anybody
and we have one person online
so it interest of time I'm going
to go directly to the committee
for questions and comments and
we appreciate all the supporters
who came out today.
So committee members Senator
Hamblen thank you madam chair
and mine's more just a comment
of working with Senator
Steinborn and and understanding
Senator diamonds appreciation
and respect and and like just
cherishing the opportunities of
of tourism when we look at this
opportunity and when we look at
this just the whole idea of the
Rio Grande trail and coming from
the same area Senator Steinborn
center diamond you know I look
at this is other opportunities
to bring people to our state to
spend money in our communities
to spend money in our businesses
and to stay in our hotels so you
have my complete support on this
bill and I I appreciate you
bringing this forward thank you
madam chair thank you.
From here it goes directly to
finance other committee members
Senator Cervantes madam chair be
useful for me experts to at some
point and maybe look at a map
and get a good idea of what we
have in place were I've seen the
map before but it's been the
right we pass this what seven
years ago or whatever it maybe
so it's been a long time I just
be curious to know how realistic
it is to be able to connect this
across private land interests
without eminent domain so I
appreciate the fact that.
Some folks don't like the idea
of eminent domain but you know
we don't have highways without
eminent domain we don't have
streets without eminent domain
will have water electricity we
don't have any of those services
without frankly eminent domain
the governments of decision to
essentially interfere with or
take or purchase private
property for the greater good
and so I I'd be really
interested to know how much of
the proposed trail is on land
that would have to be acquired
from private interest either
voluntarily or otherwise and how
much of that trail would be on
land that may not be available
for acquisitions I guess does
any part of the trail belong I
presented a significant part of
it probably once of federal
government.
so then Madam chair of Senator
about this yes it is a lot of
federal lands it's lands managed
by a lot of federal agencies
really the trail is a patchwork
of a lot of.
A lot of other existing trails
or other people's property
there's a really important
sentence in the bill that says
contiguous where possible long
long distance trails take years
to plan that's why we created
the commission the Appalachian
Trail twenty three hundred miles
along the continental divide
thirty two hundred miles long
are still completing that and so
it takes time and you need that
longevity in an apparatus that
will do it and and there will be
no eminent domain that's part of
the law that was something that
we you know we made very clear
up front that people were
concerned about and you don't
need to do it because what you
can do is you can pull that
trail you know you can pull that
trails for off the rivers you
need to to go to willing
landowners to and maybe as
desirable for scenic and
environmental you know just a
beautiful trail experience so
So yeah we we've done right now
the state has designated about
eighty some odd miles of the
trail already of the five
hundred miles and they are well
on their way to working out
believe it or not another
hundred miles in the next year
so this thing is really cruising
along and once we move this into
the outdoor division you're
going to see this project really
take off and
so but yes it does involve a lot
of relationships and partner
treatments with.
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district US international
boundary and water commission.
Bureau of land management who is
actually kind of did some great
work already in the Tulsa area
through the wild and scenic.
Revert areas so we'll centers of
you said eighty five miles of it
has already been committed by
the state to the designated.
Sorry yeah it's been designated
as Rio Grande trail and and none
of its own but the state without
none of it's owned by the state
it's all owned by other people
and its management of the
people.
Just understand the scheme of
the trial it's not the state
coming in the ownership of five
hundred miles of an asset they
have than have to manage it's
it's other people who willingly
join into this venture and then
damage their stretch of the
trail in the way that they're
probably already using it and if
it's true wild land than the law
have some guidance that you know
it's got to be kind of like a
two track trail very natural to
how much of Madam chair how much
we spent so far in actually
building develop the
infrastructure of the trial
itself.
We have roads and pathways and
signage and those kind of things
in the state the state is
probably appropriated.
I mean I would guess because I
don't know as far as the trails
plus funding that we've given
over the last years at any of is
gonna Rio Rancho committees also
maybe more or less around half
million dollars for as what
we've given to actual trail
infrastructure what I would
cultural infrastructure what's
been what's been constructed
term trail signage things like
that.
Entertain Representative you is
Energy minerals the top of this.
good morning my name is Toby
Velasquez some the director of
the New Mexico state parks
division a division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department.
primarily the majority the trail
alignments occur within state
parks currently Senator savant
is those are the largest
alignments that we were able to
have the authority to to start
work on and to get those
designated within the alignment
study that was conducted a few
years ago and so most of the
developed shows that you're
seeing uh in the alignment when
you see the map are occurring on
state park properties that are
you open to outdoor recreation
as well as some partnership that
we had with the with the bureau
of land management in Taos
county over properties that
there was state and federal
overlap where we also have the
authority to do so so the
management that's occurring or
the largest part of those eighty
eight miles is occurring within
state parks with our own staff
and our funding.
This.
And thank you that pretty much
is a really I think the best
thing that I could probably
benefit from would be to take a
look at the map it just kind of
see what we've done so far we're
we're we're going with this and
I to the to the centers point
about being experts can I just
ask of eighty eight miles how
much of that if you traverse
Senator Diamond.
Yes.
Huh eighty eight back I mean
over oh one seventy five times.
Actually majority of this
actually does go through
including as as our experts said
a state park including elephant
Butte state park there are areas
that that we're invested in in
in fifteen when the initial
initial trail was formed there
are small areas I would be happy
to get you the map I was looking
at it just this morning it's
posted online on their website
but all we have to catch the map
as well to thank you and I'd
like to hear about your
adventures walk in that eight
you should I encourage you madam
chair senator Sanchez to join
me.
We'll talk about that.
The the boating alright this is
at elephant Butte sounds pretty
good.
Yeah that's right away Vigil in
the late.
Okay.
any further questions.
Madam chair add Preciado
wondering if then Senators and
chair if Mr of molasses would
come back up just for real brief
question I understand that we're
taking it from.
Up under economic the the energy
minerals natural resource.
Is there reason to the
Department doesn't want this or
are we moving it if you guys are
the work.
You madam chair and senator
vitals as as stated earlier when
this was assigned to energy and
minerals there was not an orgy
and with the recognition of the
outdoor of record recreation
division under EDD we also feel
and with and are here in support
of the bill because it's a much
better fit they're working
statewide in nature the working
with private industry up other
commercial NGOs as well as state
and federal agencies we we feel
that it's a better fit for for
this to actually happen now that
there's an already okay and then
turn Senators I appreciate that
because my thought was and in
Senator Steinborn said it'd
it'll move on it'll get better
and I just wondered how if you
guys already had structure but I
understand going to the outdoor
recreation division that's going
to be their function that's
going to be their views so just
one last question I appreciate
that in madam chair and senator
Senator rivals I is a division
director will still sit on on
the commission as an assigned
commissioner through the
legislation so state parks will
stay in active partner with the
real drank real gradual
Commission we for the deal well
thank you for your work already
and chair Senators ideal.
What is the pleasure of the
committee madam chair I moved to
pass there is a motion from
Senator pope for do pass
seconded by Senator Hamblen.
And with the committee secretary
please call the roll Senator
serve office yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes the
gentleman of L. yes Senator pope
yes Senator smitteez.
Senator full yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator said that yes.
By a vote of eight zero you have
a due pass from this committee
thank you very much thank you
members.
Of committee members if we could
hold in place Senator Campos
assess to roll over Senate bill
one ninety five but Senator
Ingle is coming for Senate bill
two hundred.
We've also page two.
So while we're waiting committee
members were on Tuesday the we
will the speaker will be the
secretary of the environment and
we will roll over this one bill
and have several of those
listed.
So for people on the webcast
we're waiting for one of more
bill to be presented.
We still have a few minutes
before we have to go to the
floor.
Eight.
Recovery process.
You.
The
course.
This.
If you know.
The ex sister to go through
with.
Water projects through this
this.
Where would you want me to do
to meet with you and Peter.
Because I heard from Lorraine
this morning she thinks are
going to be ready with Peter
Senate bill one yes Sir on
Friday two three.
Please reconnect restrict Ford
said.
Three.
Project.
When it
I think it's a Supreme Court
case not okay but all the
tickets Senator Ingle welcome
thank you thank you.
Yes we moved you up cause
Senator Campos rolled over one
fifty three.
It's no your amount of money
that's leaving the committee all
of our bills so you have a
comment on those and get ahead
of COVID I would have to go
fast.
Representative mean to say that.
Anyway the.
Madam chairman members of the
committee this is a very triple
bill.
And what it does is
It just places.
A way that.
The McKinley County and Navajo
water project can be and the one
that you'd like both of these
are over five hundred million.
We've been working on the one
from huge since the mid
seventies and we've made some
progress we've got some federal
money we get some more federal
money committed some state money
but this just allows us to keep
this going and not have to have
a four year
contract thing on some of these
projects because it's gonna take
twenty years probably and that's
all this bill does not only
apply to these two projects
because they're over five
hundred million.
Okay thank you is there anybody
in the audience to support this
bill.
Is there anybody here to oppose.
This bill.
Is there anybody on the line for
this bill.
There's no one online so
questions comments from
committee members.
We are on Senate bill two
hundred the regional water
project the procurement by
Senator Ingle.
Well I think it's appropriate
there's no questions I do have
okay Senator Sedillo Lopez thank
you madam chair
Our committee analysis says.
Adding the language is not
necessary instead may be
prohibitive and
That just made me worry
and so if you could result in
mind and what you said with the
folks that are handling this
said that they needed for the.
One page for the project and
then go into any of that
necessarily the details but it's
been done before on other
projects that are taken longer
than the national education
from.
you from having to come back.
Thank you the process is
generally on these water
projects unfortunately is only
one one or two people at the
most to even bid on okay
okay it's just
Has you know I always think
about what is the problem we're
trying to solve so when an
analysis says a project in
excess of sixty thousand is a
public works project they're for
adding the language is not
necessary and instead made for
be prohibitive it concerns me to
pass along that doesn't solve
the problem and and so that's my
Reservation I want to support
you and want to support the
project I just think that that
issue probably is going to be it
address because it seems to be
very important to serve those to
support those projects and and
reduce of.
Paperwork and red tape and and
help them go through.
And I see those problems but
it's just odd to hear to read
this and say it's not necessary
I understand what you're saying
but the legislative analysis and
folks that wrote the bill said
this does exactly what we need
to do okay.
Well thank you I know it's going
to Judiciary and has I said I
want to support the concept
because I believe you're
addressing a potential problem
particularly if the agencies
have had this problem but.
What but I will I will go ahead
and supported a just do want to
flag that issue that made me
judiciary chairman hearings
heard your comments and I'm sure
we can get it if there some
technical things here we need to
do we'll get it done.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Senator Gallegos.
There's a motion for do pass and
the second from Center
renewable.
And I understand we have some
school board members who joined
us they're here for the day
thank you so much for being here
lots of maroon there were in all
my office okay if they're
following you senator luger from
lovely lovely for the members of
the school board and their
children okay kids refuse bugs
years.
Great I would the committee
secretary please call the roll
Senator about this.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope yes
Senator sweeties Senator souls
yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes and
centers the budget yes thank.
Far from.
Four seven.
On a seven zero vote you have a
do pass thank you so much for
coming let's users forty seven
thank god you call Rollox home
and Smalley.
Thank you though for being here
three times in the committee
meeting committee members we are
in recess we hope to see you and
the staff the analysts everyone
this evening at the committee
dinner thank you very much we'll
