I'm honored until 100, which
updates statutory debt limit for
the Albuquerque Metropolitan
Arroyo flood Control Authority
or A MAFCA. This authority was
created in 1963 to protect life
and property in the greater
Albuquerque area by managing
flood control infrastructure.
the last time the debt limit was
adjusted was in 2007 with
unanimous support.
Since then, rising costs and
inflations have impacted Amaa's
ability to keep pace with
critical infrastructure needs.
Yes, it is.
I can't hear my
Currently, Alaska's debt limit
is set at $80 million a figure
that no longer reflects the
financial realities of today.
Adjusted for inflation, that
amount would be approximately
$125 million today.
Senate Bill 100 proposes raising
the debt limit to 120 million to
ensure AMAFCA can continue to
fund flood control projects.
Increasing the tax burden on
residents.
The board of directors has not
raised the military rate for
debt repayment in 25 years,
demonstrating their commitment
to fiscal responsibility.
This is important for anybody
living in Bernalillo County, but
particularly for my district,
where there are a high number of
homes in the flood plain. The
West side and South Valley of
Albuquerque are also impacted
and without the necessary
funding, critical flood control
projects could be delayed,
putting homes, businesses, and
infrastructure at risk.
This bill does not introduce new
taxes or increased rates. It
simply allows A Maka to keep up
with rising costs and continue
protecting the Albuquerque area
from flooding.
I urge my colleagues to support
this responsible and necessary
update. Thank you. I would you
like your expert to speak? Yes,
I would. I, I would like to
refer to my expert, uh, Mr.
Kevin Troutman with AAFA. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Kevin Trautman. I'm the
executive director of AMAFCA.
The Senate Bill 100, uh, as
Senator Byson said does not
increase taxes, uh, it allows us
to structure our debt in a way
that we can continue with the
military that we've established
for over a quarter of a century.
It also provides us the ability
to deal with.
With uh increases in uh
inflation, uh, by holding our
debt for a slightly longer time,
uh, the debt will still need to
be approved by the voters, uh,
every 2 years, and it does not
remove any of the other guard
rails such as the cap on the
total time frame of
indebtedness, which is at 40
years, we currently hold debt
for only 10.
That will stand for any
questions.
Is there anyone here in the
audience supporting this.
Is there anyone in the audience
opposing is there anybody online
for this?
No.
OK, we will go to
Uh, committee members.
Any questions? Yes, Senator
Scott.
And then Senator Cio Lopez.
Madam Chair, please do not fall
out of your chair, but I've
moved.
The do pass.
Sorry.
Um
Let's go back to the questions
and comments, but we do have a
motion. So Senator Cedil Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I'll refer to my
witness.
A manager, uh, center Sidia
Lopez, uh, that particular
project is run by the city of
Albuquerque andAFA does not have
moneys tied directly into that.
However, these funds could be
potentially utilized for that
project or similar projects if
uh the city wish to engage aAFA
in a joint funding. OK, so we
have a motion for Du pass and
the second from Senator
Townsend.
And could the secretary please
call the boat.
Senor Cervantes.
Excused,
Senator Charlie
Charlie, yes, Sanel.
Satel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Senator Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
Yes, ma'am. Senator Scott, yes,
Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Dea Lopez.
Yes. Since the Lopez and
Stephonics, yes, Sasophonics,
yes.
You have uh a vote of 8 to 0 and
1 excuse. Congratulations, your
bill has passed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So moving on, uh, Senator Woods.
Senate Bill 101.
the
Yeah.
Do
Yep
Oh.
I don't want them to go to
sleep, madam chair. They've
waited here all day to hear this
bill.
We're talking about Senate Bill
101.
Yes, sir. And this is a bill
that is to increase.
Some livestock inspection fees.
And
These fees haven't been raised
in years and what these, what
you see on these fees or the
maximum amounts they can be
raised to.
The board will have discretion.
On how much they will raise them
and many of these fees can only
be raised 4 cents a year.
So it's not like we're going to
jump them in a hurry.
Uh, but
Uh, there's, there's many of
these fees here I know that.
Uh
Let me explain something to you
because I don't know, Madam
Chair, how much.
The, the, the committee
understands.
The the business.
Uh
These fees are, are talking
about ownership.
How do we determine ownership of
livestock, you know, it's damn
hard to uh brand a chicken or
eartaga a chicken.
But these other livestock that
we actually have.
Ah hot brand or a chip or
something that we can do.
To identify um.
There's a movement and these
guys can talk about it or not,
but there's a movement on
livestock to put a premise ID on
them.
And that premise ID will track
that animal all over the United
States, but what we're talking
about today.
Is the way we track cattle and
and animals.
In the state of New Mexico and
how we determine ownership and
other reasons to go out and look
at those animals not only just
determine ownership, but the
determine animal health also.
So
This, this, I can read through
all these fees, but I'd rather
you just look through them
yourselves and, and kind of ask
me questions if you have a
particular fee that that you
wanna know about or why that is
a fee, uh, we record, uh, we
didn't bring a brand book with
us today, uh, I don't how many
brands do we have recorded?
25,000 branchs recorded in the
state of New Mexico.
So it's a pretty big deal. It's
a pretty big process to keep
this all.
You know, none of them are
identical.
So, uh, it, it is a.
process that we have to do to
keep up with all these.
And when you go out there in the
country and uh inspector.
Looks at an animal
You know, across this room and
determines what that brand is.
That's a skill, that's a skill
set.
So
We have to have a lot of
training and and and these days.
A few years ago.
Whether I agree with it or not,
we, we decided these guys have
to be certified law enforcement
officers.
That means I have to go to the
academy.
They have to, they have to carry
guns and I've got producers that
tell me daily that.
They hate the fact that someone
shows up at their place look
like they come from a SWAT team.
But it is a fact of life when
you law enforcement nowadays
have to wear vests they have to
wear, they have to pack, they
have to do things that we don't
like to think about in a normal
society, but.
These guys are also law
enforcement officers.
Out there protecting you.
Protecting them
So it's a fact of life. Yeah,
and you may hear some of these
things, um.
I have some very good friends
that.
Came in and talked to me and
they will talk again today to
you guys, so.
If you're needing more
explanation, uh, I'll, I'll be
sure and give it to you.
Maybe I can actually answer the
questions on this bill where I
couldn't so much on the last
one.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And with me today I've got uh.
Uh
Melinda Garland, that is the
director of the livestock board.
John Davis is the deputy
director.
That
Certainly can answer any
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Would you
like your experts to say
anything now?
You guys need to say anything?
You want to introduce
I guess I never missed the
opportunity to talk, right?
So,
Madam Chair, members of
committee, again, I'm Belinda
Garland. I'm the executive
director for the Livestock
Board. We really appreciate this
time to present this bill to
you, uh, as Senator Woods uh
stated are these fees have not
been increased since 2002, which
is a very long time. We are not
asking for these fees to be put
in place that we immediately go
to them. This is just we're
asking this to be the cap and
we're um thinking this is
probably at least.
at least a 20 year plan to move
to these camps. Um, we do have
to go through the rulemaking
process, the actual fees that we
charge when we do inspections
are set by the board in a
rulemaking process, so there's a
30 day comment period. The board
has to have a meeting. There has
to be a forum vote, um, for the
fees to even change it is
mandated in statute that we can
only increase the livestock
inspection fees by 10 cents
annually, and the sheep and goat
fees 4 cents annually.
So I think that's really
important for you to to know
when you're considering the
passage or denial of this bill.
Um, as we talked earlier today,
um, this board is really crucial
to the um prevention of larceny
and the prevention of disease
spread in this state. We do work
hand in hand with our state
veterinarian. We're there in a
moment's notice, um, John is
actually over our field and they
do a really good job of just
trying to take care of all the
movement of livestock. I know we
have producers that tell us
that, well, we don't have any.
in the state. Well, we, we have
minimal larceny, and that is due
to our strong livestock laws and
our movement laws and we, we
really have the lawmakers to
thank for that, um, I will make
one last statement when the
cattle sanitary Board was formed
by the livestock producers back
in the 1800s, the whole intent
was that the this agency was to
be for the producers and um it
was supposed to be funded by.
The producers.
Through COVID and all of that,
um, Sean and I've worked really
hard to get more general funds
in place, we felt that um there
are some functions with our
agency that we think should be
supported by the general funds.
A lot of these cruelty cases
that we handle on a daily basis,
um, are not necessarily
producers, they're people that
really don't understand how to
cure for livestock.
So and and also we do have other
administrative um functions that
need to be funded by the general
fund, but the producers, we did
canvass the estate, most of the
producers, um, support this.
they understand and they uh
appreciate what the Livestock
Board does for them.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you again for
having us here today.
I'm just gonna say that.
Um, I've been with the Livestock
Board for 25 years.
Um
I've gone all over the Western
states and parts of Canada to
talk to brand committees and
brand commissions.
And we are the best at what we
do in New Mexico. Our inspection
crew, the the men and women that
work for the New Mexico
Livestock Board, we are the best
at what we do and we prove that
year after year with disease
outbreaks, the cases and and uh
cruelty cases and I'm very proud
to be part of that team, uh,
and, and what we accomplished at
the New Mexico Livestock Board.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I, I just.
In my heart of heart I believe
that this should be a a funded
by the producers as much as
possible there is some cases of
animal cruelty cases.
Thank you.
We'll come back to you, Senator.
Um, is there anybody in the
audience to support this bill?
Is there anybody in the audience
to oppose this bill.
OK, we got a 2 to 1.
Uh, anybody online.
OK, so we're gonna hear the
opposition first.
So opponents please come
forward.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, my name is Sanchez.
I'm with Northern New Mexico
Stockman's.
Mexico.
Uh, we didn't come here today to
Beat up our good friends,
Senator Wood, because he's been
a champion for our industry, but
we do have some general concerns
with this bill.
And uh
And we're trying to work some of
that out uh with the livestock
board, but as it stands today,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
The dynamics of the livestock
industry is changing.
Uh, for example, from 97, 1997
to now.
Ria Riba County has lost 44%
other counties like Mora and
others, 67% across the state and
we are concerned that if.
We have to be paying for the
services when the
Responsibilities have also
changed for the lifestyle board,
and they alluded to some of that
earlier that they're having to
answer all of this kind of 911
calls, if you will, because they
see somebody's sick horse in, in
somebody's backyard. We don't
believe that we should have to
pay for that, and I'll use the
analogy when some resident calls
the state police, uh, when he
shows up.
Uh, they don't have to.
cut him a check for his
services, and that's the way we
feel about that. Now the history
of this bill, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee is that
it, it has come before the
legislature twice before.
And the reason it didn't pass is
because New Mexico State, uh,
the college did a study and they
identified that the northern
counties had so many district
lines that we were suffering the
burden of inspection fees.
And because of that, uh, the
bill didn't pass. It was the
northern New Mexico counties
predominantly Hispanic producers
that were making up uh.
A lot of this fees for the board
that still exists today. We have
so many district lines that some
of our producers have to have 3
or 45 inspections to go from
their winter to their summer
pastures. Uh, we're trying to
work that out, uh, with the
livestock board and Senator.
Uh
Our senator here and we're not
asking you to stop the bill
today, uh, to kill the bill, uh,
we'd like the opportunity for it
to move on.
And uh work some of the bugs out
of it. uh, thank you for your
time.
Thank you. Next opponent.
Good afternoon. Um, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Carlos Elazad. I'm the
executive director for Northern
New Mexico Stockman's
Association.
I think this bill had there been
input from us from the north,
um, when they first crafted this
bill and from the native Native
American people, I think we
could have refined this
legislation a lot better and I'm
with I'll sign with uh.
Our board member that
We're not opposed. We understand
the plight of the um livestock
board and what they want to do,
and we also appreciate what they
do for the livestock industry
for northern New Mexico and all
the people up north realized
that.
The only thing um I my concern
here is.
In the future and maybe even the
livestock board, we need more
Native American representation.
As I don't see it.
And I know there was in the
cattle growers meeting back in
December, there was a lady from
the Navajo Nation is saying, why
do we have to pay 2 inspection
fees, one tribal and then state.
And I think uh that's something
if you had a tribal member in
the board, they could address
that.
And with that, uh,
I stand that.
Move the bill forward. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Now we'll
go to support.
Mr. Patterson
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson. I'm a cattle
rancher. I deal with the
livestock board on a routine
basis.
The Livestock board is charged.
Among other things, with
promoting this is from their
mission statement with promoting
greater economy.
Service and efficiency in the
administration of the laws
relating to the livestock
industry of New Mexico.
And with controlling disease,
preventing theft or illegal
movement of livestock with
overseeing the New Mexico meat
inspection program.
Have there been issues? Sure.
But by many accounts,
And from many corners of this
state, the industry's view, the
industry here in New Mexico of
your cattlemen and women, is it
in Mexico livestock board has
worked diligently.
Responsibly and generally
successfully to fulfill that
charge.
The Livestock Board in many
respects is.
As Deputy Director Davis said a
model state agency for the
livestock industry of which we
are very proud.
The Livestock Board hasn't had a
service fee increase since 2002.
Its service fees are among the
lowest in the region.
None of us wants to pay more.
But
We recognize that the livestock
board needs to have the
resources to efficiently
administer the laws relating to
the livestock industry in New
Mexico and we're willing to help
pay for it.
On behalf of the New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association.
We support this bill and we
request that you approve it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Is there
still no one online?
OK, we are going to questions
and comments from the committee,
and first I have Senator Eel.
Then Senator Townsend.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate y'all being
here today. My first question
is.
Uh, when was the first
registration of a brand, when
was it first imposed on
livestock owners?
And when is the first I'm sure
that y'all have books that go
way, way back. How, how far back
did they date?
Madam Chair, um, uh, Senator
Ezel, uh, oldest book I've seen
I think is 1913.
And, uh, before that, that uh
counties handle the brand
registrations and somewhere
around 1913 it was moved to a
statewide program.
And yes, ma'am, I
I don't know ask these questions
sometimes unless I do know the
answer. Yes, they were recorded
at the counties and.
I think, uh, like.
Great grandfather's brand was
first recorded.
1898, I believe is when it was.
So it does go back a long time.
And Madame Cheer.
Senator Wood.
Director Garland, Mr. Davis,
appreciate what y'all do.
Uh, sometimes it's a
Thankless job that y'all do. I
do know that whenever we were
having the issues that Ridoso
this past year, the livestock
board.
Fell in there, uh.
There were some concerns from
some from the trainers and I
picked up the phone and I called
Director Garland. We got that
all straightened out and it was.
It was good to go for everybody
concerned. I do want to
acknowledge that in an open.
I do have a couple of questions
here. Whenever, um, page 3 of
your bill, Senator Wood.
Starting at line H is inspection
of heights. Are you going to the
facility where there might be a
slaughter and uh.
That's where the hides are
inspected.
Uh, Senator Uz, yes, we've
always done that if uh a calf or
animal is slaughtered at a
facility in New Mexico we go
there, uh.
At least once a month and go
through hides and check brands
and make sure all the paperwork
matches the cattle that are
there.
OK.
And then Madam Chair and Senator
Wood.
And expert witnesses on page 4,
line 3 section. The FIFA issuing
a transportation permit.
Not to exceed $100 is that for a
cattle pot, is that for coming
into state, interstate
intrastate.
A trailer talked to me about
this Madam Chair, member, uh,
Senator Eel, that, that permit
is uh is actually your uh uh
horse permanent horse inspection
it's, it's right now set at 35
and uh we want to move that up a
little bit.
And Madam Chair and senator.
And Mr. Davis, how long is that,
uh,
Calling permit good for for that
horse, Madam Chair, uh, senator
for the lifetime of the horse as
long as you own it if you sell
that horse or trade that horse,
it needs another one, and I
think that's very important for
the committee to know that.
And Madame Cheer.
Uh, on the FIR on this
particular bill under the fiscal
impact of it.
Y'all have 25 current brands,
and the increase in the brand
fee from 100 to $10025.
And this
They, uh
You might want to point out to
the audience members.
That these
Brands are recorded every.
A renewal of at every 3 years,
isn't that correct?
So Madam Chair, senator Zel,
actually they can be recorded
every 36, or 12 years.
So and then that money is
prorated into our operating
budget. That's right.
And Madam Chair,
Whenever y'all were talking
about the larceny aspect of
livestock and the necessity of
having New Mexico is branded for
those of you that don't know New
Mexico.
is mandated to brand their
cattle, they are not mandated to
brand horses, that is optional.
Right now we can tattoo or chip
or horses or like I said
earlier, you can brand them.
Hogs
The ear tap uh chip, uh er
notum, uh.
I guess you could do the
chipping on sheep. They do have
the paint tattoos on them which
do wear off.
But larceny is alive and well in
the state of New Mexico and
therefore uh.
The quarts of us that the
definition of livestock in
regards to larceny beat.
Be defined by the legislative
body, I appreciate your efforts
on getting this done. I do have
that bill with me today that I'm
going to drop.
And Madam Cheer.
With the price of cattle right
now with the price of horses
right now with the price of
sheep, goats, the list goes on
and on and on. It's very
important.
That does not be if they steal
one head of.
Uh, let's do it this way. If
they steal one.
Head of cattle.
Verses 10 head of cattle is one
offense.
And this is going to tie to
where it's all.
I think it's gonna be a good
bill.
That will help those people out
there that are trying to feed
the world, madam chair, I am in
the.
I like I like this bill.
It gives him the discretion of
changing the rates over a course
of years. It's not gonna be an
all at once hit.
So I appreciate you allow me to
take the time to ask these
questions. I appreciate y'all
being here. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
And would if, if I'm on a ship
50.
At a cattle
Um, what is my inspection cost
like 550 head or six-weight
cattle I'm gonna shift tomorrow.
What's my inspection cost?
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
uh, $10 service charge is what
we charge right now and uh a 50
cents a head, so you're looking
at $35 for that inspection.
And
What is 50 head of 6 white
cattle work today.
Madam Chair, remember, uh,
Senator Townsend, I'm not sure,
but they're worth a lot, but
that's probably better.
$100,000.
So
What I'm saying is,
Over the last 25 years,
thankfully, the price of cattle
has moved.
Of significantly.
And
And an inspection fee.
Um, although I don't think,
quite frankly, that
Uh, tribal members ought to be
having to go through two
inspections, but unless, if the
inspections are equal, I don't,
I don't know what happens on
tribal property, but it does
seem, it does seem uh
Wrong 2 inspections have to
occur. I mean, that's kind of
like getting your fingerprint
twice. I mean, it doesn't make a
heck of a lot of sense, but
You do have to
Realize that
$35 for inspections.
$100,000 worth of cattle.
I can't think of
Uh, that it seemed like a pretty
good return on your investment
to get it done and so I, I
appreciate and I think it's a
good deal. Thank you, Madam,
Madam Chair, if I could, uh,
speak to that the tribal
inspection I talked to me um
did you want that answered? OK,
please go ahead chair,
uh, Senator Towzin, uh, I talked
to the lady that brought that
issue up at Cattle Growers this
year and she didn't understand
that uh she can go to a New
Mexico sale barn with a permit
number and.
does not have to get a tribal
inspection.
Most tribal members have their
New Mexico uh inspections, uh,
done at the sale barn on a on a
permit it doesn't cost her
anything extra and uh once I
explained that to her she kind
of said oh I already knew that.
Um, so, uh, that doesn't happen,
it does happen sometimes there
are times when a travel
inspection is needed, um, but
most of the time if they're
moving on to New Mexico brand in
state New Mexicoal barn they,
they just get a permit number.
Thank you. Any further questions
or comments. What is the
pleasure of the committee,
Senator Scott.
Thank you just one very quick
question for Mr. Davis as it is,
Madam Chair, Mr. Davis, does a
livestock board operate at all
like they do on Yellowstone
Madam chair, Senator Scott,
almost exactly like that without
the homicide.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir, for your answer.
Senator
There is a motion and a second
bipartisan or a due pass on this
bill. Could the Secretary please
call the roll?
Sara Cervantes, is is excused,
Senator Charlie. Senator
Charlie, yes, Senator Zel.
Senator, yes, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Dia Lopez.
Dia Lopez, yes, Senor
Stefanisophonics, yeah.
Hm
Uh, by a vote of 80, you have a
unanimous due pass.
Congratulations, Senator Woods.
Yes, but first an announcement,
um.
Senator Hamlin has an afternoon
committee and she's being kept
apprised.
Of how our events are going so
that she will let us know when
we might need to cut it off here
in this exciting committee.
So
So, um, Madam Chair, yes, I have
an amendment.
Uh
2300791
On Senate Bill 108.
And it does two things that I
would move the amendment for
discussion. So Madam Chair,
members of the committee, the
amendment does two things. It
gives the agency 4 years.
To expend the funds rather than
one year consistent with the
timelines they are used to
associated with capital outlay.
And it specifies that the funds
are for the river stewardship
program currently residing at
New Mexico Environment
Department.
That is the um.
the
Thank
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Chair, this is an
appropriations bill to the
Department of Environment to
plan, design, construct projects
to improve river, stream and
wetland habitat, uh, we do have
an existing program at New
Mexico Environment Department
and with me today I have two
experts, Dan Roper from uh Trout
Unlimited. Sometimes I've made
the mistake of calling him
Mister Trout, and he's been very
kind to me, um, and I also have
cake Lacey Young, who is
watershed protection program
manager at the New Mexico
Environment Department.
And we would go to the audience
or to discussion from the
committee.
I
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Vidal
Gonzalez and I work for the New
Mexicoseki Association as the
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist, and
I'm here to speak in support of
SB 108. This bill has broad
support among Oseia communities
due to its importance in helping
to restore and improve rivers,
streams, wetlands, and
watershed, which enables
communities to prepare for the
effects of climate change and to
recover from natural disasters.
This funding provides a second
communities with one of the only
opportunities to conduct
community watershed
implementation that centers on
the community's needs, wishes,
concerns.
Without this funding,
communities impacted from
disasters like the catastrophic
fires and floods that we have
seen in the Hermit's Peak Caf
Canyon area, Riodoso and the Rio
Chama will not be able to
recover.
This funding is not only
reactive to disasters but is
preemptive by restoring a
watershed and helping to
naturally store water in the
watershed for the dry season,
providing pariantes with
irrigation water during those
times of needs. Thank you to the
sponsors Bill. Thank you for
your time, Madam Chairman
members of the committee.
Madam Chair, Senators,
Uh, thank you for listening. My
name is Steve Roman. I own a
business called Keystone
Restoration Ecology, um, we work
under this funding as a small
local business we employ about 8
people, support about 15 family
members.
Uh, we buy our our supplies
locally. We hire local people to
hire all our machines around.
Um
Kind of responding to what Vidal
said we're working up in county
loan, um, to restore the
watershed, to provide for a
second cutting of alfalfa in the
summer, as it's gotten drier,
um, the erosion of the
watersheds, preventing the
watershed from holding water on
the landscape from snow melt
throughout the entire year.
That's the type of projects we
work on, we work in the GIA,
we've done 2000 acres of
improvement above the town of
Luna, um, on something called
Center Fire Creek, which is the
headwaters, um.
Of the Gila River up there.
And we've worked all over New
Mexico with many partners uh
this year we're going to work at
Santa Clara Pueblo, restoring
the top 5 miles of that creek
from the damage from the
wildfires. We're also working in
Taos Pebble this year as well.
One thing I want to mention
about this funding, it's very
cost-effective funding. We did a
project with Los Almos County
last year.
And they had a FEMA project with
the, the funds were clawed back,
and we took their $500,000 that
they had, we use that to restore
a road that was destroyed by a
stream.
Uh, we fixed the stream with the
state's money for $300,000. And
we actually managed to come in
there, uh, the original project
was $2 million. We did a lot
more work for about $800,000 and
worked on about 1 mile of creek,
dredged the reservoir, fixed
2000 ft of road and put it in a
way where it won't break again.
So this is long term sort of
infrastructure funding of our
watersheds. And as we have fires
and we have floods, um, this is
the type of money that helps fix
things. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today.
My name is Emily Wolf, and I
serve as Rio Grande coordinator
with American Rivers. I'm
speaking in strong support of SB
108 today. One example of a huge
community benefit that has
resulted in recent years through
this program was a community
restoration project conducted in
the Eastern Navajo Nation in
partnership with Oo Encino
chapter, Rio Puerco Alliance and
River Source to improve soil and
watershed health through
revegetation and building
erosion control structures. This
project over the last several
years has employed over 100
community members and local
youth.
for a seasonal restoration work,
planted thousands of trees and
drought resilient plants, uh,
implementing community
priorities to restore the health
of the Rio Perco watershed.
Additionally, at American
Rivers, I and partners are
identifying community-based
projects throughout the state,
which would improve aquatic
connectivity for public safety,
recreation, passage of fish and
other aquatic organisms and many
more benefits. The project's
emerging demonstrate the huge
community need and readiness for
this program, a state investment
in critical projects that carry
overlapping ripple effects for
our waterways. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eddie V.
Hill, registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Association of
Soil and Water Conservation
Districts we do have districts
all over the state that
Support this program we do uh
We, we do.
Numerous rivers, uh, segments at
this time, and we do support the
props.
Mellinger
Members of the committee.
Um
My name is Howard Hutchinson.
I'm chair of the San Francisco
Soil and Mo Conservation
District.
And we utilize these funds to do
a Willow Creek uh restoration,
partnering with the Forest
Service Trout Unlimited, and the
New Mexico Game and Fish
Department.
Thanks to Miss Lacey, we were
able to negotiate the funding
process.
And execute the project with
great success.
We strongly support passage of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Senator
Expert witnesses. How do you
gauge success on restoration?
Ah
Madam chair Senator, thank you
for that question. I think I'll
turn to the department for that.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
um, hello, my name is Kate Lacy
Young with the Environment
department. Um, so the river
stewardship program measures
success. The projects are all,
um, have a period of monitoring
once the projects are, um,
constructed to ensure that the,
they are meeting the goals, um,
set out for the project, um,
most projects are meant to
improve surface water quality,
um, and so they are, there is
monitoring that is occurring
post projects for that success
and to see that they're meeting
the the marks that the basically
the.
contractors in the projects are
out to go do, um, in addition to
that, the department also has,
um, an effectiveness monitoring
program to uh follow up with
projects, um, in the long term
to see how they are doing,
meeting those water quality
goals, which um can be rather
long term, uh, for, for many of
them.
Ma'am.
Are there actually
cast water test that and you can
show that the project has
As
Be beneficial.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
the, um, so, yes, there, uh,
the, the department actually has
a as part of this effectiveness
monitoring program, uh, we go
out and we'll set up monitoring
before projects occur in certain
systems that have uh water
quality impairments to our, our
water quality standards, and we
will monitor during the project,
um, as part of the project
monitoring and then we'll go out
postproject to see that. And a
collection of those.
adults as they're analyzed, um,
over time, we do actually
produce success stories as the
state of New Mexico, in
demonstrating that we are
achieving water quality
standards, um, and improving our
surface waters of the state.
Sometime when you're not busy,
I'd like to see some of those.
Thank you very much.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, I see you've got $10
million.
You're marked for these projects
and only 6.
On your project sheet, do you
know?
But the rest of the money's
going to be spent for.
So, um, Madam Chair, senator, I
have to defer to the department.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, um,
we have, uh, currently active
around um 30, 38 projects that
are active in the state, um, on
the ground, so these are
multi-year projects, uh, the
annual appropriation is to
secure new projects and then pay
those projects over time. So
when we have rolling the uh
rolling projects and new
projects accrue quite a large uh
sum, um, I don't know if that's
correctly answering your
question. Could I have you
restate the question?
if possible.
Uh, no, madam Chair, and expert
that did and what is the total?
Stay expenditure toward.
These activities currently.
Oh yes. Um, yes, so, uh, with
your hand, excuse me, Madam
Chair, Senator Scott, with your
hand out, um, as you're looking
at the funding amount of the
projects, um, this, what you're
looking at on this handout of
projects of FY 25 was the most
recently funded projects, those,
um, was, uh, there are 12
projects here and that adds up
to, um, I believe approximately
7 million, which is what the
department had available, um, in
funds. So when we did the last
RFP in 2022 prior to this one.
We had uh just over 10 million
available and allocated through
that RFP and that was with the
um ARPA funding that the that
the department received. Um, so
all of the funding that comes to
the department, um, all of it
goes back out on the ground to
projects, um, and so, as, as
much as we possibly can, and
sometimes those projects, uh,
most of them spend every last
dollar, which is what our goal
is, and we want to help them
succeed in doing that, um, and
then occasionally,
we are reallocating funds back
on the ground if we receive them
back for any reason, uh,
projects happen, fires happen,
uh, things occur, um, and so we
we try to, we do our best to
reallocate those funds back onto
the ground into new projects.
So
Of the 38 projects, Madam Chair,
expert that you mentioned
earlier, what is the total
annual expenditure.
For all of these annually.
Mm
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
I don't have that exact figure
in front of me, um, to know that
total, um.
I could give you a guess, but I
don't know if that would do it
justice. One last question.
Is there any of this activity,
Madam Chair and expert? in this
activity going on down in the
southeast.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, um,
we do have projects, um, down
the New Mexico State University
Water Resources Research
Institute has several projects,
uh, statewide, and they also
have projects in the southern
part of the state, um, running
on the, in the lower Rio Grande,
um.
They are also, we are, we have
lots of many projects in the
Gila uh area, so the southwest
side, we as a department would
like to build our um projects in
the southeast corner of the
state and are hiring, um, next
week, in fact, they start, uh, a
new member of our team in
Riodoso to help build that
capacity in the southeast corner
of the.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, ma'am.
Amodu pass
A second.
Sarah Cervantes, he's excused,
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Charlie, yes, Senator.
Saint Ozel, no, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Senator Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, Center Cia Lopez.
Lopez, yes, Senator Stephonics,
yes, Stephonics, yes.
Madam Chair, by a by a vote of 7
to 1.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
That was
a
Resolved
I'm
Um.
I just want to clarify that the
last bill was passed.
I think I'll be very quick.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Vice chair and ranking
member, appreciate you hearing
us. Um, as you know, I'm the
chairman of the New Mexico
Finance Authority oversight of
Interim committee so these bills
fall to me periodically. Um, I
have a Marquita Russell who is
the CEO of the Mexico Finance
Authority with me in case we
have any uh technical questions,
but this is one of these bills
where we approve the uh public
project revolving fund which
authorizes uh the various
projects, um, this bill
authorizes the New Mexico
Finance Authority to provide
loans from the PPRF public
project revolving fund to 154
qualifying entities included in
the bill, um, based on the terms
and conditions established by
the New Mexican.
Finance Authority actual board,
the PPRF legal legal legislative
authorization carries a 3-year
authorization period and that's
why we're here now, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Are there
people in the audience to
support.
You don't want. Is there anybody
here to oppose this? Is there
anybody online?
OK.
Uh, committee members were on to
questions, comments.
Like, I'll second.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate you bringing
this forward. I do not want,
want to know Senator Padilla and
Miss Russell, whenever money is
authorized for these projects,
what is the turnaround time on
the projects being completed, is
there a time frame that that has
to be done.
Uh, and ranking member,
essentially a we reauthorized
these every 3 years so you can
get, you can, you can bet that
the project's gonna be completed
within 36 months.
OK, 36 months, that's good to
know. Yes.
It
Uh
Madam chair, Senator, would you
like to be a little bit more
specific on that.
I would say 36 months.
OK, that's a good answer there.
I'll, I'll stick with that, OK?
And uh that's the only question
I had. I was just curious what
it, what it was. Thank you very
much.
So, um, I do.
I have a quick question. How
many counties are represented
this time?
Ms. Russell.
Yes
Madam Chair, and uh
Madam Madam Chair, I would note
that um.
I don't have the number now, but
this will get amended one more
time before it comes to the
floor. We are we are continuing
to compile a list. These were
the projects that came forward,
um, by October, which is when
our oversight committee began to
look at them. So we do have an
existing, we're continuing to
add to this list. um, this list
will get added to the lists for
the last 2 years, every county
is represented on the PPRF, um,
authorization.
Uh, list one way or the other.
And Madam Chair, I just quickly
scanned the legislation and I
counted at a minimum of 11
counties.
OK, thank you. I know that
that's one of the things that um
one of the items that everyone
gets interested in is if we're
gonna put out a large amount of
money and fund because every
county have the opportunity to
qualify.
Uh, Madam Chair, yes.
Thank you. That's all I have.
No, we do have a motion.
And a second
Motionless, uh, senator Lopez,
the 2nd was Senator Pope.
Could the secretary please call
the vote.
Savans is excused Senator
Charley, yes, Senator Charlie,
yes, Senator. Yes, yes, Senator
Hamlin.
So have excuse, Senator Pope.
Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Uh yes, ma'am. So Scott, yes,
Senator Townsend.
The Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez, yes, Sen
Stefanis. Yes, said Stephonics,
yes.
So Senator, you have a unanimous
due pass from this committee.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chairman.
Senator Woods
Senate Bill 114.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senate
Bill 114.
Has to do with the uh
The state game commission.
Requiring them to get approval.
A certain
Organizations and and whatnot
organizations.
the
Written approval
Of of the Say association, the
land grant, the board of county
commissioners.
And the uh, to which the
interest is sought to be
acquired.
What's happening is,
Whenever the state acquires
land, it takes it off the tax
roll. It takes water rights off
the there's so many things that
can affect you.
That
I don't believe being accounted
for.
Uh, the state commission.
Uh
Has a lot of federal money that
they used to acquire Lynn.
And
It's not the acquiring land that
I object to. It's the fact that
it's, it's affects the local
governments.
It affects the locals. It
affects local land grants and
the the fundings, the taxes that
they can.
Received from that land.
So this is just a bill asking.
For them to get
The permission to buy the land.
And
I know there's gonna be quite a
lot of discussion on this.
And uh
I'm sure I'll just sit.
And hear it
So
Thank you.
Thank you. Could I see anybody
in the audience supporting this
bill.
quite a few. Anybody in the
audience opposed, there's a few.
Anybody on in support online.
So here, let's hear the
opposition first.
Come on up.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Stuart Lily, New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish, and we do stand in
opposition to the bill. I think
some of our concerns with it is
an entity, one individual entity
could oppose the acquisition of
or even a donation from a
willing private landowner to the
state game commission, and that
could thwart the will of the
landowner. It could even thwart
the will of the legislature, if
the legislature wants to approve
it just the way it's written,
one entity would have the
ability to uh uh deny that will
of the legislature or landowner,
etc.
Thank you. Any other?
Comments in opposition.
OK, we'll take comments now in
support.
Please come on up.
We let me take one more uh
opponent online and that's
Patience O'Dowd.
Go ahead, patience.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can
you hear me?
Yes
Um, I can barely hear you. Can
you say something again?
We can hear you. Please go
ahead.
OK, thank you. OK, I am patients
are about, president of the Wild
Ho observers Association, and
environmental conservation
non-profit corporation since
2004.
The fiscal import the fiscal
impact report FIR admits that SB
114 relates to SP5 and that land
acquisitions involve federal
funds.
Therefore, section B3 should
state that it is to establish
wildlife refuges, not only game.
Which is, of course, also
wildlife.
Moreover,
SB 114 creates unequal
protection and unequal
protection clause where aceus
would exercise control.
over others private property
rights and slow or block the
sail, if they're shaky ran
through somebody's private land.
For these uh
For these reasons,
I respectfully oppose SB 114
until these issues are amended.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now we'll
go to the audience for support,
go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name's
Hakovo Baca. I am staff for the
New Mexico Land Grant Council.
The land grant Council supports
this bill, endorsed this bill at
its last uh regular meeting. Uh,
we thank the senator for
bringing this bill, um, land
grants in the uh traditional or
in the, the historic common
lands of the, of several grants
including Tierra Maria and
Seboeta. There have been um
Game commission purchases that
have negatively affected the
land grant and there's been a
lack of communication with those
communities. We think this bill
will encourage the commission to
have those conversations with
local communities with land
grants, with the, with those
county commissions and the
council, uh, stands in support
of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Vidal Gonzalez and I work for
the New Mexico Ase Association
as director of policy and
planning. I'm a registered
lobbyist, and I'm here to speak
in support of Senate Bill 114.
Uh, it's imperative to pass this
bill to be in support of this
bill because a lot of
traditional communities don't
have the right when it comes to
water rights getting passed out
of their seos and it's
imperative to make sure that
we're protecting both the land
and water and the benefit of the
community at large. Thank you,
Madam Chair members of the
committee.
you and next, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, David Sanchez, we're
in complete support of this
bill, and I'm going to try to
give you a description of land
makeup and ownership in the
northern counties.
Currently, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
private property in Rio Reba is
only at like a 22%. The rest of
the ownership of the land is
our, our federal agencies, the
uh Forest Service, BLM, of
course, our, our tribes, so
we're seeing in our area, Reba
County is an example. The game
and fish department has the
Humphrey Wildlife.
The sergeant in the Rio Chama,
which makes up approximately
30,000 acres.
And I don't know if they've
bought anything else recently.
The problem with that is they've
taken it out of our, our
coffers, our, our tax base, and
we're having to make up that
difference.
Uh, as ranchers that have some
holdings in that county, that's
completely wrong.
The other problem that we have
is that those
Private ranches in that 22%
makeup are feeding the state's
wildlife.
And, and, and as I indicated uh
in prior hearings, we're having
a horrible time with that. Uh,
so we stand in support of
Senator Wood's bill. There has
to be some legislative oversight
on the purchase of private
property, taking it out of our
tax base. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Tom Patterson. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico categories
Association.
Cattle growers supports SB 114.
is a fundamental political
matter, political theory.
entities closest to the land.
Here the asseas Association, the
land grant, the county.
should have a voice, an
important voice on what happens
to the lands in their midst.
For counties, for example, those
lands are part of their tax
base. The lands provide an
opportunity for jobs that in
turn fund schools and other
local infrastructure.
Let them tell you pro or con.
The impact of a proposed
acquisition.
The officials in those counties
also have the best handle on
public sentiment about land use
and management.
They should have a right to
know.
What the proposed management
plans are and to weigh in on
them.
Cattle growers urges you to
support SB 114.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Carlos Aloer, executive
director for Northern New Mexico
Stockman's Association.
We also support strongly this
bill. I think the game and fish
um already has um
Much under plate and putting
more property in their hands.
It's not gonna do any good for
the management of wildlife
overall. So,
Northern Mexico stockmens.
Also the producers that we have,
they're all impacted.
By a by allowing the game and
fish to acquire more land when
they can't manage what they
already have. Thank you.
Thank you. I think we've uh
taken everybody online and here
in the room.
Um
I would ask uh Senator while
we're talking, if you would look
at the comments from the
Attorney General and the FIR and
in our committee analysis. So
Senator Townsend, did you wanna
start? Yes, ma'am, I'll be happy
to. Um.
Thank you, Senator Wood. I, I
understand the
The removal of the land from
tax rolls.
We, I
It dawned on me that I think
Agencies that I land with
taxpayer dollars.
And
And set the value of that land
should have to make a payment on
the property value based on
work.
Is that a problem? I've actually
run that bill, madam Chair, a
time or two.
And so far I hadn't got that
through, but yeah, yeah, you
know.
It would be nice if they could.
Maintain that that part of that
requirement.
Of finance and local government.
Oh
But my, but my point.
The pill in this is that they
pay it based on market value.
When, if you pay
A $1000 an acre for land to buy
it, and you have it on the tax
rolls for $50.
The, the
People are, are
I mean, the people around them.
are getting a double hickey.
They're having to pay an
increased value on their
property tax because
An agency isn't.
And I think we ought to just
Set it up to where if an agency
buys land, they set the value.
Uh, based on their purchase
price and they pay property tax
based on that value, so I'm
happy to support it. I'm, I'm
happy to support your bill.
Um
Might have an amendment for you
when you get to the floor. Thank
you.
Oh, thank you, uh, senator,
Senator Isel, and I do want to
recognize this goes to um Senate
Judiciary so.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I appreciate this bill. I
too have.
Same thought process.
Senator Townsend does because
those.
Lands that are now owned by the
game and fish department have
come off the tax roll. It is
causing.
fluctuation in
Taxes that are paid to the
surrounding lands.
And it's also creating um.
Just uh
burden on those people that they
want to.
Have first right of refusal.
And I, I do have a problem with
this, but Mr. Chair, Madam
Chairman and senator.
Do you, do you know, have any
idea?
How many acres of land does New
Mexico game?
No, I do not know that, although
we have the
The director of the game and
fish behind me here he might
wanna chime in on that.
So could the director come up
and uh sit uh next to Senator
Woods.
Is the director of deputy
director.
And did you hear the question?
A chair.
Center as well, it's
approximately 200,000 acres.
200,000 acres, Madam Chair,
that's an awful lot of land, OK?
Oh wow.
Do some quick math for me, mis
uh Senator Scott, how many
sections are in 200,000 section
640 acres.
by now.
Madam Chair, I'm kind of
disappointed he is a
mathematician right here.
I put him on the spot.
312.5 sections of land. Each
section of land is 1 square
mile.
That's what that boils down,
madam chair and Senator Woods.
And director Sloane or?
Mr. Lily, um,
Isam of fish purchased any land,
private property in the last 10
years.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes.
And can you tell us how many
acres were purchased in the last
10 years and where they are
located and the cost per land
and what type of land it is, is
it?
Cast your land is a farm land,
is it municipal land? I'd really
like to know, is it a
psychialand? Madam Chair,
Senator, I probably need a
little help from Stuart on this,
Mr. Riley, um, but we have
purchased somewhere around 1000
acres.
One of which was a
54,000 acre property, 56 56,000
or so acres, I think.
Um, one was a
54,000 acre Elbar ranch in uh
Grants or McKinley County, I
think, and Sandoval.
So, so yeah,
I excuse me, um.
And then we purchased a smaller
piece in Karon County near
Glenwood hatchery.
And a peace in Roosevelt County,
which adjoins our um
prairie chickens, all three of
those properties a join existing
properties that the commission
had already owned and managed.
Hey, Mr. Lili.
Madam Chair, um.
Director Sloane said that you
might be able to come up with a
dollar amount on those 3
properties at totally 56,000.
Acres that have been purchased
by game and fish in the last 10
years.
I'm sure Senator, yes, I think
also it's important to note that
we have to use a fair market
value appraisals on that. So
when the appraisals go out, it's
a yellow book appraisal because
we do use federal funds. And so
they were purchased at um
appraised price yellow book
appraise price, we're we're not
allowed to purchase because the
federal funds above the praise
price.
Given all of the different
properties and some others came
with donations as well, so it
wasn't strictly Department of
Game and fish paying for it or
federal funds somewhere from
like a national Fish and
Wildlife Foundation.
approximate dollar amount off
the top of my head is going to
be about 20.
5 million
The price value or money
dollars. Madam Chair, Senator,
that would also be the appraised
value, which equates also back
to the dollars as well. OK, but
I guess I'm kind of confused
here. I want you to straighten
it out, senator and Mr. Lili
said 25 million priced and.
Oh, it's 56,000 acres that was
either purchased or donated. Is
there a designation between the
amount of land that was donated
over the.
Purchased land.
Madam Chair,
Senator,
on the one property, the uh uh
The LA, we had a million dollars
donation that went towards the
purchase of it.
So, so it wasn't directly from
the state coming into it or the
federal money we receive.
But it came from an outside
entity that went to a full sale
at the appraised price of that
property. It was not a donation
from the lander.
Madam chair.
And Senator Wood and Mr. Lily,
in spite of the $1 million
donation for that land, and I
think it needs to be made clear
to the members setting up here.
Tell me the type of land that
it.
Madam Chair, Senator, that was
mainly uh rangeland pasture
land. OK.
And
Madam Chair, uh, what is that?
Come out to an acre in spite of
the $1 million donation on that,
on that parcel of land.
In Roosevelt County.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, the
Roosevelt County did not have
the donation. Oh, OK. I'm sorry,
I misunderstood that,
Madam Chair, the, the Ear was
the one that did have the, the
million dollar donation. The
Roosevelt County.
Property
was approximately $700 an acre
at appraisal.
Hm. And that was pasture land as
well, Madam Chair and Senator
Wood and Mr. Lily.
Ma'am Chasen is, that is
correct.
OK, the Lar property that was
purchased, it was $1 million
donation. Can you tell me, Madam
Chair and Senator would Mister
Lili what the.
Remainder of that property did
cost game and fish.
Madam Chair, sin is, uh,
Part of the acquisition there
came from money from the
legislature as well.
So is uh money that was game and
fish money, money from the
legislature, money from uh the
the million dollar donation and
federal funds associated with
the game and fish. Approximately
17 million came from Department
of Game and Fish and Federal
funds.
With the majority of that.
Coming from federal funds, over
80% of that.
And Madam Chair and Senator Wood
and Mr. Lila, can you tell me
the
I'm not gonna hold you to
anything hard and fast. What is
the size of that property of the
Ear?
Madam Chair, senator is
approximately 50,000 acres.
50,000 acres at $17 million plus
a million dollar donation
equates to what? Madam Chair,
Senator,
including the money from the
state legislature, the donation,
the department's federal funds,
and some of the game protection
fund money. It was about 23 $23
million over how many acres?
Ma'am Chain is approximately
50,000 acres.50,000 acres.
Well
I'm sorry.
closer to
isn't that the
Madam Chair, sinners, Elbar is
near Mount Taylor.
Yes, OK.
OK.
And the
Roosevelt Ranch is the one that
so y'all bought for $700 snake.
Madam chair, sinners, that is
correct.
Madame chair right now, um, I
guess the problem I'm having
with this.
With the purchases by the game
and fish department. We've heard
how many acres they now own,
it's over 200,000 acres.
Um
Throughout the state of New
Mexico, even through donations,
contributions, whatever the case
may be.
Um
All that land has come off the
tax rolls.
And
Some of these counties can't
afford to have that, that land
come off the tax roll.
But it also diminishes the
opportunity for anybody.
That wants to get started in the
ranching business such as this
property here in in Roosevelt
County.
And it's kind of hard.
To know that they're going up.
big government entity that does
have the means to get it done,
done, whatever the cost may be
per acre.
You're overly inflating the
price of these lands.
Where nobody else can afford to
buy it, and you say, well, you
have to have it be in
conjunction with.
This project that's going on
over there to protect, uh, I
think he said, oh, no sand dunes
lizard. They uh prairie chicken.
What about protecting the
people, guys.
We need people out there on the
land.
We don't need a government
entity that can't take care of
the state's wildlife.
And y'all haven't proven to me
that you can yet. OK, I'm real
disappointed in that.
Senator Woods.
I'm glad you asked him to come
up and join you. Those things
were bothering me, um.
Madam
Madam chair
Senator Woods
I do have a ranch. It's outside
of.
Roswell, my husband and I have
worked hard for the last 30
years to pay that thing off. We
finally got it done.
It came from, as I said earlier,
building up these calluses on my
hand. My husband does have a
job. I don't make a living, OK?
But I still have to feed your
deer and I have to feed your
antelope, and I have to feed
your bobcats, mountain lions
over the predator that might
show up out there.
Madam, cheer whenever the game
and fish because um.
Once upon a time they did a
flyover my ranch after my
repeated calls to the game and
fish.
Do something about the antelope
population out here. Oh, it
can't be that bad, can't be that
bad, can't be that bad. They
finally flew and said, Do you
have the 2nd largest bachelor
herd of Antelope in the state of
New Mexico.
Madam Chair, I get.
Kind of wound up on this. I
really do. I apologize. No, I
don't apologize for it.
I met himmant about what I do. I
stand up for what I believe in.
And bigger government is not
better government.
Whenever game and fish comes to
me and says we're cutting your
antelope permits from 24 to 3.
Y'all can take a hike.
Our neighbors did the same thing
whenever their permits were cut,
they said take a hike.
So whenever we said no more
antelope hunting on our land
other than the private tags that
we can issue to somebody that
might want to come out there and
do what's right on our land.
That cuts out
Handicap punts that cuts out
the.
Archery part of it that cuts out
the.
Of
All the other hunts that you
have, including your youth
hunts.
So what's that doing to your
your department there?
This is what you're doing to the
department.
In our counties whenever you're
buying up the land in those
particular areas.
You're inflating the price of
the land, you're making it
impossible for anybody else to
get started in.
The agricultural sector of it?
Madam, too, this brings up
another point. I have, and I'm
gonna address it to.
Director Sloane and Mr. Lily,
whenever you're buying up this
land, do you also acquire the
mineral rights that are
underneath it.
Madam Chair, senator is on the
most recent acquisitions no
severed estate.
The recent acquisition is a no,
madam chair, but senator and
director and Mr. Lily in the
past has it included any mineral
lights rights under those lands,
Madam Chairen is on some
properties, the majority of the
properties that severed estate.
Madam Chair.
I'm not gonna get too wound up,
so with that last statement, I
am going to say thank you for
your responses. I will support
this bill.
To try to rein in game and fish
department. Thank you very much.
Thank you. OK, so I have Senator
Charlie, Senator Scott, and
Senator Sidia Lopez. Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I want to go back a little bit
further.
And all uh question about what
kind of land is this
particularly around Elbar
because that happens to be on
Mount Taylor, the mountain that
I happened to reference almost
every single time we're in
committee together.
That that's that's the ancestral
homeland of several tribes.
And that acquisition at Albar
provided access where we never
had access before.
Um, as a matter of fact, it's
per it restored 26,000 acres.
Of access
Alama, Laguna, Zuni, Hopi, and
Navajo.
Be able to access sacred sites.
We didn't have
Um
It also, uh,
Is providing um.
Access for hunting, um.
Because it is ranchland. And my
husband actually got it uh elk.
Up on that mountain and we're
still eating the meat this year
from um from that harvest.
Um
I do have a question, um.
Madam Chair and Senator.
Um, um, senator.
Um
Um
Madam Charma, you're gonna have
to come back to me losing my.
Yeah, sorry. That's fine. We
will come back to Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator.
An experts.
I'd like to circle back to the
Financial arrangements that are.
Undertaken during the
acquisition.
Of these properties.
Are there
Are there tax benefits.
That accrue to these
acquisitions.
In the event that a donation
Occurs
Part of the transaction.
Madam chair, Senator, I'm not a
tax attorney, so.
Um
But in general, if they make a
donation, we can acknowledge the
value of that can do with that,
but they will with the with the.
In their on their taxes, which I
assume would be considered a
donation to an essentially a
nonprofit.
OK, so
So for example, if a property
I
I cash transacted at something
less than.
The appraised value.
Gaming fish can make that value
up.
With a tax benefit for the
difference.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm not
sure what you mean by game and
fish making up a, a benefit.
Well, I guess what I'm getting
to is there is those, those tax
credits cost somebody something.
And
And apparently it's
Madam Chair and
And exports apparently it's up
to y'all.
To authorize.
That tax benefit is a part of
that sale.
Is there any
Is there any
Inquiry
Up the chain of command, if you
will.
As to whether that
That tax expenditure is
Appropriate for that piece of
property, or is it all
Madam Chair and
Experts within
Your purview
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm not
completely sure I follow, but
We're required to get a yellow
book appraisal when we use
federal funds, which we do for
essentially every purchase we
make.
And so that sets the market
value of that property, and
that's what we have to pay for
that property if a private
landowner chooses to sell it to
us for something less than that.
They would have
The bill of sale in essence and
the appraisal.
to use for their tax purposes.
If they wanted to try and claim
that that was a donation.
We don't have anything to do
with.
And maybe I misunderstanding the
question, but we don't have
anything to do with saying
whether it is or isn't a tax
benefit.
Madam Chair and
And Senator, under most
circumstances.
This legislature authorizes tax
benefits.
under all circumstances that I
can think of with perhaps
This particular type of
transaction.
So
It does seem appropriate.
That before
Madam Chair does and Senator, it
does seem appropriate that
before we enter into these
transactions.
With the high likelihood that
A portion or perhaps all the
transaction.
Would
cost the taxpayers of New
Mexico.
Tax dollars
That maybe there should be.
Some additional oversight there.
Uh, Next question.
For example, Madam Chair and
experts in this.
Last acquisition over on the
east side of the state.
What
Are y'all doing with the land.
How is
Game and fish.
Managing
the land.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
purchase of that property was
specifically for less pried
chicken uh conservation.
That was purchased prior to the
federal listing of the Help
stave off a listing, but also
work on recovery efforts now
too. And so the prairie chicken
was listed federally. The
department is working to work on
conservation actions to bring
population numbers of the bird
back to hopefully get back to
delisting.
OK, and
Um,
after an experts could you all
describe
Some of the other activities on
the rest of the.
200,000 acres that.
That you guys own?
How is that managed, Madam
chair, Senator Scott, it's a
variety of things from, for
example, eagle Nest Lake, where
we have a huge recreation area
where a big fishery across the
state that
A lot of people come tourist
visitors to to fish, etc. to
other areas across the state
where it may be for
Uh, hunting opportunities. I, I
will, uh, mention that specific
to our, our statutes set by the
legislature hunting on wildlife
management areas owned by the
commission land is restricted to
residents only, uh, draw hunts
are there. So there's, there's
properties there for hunting,
etc. There are properties that
are um like prairie chicken
areas, conservation properties
that we're trying to work to
stave off listenings of
endangered species or or
threatened species or trying to
recover those species to get
them off this. So, it runs like
I.
From, uh, tourism, fishing,
hunting, uh, recreation
opportunities, etc.
OK, last question, Madam Chair
and experts.
Were any of these purchases
authorized by the legislature
any of the 200,000.
Acres authorized by the
legislature.
Or were all those acres taken
up.
On your own initiative.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, some
of those were authorized by the
legislature, especially the ones
that had um some buns outside of
the game protection fund. So
yes, some of those were
authorized.
So, Madam Chair, could, could
you explain the difference
between
Those that were and those that
weren't.
Why was that process?
Diff.
Madame Chair, Senator Scott, if
there was non
Federal funding directed
specifically at the department.
Or game protection fund our main
fund use, and it came from other
funds like the general funds. So
if it was uh general fund
monies, it would go through the
leg.
And
In the circumstance where it
didn't.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, then
it would not be required to, I,
I will admit that some of those
acquisitions were in the 1920s,
so I don't have the history on
if it went through the
legislature at that time or not.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I have Senator
Cedilla Lopez, Senator Charlie,
then Senator Riel.
However, I'm really concerned
about what this what this does.
Um, in terms of limiting
authority because it's so many
hurdles to jump jump through
that I think it would.
Really stop them. First they
have to.
Prior to acquiring land obtained
written approval of an Aseca and
has the FIR pointed out, what
does that mean? Um,
Does it have to come from the
chair? Does there have to be a
meeting of this the ase
Association of Land Grant. I'm
an heir to the Tomeland grant
and failing to have this
communication.
could be a disaster, um, the
border and the and the board of
county commissioners of the
county in which the proper water
rights are located, does that
mean all the commissioners, if
you're talking about property
that that spans um and then it
says, um, so what you, so that's
just unwieldy and, and, and hard
to figure out, and then examine
and compile a report on the
social, cultural, and economic
impacts to the Aseke Association
land grant or county in which
the acquisition is.
I, I think that probably they're
gonna have to do some rule
making or something to explain
what needs to go in this report,
because that's, that's really,
really broad. Um, it doesn't
say.
Well
And then obtained the approval
of the legislature for the
acquisition. We only meet once a
year.
So this would effectively take
the, take this property off the
market.
For long periods of time until
the legislature could meet and
approve or disapprove this sale.
I've been here long enough to
know that.
Um
The reasons we might approved
something might not have the
expertise associated with the
decision to acquire it.
Um, and
At least I understand some
people are frustrated, but some
of the state parks and some of
the things I think that have
been done have been real
positive things.
Um
And then, then it requires a
report which I don't really have
a problem. Um, I think it's good
for us to know what's going on,
um, I think that's probably why
Senator A ask so many questions
because sometimes we don't know
what's going on, so I have those
technical um
Technical problems with, with
just how difficult it would be.
To to do this, um, there might
be a better way to
Cause it looks to me like this
bill just wants to stop.
Stopga and fish from doing it
because those those requirements
are so hard, so I don't know,
maybe some kind of compromise
that would.
Have some other entity, um, look
at it or have.
Um, give some guidance to the
Asecas cause what I do, what I
do think is good is at least a
consultation process with, with
the assass and the land grants
and and you know some that
should be spelled out, um, if
And I, I am forever scarred by
the Tome land grant where they
sold the, the board sold the
land without a meeting.
And um
And that would that just caused
litigation for years. People
still don't speak to each other,
and so I just think it's
important to be careful. So
those are are some technical
problems and then my policy
question is, do we want to put
this much of a stop to uh game
and fish doing what I think.
In in large part is is important
work. Perhaps there could be
better communication about why
they're doing it.
Um
At least what I heard was people
being frustrated with why they
were doing it and what the
benefits were to the community
and it's better to do outreach
in advance.
Um,
So those are my my concerns
about this, uh, Senator, I, I
won't be able to support your
bill.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
senator.
Um
I think
I appreciate the the effort of
all of the input and the
consultation that's kind of
mapped out in here. Where is
tribes mentioned?
Where is consultation with
tribes mentioned in this
process.
It's not.
Do I need to amend that in?
I, yes, I'm, I'm really tired of
legislation coming in here
without with tribes being an
afterthought.
Especially
For all of the reasons we know
that tribes should be consulted
about land and resource
management.
Um, and with that, you know,
there's there's private land in
all those.
Tribal areas
And, you know, you should be
consulted about that land
selling to the state within
those areas. I agree with you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, Madam
Chair.
And there, there's nothing like
another government to slow down
a process.
So when you start consulting
with tribes on this, we're
talking about, um, tribal
governments where uh leadership
changes every year and, you
know, I have my, my concerns
about weighing this down with
bureaucracy this process, um,
some of which was what is was
named and I have a real fear
that there's the unintended
consequence, your, um,
And that we're guaranteeing with
the pace.
That that this legislation would
require to move at, we'd be
guaranteeing a land grab.
Or, um, out of state purchasers.
I think that's who's gonna come
in and, and who's ready to
purchase land, um, if it isn't,
um.
Our land commission, and so I
just have to name that and get
it out there. Uh, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Madam, thank you for allowing me
to go the second time. Senator
Woods and
Director sled to Mr. Lily, uh.
And I'm gonna be very specific
on this question. The land that
was purchased in Roosevelt
County, was there a current
appraisal on that land?
Madam Chair,
Senator at the time, the
property was listed.
For sale. The department saw it
listed for sale at a joined two
other commission-owned
properties. At that time, we
went and did an appraisal.
And praised below the asking
price, and we worked with the
landowner to purchase it below
that.
So Madam Chair, I'm assuming
then that it was a private.
Araiser that put this price on
this, on this land, is that
correct?
Madam Chair
Senator is, yes, so because we
use federal funds, we have to
use what they call the yellow
book standards appraisal.
Which is a more rigorous
appraisal than just an
individual appraiser actually
has to go through appraisal
review as well.
And it has to be checked at the
appraisal review. So it's not,
uh, we can't just go out and get
a, a, a an appraiser in New
Mexico. It has to be a certified
yellow book appraiser to
appraise the land prior to
acquisition.
Well, Madam chair and.
Senator Woods and your expert
witnesses or not witnesses up
there, but the game commission
that is represented by the
executive director, Mr. Lily,
who is hands-on. I know that and
I appreciate your efforts that
you.
To this
If y'all are wondering what the
land looks like if you drive
between.
clients corners.
And Roswell, that stretch of
road 285, that's approximately
what the the the the native
grasses that are out there in a
good year, it's beautiful and
the.
You're like we've had this past
year, it's, it's pretty weak.
And that seems extremely high to
me if that is the case, my ranch
is up for sale, OK? I will sell
every bit of it right now.
At $700 an acre. Oh my goodness.
Oh
That Miss Madam Chair and
Madame 10 Woods,
I think it is our bounded duty
that we do have oversight over
the actions of the game and
fish, especially whenever it
involves those people that are
affected most in those counties
because that land.
That is their tax basis on those
lands and y'all are not doing
anything to help that tax
situation that y'all have just
created.
I am concerned about the
psycheias and the ditch ditch
communities, uh.
Some of them don't have the
capacity to be able to.
stop any sort of development
like this and it will affect
them directly and it'll take it
have a negative impact on their
public welfare, Madam Chair, I'm
just, I'm real bothered by.
That's 200,000 acres that are
now owned by the Game and Fish
Department.
Do you have manpower enough to
go out there and
Do any sort of
Work on these lands, Madam
Chair.
Mount Share Center as well.
Yes, I mean, we definitely have
manpower to do it. We also do
conservation actions on, let's
say Juniper expansion. We, when
we acquired the LA, we
specifically created new FTE to
put it on when we, we purchased
that, it was one of our largest
acquisitions, so we do have
people that work specifically on
our prairie chicken areas that
work out there. We're currently
doing, working with neighbors on
fencing and, and we're redoing
all the adjoining fences on
that.
Sure, I, I guess I need you to
answer a question then.
You said this was for, you had
to hire new FTE for the Ear
ranch. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator is uh, we
took an FTE and put it on the
Ear ranch. It wasn't like an
expansion of ours, but we did
put that FTE on the album.
And what about the Roosevelt
County?
Property that y'all purchased,
is there?
Changes made to that property.
Madam Chair, Senators, uh, we've
been working on uh water
development in terms of fixing
the current infrastructure that
was there to make it more
wildlife friendly. We've been
working with the neighbors on
redoing fences.
Um, adjoining fences across
there as well.
I'm cheer what I might be
hearing and I want you to
clarify this, Mr. Lily, whenever
you say you're working with the
surrounding neighbors on that on
fixed fence.
building
Um, is that a joint effort or
are you just saying neighbors,
y'all have to fix your fence to
keep your cattle or your sheep
or your goats or whatever the
case might be of our property.
Is that what I'm hearing? Madam
Chair, we're paying for all the
fences on the boundary fencing.
Are you doing as far as
promoting the labor to get these
fences done, Madam Chair,
Senator, we are contracting that
and paying for boundaries.
On all the boundaries here, OK?
And I'm assuming then whenever
you say this is for the good of
our everybody concerned, uh, let
me see if I can find that
exactly.
Um
Hold on here a minute.
I read it a while ago.
Oh
For today
Um
But Madam Chair, I guess my
concern there is.
If there's no oversight by.
The legislature.
You can continue to go out and
acquire more land and water
rights.
And water rights, which is.
a
Depleting
Our resources as far as anybody
else being able to make a living
off that land.
Which whenever we're talking
about this particular land
whenever you say it's for
wildlife habitat.
Even if a
A single person owned this
property.
That wildlife would still be on
that land, those people would be
also contributing to the welfare
of the state's wildlife, isn't
that correct?
Like we always do.
Like we always do.
And we are the ones out there
with boots on the ground. I like
to use that.
Expression quite a lot because
we are out there.
Um
Madam Cheer
I, I think that the legislature
would be.
Slacking in their duty to
protect the taxpayers' dollars
that are coming in.
Whenever
It's in
In retrospect now, do you
understand what we're talking
about whenever we're saying
those tax bases are in those
counties are being harmed.
I hope you do.
They're entrusting us to take
care of them and now we have a
department that's going out
there.
Right now, unless this bill
passes, being able to buy up
whatever properties they think
is necessary for the protection
of wildlife habitat.
We've seen what's happened at of
Chiquita.
That's not a good situation up
there.
And I'm not gonna get into that
because I could go on for hours
about that.
Madam Chair, I do appreciate you
letting me have this extra turn.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Yes, thank you. I just want to
make sure.
We all understand what your bill
does. I think we've got off on
kicking the game and fish and
we've kind of forgot what we're
supposed to be doing.
Your bill
Protects
The Asacus.
It protects the tribal
properties.
It protects the taxpayers
because it requires that the
game and fish would come back to
the legislature.
And get prior approval before
they purchase property and
explain the purchase. Is that
correct?
Yeah, that's the intent of the
bill.
The intent to tribal group is
not named, but I'd be happy to
name them.
Uh
It is to protect the local
community.
Essentially
The local culture.
That's the idea. Yeah, that's
what I wanted to make sure of,
because
In my, in my view, a vote
against this bill.
Jeopardizes some of the comments
that I've heard. I mean, my, my
Peer Senator Charlie is worried
about
The tribal properties being
represented and having a chance
before, not after the fact, and
I, I get that. And that's what
your bill does. It gives Senator
Charlie the ability to comment
on something and affect it
before it happens.
Same thing with the assass, so.
Um
I want to make sure that, that
we're all, I think we're all
aligned on this, and that is
what I'm supporting. I'm
supporting your bill because it
does provide those protections.
Thank you.
You, we are now to the point of
a motion. What would the
committee like to do?
Yes.
And Cio Lopez.
Uh, tabling motion is
non-debatable.
Uh, could the secretary please
call the roll.
Senator Cervantes, excuse
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator.
Saint Joel? No, Senator Hamblin.
Excuse
Senator Pope
Yeah, so like this.
And Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
And Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
There's 00, no,
Lopez, yes to table.
And I still Lopezonics.
Yes.
So the phonics, yeah. Senator
Pope to explain his vote and
then Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
think this was a great
discussion. I just have a lot of
concerns. I'm kind of where this
bill is at, what's not in there
as well.
Um, so I just wasn't ready to
support this.
Thank the sponsor. Thank you,
man.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Yes, ma'am.
I, I
Supported your bill, and I
opposed the tabling motion.
Because
What we did was we jeopardized
the taxpayer.
Tribal lands, the Asaa
Associations, we jeopardize them
by not adopting your bill.
And and passing it through, and
I, that bothers me.
I mean, I think we're all about
protecting the Mexicans, and I
know we all have
The same, um.
Concerns, uh, way down deep.
But um I look forward to a bill
that comes back and does that
because
I, I think our job is to protect
the people of New Mexico, and I
don't think we did it today.
Thank you very much. By a vote
of 4 to 3 this uh bill has been
tabled. Thank you very much,
Senator.
Thank you. Committee members,
um, we're going to recess in one
minute. I have asked the vice
chair and the ranking member to
see if there are any.
A preparations bills that might
be consent items, um.
There might be a couple left.
We have around 19 or 20.
Bills left.
Before we have new introductions
and uh so we are getting caught
up. It is possible.
I'm gonna leave this to the vice
chair and the ranking member to
discuss if we're gonna need a
Saturday meeting, um, and then
you can come back on Thursday to
let us know. We do have the room
booked, but if we don't need to,
that's great.
So thank you very much. Uh, we
will be in recess and continue
the last item on Thursday. Thank
you.
A
At least.
Yeah. So you can stop.
