3
Oh, you're in a row 4, OK.
Thank you and for anybody who's
here for uh
Or SB 470.
Uh, Senator Townsend has just
told me that he's gonna roll it.
So we have 2 bills. Great.
Um
Senator Hamblin, are you ready
to proceed?
Yes, madam Chair, I am.
So, Madam Chair and committee, I
want to once again thank the
discussions that we had in this
committee and share with you
also afterwards we had with the
New Mexico Livestock Board
legislative Finance Committee,
animal protection voters and the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture. I believe we have a
solution to the concerns that
this committee and the livestock
board brought forward the last
time we brought this bill
forward.
And just to summary, what this
bill does is it adds some
strength into the laws enacting
the expendable fund to increase
the accountability to the state
on the expenditure of the funds
for equine rescues and this,
what this does is this moves the
expendable fund from the
livestock Board to the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
to support more robust
administration of a regularly
funded program. This provides up
to 5% of annual distributions
that is appropriated to the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
for costs of administrating.
Administering the expendable
fund.
And so, just to share with you
how this committee sub differs
from the original bill.
Number one, it moves the
expendable fund, the equine
shelter rescue fund from the
Livestock Board to the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
It removes extraneous language
not needed regarding NMDA's
rulemaking authority and
advisory Committee and
distribution guidelines that
will be instead governed by the
procurement code.
It adds the state investment
council's suggested amendments
from the FIR and removes
language as requested by the New
Mexico DOJ to resolve
anti-donation clause concerns.
This solution is supported by
Secretary Whitty from the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture. I believe Deputy
Secretary Owens is here in
person, there you are. Thank you
so much. Uh, is here in case
there are any questions or if he
would like to say a few words um
when we come to public
testimony. And so just in
summary, this bill would
appropriate $20 million into an
investment fund that would grow
over time and should this bill
pass this committee, our next
stop is the Senate Finance
Committee, and I have with me um
Jessica Johnson Shelton.
who is the senior program and
policy strategist for animal
protection, uh, New Mexico and
also I have Nina Edelman, who's
the director of animal
protection voters, equine and
Wildlife. And so at this point,
Madam Chair and welcome, if you
want to go ahead and do public
comments or if you want to go to
the committee, either is fine.
Thank you. I believe we did
public comment last time.
Um, although we now we have more
time if if we had a bunch of
bills, I'd probably say no. If
you have new commenters that did
not comment last time, I would,
uh, entertain their comments
now. Is there anyone who did not
comment last time?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, really just
deputy secretary Owens if he
would like to say a few words,
if you, if he, if he feels the
need, um, otherwise, we can go
ahead and go to public uh to
committee comment.
Thank you, uh, Deputy Deputy
Secretary Owens, would you like
to say anything?
They, um,
Thank you. So with that, we'll
move to, um, and, and we already
did Zoom last time, so we're,
we're done with comments, um,
thank you for taking the time
to, to make a better bill. Um,
let's go ahead and turn to the
committee for any comments, any
comments and questions.
Senator Azel.
Sources
And Madam Chair.
Whenever I see.
Barrel horses running wild. I
have a problem with that because
these horses are out there
trying to survive.
And
We saw a problem a few years
back in the Ridoso area where
the livestock board did have to
come in because of the.
Oh horses that
were.
In an area where they were not
supposed to be. The livestock
board did exactly what they were
supposed to do.
By gathering these horses up,
they took, they gathered them
up, uh.
They impounded them, they
advertised those horses.
Madam, cheer and Senator Hamlin.
What transpired then.
Through the efforts of special
interest groups, these horses.
Brought back to the Ridoso area.
They
Were held by
A couple up there that did own
some property with the promise
that these horses would be taken
care of.
After about, I don't know how
many months, 6 months.
Whenever the funds were not
coming in to help feed these
horses, the people that were
holding these horses said we
can't afford to keep feeding
them.
Cause I can't remember the exact
number. There's nobody here from
the livestock.
Oh, I can't impounded by the
livestock Board, if the
gentleman back.
If um
He is the assistant director of
the New Mexico Livestock Board.
Mr. Assistant Director, would
you like to, uh, respond? Yes,
madam Chair.
My name is Sean Davis with the
New Mexico Livestock Board. The
case you're talking about
involved about 14 head of
horses.
Uh, and then
Exactly what you're saying is
true, yes, they were held for
for uh some volunteers held him
for a while under the agreement
that certain entities would pay
them for the feed, which did not
happen and those entities aren't
here today.
So, uh, anyway, that turned into
kind of a mess for sure.
Madame Cheri did and Mister
Davis, I appreciate your
comments right there.
After a while, these horses were
turned back out.
During a blizzard time, these
horses were hard pressed to find
anything to eat. They had a hard
time even finding water.
And these horses have now
Uh
That herd has that particular
herd has grown in excess of over
30 head of horses.
We have stallions out there that
are breeding their daughters
that are breeding their
granddaughters.
And it, it just keeps going on
and on.
Whenever we have the rescue
facilities like y'all are
describing right here.
That is a good thing.
But I don't think it's up to the
taxpayers of the state to have
to pay for somebody's neglect.
Of a domesticated animal.
And
Madam Chair, and Senator Hamlin,
if they can no longer take care
of these horses.
That they do have the ability to
sell these horses to somebody
else that may want them.
These these horses that are
sold.
are cared for by these people
that do buy them.
Madame Cheer, it's very
expensive to feed horses right
now with hay alfalfa prices in
the state of New Mexico that are
in excess of.
$280 a ton.
That adds up
Pretty fast, and that is what he
is going for in the papist
Valley.
Horses require if you're going
to feed them to maintain a
decent weight on them where they
are healthy.
It takes about 2 gallons of
grain a day once I hit the
desired weight that they're
supposed to be, it takes about 2
gallons of hay of grain a day
plus free choice hay.
They also have to have their
hoofs worked on and trying to
get horses' hoofs worked on
right now, a minimum cost of $60
per horse, and that's if they're
having problems with their
mouth, they have to have their
teeth worked. If you are going
to yield a horse that costs
money too.
If you're going to try to rehab
these horses to go to another
home, you have to pay a trainer.
To come in there and break these
horses.
You have babies that are out
there. Sometimes there's a
problem with the mayor after she
gives birth to this baby that
the mayor dies, so you have to,
you have a doggie baby a foal.
OK.
Madam Cheer.
Senator Hamlin, whenever we're
talking about that cause per
horse for the shelters. It does
add up in a hurry. I do get
that, but that is not stopping
any.
Private citizen out there for
helping the shelters out, is
that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator,
absolutely. I mean, these,
that's, there's the reason why
we're bringing this fund because
these private shelters are
heavily dependent on grants or
the generosity of people like
you and people in our
communities.
But as we're finding and as
you're talking about the cost of
hay and the cost of care, and we
even talked about dental care,
uh, in this committee, and you
explained about how expensive
that was, um, that costs money
and in some cases for these
rescues who are trying to do the
same thing that you would do in
terms of caring for your horse,
Madam Chair.
That costs money that they are
