So we'll go to about 11:15, so,
uh, we can see how many bills we
can get done.
There were some committee rules.
That were posted and are
available from our secretary. It
was 10 minutes for the sponsor
and their experts.
10 minutes for the proponents,
10 minutes for the opponents.
Yesterday I went way over.
And we got one build done.
So then, uh, I'm gonna stick to
it a little bit better, and also
we're gonna ask committee
members not to speak longer than
10 minutes.
Uh, and if we have time, we'll
circle back.
You can get quite a bit done in
10 minutes. Let's see here.
Good morning, Senator Wirth.
Madam, madam chair, I, I don't
like to.
I, I am gonna protest that
because if we don't ask the
questions here in committee.
We don't get the full scope of
what it, what this sponsor of
the bill is gonna do any any
bill that's coming up before so
I am going to object to the 10
minute rule.
Oh, there are some concerns on
lots of these bills that we're
hearing and I want to make sure
that if there is a bill that's
gonna be passed out of this
committee that it is a good
bill, not one that is just
piecemeal and they're gonna take
care of it in some other
committee later on. So I am
going to protest the 10 minute
rule.
Thank you, Senator, and so, um,
It is possible that if uh you
speak for 10 minutes and then
everybody else does. We, as long
as people do not repeat the
questions or the points we might
get through it and we might be
able to come back around.
Yeah, a second time.
Well, it, it kind of impedes us,
it's not stated in the Senate
rule books that we are.
Held to a certain time limit in
our discussion of the bills and
asking questions on it and
therefore I think that I, I
would assume that the crowd
would agree with us that all
questions that is in regard to
any bill that's before us is
fully vetted before it does
leave this committee that
everybody is fully informed of
what is going on there and
making sure that we are not
violating any other statute
that's already in place, so
Senator Mason's rules does
indicate that the chair of the
committee can
determine if there needs to be
time limits in order to complete
the business of the committee.
And um
My practice has been to complete
all Senate bills.
And if
Your bill is at the end and
doesn't get completed.
I would hate that.
I want to make sure that
everybody receives fair
treatment and gets their bill
heard uh through the session.
And I agree with you that
everybody does have, they think
that their bill is utmost
importance, everybody that
submits a bill feels that way.
But
We also have to take the, take
uh into consideration what is
good of all the state
representing our constituents
and the good of all the states
so therefore I.
I feel that if we're saying no,
we're only gonna talk for this
long there's still some
questions out there.
Are we going to take the time on
the, on the Senate floor.
To carry on that debate that we
should have taken care of while
we were in committee. That's my
concern right there.
And I appreciate the response
you have given me, but I do have
a concern over this 10 minute
rule.
I am noting that and we'll see
how much we can accommodate
longer than 10 minutes. Thank
you. Um, OK, so Senator Wirth,
why don't you proceed with uh
Senate bill 21.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
good morning ma'am for the
audience.
It's a roll over from Tuesday.
Senate
I'm here to present two bills
this morning, 21 and 22, that
both are focused on protecting
New Mexico's water resources.
Uh, representative Cristina
Ortiz is the house sponsor.
She's jumping around this
morning, may show up also uh
Senator Bobby Gonzalez signed on
as a plus sponsor on 21.
Uh, with me today from the New
Mexico Environment Department
are the department surface water
Quality Bureau chief Shelley
Lemon.
And counsel Zach Ogaz, the
general counsel.
Uh, I want to just begin this
morning by talking a little bit
about the process that was put
in place by NMED to get us here
because I think that's
important.
Um
In the fall, uh of this 2024
enemy convened a surface water
advisory panel references swap
that meant for 6 times, uh, the
group was made up of a diverse
array of stakeholders with
various expertise and
perspectives, uh, the purpose to
give enemyD technical
information, practical
consideration, policy
perspectives, relevant to
developing and implementing um a
surface water quality permitting
program.
Uh, there were 49 participants
in that group.
From industry, oil and gas,
mining, construction, business
sectors, agriculture,
as conservation districts,
dairies, ranching and farming
organization, environmental
groups, conservation and
advocacy organizations, tribal
governments, uh, local
governments, water utilities,
wastewater, storm water.
Water delivery, irrigation
districts, flood control
organizations, state and federal
agencies, Los Alamos lab and
Sandia participated in watershed
and wetland restoration
professionals. Again, when
you're addressing something as
important as surface water and
water in New Mexico.
Uh, this isn't a bill that's
just coming off the fly. It's
really been worked on, uh, and
there's been an ongoing dialogue
also with EPA and we'll talk
about that.
So Senate Bill 21 lays the
groundwork for the Environment
Department to implement the
federal Clean Water Act. Uh,
this is a law passed in 1972,
uh, which has been on the books,
has been followed here in New
Mexico, uh, to include
permitting, compliance, and
enforcement.
What Senate Bill 21 does, uh, is
give New Mexico.
The
Control of that process of the
permitting process. Currently,
we are one of 3 states, New
Mexico.
Massachusetts and New Hampshire
are the only 3 states.
That don't assert what's called
primacy, basically control of
the application of this federal
law.
So I just want to point out all
of our neighbors, Texas,
Colorado, Arizona, Utah, Idaho,
every state in the West except
New Mexico is doing what this
bill reports to do, taking this,
uh,
federal statute and implementing
it for uh federal Clean Water
Act.
Um, I would note that the
default in New Mexico is that we
have Texans.
In Dallas in the EPA Region 6
that are basically the ones that
are making the decision about
how our discharges are
implemented. This bill would
move that to the New Mexico
Environment Department.
Uh, so what does the clean Water
Act do. It protects surface
waters by requiring a permit for
discharges of pollution into
what are known as waters of the
United States.
And we'll talk a bit about
waters of the United States this
morning because it's been a
definition that's in flux. And I
think that ties into Senate Bill
22, uh, which again is an
attempt to continue.
The way that the federal water
um
The way the Clean Water Act was
interpreted up until 2023 when
there was a Supreme Court
decision that limited it. So let
me just say what the, the
Supreme Court's decision was
sack versus EPA. And let me just
lay out exactly how it defined
what the federal government has
authority over uh under the
Federal Clean Water Act, which
is different than how it been
interpreted up until 2023. It
basically said that the clean
Water Act deals with waters
encompassing only those
relatively.
permanent
Standing or continuous in
flowing continuously flowing
bodies of water forming
geographical features described
in ordinary parlance as streams,
oceans, rivers, and lakes.
So Senate Bill 21 is to give the
state environment.
Department the authority to
issue permits that deal with
streams, oceans, rivers, and
lakes reflowing water in New
Mexico.
Um, so EPA again, as I
mentioned, has been the lead
agency. This again proposes to
give New Mexico primacy. Why is
this important?
Uh
With precipitation becoming more
variable and extreme snow packs
runoff we're seeing the effects
of climate change, certainly a
hotter, drier, uh, climate with
higher temperatures, experts
predict that 25% of our water is
going to be gone in the next 50
years.
25% less water in New Mexico in
the next 50 years.
Therefore, it's absolutely
essential that we
Conserve and protect the
resources that we have. That's
what this bill does. So under
the specifics of the bill, um,
NMED has been working towards a
primacy application and
collaborating with EPA to
develop the language in this
bill. It complies with the Clean
Water Act requirements of
establishing a state.
Program in law.
Uh, and legislation is a step in
that process, uh, the bill
requires the New Mexico Water
Quality Control Commission to
set up rules to implement the
program and then once that's
done, once the bill passes, the
rules are set up, NMED applies
to EPA or authorization of the
state program.
Uh, again, I think that the
purpose of the bill is to give
New Mexico the lead in
protecting our own water
resources under federal law in
this bill, I know there's been
issues brought up by uh various
stakeholders about penalties,
and there are some pretty severe
penalties in this bill. Uh, we
can talk about those here and I,
and I appreciate that, Senator
Eel, because I think it's good
to talk about them here, but
it's also the thing that about
this bill is that um it is
going to 3 committees in the
Senate. It's going to the Senate
Judiciary Committee. There's a
lot of issues about penalties.
There's a private right of
action in this bill, similar to
the federal private right of
action. Uh, we can talk about
those here, but there's gonna be
a full discussion about those in
judiciary, and I could certainly
foresee some shaping of the
penalty piece of this, uh,
again, the purpose of this is to
try and line it up as much as
possible with the status quo as
to how EPA has been doing this.
Again, it's new and the state's
taking it on. Uh, there also are
gonna be questions about
funding. This bill does go to
Senate Finance, uh, there have
been bill, there have been
monies appropriated, uh, already
the last couple of sessions for
this transition process, uh, and
so again we'll have all those
discussions in Senate Finance.
There's also a fund in Senate
Bill 22 we can talk about when
we get to that one. So that's
the gist of the bill, and I, I
will.
Just have our experts here to
help answer technical questions
and that's the extent of what
Cent Bill 21 does. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. So you don't want
your experience to say anything
at this time.
I'm going to save them for
saving me. OK. Thank you very
much. Uh, in the audience, could
I see how many people are in
support of this bill.
Thank you. Could I see how many
people are opposed to this bill.
OK.
Online, uh, how many people are
supporting?
The
43 supporting online. How many
opposing?
I'm sorry, how many?
There's 2 online that oppose.
You know, when you hear yourself
talking, it sounds awful.
Um,
OK, so what I would like is, uh,
there are quite a few people on
both sides in the audience.
So let's start with um
Let's start with 10 people from
each side, if you can keep your
comments to a minute.
Uh, you would be cutting off
your colleagues if you.
Ramble. And ma'am, I, I do
believe that the proponents,
yeah, had a list if you want to
use that.
OK, on Senate Bill 21, the
people who will be coming up
first.
Our Vidal Gonzalez, Carlos
Matutis.
Probably slaughtering that and
Tanni's Fox and then virtually
Adrian and Gullo, and then we
can have different people
speaking, if we have more time.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Vidal
Gonzalez, and I work for the New
Mexicose Association as the
director of policy and planning,
a registered lobbyist, I'm here
to speak in support of Senate
Bill 21.
This bill would bring permitting
for waters that still have
federal protections under the
Clean Water Act, home to New
Mexico. We believe this creates
a more streamlined process and
together with Senate Bill 22,
for which I will have additional
comments later.
Creates a complete permanent
program for the state of New
Mexico.
Only two other states in the
country leave issuing these
permits up to EPA Environmental
Protection Agency.
Issuing permits here in New
Mexico where the people who
depend on these water to live,
work, and to survive on, makes
sense to me as a New Mexican
that comes from a traditional
Mexican community that relies on
agriculture to put food onto the
table.
Thank you, Senator Wirth,
Representative Ortez.
In the New Mexico Environment
Department for moving forward
with this effort. Archie to vote
yes on SB 21. Thank you for your
time, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Madam Chair, senators, members
of the committee, thank you so
much. My name is Carlos Mate. I
am the New Mexico Community
advocate for green Latinos. We
are a national organization
dedicated to environmental
justice for Latina communities
and other communities of color.
I here for the people of New
Mexico. I'm here for our
communities.
families
The fact that 95% of New Mexico
surface water is no longer
protected by the Clean Water Act
because of Sacket VEPA. We need
to take control and make sure
that we can protect our waters
for our families, for our
children, for our elders.
This is about the people of New
Mexico.
The substance of this is water.
But we cannot live without
water.
And we deserve
Clean water, we deserve.
Healthy environments and that
depends on being able to protect
our waters. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh chair Stephonics, uh,
committee members, my name is
Tanis Fox. I'm a lawyer with the
Western Environmental Law
Center.
Welk has been working with a
broad coalition of environmental
conservation and community
groups, uh, on the two surface
surface water bills you have
before you today. You should
each have a copy of our handout.
OK, stand in strong support of
SB 21 and its companion Bill SB
22.
Together, these bills will
establish the framework
necessary to protect New
Mexico's waters now vulnerable
waters, rivers, streams, and
wetlands for the future.
SP 21 gives the state the
necessary authority to take over
permitting from EPA.
Transferring authority to the
state was streamline permitting
and keep solutions local and
with the uncertainty at the
federal level, including staff
reductions at federal agencies
like EPA. It's all the more
critical than New Mexico take
over responsibility for keeping
our waters clean.
Reduce capacity at EPA could
very well result in delayed
permitting to the detriment of
New Mexico industry and our
watersheds.
SB 21 carries forward a
permitting program under the
Clean Water Act that has been in
place for decades. This is not a
new program.
NSB 21 carries forward
exemptions for agriculture,
mining, and oil and gas that
have included since the
inception of the Clean Water Act
in the early 70s.
These industries have flourished
in our state.
There's no reason to believe
they will not do so in the
future under the same regulatory
regime.
that has been in place and it's
protected both our surface
waters and about economic
development to move forward.
The legislature has already
begun the hard work of creating
a surface water permitting
program in 2019, it authorized
the state to adopt rules for
such a program in 2022, 23, and
24, you appropriated funds to
the environment department to
begin such a program,
culminating in an appropriation
last year of over $7 million.
The time is now to lay the
foundation and statute for the
state to take over permitting
from the federal government to
protect New Mexico's most
valuable resource. Thank you
very much.
Thank you and um
Another person on the senator's
list is Adrian and Guo.
He's online.
When it's.
Good morning, uh, chair, members
of the committee. I appreciate
the opportunity to speak in
strong support of Senate Bill 21
and 22. My name is Adrian Agulo
from the Tierra Conservation
Project.
are making is to ensure the
community not only have access
to outdoors, but that our
history values and stories are
authentically reflected in
public land and water decisions.
I'm an irrigator and like many
of my neighbors here in the
South Valley and across the
state, we depend on our tech and
clean water to grow feed and
food. This bill would allow New
Mexico to join 47 other states
in administering the surface
water permitting program.
Was to be to continue to be
federally protected like Senator
Worth explained, New Mexicans
have to rely on EPA staff
located in Dallas to protect our
waters and answering and answer
permitting questions. Now, as a
New Mexican, there's a special
type of heartburn that comes
with retaling on Texans for
anything. So 21 enables us to
account for needs that are
unique to New Mexico.
In combination with Senate Bill
22, this bill would enable the
state to establish a
comprehensive state surface
water permitting program by
passing both pieces of
legislation concurrently today.
New Mexico can lead the way in
addressing the challenges posed
by federal rollbacks while
prioritizing the health of its
communities and our ecosystems
which are us, thank you so much.
Thank you very much. JD
Bullington.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, and I am here at the
personal request of Governor
Harry Antonio Junior, who was
the governor of the Laguna
Pueblo.
Bill and Senate Bill 22 are the
highest priorities. This session
for the Pueblo of Laguna, and
that's because we've lost
federal protections.
Over water, surface water that
flows all throughout our native
lands here in the state of New
Mexico.
It is estimated that we have the
most endangered.
Rivers, streams, creeks.
In the nation now because of the
reduced federal protection. So
I'm here just to convey to you
that this is the highest
priority for the Pueblo of
Lacuna this session.
And we strongly urge you to pass
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. We have 3 minutes
left, so we'll take 1 or 2
people in the audience and one
on um.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, doctor. Um, my name
is Elizabeth Anderson. I'm the
state engineer designate.
And um wanting to just speak and
state support from the Office of
the State Engineer and the
Interstate stream commission for
this bill. These are very
important bills.
Thank you.
Next.
My name is Bobby Bold. I'm with
a small, very small organization
called Rivers Run Through us. We
walked the length of the Santa
Fe River in 20.
From the upper watershed to the
Rio Grande, putting our feet on
and in the river. Um, and we
camped along the way 5
consecutive days and we have a
really great um love and care
for our rivers, and as you may
know, um, American rivers
declared every single river in
New Mexico endangered because of
the act of the Supreme Court,
and it is essential that we
support SB 2.
1 and SB 22, these two bills
bring us the power and the
strength to protect our waters
and our children and our
children's children and so on
and all of the beings that we
love in New Mexico and I have a
handout here, but I don't know
how to give it to you,
but could you repeat your name
again for the record. So, um,
No, could you repeat your name
again for the record.
I'm sorry, I didn't. Your name
again, my name, Bobby, B O B B E
and the last name is Bisso, B E
S O L D. Thank you.
And um
The Hopi wrote a declaration of
water, um, some years ago and
part of it reads like this, we
are of water, and water is of us
when water is threatened, all
beings are threatened.
What we do to water, we do to
ourselves.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. And online, uh, this
will be our last person, Russell
Lion.
Early gone.
I just throw accents and
different names.
Good morning. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak, um, my,
uh, fellow New Mexicans have
made uh excellent points. Um,
I'm a resident in Cedar Crest,
New Mexico, uh born in New
Mexico.
New Mexico because I wanted to
raise my family here and, um, as
has been said more eloquently,
uh, water is life and these
bills put the control of that
water back in the hands of New
Mexicans who care about the
quality of life here and thank
you for the opportunity, uh,
just for me to speak in support
of these bills.
Thank you very much. We'll go to
the opponents now for the 10
minutes. If you would line up,
uh, behind the senator and uh
we'll see how many we can get
done in the 10 minutes.
And how many are online that
would like to speak?
There's 2 online that would like
to speak against as well, so
we'll fit them in.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Tom Patterson. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico cattle Growers
Association. I'm a cattle
rancher from Catrin County.
Cattle growers opposes this bill
in its current form.
As written, it would seem to
authorize the water quality and
control commission to require
New Mexico farmers and ranchers
who are engaged in normal
farming and ranching activities
to apply for a pollution
discharge permit or face the
prospect of wrenching civil
penalties in Section 6B or
criminal prosecution if they
don't in section 7B.
That activity and related
activities are actually exempt
from permit requirements under
the Clean Water Act.
We have asked the bill's
sponsors to amend Senate Bill
21, Section 11D to include the
ag exemptions in the Clean Water
Act. We understand that they are
amenable to doing so.
But I've not seen a substitute.
We have also urged the sponsors
with less success.
Strike section 10, the private
right of action.
If you approve this bill with
that provision, experience with
the Forest Service here in
Region 3, the Southwest region,
shows that the NED and private
landowners who cannot afford it
across the state of New Mexico
will be embroiled in expensive
litigation with radical elements
of the environmental community
that thrive on lawsuits. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, I am Liz
Newland Taylor. I have practiced
water.
I'm Liz
Newland
Taylor
Sure, uh, I've practiced water
law in New Mexico since 1992,
but today I'm here in my other
job. I'm also on the board of
directors of the Albuquerque
Flood Control Authority or
AMAFCA, and I'm here
representing AMAFCA today.
AMAFCA opposes Senate Bill 21
and 22.
AAA poses 21 primarily because
Permittees will pay the cost of
the program. Now AAFCA pays no
fee for its NPDES permit.
Further, we have no idea how
much the fee will be or what it
will be based on. This worries
us.
AAA already is facing a revenue
shortfall because of the new
exemptions from property tax for
disabled veterans.
We estimate that about 17,000
disabled veterans reside in the
Amaca service area.
The revenue shortfall will come
when they claim up to 100%
exemption from taxes on their
properties even though if they
have more than one property. We
do not know how much the revenue
will go down, but we know it
will go down, thus adding this
new cost will burden the
remaining taxpayers any more.
This could be fixed with a
dedicated funding stream from
the general budget, but right
now that is not in the SP 21.
Also, Amafka has firsthand
experience in dealing with the
shortage of qualified
professionals in New Mexico.
Amaca's vacancies for
professional engineers and flood
control managers are hard to
fill. We understand that
sometimes they um agencies have
been known to poach
professionals from other
agencies, and that creates
another set of problems. The
lack of professionals in the
state is another problem, uh,
for both, uh, 21 and 22 we are
concerned deeply that enemy
will.
not be able to find enough water
quality professionals to staff
up its new bureaus to process
and approve these permits in a
reasonable amount of time. There
are other technical reasons that
MAFCA opposes this bill in SB
22, but the primary concerns are
the permitting and lack of
professionals. Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, so
we're gonna go to 2 people
online and then we'll come back
to you. I have Jim Winchester
and Ashley Wagner.
Madam Chair, thank you so much.
My name is Jim Winchester. I'm
with the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. We do
stand in opposition of SB 21 and
22, um, the complexities of the
new authorities that are sought
by the state in this bill, uh,
do have major unintended or
frankly, intended consequences
to over-regulate discharge and
to create an entire line of
permits and fees on the backs of
industry.
Now this bill is pitched as a
state primacy of an EPA rule,
but this bill makes it much more
prescriptive than the EPA rule
and the language is inconsistent
calls for new permits that have
not been required up to this
point, and it does not carry
over exemptions to particular
industries. The Environment
department overall has been
aggressively pushing to fund
bureaus and new positions by
imposing these high fees on
industry.
Which this bill will allow. Now
that's the equivalent of setting
speed traps to raise fees, to
levy fines, to essentially raise
funds for their programmatic
activities, and it's a dangerous
precedent. It circumvents
legislative authority. And it's
really concerning because it
falls on the backs of the oil
and gas industry, which already
funds 49% of the state budget.
So for that reason and many
more, we do stand opposed. Thank
you very much, Ashley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies. Nimmoca appreciates
the sponsors working to ensure
that New Mexico's water supply
is protected for generations to
come. However, we oppose Senate
Bill 21 because we have been
emphasizing the importance of
reusing and recycling water in
order to preserve freshwater
sources. We are concerned about
the definition of polluting.
in the definition section 2L2
EPA has not modified the federal
definition of pollutant to
include drilling fluids, produce
waters, and other non-domestic
waste associated with the
exploration, development, or
production of crude oil, natural
gas, carbon dioxide gas, or
geothermal energy, and we don't
understand why NMED needs to do
so here. This definition in the
bill will inhibit the state's
ability to utilize cutting edge
technology that will
drive our economy forward. The
definition also contradicts the
language in section 2L3 where it
says, but does not include
material which is injected into
a well to facilitate production
of oil or gas or water derived
in association with oil or gas
production and disposed of in a
well. This will create a
question of jurisdictional
responsibilities between NMED
and the Oil conservation
division. This provision will
cause unnecessary burdens upon
any reuse application.
recycling of produced water.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and we'll go
back to the room here, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley. I'm the
director of public policy for
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. And while we
understand the importance of
safeguarding New Mexico's water
resources. We believe this bill
will impose significant
challenges. First being that all
New Mexicans will now bear the
financial burden of this
legislation. Small
municipalities, public safety
agencies, and other taxpayer
funded service agencies that
currently pay nothing for
federal permits will now bear
the financial burden for all
state-issued permits.
Also, the funding implementation
and plan for this program
remains unclear. NMED has not
provided a sustainable funding
structure for staffing,
enforcement, and rulemaking. The
bill also introduces a private
right of action, which allows
third parties to sue permit
holders. This provision creates
significant risk from excessive
lawsuits against permit holders,
forcing them to divert their
time, energy away from their
operation to defend against
costly litigation.
This bill also raises questions
about serious overreach. The
provisions that allow NMED to
enter private residences to
investigate potential water
discharges goes far beyond the
federal standards, and such
measures only add to confusion
for business and public service
without delivering meaningful
environmental benefits. We
respectfully urge this committee
to vote no on this bill and seek
solutions that balance
environmental stewardship with
economic viability. Thank you.
Thank you, and there's 2 minutes
left. Go ahead, former
representative. Thank you,
madam.
The committee, Kelly Fajardo on
behalf of the New Mexico Farm
Bureau. Um, I'm not gonna repeat
what's been said. I just want to
add that um New Mexico fire has
concerns about this bill.
They're concerned about the
financial impact as well as the
Mexico environment's ability to
um create a fund to sustain the
program. Thank you.
I'm Madam Chair and members of
the committee, Jason Espinoza,
representing the San Juan Water
Commission. We do have serious
concerns about the bill, uh, as
stated before, financial
implications for small
businesses, many small
municipalities currently covered
by the federal and the NPDES
permits do not pay those fees
under the legislation, they will
face new costs. This could
financially strain communities
already operating on limited
budgets. Additionally, because
of the concerns around the
funding mechanism for the
environment department, you
know, if SB 21 relies on.
fees for to fund its
administration, it could create
an unstable funding structure.
What happens if these, of the
fee revenues fall short, could
this jeopardize program
continuity as we've recently
seen with our air quality
permitting program. Thank you.
Morning Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is TJ
Trurilo. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Freeport MacBran,
uh, one of the leading copper
company, uh, copper producers in
the world.
Um, I'm not gonna repeat
everything that's been said, so
I'm just going to give the three
big issues that we have concerns
about, uh, as I mentioned
before, we're very concerned
about the private right of
action provision.
Uh, second, we're concerned
about the uh the fact that in
the criminal penalty section,
uh, that essentially there's a
felony for a standard of
negligence.
And finally, as mentioned, we
have issues with fees and the
ability for NMED to hire staff
and maintain the program. Thank
you, man.
OK, I've started the list, so
it'd be good to know how many
people would like to speak. I
have Senator Cia Lopez.
Um, Senator Townsend.
Senator Scott.
uh Charlie, let me get these.
I'm just gonna go back and
forth. See Charlie.
And we have Scott, uh, anybody
else and, and Cervantes and
Cervantes and Senator Isel.
Right
OK, Senator Saa Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for bringing
this bill. Um, I have firmly
believe that water, both quality
and quantity is going to be the
the most important issue facing
us over the next few decades,
and um especially the quality
issue in a desert state, so I'm,
I'm really happy you brought it.
I also want to commend you for
um
for listening to our
Constitution.
Um
Article 20 section 21 of the New
Mexico Constitution says the
protection of the states, and
this is the existing law, the
protection of the state's
beautiful and healthful
environment.
I hereby declared to be a
fundamental importance to the
public health, safety, and
general welfare.
The legislature shall provide,
shall provide.
For control of pollution and
control and despoilment.
Of despoilment of the air,
water, and natural resources of
this state, consistent with the
use and development of these
resources with a maximum benefit
of all the people, and of course
it is in the maximum benefit of
all the people that have clean
water in our state.
Now, is this, I have a que a
couple of questions. Is the
Federal law
In in the area of water quality
like the federal law in the air
of air quality in that no state
regulations can be less
stringent than federal law.
Ma I'm sure you is my expert.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that
is correct.
Or SB 21 for taking over the
federal NPDES program, we can be
no less stringent than the
federal program.
So Shelly, reintroduce yourself.
Good morning. My name is Shelly
Lemon. I am the surface water
quality bureau chief for the New
Mexico Environment Department.
And I heard you say that the
that the um enforcement.
Monies are available, they've
been allocated. I, I'm just
worried about making sure that
there is enforcement behind this
because we've had problems with
enforcement and inadequate
enforcement throughout the
state.
Are we sure that we have it?
Madam Chair, Senator, um, part
of the program that would be
authorized by this bill would be
an enforcement piece and those
any penalties collected under
that enforcement would come to
the state, not to the federal
government.
Oh, OK. Thank, thank you. I, I
shook my head because it doesn't
come to the department, and I
think that's very important that
the fees don't go to the
department, so there's not an
incentive to build the
department by collecting fees.
The fees actually go, um, I
think it's to education is what
it says, um.
So I'll just ask, where did
these go? Any fees incurred. Uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, I believe
currently it says uh that the.
Please go to the school fund.
Yeah, something like that. I, I,
uh,
I didn't underline it, so I'm
not finding it, finding it um
right away, but it goes, yes, it
goes to the, it does not go to
the department, and I think
that's important because it is
not good policy to have these.
And penalties go to the
department because then that
creates a perverse incentive,
um, and the fee structure, how
would the fee structure work?
Uh, Madam Chair Senator.
Um
One clarification going back to
the previous question, fees
would come to the department.
Exactly. Penalties would go to
the school fund. Um, the fee
structure will be detailed in a
rulemaking, uh, through the
water quality control
commission. So that process will
be a public rulemaking hearing
to establish that fee structure
and that public rulemaking will
involve all of the stakeholders
and all of the consultations
that are normal.
rulemaking process requires.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's
correct.
So, um, I was looking at this
private right of action and on
page.
16
Um, it says state district court
shall have jurisdiction to
enforce compliance with the
pollution discharge, um,
elimination, blah blah blah, and
it goes through, isn't that
already the law?
Madam Cherry, I think that was,
yes, the federal law has a
private right of action, and I
believe Senator Cervantes
actually passed what's called
the quitam statute, which
creates a private right of
action.
For anything in state government
and we've seen that.
Invoked uh but currently the
federal statute does have a
private right of action and so I
just wonder.
This is not judiciary, so I'm
not gonna ask. I'm thinking
judiciary might say, why do you
want to say it? Um, so I'll just
leave it, leave it to judiciary,
um.
What?
Um, yeah, well, I would if I
were invited.
Um
I won't even do that with my
arms, yeah, no, I won't even do
that with my arms. Um, it just
gives me the chills, um, and
then this thing about um
notwithstanding 7 I I well I
guess I just will leave, leave
it. I'm sure that my colleague,
um, Senator Cervantes will do a
much better job of going through
it, but there's some private
right of action issues that are
probably gonna need to, need to
be fixed. This, um,
Like on E notwithstanding, I
think there needs to be stuff
about what is an immediate, an
immediate threat, and there's
some details with the private
action that I think could make
this clearer, uh, but I think
the private action is really
important. It's already existing
law and especially during those
times where we don't have
adequate enforcement, and
especially in those rural areas
where we're not monitoring,
monitoring this, we need to have
the people, the people of state
of New Mexico have the right to
protect their waters as well.
So I really um
And, and, um,
And uh
Leaderworth, I also really
admire how you, uh,
draft legislation and how how
you get so many stakeholders
involved and how you bring
everybody together, and even
though you don't come.
with unanimous support of
something they're aware of it,
they've they've been fully uh
understand it and I, I think
it's really amazing. I think
there's been a lot of public
input and I'm very impressed
with this legislation and it's
going to be my pleasure to
support it.
Thank you Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, can I just say one thing
about the fee issue. That's a
discussion we'll have in Senate
Finance and I hear
You know, currently under the
federal system, there's not a
The, um, and so again, we're in
a position as a state to be able
to have these discussions and,
you know, figure out exactly
what the revenues are needed to
implement this and I think we'll
have that discussion in finance
and I appreciate you bringing
up. And again, Senator Cervantes
got here a little bit late, but
yeah, this, this bill does is
going to the 3 committees and
there's a reason for that we
need to have thorough
discussions of all these issues
in each committee.
Well, in my own uh view, Madam
Chair, is that it shouldn't be
free to discharge a pollutant
into our waters. It should not
be cost-free.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So that was about 8.5
minutes. The next is Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Good morning.
Thank you guys for bringing this
forward. Good morning. I think.
Um, but with that said, let's,
let's delve into the private
right of action.
Um
portion. I have
And, and I wanna kind of since
we're doing this in abbreviated
form.
I have heard that there are
agreed to exemptions that you
have agreed to. Can you tell me
what they are so I don't go down
a rabbit hole that there's
already been
So
No, I appreciate that, uh, Madam
Chair, and senator. So on Senate
Bill 22, there's going to be
amendments that line up the
farming exemption so they track
exactly what's in the federal.
Law. We've worked on that. They
also will be uh an amendments to
insert the word, and again it's
a separate bill, but
Uh
The word treated, um,
Basically, we're making sure
that it's domestic.
Treated water.
Uh, and we'll talk about that
when we get and that was, that
was flagged by a bunch on one
side and the ag thing was on the
other. I think we've lined these
up on the, on the ag exemption
to track exactly what it is, so
it would be, and I think Mr.
Patterson had that.
Concern and that's, that's
coming, that'll be on the next
bill.
OK. Thank you for that.
Um
And that that is the only one.
Is that correct? So, Mr. Chair,
if you go to this bill on page
19 are the limitations.
And it goes through all the
different
Again, exemptions and the idea,
the idea really was to try and
get this as close as possible to
the federal system that we're
just having the state now
implement.
So there was uh Madam sure there
was some
There was a question about this.
This bill could not be less
restrictive.
And federal
But it is true, it can be more
restrictive than federal. Is
that right? Madam Chair,
Senator, that is right. And it's
the federal law that sets that
threshold.
And um
Madam Chair
And Senator, I, I believe.
I don't remember what year it
was, but we
Has the bill, I think it started
over in the house about re
access.
And I think this is going to
have an implication on that. And
can you address that? I mean,
what, what are the implications
to private property owners that
this bill will impact.
So, uh, Madam Chair, I wore my
tie with lots of trout on it
today because one of the things
that I think is super important
is that our rivers are clean and
that folks that are fishing and.
Bringing fish out of the water
or eating them in a way that's
safe.
Uh, and so,
Again, I don't think it's going
to change. That's the thing.
This particular bill really is
about the jurisdiction, the,
the second bill we can talk
about that because again, there
was a Supreme Court decision
that as was mentioned, did.
Deregulate quote unquote, about
95% of the
of the waters in New Mexico
based on the interpretation of
what was free flowing and I went
through that definition upfront.
So, again, if you've got a river
that's covered under the
current's interpretation of the
Federal Clean Water Act.
This is
Ensure that the protections that
are there now that are enforced
by the Texans down in Dallas are
now being enforced here in New
Mexico by the regulators here in
New Mexico.
But Madam Chair and senator
doesn't go on a little farther
than that, as far as, it doesn't
have to be a flowing river.
So Mountie, that's the next
bill, and that's, that's the
sacket bill and yes, you're
right, we are seeking to
go back to the way the federal
statute was interpreted from
1972 until 2023, where all of
those were covered.
And then we have been in a gap
now, so you're correct. If we
passed the 2nd bill, we're
filling in a gap that right now
those, those, those waters,
wetlands, ephemeral streams are
not covered, and this second
bill will go back to the way it
was for the 50 years that it was
interpreted that way. I
appreciate that and uh.
And I apologize for mixing them
up, but
They're so intertwined, it was
hard for me to, to
Forge questions that were not
applicable to both, but
With that said, uh, there was
some talk of senator about the
uh
effort to include the public in
the drafting of this bill, and I
have had a number of people.
That have been um
Concerned that maybe they're
Their comments were
categorically excluded. Are you
aware of any
Uh, people that have offered
Yeah.
None of them were.
Included in
And how do we say we had the
public involved when we
categorically excluded some.
So Hampshire. I wasn't part of
the discussion, so I'm gonna
yield to the experts on, on
that.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, we
did organize a surface water
advisory panel, which was
composed of, um, I believe there
were 56 total 27 primary members
that um Senator Wirth already
listed the different
representation. We met 6 times,
all day sessions, um, in the
fall of 2024 to discuss this. It
was to gather information.
We did amend our proposals based
on that input received from the
advisory panel, um, they
reviewed both both pieces of
legislation SB 21, which was um
not called SB 21 at the time,
and SB 22. So we did incorporate
changes based on that input
going line by line, um, I would
have to go back to, um, look to
see exactly what was.
change, but we did make
alterations based on that input.
Ma'am and
Ma'am, thank you very much for
that.
Oh, on
On fees. Currently there are no
fees if a
Company or an individual is
required to go get uh in PTS
permit from the federal
government.
This bill
will impose a fee that doesn't
seem right. I mean, here we are,
um,
In a time of plenty, why are we
imposing fees on our
businesses and individuals
trying to be compliant, Madam
Chair.
Uh, so I'm on a chair and
Senator Townsend, and I think as
I mentioned the Senator Sadil
Lopez, again, there is a
philosophical difference and she
articulated the other side that
Again believes there should be a
fee for a discharge.
But I think one of the, this is
a, this is a legitimate question
that I, and I heard it loud and
clear, and we're going to the
Senate Finance Committee. And I
think what's going to be
important is to figure out kind
of what that dollar number looks
like, and certainly if the
Senate Finance Committee wanted
to put in
You know, a recurring
appropriation to allow the
department to be able to do
this, you know, that, that would
be an option that I think the
Senate Finance Committee could
consider and, and
Again, I think we'll have that
discussion and I, and I, and I,
you know, I hear from the
audience and, and understand
that's a, that's a challenge for
some.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. Is it, um,
Is this
Right
That we're trying to
abstract from the federal
government.
Do we have to work with the
federal government in order to
obtain this right? Do they have
to say, OK, New Mexico, you got
a good plan, you can do it. Or
do they?
And have there been
conversations that
Um
Lead you to believe that's gonna
happen. We've had an
administration change, and I
think the the weather may be a
little different than it might
have been, even in Texas.
Fair enough, Mr. Chair and
Senator, yes, there definitely
is a process to do this. There
have been lots of
communications, as I said
upfront, state has to pass the
Enabling statute and then it's
got to be approved by EPA, uh,
again, I would just note that.
Every other Western state.
Does this themselves. And so
again, I think we are the
Exception here in terms of the
default, uh, in terms of
controlling who's going to
administer.
With that said, one more
question. When, when we talk
where the exception, how many of
those other states are charging
permit fees.
In the
In the realm of what you owe,
if, if you do the math on, on,
on this bill and look at the
cost. I mean, you're looking at
some pretty hefty fees, I mean.
My calculator was running in.
15 $20,000 kind of range, maybe
more.
So
How do we control that and how,
how, how do we get there?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, as far
as other state programs, it's a
mix of funding on what other
states do. Some states are 100%
fee-based. Some states have a
mixture of fees and legislative
appropriations. And I think a
couple have 100% state funded,
um, so it's, it, it's a variety
of different um mechanisms
depending on the state and what
the state.
wants to do with the program,
um, so it's, that is a
consideration as we've been
talking about is, you know, how
much are the fees going to be,
um.
If it's 100% fee-based or if
there's a certain percentage
that's going to be paid by fees
and legislative appropriations
or if the legislature will
provide 100% of the funding. So,
um, we do have some information
that we talked about this in the
advisory panel process, and we
have some information online on
our surface water quality bureau
web page that has a presentation
on fee estimations.
It's 100% fee based and looking
at um different percentiles if
you're a small minor discharge
versus the largest discharger,
um, like Los Alamos National Lab
or the city of Albuquerque and
what those fees would be if it
was 100% fee based.
Appreciate that and um I'll
I'll not continue. I've got a
whole list, um.
Madam Chair, and uh
Even in the abbreviated form, I
have.
I have um
Questions and reservations that
my questions will be answered
going forward. So in other
committees, so I, uh, I
I'll yield, but knowing.
Please know that there's many
more concerns and thoughts that
people have addressed to me.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
and we could always try to, uh,
we have an ex-senator Charlie
and then Senator Scott.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, I am, I want to dig a
little bit deeper into the fees.
Specifically in regard to tribal
primacy.
Um, it is my understanding, and
please correct me if I'm wrong,
that tribes receive primacy on a
federal level.
And so if we're enacting this.
Um
Will there be an exemption for
fees for tribes who have already
achieved primacy.
So ma'am Chair and Senator
Charlie, and I appreciate you
bringing that up because tribes
are allowed under the Federal
Clean Water Act to assert
primacy.
And I'll give you a specific
example here in Santa Fe which
really brought this whole thing
home to me.
Um, so we had a hotel here,
Bishop's Lodge, that we wanted
to discharge, it's treated
wastewater into the Tasuki
Creek.
And EPA was the one at the table
with the lead on that. Uh.
Very contentious and basically
EPA
Advised and I think that the,
the discharger didn't realize
that downstream was Tasuki
Pueblo.
Who had asserted primacy.
And as a result of that, and the
fact that the tribe was not
Consulted or part of the
process, that discharge went
away completely. So, again, this
is not designed to infringe.
On a tribe's right to assert
primacy and certainly if a state
has and I'm gonna, if, if I'm
saying something wrong here, but
I think it's clear if a state
has asserted primacy, then the
decision about how they deal
with
The cost of implementation is
going to be at the trial.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you. Um, I feel like you've just
teed me up for, um, talking
about the comments made earlier
on behalf of the pueblo of
Laguna, of which I'm a citizen,
um, indigenous communities are
the original stewart's
caretakers and protectors our
land, our water, our air, the
animals.
And so, um, I, most of my
questions will be about the next
bill coming up in relation to
tribal issues, but as we're
looking and experiencing all of
these uh the chaos that's
happening at the federal level
with.
various exemptions.
back around.
Federal protections. I think
it's incumbent upon us at the
state level to create
protection.
Um
Against what's happening.
For the spill.
Adam.
Thank you very much, uh, Senator
Scott, and then Senator
Cervantes and then. Thank you.
Madam Chair and senator.
I is it my understanding.
That these two companion bills.
Move the responsibility.
For protection from the federal
level to the state level, and
then the second bill expands.
The
Oh
Various water sources that will
be
Under that new jurisdiction is a
my am I on the right track
there? So ma'am Sharon Senator
Scott, yes, I think you are on
the right track. Uh, the first
bill basically as New Mexico
being able to exert primacy of
those waters that currently are
covered under the Federal Clean
Water Act as interpreted after
the sacket decision in 2023.
So up until 2023.
There was a much broader
interpretation of the
application of the Clean Water
Act. And so Senate Bill 21 and
22.
I would contend, take us to that
point in 2023, the way that the
waters of the United States were
interpreted from 1972 until
2023.
But you're correct. In 2023.
The waters that now are able to
be covered under 22 were
basically under the Sackett
decision, which narrowed
substantially.
Uh, the scope of the Federal
Clean Water Act are no longer
covered. So currently status quo
is that those are not.
There's no regulatory oversight
of those ephemeral.
Non-free flowing waters. So,
Madam Chair and senator under
the current system.
Is it being represented that the
federal program is not.
Doing its job with respect.
But the waters that are covered
under this bill.
So, ma'am, sure, I don't, I
don't wanna sit here and
represent that they're not quote
unquote.
A job certainly they will do the
job in a situation where the
states say they don't want to do
it themselves.
Every state in the West.
Texas, every state, but New
Hampshire, Massachusetts, and
New Mexico has said,
We want to be the ones who are
implementing this act.
Obviously, there's a
Got to be done, as was
mentioned, it can't be less
stringent than the federal
standard, but
Again, I think this is a, it's a
policy to question and also in
order also this is important
too, back to your first
question. In order to regulate
The ephemeral water, the
non-free flowing water, the
state obviously has got to
create a program.
So they kind of go hand in hand.
I mean, step number one, you got
to create the program, assert
primacy for those that are
currently covered, once that's
created, then you can expand
that if that's the decision of
this body.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Senator, I
think my question might have
been misinterpreted, I guess.
What I was trying to get to
there was.
Is the Federal program.
Not adequate to protect the
waters that are currently
Up
Being protected after the
Sackett decision, that is, are
we seeing pollution somewhere
that the feds are not.
Uh, appropriately addressing.
So Madam Chair, I'm gonna yield
to the experts who deal
With the EPA, um, on that
specific issues on on those
waters that are covered and the
current relationship that exists
there, I think that's a direct
experience.
Madam Chair and Senator
currently, uh, they.
The EPA is administering the
program, the state does have a
role, um, but we don't have
control over the permits. We
don't have control over
enforcement, where I see gaps is
on the enforcement piece when
the, the discharger is not
complying with the permit, the
state does not have authority to
enforce on that because they
have a federal discharge permit
through EPA. EPA is responsible
for enforcing on those.
Uh, dischargers who are
noncompliant, we have no say in
that. And there are dischargers
that we want EPA to enforce on
where they are not enforcing.
um.
Regarding the program, like I
said, we do coordinate with EPA.
We certify the permits to make
sure they're complying with our
state water quality standards,
but EPA has the authority to
issue the permit and to enforce
the permit. The state does not
have that authority.
And
Madam Chair, Miss Lemon, can you
tell me how many instances of
those conflicts are currently in
effect.
Madam Chair and uh senator, I
would need to get back with you
on the actual number, um,
Of noncompliance and violations,
but we can get that number for
you.
And under the current system,
Madam Chair and Miss Lemon.
How are those conflicts
ultimately resolved.
Madam Chair and senator, it's
through the EPA, um, enforcement
process, so they issue a, uh,
compliance order and work with
the permittee to
Come back into compliance. OK.
And Madam Chair.
A senator, all of this.
is currently at no charge to the
folks that are discharging
these.
Of waters into, into our rivers
and streams.
So, ma'am Chair, on the front
end, we've had the discussion
about the fees under the federal
system.
On the there's no fee at the
federal on the front end. If,
however, there's a violation,
there's certainly are federal
penalties and, and there's a
whole process there that does
exist under the federal system
and we're going to do something
similar in terms of the
penalties here and we'll have
that discussion. I appreciate
it, Ms. Lehman.
Helping us understand how other
states have done it.
Bifurcated fee state piece, all
state, all fee, and we're
certainly going to look at that
as we move, if we move along and
have that discussion in finance.
Madam Chair and Senator, let,
let me.
Move on to economics did.
And I see that this.
is going to require a one-time
appropriation.
Of some $50 million to stand up.
So ma'am, sure, that's the next
bill.
That's the next bill, OK.
And as I understand it, if
If this
Legislation comes to pass, there
will be.
Oh
Expenses associated.
With the environment department.
That
Or today.
Undetermined is that accurate?
So Madam Chair, I think you can
take a look at the FIR, but
there's no question there will
be a need to staff up.
Uh, and as was mentioned, I
think, by one of the public
commentators, we've actually
provided last session, I think
it was 67 $7 million out of a
step number one, but I think
absolutely that's going to be
another
In addition to the fee slash
State funded question when you
put a new program like this in
place. There's no question that
it's gonna have resources and we
need to make sure we give them
the resources to be able to
stand this up and to make it
work.
And
Madam Chair, Miss Limon, can you
tell me how many of these
permits are currently active in
the state?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
currently we have around 110
individual permits that are
issued as a federal NPDES
permits. Uh, we also have
between 3000 and 4000 general
permits that are issued as NPDES
general permits for stormwater
discharges, um, for pesticide
applications and things um that
are.
Not as uh impactful. So there
are um
Around 110 individual and, you
know, up to 30 or 4000 general
permits that are issued under
this program.
Uh, Madam Chair, I think I may
have used up quite a bit of my
time. I still have
Right on
top.
We can put you back on.
Please
do so.
Thank you, Senator for your.
answers and thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am.
Was that directed at me for some
particular reason? Oh, OK.
I always feel persecuted here
but uh
Uh, Senator Worth, I wanna thank
you and and note for everyone
that you've given this 3
referrals around here thinking
sometimes is 3 referrals, this
is for my newer members,
particularly from the minority
thinking is three liberals is a
kiss of death sometimes. It's
not, and particularly where you
have a sponsor like Senator
Worth who uh gives his own bill
3 referrals, and I think that's
noteworthy. This bill does
belong in judiciary.
Um, I, I was listening online
before I came over and I'm sorry
with the two individuals with
you, are they attorneys?
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm an
attorney, uh Ms. Lemon is not.
She's our technical, uh, she's
the head of our surface water
program.
Sorry, uh, for the record, my
name is Zachary guys. I'm the
general counsel for NMED.
OK, and I, I, I ask only because
again this is going to
judiciary. There'll be a lot of
work. I've, I've resisted always
trying to turn this into a
judiciary committee. I know you
all don't really want to see
that. The, the point that I'll
make only is that again, I
appreciate everyone always
coming. The public comment is
always we support clean water,
we simply supportmo. I think all
of us support clean water. It's
hard for me to imagine that. So
the, the, the notion that that
that's what I'm gathering, but,
but we'll dig into the words and
we'll actually read the bill and
and go through that. I have a
pretty strong feeling this bill
will not look in.
anything like this, um, by the
time it comes out of the
judiciary Committee, I see
Senator Wor nodding his head.
There are so many things in here
that are inconsistent with the
way we practice law.
Uh appellate process, venue,
jurisdiction.
right of intervention, uh,
having a right and there's, and
there's a lot of inconsistency
very candidly in here too, uh,
so there's been a lot of
attention to the private right
of action and judicial review,
but the, the private right of
actions on page 16. It's kind of
just interesting because
If you all wanna follow along,
you'll look at that and, and who
has the private right of action
would be one of the most
important things, right? Who has
that right?
Um, and then it goes on to say
that except is provided in
Section C, a person may commence
the civil action.
Against any other person that is
regulated. So any person who has
a permit can be sued under this,
right, by any, any person,
right? So, um, that's, that's a
lot of lawsuits, uh, especially
because you're gonna get
attorneys' fees and then
weirdly, very weirdly, if you
look at subparagraph G, which is
on page 18, it said the court
may award attorneys' fees. I'm
looking at Maryland, lots of us
have practiced law says the the
attorneys' fees um and costs and
fees go to a prevailing
plaintiff or a substantially.
Barely plain to see that in
some, that's just crazy, you
know, there's no such thing as a
prevailing plaintiff and then a
substantially prevailing
plaintiff, and you wouldn't have
attorney's fees to prevailing
planes and also attorney fees to
us substantially prevailing
plaintiff, um, and it says that
it says or or to a substantially
prevailing defendant.
The claim was frivolous or
unreasonable or groundless.
We're doing a whole, uh, kind of
weird American rule, English
rule thing that we, we tend to
avoid.
Um, and that, that's for
everyone else here in the United
States usually we don't, we
don't do that. Sometimes we do,
and this may be the right case
where we do want to shift shift
those attorneys' fees.
But, but again, I, I, I think
that that sometimes has a
chilling effect. In other words,
do we really want to have
somebody, any person, sue, and
then realize that if they don't
win they're gonna pay my fees,
right, for defending.
Can I just say, Madam Chair, I,
I appreciate what, what you're
saying, Senator Cervantes, we
will certainly look at this.
It's modeled after the existing
federal law. And so we may also
be rewriting some federal law
here in New Mexico and there's
nothing wrong with that. That's
what you get to do when you do
this, but what we tried to do is
start it. You're not certainly
defending the federal government
today, are you, Senator Worth?
I'm defending the federal
government in 1972 that created
the statute I'll have to go back
and see who's in charge in '72,
but uh yeah, I, I, I do
appreciate where you're going.
And I, I know a lot of this
probably does come out of
federal law, um, doesn't mean
it's good, um, and there's a lot
of things the federal government
is doing today that I don't
think it's very good. So, um.
I, I appreciate the admonition,
but um.
Again, even if, uh, if you look
at subparagraph D on page 17.
A person who has standing has
provided notice, um, may
intervene as a matter of right.
So this essentially allows, when
you look at the language, just
about everybody can intervene
and, and really just about any
action because this is any
person who has standing under a
subsection A and as we said,
subsection A says any person.
Who, um
against any person's regulated,
right? So it can be brought by
anybody.
Agains a person who's regulated,
that's pretty much everybody,
like, everybody can sue.
Um
The, um, what I, I also have
some concerns. Let me just alert
some of the members just as a
matter of kind of interest.
Um, subsection C on page 16 says
no action may be convinced until
and convinced into this section
until 60 days after the
plaintiff has given written
notice, we generally try and
avoid that, right? We, we try
and avoid putting roadblocks in
in access to the courts, and
this says you can't sue for 60
days unless you give notice
first. Now again, then we kind
of undo that over in
subparagraph F because um in
other places we say you can do
this, right? So you say you
can't do it unless you give 6
days' notice, but over here it
says you can if there's an
immediate threat.
Health or safety, well,
everybody's always gonna argue
there's an immediate threat to
safety, so.
We're just gonna, we're just
gonna end up twisted in knots, I
think with the chords, but I do
appreciate Senator Worth, him
and I will work very hard.
I can assure you that the bill
will probably look very
different.
where it is and I'm just, I'm,
I'm smiling because I'm, you,
you mentioned the federal
government model in this is I
want to just ask one in
particular.
If you look on section 5.
Uh, page 5, section 4.
The first paragraph there is
that federal, is that also
federal language?
You all know, if you don't know,
that's OK.
Uh, section 4 on page 5.
Yeah.
If you're not sure, don't worry
about it. It's not a big deal.
It's just like, I, I like,
again, it's, it's an opportunity
for us to take a 20 page bill or
something and make it a maybe a
5 page bill or 10-page bill
because the language here says
the commission shall, I love
this part, adopt, promulgate,
and publish rules to implement
and administer the program,
including the standards
requirements, exclusions,
exemptions, grants and processes
to issue renew, modify, deny,
and terminate permits, including
rules that are necessary and
appropriate to obtain and
sustain authorization from the
regional administrator. That's
one.
sentence, um, you know, we, we
could probably tighten some of
this stuff up, um, and, and I'm
certain that we will, so thank
you, Madam Chair. Again, I don't
want to so much turn this into a
judiciary meeting as to accept
of the committee appreciate the
process that you've adopted for
your own bill and I, I think
that's a good thing.
Thank you
Thank you very much, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I guess 30+ years of
living with an attorney I picked
up some stuff for him and
Senator Cervantes just took it
all away because I was gonna go
after the private right of
action there. I do have big
concerns with that.
And uh I, I'm not gonna be
redundant and what he has
already brought forward, but
yes, there are some
Very big concerns that I have
there.
Uh, senator, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Wirth.
Um
Page 18, section G, whenever
we're talking about litigation
costs.
Blah blah.
I have a problem there. What is
this going to do to our small
municipalities if this bill is
passed, and they have
implemented all these rule
changes that you want to have
take place. I have a concern
there. I also have a concern
about other people that do put
put food on your table, so I'd
like to hear what you would
recommend in that aspect.
Do, do, do, do, do.
Man, I'm sure I think I senators
will appreciate this. I can
remember on House Appropriations
and Finance with Kiki Saedra
when he chaired, and the cell
phone would get up and he and
Lucky Varella would just start
dancing and it was one of those
moments
Yeah, before cameras. Uh, so
madam chair and senators.
I certainly think this is the
kind of discussion that's good
to have and, and we're gonna
work on this. There is a
private, here's the thing,
there's a private right of
action right now under the
federal law. So understand
there's a private right of
action there. As I mentioned,
Senator Cervantes, a lot of this
language comes right out of the
federal.
Statue
So, we need to tweak this tune
it up.
Um, and again, there's an
openness and willingness to do
that and we're gonna do that as
it moves.
If it moves forward.
Uh, in the Senate Judiciary
Committee because I, I, I
understand. I hear what, you
know, that's a, we do have a
provision and Senator Cervante
didn't talk about this, but we
have an existing statute under
New Mexico law that does allow
private citizens to come in.
So we do have
process in state law that I
think has been effective. It
does allow private citizens in a
situation where the government
is not acting.
To come in and trigger an
action.
Uh
To get compliance. And so when I
was first looking at this, I
immediately said, and one of the
things I think we're gonna need
to understand and we'll we'll
have this discussion is whether
the existing key tam will
already.
Allows for this to happen in New
Mexico. Uh, so again, certainly
something to look at and willing
to do that.
Well, I appreciate you bringing
that up, but I, I'm just afraid
that they're not tracking what
the federal is saying as far as
our fees go, and, and everything
else that Cervantes brought up,
the right of action is very
troublesome to me.
And whenever we're going to and
and what I'm.
driving for it is on page 18
under G.
Oh, in this particular bill
under H, I'm sorry, under H on
page 18 G8 or 8.
Says that these fees are gonna
be deposited in the state
treasury to be credited to the
water quality management fund.
And then the fees collected by
the department pursued this
section shall be deposited in
this current school funds.
Is there anything in this bill
that does designate that these
fees will be used for this
certain purpose or can they be
used for a broader
Area
At the discretion of, of the, uh
Agency.
Um,
go ahead.
Oh, my
Thank you Madam Chair, members.
I'm Jonas Armstrong, the
director of New Mexico
Environment Department's water
protection division, uh, to your
question, Senator, the
limitation on how the fee can be
used is not found in this bill.
The bill directs the fee revenue
to the water quality management
fund, and there is a fund
statute for that fund that
limits it to supporting the
program.
Thank you very much for your
response.
Oh.
But this fund until you do
collect, Madam Chair and.
Senator, but the funding for
this program is not going to
Have any basis until there are
fines imposed. I'm kind of
reading it that way. Am I seeing
this wrong? Madam Chair, no, I
think there's two parts. So
certainly this proposes setting
up the ability for the
department to put in place a fee
schedule. So when you go in for
the permit, you're Senator
Townsend mentioned, you're going
to write a check for the fee.
That's different than if there's
a penalty.
Which if there's a penalty,
there's a separate provision and
those funds and they go in
different places, um, but that's
the discussion I think we'll
certainly have in the
You know, it's kind of a front
end and a back end and, and
currently there's already a, let
me be clear, and I think Senator
Scott got into this. There's
currently a back end under the
federal system. If you violate,
there need to be consequences.
And so that's already status quo
or the existing waters of the US
definition, but the front end
issue of fees, hybrid.
Again, I've heard that loud and
clear and
And a visit with Senator Munho
and Finance Committee to see
what
What the thinking is there.
Well, madam chair and Senator
Worth. I just feel like this is
given a lot, a huge amount of
discretion to the agency to
make, to implement these
decisions and I'm, I'm really
bothered by that.
Are you going to try to clean up
all of this whenever it gets
over to Senator Cervante's
committee?
So Madam Chair, I think all of
this, the, the fee issue and
the, and how the structure,
that's why this bill is also
going to Senate Finance. It has
to go to Senate finance for that
purpose. And then I think as was
mentioned, we've got to make
sure that there's recurring
dollars.
For the staffing to uplift this
program that's in the budget,
um.
And again, that's going to be a
discussion we'll have there with
respect to the specifics about
Penalties, we haven't talked
about, you know, the felonies
that are in this bill, those,
you know.
raised some concerns for me too.
And we're gonna talk about that
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee and so private right
of action.
you know, do we follow the
American rule on attorneys'
fees, you know, what's the
genesis of where this comes
from. I think a lot of it is the
federal statute, but
We absolutely need to get this
right to make it work for New
Mexico.
And again, to the extent that
this is another example of why
having control over this process
here.
Again
If it's done right,
I think makes it really work for
New Mexico in a way that perhaps
some of this language that we're
not liking that already is in
the federal statute isn't
working. So, yes, we're going to
certainly work on that.
On the penalty and the
The different attorney fee and
those kinds of things.
Well, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Worth, you've heard me
say this before in other
committees.
We're gonna make it right.
But it's not right right now.
And I have a problem with any
bill that I vote in favor of
going out of the committee that
is not right and that's where
we're heading with this pill.
We're expecting another
committee to fix what we are
overlooking while we're
discussing this bill in this
committee.
And therefore I, I have
heartburn over this.
I think it's very muddled
whether this is going to be
applicable to surface water or
was that the original tent, um.
It, it's not clear whether this
bill, I can't find it in here.
Maybe you can point me out to
that, madam Chair and Senator
Worth.
But is it
Directly pertaining to
groundwater or to surface water.
Show me that section in here.
That makes it clear. So Madam
Chair, this bill is 21 is
surface water.
There's a provision in 22 that
does deal with groundwater and
we'll talk with it there.
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
show me that in the bill that we
are discussing right now.
So I think Madam Chair, page 6,
section 5.
For discharge of a pollutant to
waters of the United States.
The department shall administer
and enforce rules adopted by the
commission pursuant to the
pollutant discharge elimination
Act. So basically, this deals
with waters of the United
States, um.
And
Essentially those are defined,
uh, specifically in the
definition, go to
Page 5, section 0, waters of the
United States means those waters
regulated under the program and
defined in federal regulations
again,
page 5 section 20 Waters of the
United States. And so this is
really and, and, and I want to
be clear, this is
This, yeah, this.
Wait,
I was expecting to be played.
I think we should put a request.
I'm gonna defer back to you on
that, OK,
this is where I started when in
the intro this clearly applies
to those and Senator Scott had
this question and it was spot
on. This is what's currently
regulated by the federal EPA.
This bill allows the state to
step in.
Madam chair, I know I'm out of
time. I do have some more
questions here, but uh my
concern is we are sending a bill
out that we are expecting
somebody else to make right.
And this is has a huge effect
over the state of New Mexico and
some of our industry.
That does fund a lot of, a lot
of.
50% of the budget of the state
of New Mexico.
And I think the repercussions
could be devastating.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Senator Worth, expert
witnesses, thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Townsend,
you had another, uh, comment or
two.
Thank you, ma'am.
It was more than that, but I
limit it to that.
Um
Senator under the criminal
penalty on page 3 lines 6 and 7,
there's the definition of
negligently.
And
That did cause me some concern.
And, and
And the and quite frankly, the
analysts that brought it up,
and, and it was
With that terminology.
knowing federal law.
And this proposed state law.
Does it put the people, the
working.
Potentially the working people
of New Mexico.
In a category that they're not
currently in.
Ma'am chair Senator, the answer
is no, uh, this definition.
Comes directly from a uniform
jury instruction in New Mexico
about the term negligent with,
and this is important, uh, EPAs
looked at this already and there
is a tweak that came from the
federal EPA and I'll have to get
exactly what the distinction is
between the two of those. We're
not trying to create a new
standard here. It needs to, it
needs to be, this goes back to
the point. It needs to be
consistent with.
Existing New Mexico.
Law and I think we're going to
have that discussion.
To the extent the federal law
goes too far. I'm sure we're
gonna have that discussion.
And tweak that, tune it up. I
appreciate that and I, I hope
the same uh conversation occurs
with annoyingly statute that's
in there.
I see you.
Senator Servant is smiling, so
that's the reassuring. So, Madam
Chair.
Yes, for 2, I've given you 2,
and I'll hush there.
Thank you. I have Senator Scott
and Senator Cervantes for the
2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes
I'm on page 4 lane.
15
Does that language exactly
mirror, Madam Chair and
Senator, the language that's in.
The federal statute.
So I'm sure, I do think and and
I certainly took note of the
fact that
The produced water being defined
as a pollutant.
is different than in the
statute, somewhat surprised
that.
Again, I think we need to think
that through, uh, that.
Reduced water, nobody wants
produced water coming out of uh
oil and gas operation to be put
into any kind of water, it would
seem to me, so again, having
that defined as a pollutant and
then this is the exception for
that, which I think is making it
clear that the produced water.
It's part of the operation
itself.
Is not considered a pollutant,
so it's making that distinction,
but again, I, I think you're
right, you're this is different,
this is different than what's in
the federal in terms of putting
the word.
The actual produced water into
the definition and then doing an
exemption, which is the way this
is structured.
So, Madam Chair and senator,
would you agree that there
Is the possibility.
That
Technology improvements in
coming years could.
Modify this to make produced
water appropriate.
For discharge in streams or
Is it
Madam Chair and Senator, your
position that that would never
be possible.
So ma'am I'm sure, I think we're
gonna have that discussion
during this session for sure.
uh, as we sit here today, we do
not want produced water being
Dispersed into our streams.
And
Again, it does.
Cause me
real concern. Uh, let me yield
to.
My expert here has got another
point on this that I think is
relevant to what's happening
here.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator.
Regarding that,
You would need to have a permit
to discharge treated, produced
water if that ever came about,
so, um.
As Senator Wirth mentioned this
is a topic of discussion for
this legislative session, but if
there was a wastewater.
Under this program, you would
need a permit to discharge that
wastewater that has, um, been
treated.
Madam chair, Miss Lemon, of
course, you know, at least in
the southeast part of the state,
there's way too much salt.
In that water today to even
consider.
The economics of getting it
clean enough to go into.
That said
I would never rule out.
The
Technology improvements.
Could modify that
Oh
Madam, I have many, many, many
other questions.
But it looks like I'll have to
hold them for the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and Ms. Lemon.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Senator Cervantes.
And is there anybody else who
wants to be on the list for
another comment?
And yourself
OK, so I'll be quick and I just,
the conversation was going
around what are the waters of
the United States, the uh the
best example is the Rio Grande,
um, and I bring it up because we
had this experience on our farm
in southern New Mexico where we
were cited by the federal
government, but get this, the
reason is because we bring in
chili from the fields and we
wash the we wash the chili.
Hose it down. You like you all
bring vegetables from the store
and wash it down. So we'd wash
down the water and then we would
uh put it into the ditches on
our farm, and the ditches on our
farm, as you all know, are
hydrologically connected to the
Rio Grande River, so because of
the underground connection
between the ditches on our farm
and applying that water to our
farm, the federal government
said that we were discharging
into the Rio Grande, effectively
because we were putting the
water into dishes on our farm,
kind of weird, but they cited us
and we paid a very large fine as
a result of that.
Um, which again is somewhat
still bizarre to me, because now
we're allowed to wash the chili
the same way, but we now we
spread it, and we spray it on
the fields, uh, to irrigate
alfalfas, and that's OK. Um, and
so, yeah, you're all shaking
your heads weird, it's the
federal government. I'm trying
to tell you, so let's not get
too enamor with the federal
government because the EPA says
that's perfectly OK.
Uh, we should recognize it when
we talk about the waters of the
United States being the Rio
Grande. This means everybody
discharging into any
tributaries, that means the
sekis.
Uh, that means anybody in
northern New Mexico, everybody's
putting any water it reaches the
Rio Grande is going to be
affected by this and can be
sued.
Um, and so just like I said we
need to be cautious and, and
proceed very carefully here, I
imagine that this may already be
true under the federal law and
maybe just the feds don't have
the time or the interest to be
suing every small user that
discharges into the Rio Grande,
but uh a lot of people
discharged the Rio Grande in the
state, uh, in, in any way, shape
or form in.
We'll see how it goes,
particularly, I guess, maybe
some of it maybe include, I
guess the storm water. I assume
the river that runs here through
Santa Fe, right, doesn't it?
Eventually, uh, flow to the Rio
Grande as well too,
isn't it the sing so
we have a lot of lawsuits of
anybody who's putting anything
into the river here, anything
that's getting into the river
here.
Also, and again, if you're gonna
get attorney's fees for doing
so, it's gonna be um a very
lucrative ma'am, before we get
ahead of ourselves, again, I
think it's gonna be important
there's going to be, there's
exemptions, there's farming
exemptions,
let me just say, I mean this is,
this is again.
I, I think we'd like to have New
Mexicans into making this
interpretation, but we're gonna
line these up exactly. So, so
before we just say everyone's
going to be suing everybody
because you're automatically you
put anything in, there's a whole
bunch of exemptions and we'll
work our way through those. But
it doesn't mean that the lawyers
can't go and
And fight about it and I just
think that fight should be
happening with Mexicans here.
As the ones doing it versus the
federal government.
Yeah, and I don't wanna get too
far, but you're, you're holding
up centers. There are other
exemptions that are in front of
us
they're coming on the next bill
because again we open up
different sections. So on 22 and
and there's exempt, there are
exemptions here in this bill as
well that carry over but just
like waving something came up
before you got here, it was one
of the comments from
Yeah, I got it. And I see so
what what will be called the
agricultural exemptions on page
19, but with the exemption
language says is that that
exempted will be any discharges.
Here's the operative language
composed entirely of return
flows from irrigated
agriculture. Well, it's the
composed entirely because in our
case, the argument they made is
the water that we were putting
out there had insecticides and
fertilizers, because it's coming
off the chili, right? So the
chili pot has insecticides and
fertilizers on it, so the
federal government was saying
that that's a pollutant.
In other words, they weren't
saying the water being washed in
the chili was the poll and
they're saying the water that
had uh maybe any chemicals and
the chili was a pollutant. So
the language here, the exemption
says it's in composed entirely
return flows that in our exam in
our case didn't apply for
exactly that reason. They said,
no, that's not composed entirely
of agricultural water. It's got
other stuff in it, which
True.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
and follow up with what senator
Cervantes was talking about
there would be a.
I'm sure that
He and several members that are
part of their cultural
community. I understand.
The importance of Roundup Ready
seed.
And if there is a problem on
that patch of land where this
seat has been applied, you have
to wait a certain time period
before you can go back with any.
Oh yes, I can see that.
Very important thing right there
also whenever we're talking
about.
The agricultural exemption.
I'm just throwing this out
there, OK? I'm not throwing
stones at anybody's towns at
all, OK? Don't take it that way,
but let's say the
City of Albuquerque just
receives a flood, say like Rosal
did just very recently.
And everything goes down that
river and it gets up at this
lead pueblo.
And they're using that water for
irrigation purposes, there would
be cause for a suit there, isn't
that correct, Madam Chair,
Senator.
The national NPDS program.
Regulates point source
discharges of pollutants to
waters of the United States. So
a point source discharge is a
discrete.
Point where a discharge is
happening. It's not nonpoint
source pollution, which is
coming off of the landscape and
into a water body through.
Uh, just normal processes that
happen. So there, there are two
different programs under the
Clean Water Act. One is for
point sources to regulate those
point sources, and then there's
a nonpoint source program that
kind of takes care of what
you're talking about with those
types of pollutants that are
coming off of the landscape we
use best management practices,
um, it's a voluntary program and
that is.
from this permitting program.
Madam Chair and Senator Worth
and Miss Lemon.
He brought up best management
practices.
With the.
For example,
The devastating forest fires
that we had this summer in
Riosa.
And the amount of pollutants
that came down that river that
affected everybody on the
downstream side of it.
All the way to the Pecos River.
That eventually ended up in
Texas.
Would there be cause to bring
suit against the US Forest
Service for their mismanagement
of our force and state of New
Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, under
this program, that is not.
Regulated as a point source
discharge.
Um
So it would not be under this
program that it would be
enforced upon, but it could be
another state, uh, enforcement
action against the state of New
Mexico, Madam Chair.
Against the US Forest Service?
No, the state of New Mexico
because New Mexico is who sent
the water down.
Through the through the
non-compliance of maintaining
our safe forests, our healthy
force by the US Forest Service.
I, and I'm just throwing these
things out there because it, it
not only affected.
The state of Texas, but whenever
you go to taking it back.
What all has happened due to due
to flooding due to fires.
It not only affected my side of
the state, look what it did up
in the Las Vegas area as well.
So I
There's one other question I
have.
It is on the bill, madam chair.
I have found though.
Just me. I haven't gotten my
degree in law yet. I'm getting
there though.
My husband says I really like to
argue sometimes and I do.
I have found that the waters of
the waters of the United States
has been interpreted to mean
groundwater in some contexts,
and I find that very
troublesome. So are we going to
have it?
clarified in this bill is that
one of the issues you're going
to bring before the
Uh, judiciary Committee where if
this passes out, it goes next.
So ma'am, sure, I, I don't, this
bill is not, does not go to
groundwater. It is specifically
designed and it's the
bills.
So ma'am, sure, I, I don't, this
bill is not, does not go to
groundwater. It is specifically
designed and it's the
bill has got some
the next bill does have a
groundwater component that we
need to talk about and but this
one is is.
Waters of the US as defined.
Is it
Applying the 1972.
Instances that they're
interchanging the two, and I
think that might be a big
problem.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
for allowing me to go the 2nd
time and I will save the rest of
the questions.
If this gets to the floor. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Wirtz, do you
wanna close? just briefly, I
very much appreciate the input,
not only from the committee
members but from the
Folks on both sides. It's super
helpful as we move this forward
and I don't, Senator, I
completely understand what
you're saying.
And I don't expect you to vote
for this bill, and I'm not
asking you to vote for this bill
as it sits here today.
I do hope that as it moves
through the process, we address
some of these issues doesn't
mean you're gonna, I'm gonna get
your vote, but that is the way
this place works. And again, I
think we've had a good
discussion.
You know, about the issues of
water in this committee and
we'll do the same thing on the
next two stops and I am sure
we'll have a vigorous discussion
on the floor, and I appreciate
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. I'm
over a pass, Madam Chair.
I could
We have a motion for a due pass.
Uh
Could the committee secretary
please call the roll. Yes, uh,
Senator Cervantes.
Centeronus, yes, Senator
Charlie.
Yes, Senator Charlie, yes,
Senator.
Sanzel? No, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. Senator Pope, yes,
Senator Scott.
No, and I would like to explain
my vote.
Senator Scott? No. Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, no.
Senator Saa Lopez, yes, Lopez,
yes, and Stephonics. Yes.
of phonics, yes. OK, before we
announce the vote, Senator Scott
would like to explain his vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
Bill has too many unknowns at
this point.
I don't believe it's ready for
prime time and I don't like to
pass.
Anything out of a.
Committee that I'm associated
with.
With so many questions
unanswered.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, Senator
Worth, you have a due pass with
a 6 to 3. Thank you very much
for being here. And let's excuse
me, roll on to your next bill.
Senate Bill 22. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and we've had a good
discussion on 21 that helps
really set the stage for this.
There's 2 distinct prongs in
this bill, uh, the surface water
issue basically filling in the
The, the gap that exists post
sack at that Senator Scott and I
talked about, and then there's
another provision here that
addresses groundwater. Uh, Madam
Chair, there is an amendment to
this, and I kind of think we
want to put this on before we go
out to the audience because I
think it'll help, uh, with a lot
of different issues. So that's
up to you as to the timing of
that.
Let's do that, um, 230046.1.
Yes. Please explain.
Oh man, I'm sure
it does
it?
OK, thank you.
It is move for discussion,
please go ahead.
kind of focuses to this, uh, the
First Amendment is to section 3T
on page 29.
Uh, line 17 through 25.
And it clarifies the language
describing the exemptions to
match what currently exists on
Under the Clean Water Act, and
I'm realizing, yeah, on page 29,
so that's, that's items 2
through 7 on the amendment, we
can walk through exactly how
that works if you'd like to, but
let me just say.
it's designed to do is make sure
there's no
Difference between the exemption
language under the current
federal statute and what we're
proposing the 2nd Amendment is
number 1 in this, which is to
section 2S on page 19 lines 15,
I'm sorry, lines 5 through 6. It
makes it explicit that the bill
directs the water quality
mission control, water control
commission to establish rules
for only domestic.
Wastewater for potable reuse.
This goes back to Senator
Scott's question about produced
water, making sure there's no
Misunderstanding that somehow
wastewater that came from a
produced source could be used
for potable reuse. Uh, and I'm
happy to walk through the
specific if you like on the, on
the
The line of page 29, line 17
through 25.
OK. Is there a discussion on the
amendment?
I move the amendment.
Is there any
position to
OK, for, uh, we have adopted the
amendment on the bill, so
Senator Wirth, please proceed.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
as I mentioned, there's two
prongs, uh, to Senate Bill 22,
um.
We've talked a lot about Sacket
and what it did. And so I'm not
gonna reca that, I think the
discussion with Senator Scott.
was spot on in terms of
What's happened here and
The reason I'm sponsoring this
bill is to provide
Additional regulatory oversight
of the 90 to 95% of ephemeral
streams that don't run year
round that currently after the
Sackett decision in 19 in 2023
are not covered.
Basically what this would do
would put protections back in
place that existed from 1972
until 2023, um, this bill.
God is, is part of the
governor's 50-year water action
plan by modernizing the water
Quality Act to again improve
protections and explain, expand
uh regulatory authority, um.
Let's see, a couple of other
things, uh, we've talked about
the permits and we've talked
about the state permitting.
Program. It does protect
downstream to Senator Charlie's,
uh, questions. It's very clear
protecting downstream straight
or tribal water quality
standards, uh, by basically
requiring the Environment
Department to deny a permit
application if the proposed
discharge would exceed another
jurisdictions standard with
respect to tribal sovereignty.
Uh, this is also going to be a
new issue for each tribe to look
at because they're also going to
need to determine, do they want
to put in place their own
regulatory scheme.
Osaket, uh, clearly.
This is gonna be respectful of
that process and needs to be.
Um
The second part of the bill is
Um, basically one that does deal
with groundwater protection and
it provides authority to the
Environment Department to hold
polluters responsible for
groundwater pollution and soil
contamination that threatened
groundwater.
So we currently have a federal
super fund, uh, act, a
comprehensive environmental
response compensation and
liability Act, which has
provisions liability provisions
and protections, uh, there's
hundreds of sites in New Mexico.
Many we've dealt with here in
Santa Fe, uh, that are
contaminated, threatened
groundwater in New Mexico. Um,
and many times you can't find
the owner who was responsible
for that. If the federal
government doesn't step in,
there's no.
funding there to clean up those
sites. This, uh,
Tracking the Fed, the federal
cirLA statute putting that in
place in New Mexico is going to
allow for a fund, and this bill
does contain a new fund and a
$50 million appropriation into
that fund to allow
Or clean up of those sites, uh,
so.
Again, I think that's the gist
of the of Senate Bill 22. They
do go hand in hand and happy, I
think will again yield to
questions, um.
When we get to that point. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Do your experts wish
to say anything?
I think we'll just wait till
specific questions. So could I
see hands of everyone in the
audience that is supporting this
bill.
Could I see hands of anyone in
the audience opposing this bill.
OK, there are approximately 10
opposing online supporting.
Supporting is 9 online and
opposing.
And there's 5 online opposing.
So let's start with your list of
uh speakers timer.
OK, uh, 10 minutes, no, 10,
yeah, 10 minutes for the
proponents.
Oh
We'll start
With Vidal Gonzalez.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Vidal
Gonzalez and I work for the
Mexico Psych Association as
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist. I'm
here to speak in support of
Senate Bill 22.
This bill has broad support
among organizations representing
a broad cross section of New
Mexicans working together to
protect our waters. I would like
to call your attention to a fact
sheet and the various logos of
all the partners.
Senate Bill 22 is critical for
protecting New Mexico's water,
Esea's farms, traditions and
culture. We wish to highlight
this, this legislation is needed
to have a New Mexico-based
process for protecting clean
water in both rivers and seass
while upholding the needs of
agriculture by including
agricultural exemptions so that
it can continue to prosper into
the future.
We need to pass legislation that
will protect our waters,
traditions and customs into the
future.
Which is what makes New Mexico
so unique in the line of
enchantment.
I also want to thank New Mexico
Environment Department and the
sponsors of the bill, Senator
Wirth and Representative Ortiz,
thank you for your time, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Great, thank you. Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Victoria
Larcon Macias, advocacy fellow
with the Samilia Project, and I
stand before you today in full
support of Senate Bill 22.
First, I want to extend my
gratitude to this.
sponsors of this bill and to the
New Mexico Environment
Department for their leadership
and vision in protecting New
Mexico's wetlands and streams.
Clean water is important to our
state, not only for outdoor
recreation, but also for ours,
our drinking water and cultural
ceremonies that are deeply
rooted in our communities.
Changes to federal clean water
protections have left most of
New Mexico's waterways
vulnerable to pollution without.
Estate surface water permitting
program are waters are at even
greater risk endangering our
communities and ecosystems.
As born and raised New Mexican,
I cherish memories of camping
along our rivers surrounded by
the beauty and life that our
waterways sustain.
Senate Bill 22 will help ensure
that future generations can
create those same memories in a
New Mexico with a healthy
thriving waters. Our state needs
strong laws and safeguards to
protect our surface waters and
wetlands from pollution, and
this bill is a crucial step in
that direction.
Without any protection,
industries, and development can
pollute or destroy wetlands and
streams, risking contamination
of drinking water and making New
Mexico communities more
vulnerable to severe drought and
flooding.
I urge you to support Senate
Bill 22 for the benefit of our
communities, our ecosyste
system, our environment and our
future.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
your time and consideration.
Joyce, and then we'll go to um
the online.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jillian Joyce and I'm a
government relations advocate
for Rocky Mountain Farmers
Union. I also stand today, uh,
on behalf of the New Mexico Food
and Ag Policy Council. We
support managing water resources
for the benefit of all people
and the environment, while
limiting the challenges faced by
our farmers and ranchers as they
work to feed our communities and
steward our natural resources.
Following the Supreme Court
Sackett decision, it is critical
that New Mexico step up to
protect our waters.
While ensuring agricultural
activities can reasonably
continue.
That is why we appreciate the
sponsors, Senator Wirth and
Representative Ortiz, the
Environment Department, and the
coalition behind this bill, for
working with us and others in
the agricultural community to
ensure the language in this
bill, particularly the
agricultural exemptions outlined
in the amendment mirror the
historical federal exemptions
for normal farming and ranching
activities. RMFU believes that
by maintaining the same
exemptions for agricultural
activity, we have historically
had at the federal level, Senate
Bill 22 strikes a reasonable
and workable balance between
protecting New Mexico's water
for future generations while
protecting the ability of our
farmers and ranchers to
efficiently and responsibly grow
our food.
Thank you, members of the
committee for this time, and I
hope you will vote yes on Senate
Bill 22.
Thank you. Um, now we're going
to Allison Sewick or Siwick.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today in support of Senate Bill
22. I'm Alison Civic, executive
director of HeLa Resources
Information Project based in
Silver City. We've advocated for
protection of our surface and
groundwater supplies in
southwestern New Mexico for more
than 25 years. For the
communities of Silver City,
Demming, and the mining district
and farmers and ranchers in
Grant and Luna counties that
rely on water supplies in the
member
basin, the Federal Clean Water
Act no longer applies to member
space and surface waters, for
example, the Membros River and
San Vicente Creek have lost
federal protections and
discharges from wastewater
treatment plants, mining and
other industrial sources no
longer have federal permits for
discharges to our streams and
rivers. We urgently need to set
up a New Mexico surface water
quality permitting program.
To safeguard New Mexico's waters
that have lost federal
protections to ensure the health
of our communities and our
agricultural sector well into
the future. Please support
Senate Bill 22, and thank you
very much.
Thank you.
We have 3 minutes left. We'll
take 1 person here and one
person online, uh, the person
online will be.
See you
Go ahead,
Anna Hansen sit down.
Um, we might have time for more
in the morning, um, I am, uh,
the registered lobby for the
Pueblo Auake, and we are in full
support of this, and I am going
to be brief and not go into
detail, but this is something I
have worked on for the last 10
years, and um the pueblo is
completely in support of
protecting their waters,
especially the the Riouake and
the Rio, the creekuake Creek,
which are both impacted by
Uh, the federal law. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, is there somebody
by the name of Zia?
That
Hi, yes. Can you hear me today?
Hi, thank you. Thank you
committee. Thank you. Thank you,
chairs. Uh, we live on the Rio
Hondo here in, uh, in northern
New Mexico and that the head of
our river is the uh Taoski
Valley, uh, the waters flow from
there down and then feed Valdez,
where farmers grow their crops,
uh, hay and fruit, uh,
throughout the summer. Uh, from
there, it comes to our house
where the, uh, the river splits
into two ditches, the Adelaya
and the uh the madre, and those
two ditches feed our valley.
With, uh, with water throughout
the summer, uh, feeds our local
crops, which is apples for us.
And then that goes down and acts
as a tributary to the Rio
Grande, and at that, at that
confluence, you'll see a kiddie
pool where you know parents
bring their kids during the
summer. Those kids play and swim
in the water. Uh, people bring
their dogs, so the tennis balls
in the water, all the rafters
put in, um, any day, uh, during
the summer, I can count 2027
cars there, um, and
that's a big recreation area. So
I encourage you to protect the
water just for all of us along
the rivers. Thank you for your
time. Thank you. Uh, Dan intels.
Online.
Morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Daniel Pritchard, and I live in
Taos. I'm on the executive
board.
Of renewable to, and I speak for
as many members in support of
Senate Bill 22. We have all seen
or heard of countless examples
of waterways, streams, and
wetlands that have been harmed
by pollution from industry and
the developers and the hazards
of highly toxic produced water
pumped by the billions of
barrels.
By the oil and gas industry, I
encourage you to vote to protect
the precious waters of New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, we could do one more
person in the audience.
Is there anyone?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Gallegos. I'm
from the pueblos of Laguna and
Acoma, and I'm the climate
justice organizer for Pueblo
Action Alliance. We are a pueblo
indigenous grassroots women-led
organization, um, focusing our
efforts on issues relating to
climate, environmental, and
youth justice, indigenous
rights. Our organization is in
support of SB 22 as
It provides important provisions
necessary for the regulation.
Of water reuse and permitting
and enforcement for surface
water. Our organization
represents many pueblo community
members who come from
communities that utilize water
resources for agricultural,
environmental,
And cultural uses. The pueblos,
who have the most senior water
rights in this state need the
state to adequately monitor the
use of surface water resource to
not infringe on our senior water
rights and water adjudicated
allocations. We support SB 22
and support the committee to
stand and support as well. Thank
you. Thank you very much. We're
now going to opponents with the
opponents please line up who
would like to speak?
And let's go ahead and start.
Good morning.
Good morning again. uh, this is
Liz Newland Taylor, uh,
representing the MACA and just a
couple of points we're very
concerned about the dredge and
fill requirement, which would be
a new requirement.
Whether that would allow us to
clean out our settling ponds in
time for the monsoon season.
We also would seek an exemption
for government owned and
maintained stormwater
facilities, um, the discharges
are already covered by our
federal MS4 permit, um, and then
one, issue is, is problematic on
the Rio Grande for AAFCA,
Albuquerque, is that the Rio
Grande above Albuquerque does
not meet is lets water quality
standards now and so without any
additional discharge. And so,
if
um MAFTA applies for a permit,
the statute now says that it
shall be denied because it would
not meet his letterta standards
that creates a serious problem,
uh, for city of Albuquerque and
um folks uh who serve IMAFCA,
um, and that seems to be a very
unworkable, uh, part of the bill
if it's a forever denial of a
permit to discharge. So thank
you very much.
Thank you. Next please.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, director of public policy
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. We oppose Senate Bill
22 as it significantly expands
the definition of state waters
to include ephemeral streams and
dry royos, features that rarely
hold water and do not
consistently contribute to water
systems. Regulating these waters
of the state creates creates
overreach, adding costly and
time consuming permitting
requirements. The regulated
community relies on timely and
predictable processes to keep
their
operations running, and this
bill, unfortunately does not
offer any assurance of
efficiency or accountability.
Additionally, this legislation
could increase flooding risks,
requiring permits for routine
maintenance of flood control
systems. The bill makes it
harder for municipalities and
flood control authorities to
remove sediment and protect
communities, including
agriculture.
This creates avoidable risks to
crops, infrastructure, and
livelihoods.
Our agriculture and small
business owners are proud
stewards of New Mexico's water
and land resources. But this
legislation imposes unnecessary
burdens and creates uncertainty
for this critical sector of our
economy, and we urge you to vote
no on this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Next,
please.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza again
speaking on behalf of the San
Juan Water Commission. Uh, we do
have serious concerns with the
legislation. Uh, you know, this
expansion really does complicate
water management for the San
Juan Water Commission as it
introduces new permitting
requirements that could impact
water storage, conveyance and
treatment infrastructure.
The bill does not provide clear
exemptions for routine water
management activities, meaning
entities may be required to
apply for new or additional
permits leading to delays in
added costs than just echo
concerns of the others. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next please.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Mike Miller. I'm with the
Premium Basin Petroleum
Association. We'd like to
express our opposition to this
bill today.
Excuse me, while I appreciate
the intentions behind this
legislation, it presents
significant concerns for
businesses, local governments
and communities throughout New
Mexico. First and foremost, the
bill expands regulatory
authority over water quality in
a manner that threatens economic
development, especially in
industries such as energy and
manufacturing.
By imposing stricter permitting
processes and expanding the
scope of the water Quality Act.
This bill could stifle
innovation and increased
compliance costs and discourage
investment in our state at a
time when we should be fostering
economic resilience, these
additional regulatory burdens
have the opposite effect.
Additionally, the bell grants
broad discretionary powers to
regulatory agencies without
sufficient oversight or
accountability. The ability to
deny permits based on subjective
determinations of substantial
adverse environmental impact
raises.
curious questions about due
process and fairness in
environmental regulation.
Businesses and individuals need
clarity and predictability in
the permitting process, but this
bill introduces uncertainty and
excessive discretion potentially
leading to inconsistent
enforcement.
Furthermore, the creation of the
neglected and contaminated sites
fund and it's associated $50
million appropriation places an
undue financial burden on
taxpayers without clear
parameters for its use while
environmental remediation is
important. This bill fails to
outline sufficient checks and
balances due to these fund to
ensure these funds are spent
efficiently and effectively.
Moreover, the bill does not
adequately distinguish between
responsible parties and those
unfairly burdened with
remediation costs. Lastly, while
protecting water
Sources is shared go. This bill
does not balance environmental
protection with economic
sustainability. New Mexico has
long relied on its natural
resources to support livelihoods
and over regulation without
thoughtful consideration of
economic impacts will lead to
job losses and economic
stagnation. I urge the committee
to reject this bill. Thank you
for your time and consideration.
Thank you.
OK, go ahead, please. Madam
Chair, members of, of the
committee, my name is TJ
Trujillo, and I'm a registered
lobbyist for Freeport McEnran
and the dairy producers of New
Mexico, and I'll be testifying
on behalf of both of them this
morning.
Um,
out of term members of the
committee, the problems with
this bill are really too
numerous for me to summarize in
in a minute. Uh, so let me say
this to, to at least get the
point across.
My clients participated in a
working group over the past year
dealing with this bill and
simply put, I can tell you their
concerns were largely ignored.
Uh, this bill needs to be, this
bill needs a lot of work, and
members of the committee, and
let me point out one other issue
why I, I would say this new
permitity program is terrifying
uh for my clients is because
under the current groundwater
program, uh, and, and within NBD
to get permits out of there, I'm
not talking months, I'm not even
talking years in some cases
we've had permits outstanding
for over a decade.
And now we're gonna add another
layer of permitting. There's
multiple overlaps.
Um, permitting between, uh, in
the mining context, we have the
uh copper rules, we have the
dairy rules, and there's
significant questions it took
years of litigation, uh, build
passages to get through and the
overlap and the threat that it
that it puts through those
groundwater discharge programs
is extremely significant to
these two constituencies. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. We'll go to
Jim Winchester online.
We might have time. We need to
hear two people from the um from
the zoom.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thanks for the
opportunity. Jim Winchester
again with Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. You
know, we've got concerns across
the board, um, really related to
the new regulations that define
the new waters that would fall
under this rule, um, very
concerning broad definition for
source waters, which will now
include those ephemeral streams,
which, in our opinion, is
excessive, it's unnecessary and,
and frankly,
It represents extreme
overregulation, because if you
map ephemeral streams in New
Mexico, you're suddenly
including thousands of miles of
streams. I mean, it's massive,
and the new permitting
requirements could be endless,
which leads to the second
question we have about this
bill. The Environment Department
last week announced that they
can't keep up with the authority
in issuing basic simple air
permits for industry due to
staff shortage. Now you're going
to add these in
into the mix, wide ranging
rules, and if you'll excuse the
pun, it's really gonna clog up
the works. So for that we stand
opposed. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ashley.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. We represent over
180 member companies. Their
surface water advisory panel
raised serious concerns about
NMED's ability to have
sustainable funding for the
program in this bill. Section
3746-5K states that fees for
permits and approval of general
permit coverage must be
sufficient to pay the cost for
implement
the discharge permit program.
Yet it is unclear how much NMED
estimates it will cost and
whether all the funds will come
from permit fees only. Basing a
department budget off fees is
unstable and promotes an
overactive finding of regulated
entities and rejection and
reapplication approach to permit
applications. A constantly
fluctuating budget means an
unstable market for FTEs and
necessary personnel and to echo
some of what was said before,
the
Mexico Environment Department
just shut down the permitting
for air quality permits because
of lack of funds. This stops
businesses from locating here or
expanding their operations. If
NMED takes over the NPDES
program, we're concerned that
the same thing could happen.
Thank you.
Thank you and uh we'll go back
to the room we had uh how much.
1 minute 38 seconds. OK, we have
time for one more person.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name's
Adela Duran. I represent 3
uranium mining companies in New
Mexico, I'd like to emphasize if
never mind here, they hope to
someday. I've had the
opportunity to speak with the
staff about some of my client's
concerns, primarily uh overreach
or duplication of language
that's already in the Mining
Act, and so we look forward to
possibly getting some changes in
the next two stops.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, how
many people would like to speak
on this bill? See a nod from all
three here and Senator Charlie
later.
And Senator CD Lopez, OK, we'll
start with Senator Townsend.
And Charlie
Then Eco,
then Lopez, then his cell.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Um, I'll start kind of like I
did last time. Do we have some.
Yes, ma'am, it is. Maybe I can't
move it closer, scream a little
louder, so.
Are there exemptions that are
agreed to um in this bill that
we can divulge and talk about a
little bit.
So Mount Jeon Senator, yes, and
we expanded those exemptions
with the amendment that was put
on, it's on.
Page 29. So if you go to page
29.
Section T line 17.
And again, you need to read that
in.
Conjunction with the amendment
we just put on the idea with the
amendment was to line these up
with the existing federal
exemptions. And I think we've
worked with
All sides to make sure that.
There was concern on both sides
that it.
We didn't want it to go farther
or not as far. OK.
Um, madam chair and
And Senator
When I look at both of these, I,
I have one comment, um, that I,
I, and I want your, I, I would,
I do want your, I'm having a
hard time.
I think these bills need to be
renamed.
They're not so much.
Water quality, because there's
so many exemptions.
So I, and I say this with tongue
in cheek. I don't know where
this is in a lawyer employment
Act.
Or an anti-oil and gas Act.
Why should I not say that?
So ma'am chair and Senator
Townsend, I want to just first
say that for all the sky is
falling about the second part
and what we're doing here from
1972 until 2023.
Federal government
Regulated all the waters that
are now going to be regulated by
the state under this. And so it
was the sacket decision that
dramatically narrowed.
Um
The
Interpretation of, of what was
controlled under the Federal
Act. So this is
You know, it's, it's
I don't want to say status quo
because that's not fair. The
status quo right now, and I
think folks have gotten used to
having no regulation on 95% of
the streams.
But it seems like this is an
important discussion to have and
because we're still in a, in a
window here where just 2 years
ago.
Everyone was understood how this
was applied and what was
covered. So to some extent I,
I'd like to go back to pre-2023
and I, and I understand the
arguments.
Against doing that, um.
Well, Madam Chair and senator.
It is true that many
organizations and industries are
exempted.
But in both of these bills,
That has not been applicable to
any of the oil and gas
producers. Is that correct?
Madam Chair and senator in the
um SB 21, there are some
exemptions or storm water coming
off of oil and gas facilities,
um,
I, I would have to find the
exact language in SB 21.
It says uh.
Stormwater runoff from mining
operations, where are you at, if
you would please.
Madam chair.
It's, well, mine's different.
It's section 11, limitations in
the prior bill SB 21.
Uh, paragraph E.
Has the oil and gas exemptions.
Page 19.
And Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend, they're also are
exemptions in 21 on the
definition of pollutant on page
4, specifically saying it does
not include water, gas, or other
material that is injected into a
well to facilitate production of
oil and gas.
Uh, or water derived in
association with oil or gas
production and disposed of in a
well if the well is used either
to facilitate production or for
disposable purposes and if such
injection or disposal, I see.
Thank you very much.
Um
On Madam Chair.
On S in SB 22.
Do you believe the bill clearly
defines surface water.
Madam Chair and senator.
Um
The definition of surface waters
of the state is in the water
quality commission regulations,
um, which
The Water Quality commission
has, um,
Authority to adopt rules
pursuant to the Water Quality
Act, which is.
What we're changing, we're
making amendments to
To the Water Quality Act in SB
22.
Madam chair and Miss Lemon, the,
the impacts of this bill would
change then as the definition
might be changed within that
act. Is that correct? Madam
Chair and Senator, there.
Is not a definition of.
surface water in SB 22.
It is in the New Mexico
administrative code.
So, and my point was, is that
code may change the implications
as we see this bill today may
change.
Is that right?
Madam Chair and senator.
Potentially
We are providing authority for
the commission to adopt rules to
administer a permitting program
for surface water discharges,
part of SB 22. There's another
piece of groundwater component,
but.
Those rules.
Would define how the program
that the water Quality Act in
these amendments is giving
authority for how the program
would be implemented.
Ma'am chair, move along, um.
And man-made canals and ditches.
Would they be classified as
surface waters.
Madam Chair and senator, um,
currently, I would need to pull
up the definition of surface
waters of the state. I believe
if they are made in a.
Um, natural stream, they would
still be considered a surface
water of the state if it was
outside of a natural stream,
then it would not be considered
surface water of the state, but
I would have to look at the
definition to confirm.
That interpretation
and as I understood Senator
Cervantes ago his.
is um example that
would still be a
Because that's was an irrigation
ditch with that ran off.
So Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend, I think that
Of course, each case is going to
get taken on its own, but if you
have a bunch of chili that
you've grown in Mexico with a
bunch of contaminants on it, and
that contaminants are ending up.
In being discharged into a
stream.
Then I think that's exactly
What we're talking about versus
the normal return flow, which
clearly is exempted.
So again, I think those are
going to be
A kind of case by case that
already exists and
You know, and I, I appreciated
getting his example as well.
Madam chair and senator.
Where, I think the issue is that
a person
Who is using a permitted
Pesticide and chemical.
On a crop.
With the best of intentions.
Could then be
Outside of
purview of this law.
If
It was a runoff.
Is that it? Isn't that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
One thing that these amendments
are doing is uh is often also
authorizing the use of general
permits for similar types of
discharges, and one of those
general permits is a pesticide
general permit for when you are
along a stream, there's a
potential for that pesticide to
be discharged to the stream and
again, the general permits
typically use best management
practices, it's not um something
That you have to treat, you
know, and have a facility to
treat the wastewater, but it's
setting up firms, so there's
less potential for contaminated
water to reach the stream and
doing different things, um,
changing when you are applying
the pesticides, so it's not
during the rainy season or it's
not during certain times where
there's a higher probability of
contamination, so
Um, these amendments help with
that facilitation of
Establishing a water quality
protections, but also making it
an easier, um, less arduous and
less burdensome process.
And
I'm sharing with them and this.
And SB 21.
The state would require
The nod from the
Federal government in order to
implement and take over those
permitting. Is that true in SB
22?
Um, Madam Chair and senator, no,
this is a state implemented
program.
Uh, we would have to the water
quality control commission,
which is the commission
authorized to administer water
quality in the state of New
Mexico would have to uh approve
the rules and adopt the rules
for the program.
So one follow up. I hear my bell
ringing.
Madam Chair, with this make.
A permitti then have to have to
permits.
One federal and one state in
some. Uh, Madam Chair and
senator that should not be the
case. Um, if you have one
permit, we're putting the
surface water permitting under
one umbrella state um authority.
So whether it's, it's where it's
discharging, if it's discharging
to a water of the United States,
then it would have the federal
permit if it's discharging to a
surface water of the state, it
would have the state.
permit.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
thank you. I go back to my
earlier comments of what we're
doing here. Thank you. Thank
you. I have Senator Charlie,
Senator Scott, Senator Sadia
Lopez, Senator Ruel.
Senator Cervantes, did you want
to be on the list? OK, thank you
very much, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Senator,
There's an immense amount of
potential FTEs in this piece of
legislation. Are we talking
about the creation of a new
division within the agency.
Madam Chair and senator, it
would not be a new division. Uh,
it would still be under the
water quality protection
division. We do have a proposal
for a compliance and enforcement
division, so the compliance and
enforcement piece might be under
that division if it gets
approved. Um, so that would be
the separation, but the water
quality piece and the permitting
would stay and water quality,
um.
But
The same division.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um, I'm
curious how that um department
division, those folks are gonna
work with senior water rights
holders.
I
Land grant communities. What is
that relationship now and how
are they gonna commit to work
together to ensure the needs of
those.
Um, Madam Chair and senator.
The permitting program should
not, and I believe it's in here
under one of the limitations,
um, it does not impact water
rights, um, and I believe, uh,
In that respect, it's not going
to impact the water, right? It,
what it will be doing is
protecting the water quality for
the intended use of that water.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
specifically about my district,
which is Senate District 30, the
public of Aleta, um.
is in strong support of this
legislation because they are
down.
Come out.
They are experiencing firsthand
what it looks like to farm.
drop. Um, this is impeding their
way of life, but in general
across Senate district 30, I
just wanna share some numbers
here about the reality of what's
at risk.
Um, 99% of our water in Senate
District 30 is not protected.
1% is protected. I'm talking
about 9500, over 9000 miles of
water.
is unprotected right now. Um,
our wetlands, they're a little
bit better, but it's not much
better, uh.
Currently, 94% is at risk. Only
5% is protected. That's 8200
acres of wetlands that are not
protected. And in these
communities, we're talking about
waterways that are um that are
seasonal.
In my community and in all
public communities since the
beginning of time, our farmers,
our men have gone out to correct
um.
Water waste to bring water into
our communities. Um, those are,
those are becoming shorter.
Um, in time that they're coming
and running off of our mountains
and our waterways and that
limited amount of resource that
our communities depend on
deserves to be protected, and we
have here an opportunity to, um,
protect people and not industry
and all of this I promise is
leading to a question, Madam
Chair, um, Senator, what's that
risk here if we do not do this.
Thank you.
So, Madam Chair and Senator
Charlie.
I really appreciate.
Your framing of this issue.
Again, to have this protection
for 51 years.
Um
Things worked.
I'm sure they weren't perfect
anytime you're asking industry
to comply with regulations.
There's going to be pushback,
there's going to be times when
there's overreach.
The fact of the matter is that
worked for those until 2023.
And I just think
As I said in the.
Opening
With what's happening in our
state and we live in a high
desert state.
With climate change, with water
reductions, it is more important
than ever.
Or are well-being, our quality
of life.
That we make darn sure we do
everything to keep the water
that we have clean.
And so
Again, I appreciate how you
framed this.
And I just think this is a very
important
I, I, I want to argue it's
status quo. I get that it's not.
But it should be, in my opinion,
and I realize there's
differences and I think in your
opinion as well, but again, I
think this is an incredibly
important thing for the future
of our state.
Thank you. So, um, Senator Wirth
is gonna have Senator Padilla
start the floor so that we can
complete this bill even if we go
over 11:30.
So, um
Uh, let's continue. We have
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
didn't see a definition of
surface water.
In this bill
Some I chair and senator, I
think we had that discussion
with Senator Townsend. Yeah,
there's not a specific one, let
me yield to Miss Lemon's about
where it is defined.
Um, Madam Chair and senator,
it's in the New Mexico
administrative code. It was
adopted viral by the water
quality Control Commission under
the authority of the Water
Quality Act.
And
Madam Chair, Miss Lemon, could
you describe that definition for
me?
Um, Madam Chair and senator
surface waters of the state
means all surface waters
situated wholly or partly within
or bordering upon the state,
including the following lakes,
rivers, streams, including
intermittent and ephemeral
streams, mud flats, sand flats,
wetlands, sloughs, prairie
potholes, wet meadows, playa
lakes, and reservoirs and
natural ponds. It also means all
tributaries to such waters,
including a
adjacent wetlands, any man-made
bodies of waters that were
originally created in a surface
water of the state or resulted
in the impoundment of a surface
water of the state and any
waters that the United States as
defined under the Clean Water
Act that are not included in the
preceding description.
It does not include private
waters that do not combine with
other surface or subsurface
water or any water under tribal
regulatory jurisdiction for
pursuant to section 518 of the
Clean Water Act.
Waste treatment systems,
including treatment ponds or
lagoons designed and actively
used to meet the requirements of
the Clean Water Act.
Um, other than cooling ponds
defined in 40 CFR part 423.11m.
That also meet the criteria of
this definition are not surface
waters of the state unless they
were originally created in a
surface water of the state or
resulted in an impoundment of
the surface water of the state.
Thank you for that.
Madam Chair
Senator Miss Lemon, could you
describe for me?
If this piece of legislation
passes, the differences in the
regulation with respect to
The industry that is so
important to my community,
specifically oil and gas.
And I'm asking this now with
respect to
The
Impoundments.
That are constructed
specifically to support those
kinds of operations.
Filling pads
It may be adjacent to normally
dry arroyos.
Or
Or
Whatever
Could you
Could you tell me
Approximately what that impact
might look like.
Madam Chair and senator, um.
Currently, anything that is.
Um, on the, the well pad is
regulated by
Energy, minerals and natural.
I'm getting this wrong. It's
energy, minerals, minerals and
natural resources division
department, um, through the oil
conservation division, um,
Anything outside of that will be
regulated by the Environment
department, um, so surface water
discharges to
From those facilities would be
regulated. Um.
Currently
EPA, you know, and SB 21 EPA has
authority over that, we would be
taking authority of that from
EPA ver um certain activities
related to oil and gas
discharges to surface waters,
but this.
An SB 22, it's specific to
surface water discharges from
point sources and also the
dredge and fill um program.
Which is mainly there to
protect, help protect water
resources in wetlands.
And madam chair.
Miss Lemon, I'm not aware of
many circumstances.
Where the oil and gas industry
is
Discharging into anything.
However, I am concerned that
this permitting process.
Or locations that are
Perhaps adjacent to some of
these.
Defined spots might be impacted
by
This legislation.
Um, Madam Chair and senator, if
they're not discharging.
Or have the potential to
discharge, right?
Um, there may be a potential,
again, the potential when I,
when I think you're getting at
is related to a storm water, um,
if the storm water comes into
contact with pollutants, then it
will be.
Probably have a general permit
that I talked about earlier that
is implementing best management
practices and a storm water
pollution prevention plan to
reduce or eliminate that
potential stormwater discharge,
carrying pollutants to a stream.
Um, if it doesn't come into
contact with pollutants. It's
just storm water, right? It is
not.
Regulated.
So there are exemptions for um
it's, it's no exposure
exemption, so it's not exposed
to those pollutants that the
storm water would then carry and
contaminate.
And Madam Chair, Senator and
Miss Lemon.
That potential would be
certainly in the eye of the
beholder.
And would
In the
Environment department's
judgment.
Strongly suspect.
Because there are hydrocarbons
on location.
Would yield a requirement for
permits.
In any of those spots where
Hm
Trying to
Mitigate the effects of storm
water.
Ranulf from.
Grilling pan
So
I heard
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
To different
Representations as to
How long this program was going
to take to stand up.
And in one instance, I believe I
heard somebody mention.
7 years.
And in another representation I
heard.
I believe
18 to 24 months.
Where are we?
With current estimate.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator.
So
It's
That's a little bit of a
complicated question because we
have two different bills and 2
different programs we're talking
about, um, for this bill, SB 22
because it's a state program. We
do not need EPA approval, but we
do need to develop rules for the
program. Um, so the rulemaking.
If this bill passes would be
sometime um this year we would
be working on the rulemaking if
the bill passes, the water
quality commission public
hearing, rulemaking hearing
would probably be in calendar
year 2026. Um, and adoption of
the rule that same year, not
sure of that timeline because it
is a public hearing process, and
there I'm sure will be a lot of
similar discussions.
at the rulemaking hearing, um.
When the rules are adopted,
that's when we would be able to
start.
ing the program. So we're
looking at state program
implementation for SB 22,
probably in some time issuing
our first permits in 2027, 2028.
Um, with the EPA program and SB
21, we have to do.
We have to pass the legislation,
get our rules done and adopted
and have all of our SOPs and
guidance documents developed,
and then submit our application
to EPA and EPA approval can take
anywhere from 6 months to 18
months. So that is dependent on
EPA, um, but it would follow the
state program implementation and
probably be issuing the first um
federal.
under the um New Mexico
pollutant discharge elimination
system in 2029 or 2030, uh,
after EPA approval.
And
Madam Chair, Senator, Miss
Lemon, is there any estimate?
Currently available as to the
total cost of this effort.
Over the next 5.
Madam Chair and senator, yes,
for, for full program
implementation, which includes
SB 21 and SB 22. So we're
looking at
2029, 2030.
Uh, it would be in the 8 to $9
million dollar range, depending
on how the program is
implemented, um, that we already
have about a million dollars in
the environment department, so
that's an additional $7 million
that we need to implement the uh
a full program, um.
It's about 50 full time
employees, um, we have 10, well,
60 full-time employees. We have
10, so an additional 50 for
permitting compliance
enforcement, outreach, and um
Communications, data management,
and then human resources.
Lawyers, uh,
IT staff, you know, the support
staff, so, um, that's what for
full implementation in 2030,
that's the $2025 amount.
And Madam chair, Miss Slemon,
that would be annually $9
million.
Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, I was gonna say
commissioner, sorry, senator,
Um, yes.
Annually.
And again, it's a
OK
Up, madam chair.
I didn't even begin.
So,
Um
I'll, I'll just briefly say that
I think it's really a great idea
to bring this home, and a great
idea to um address the surface
waters, um, and I, I understand,
I guess I'll, I'll ask this
question.
When I did a tour of some of the
sites in New Mexico. One of the
disturbing things I saw was uh.
What these um
I don't know what to call them,
I guess plastic. It looked like
plastic, I don't know what,
what, what was this thing,
filled with really nasty.
Stuff, um, it just, yeah,
whatever the liners were, and it
was filled with really nasty
stuff and it was, it didn't look
to me.
Well, I guess it didn't wasn't
technically a discharge, but it
sort of came from somewhere, um,
and I just wonder if there is
anything here that would help us
get to those nasty.
Pools.
And I didn't see anything.
That would help us get there,
that might be.
Something in the future.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Justin Ball. I'm the bureau
chief for the Groundwater
Quality Bureau. Um, the
impoundments that you're
referencing, um, could
potentially discard, discharge,
uh, if they overtopped and for
uh industrial.
Uh, domestic waste, all sorts of
uh contaminants, those entities
would are required to have a
discharge permit from the
groundwater Quality Bureau.
Excellent, excellent. OK. Um,
well, um, cause I worried about
that and I didn't see in this,
in this statute that there was a
way to get on it and if there is
a potential, I think it's really
good that we not only bring this
home, but we protect all of the
waters in our state, and I, it's
been said before, um, Senator
Wirth said it again. This is
what was happening. This is what
we were doing, except we're
dealing with a long
A person who wasn't even from
here and didn't really
understand our communities
didn't understand our
industries, um, often didn't
understand water laws here, so I
think it's really uh a huge
improvement.
So thank you for bringing this.
Thank you, Senator Ruel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Senator worth one of my
questions has already been
answered by Senator Townsend
because I have read this bill.
2.5 times now and I scoured it
and I
did not see in it any exemptions
for oil and gas. So you
clarified that, OK? So I'm gonna
be moving on whenever we are
talking about, uh, I didn't
write the page number down on
that. Let me see if I can find
it with my little sticky notes,
um.
Is it
Neglected and contaminated
sites.
I know that y'all are asking for
in this particular bill an
appropriation of $50 million.
Is that going to take care of
the uranium cleanup? Is that
going to take care of the potash
sites that created the salt ply
is down there in the
southeastern corner.
Um, short answer is, yes.
Madam Chair, that was a not a
very good answer on the part of
the department, in my opinion,
it is going to take a whole lot
more than $50 million to clean
up both either one of those
sites and Mr. Madam Chair in
Senator Wirth.
Um
Whenever
Industries that I am very.
That I held dear near and dear
to my heart whenever they have
to have monitoring wells in
place whenever they have to
follow all the rules and
regulations and now you're
asking for
$50 million.
To start the process, and this
was first brought to my
attention whenever I came up
here 21 years ago and we're
still here today without these
sites being cleaned up.
I have a problem with that. So
what is the purpose of the
environment department if
they're not going to do the job
that we've entailed them to do.
If we have a representative from
Answer that for the senator.
Mm
Madam Chair, senators, thank you
for the question.
Your previous question on the
$50 million our bureau chief
Justin was trying to explain
that the funding would be
available to clean up uranium,
potash, other types of
contamination. The language is
written very broadly to address
a number of different types of
contamination that we
unfortunately have way too much
of across the state.
On, on this question, um,
We
Need to pass Senate Bill 22 to
hold those polluters
accountable. Most times when
there is pollution from a
responsible party, it does not
meet the threshold for Superfund
criteria under federal law and
so federal funding is not
available to do that clean up.
We don't have clear state
authority to hold those
polluters responsible in a
similar way as under Superfund,
so that's what we're asking for
here in Center Bill 22, the $50
million appropriation would help
us get started on cleaning up
sites where responsible party is
long gone because like you said,
it's been there.
For decades.
And Madame Chain in response to
the statement that was just made
from the department.
Uh whenever there is.
Let's take the uranium.
Run off whenever it is affecting
drinking water for those people,
there is a problem there that
should have been addressed many
years ago.
Madam Cheer and Senator Worth on
page 22 of your bill.
starting on line 22.
You've added um.
Hold on just a minute.
I, I think there was some.
Problems during the swap meeting
where they're.
They felt that what y'all were
trying to do here was way too
broad, OK, by including uh using
postal service electronic mail,
text messages, or combination of
these.
But the part that really
bothered me was the notice to
the potentially affected.
Local, state, federal government
agencies, land grant
organizations, ditch
associations, Indian nation
tribes, and or Pueblas using
postal or electronic mail. The
potentially affected really
stands out at me. Do you see
this as a way for further
litigation or more litigation
that would hinder a person's
ability to make application.
Madam, uh, senator, um, you
know, the way I would
describe that situation is that
um yeah.
Uh,
one moment.
Sorry about that, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, um, notice is
often a requirement of due
process, um, you know, no, I
don't believe that this would
lead to additional litigation in
all honesty, what we're trying
to do is make sure that the
potentially affected people are
aware or unnoticed that they
could be affected by some
discharges of stream. So what
we're really trying to do is
make sure that communities who
could be impacted by this or
adequately on notice. I mean, to
do without uh a similar notice
provision would leave plenty of.
folks who may be who may be
affected by upstream discharges
but receive absolutely no notice
or have no idea that such
discharge is going on. So we're
trying to make sure that our
protections are adequately
protecting the, uh, you know, as
many people as possible.
Well, Madam chair and
Senator Worth and I'm sorry, I
can't say your name.
Mr. Zachary Ogas.
I guess, OK.
I see this as a potential for
being more
Onerous litigation if there's
just a simple permit.
That is trying to get past here.
Because we do have special
interest groups that do like to
look at sites and see what else
is going on and then file a
protest. Am I wrong there?
Because that has been uh.
pattern in the past, Madam
Chair, Senator, I, I don't
disagree with you that there is
a potential for more litigation
there, but the, the key here is
that really we're trying to
provide notice to individuals.
And if they believe that
they're, uh, their rights, their
property rights are going to be
impacted or whatever their
operation is might be impacted
then, you know, they have a
right to bring that claim I't
disagree with that, Madam Chair
and Senator with Mr. Acosta, but
in the same instance whenever
you're putting that out in
electronic mail text.
messages combination of it all.
Instead of noting maybe.
If it's, let's take for instance
a farm, OK? They're wanting a
simple permit, let's say a deer,
even though they may have a
monitoring will and they may
have to change up some things.
Would they not be able to just.
Notify, have notification go out
to those lands adjacent to it.
Uh
Um
it's a process that is going to
be a hindrance to lots of
businesses. I just want to point
out though if you read on page
22 and 23, the existing law
already requires a posting and a
publication in a newspaper
in a newspaper and again we've
had this discussion about, I
mean, this is a due process
question. Is that fair? I mean,
if you've got a constituent on
the other side of this, you want
to make sure that they get the
notice, but I I hear what you're
saying, and again,
We want to also make sure that
someone, the thing that jumps
out to me is
You know, the notice now is by
mail and that's being struck on
the bottom of page 22 and it's
in its place. It's got postal or
electronic mail, so we're
Expanding that text message or a
combination of these methods. I
think we can look at this. I
mean, this is something I, I
hear what you're saying and on
the other side, it's the due
process piece, and it's making
sure that the notice is out
there to the world.
But I also understand, I mean,
right now, anyone who picks up
the newspaper and reads is gonna
have.
Well, unfortunately, our
newspaper.
Population of readers has
dwindled quite a bit and so have
our newspapers daily now becomes
weekly and all that type of
stuff. I do still read all the
legal notices that are in our
Sometimes weekly additions, so.
But
Whenever you're, I'm hearing
text messages.
How are you going to come up
with those.
Those numbers.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, um,
that would be through our
notification process, so if
somebody identifies themselves
as wanting to be notified via
text message. We would do that
if they want to be notified by
mail, we would do that if they
want to be notified by um email.
So it's, it's more of a self,
um.
Identification process, or the
department, you know, notifying
the department how they want to
be notified, um, we would also,
we have list serves and other,
um uh notification processes
that we would be using uh for
interested parties, and the
potentially affected is actually
Narrowing the scope of this
notification cause right now I
believe it says, you know,
local, we will notify local,
state, and federal governments,
land grant agencies, and it
doesn't qualify that right now,
so we're qualifying it as
potentially affected.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, but in response to the
statement you just gave there, I
can see it being a very big
problem in many, many instances,
and I think those should be
taken into consideration too,
especially if there's a person
out there that is trying to get
something done to be able to
make a living and to continue
the practices that they're.
forward with, Madam Chair, thank
you very much. I appreciate the
responses.
Thank you Senator Cedilla Lopez.
I move a you pass on SB 22 as
amended.
Second
OK, could the secretary please
call.
Senator Cervantes.
I want to, yes, Senator Charley,
yes, Senor Charlie, yes,
Senator, no.
No. Senator Hamblin, Senator
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope. Yes,
Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
and Scott? No. Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, no. Senator
just said Lopez. Yes.
Senator Lopez, yes, Senator
Stefaniks, yes, Sara Stephonics,
yes.
Senator worth by vote of 63, you
have a due pass of this bill as
amended.
Thank you everybody for
participating today. The
audience and the members. Thank
you.
We are in recess for some.
Yes
Well, we gave it to you.
Yeah.
