Memorial one, so good morning,
Senator. Oh, let's introduce our
guests, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
really pleased to introduce my
guest Adriana Cassau, who is
here with me from UNM, um, for
the entire week, and this is a
political science class and she
already tells me she's learned a
lot.
Welcome to the committee and to
the Senate. Thank you.
OK, Senator Padilla, thank you,
Madam Chair. Good morning Madam
Vice Chair and madam uh ranking
member and members of the
committee. I'm Senator Michael
Padilla, and this is Senate
Joint Memorial One. I don't like
to carry memorials unless their
joint memorials were actual work
has to be done, um, so
essentially what this we know
about the devastating issues we
faced with regard to these
massive wildfires and I just
repeatedly hear, gosh, we need
to clean up our forest. Gosh, we
could maybe do, do some business
and industry out of this. Gosh,
we could create jobs. Gosh, we
could, you know.
Whatever make the forest more
accessible, etc. and so uh with
that being said, you know, I
introduced a bill similar to
this about 5 or 6 years ago to
do a, so now we thought let's
just approach this from a a
joint memorial study by the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department and the
Economic Development department
and they'll convene a group that
will actually help us to
understand and make
recommendations to expedite
forest restoration through
economic development here in New
Mexico. The benefits and why we
should be doing this is again.
There is a tremendous economic
development opportunity. We used
to do this a long time ago. And
boy, I don't know how we got
away from it, but here we are
again and, and we wake up one
day and see half of our states
on fire and so we need to get
our hands around that. There is
obviously environmental benefits
by accelerating forest
restoration, we can enhance
ecosystem health, reduce
wildfires, which we all know has
been plaguing our state for some
time now, improve water quality
and contribute to our overall
environmental sustainability,
um, resource optimization, the
study will, will definitely help
us to
identify those efficient methods
to utilize uh forest resources
such as timber and biomass
promoting sustainable practices
and reducing waste. Uh there's
definitely a community benefit
because these communities will
become more, uh, probably, um,
you know, within the community
stewardship and then of course,
it does align, it will align our
our state priorities together
all in one place so that we put
these plans together and get
this work done and have these
great recommendations and start
moving ourselves in the
direction where, where we all
want to go. Thank you.
Oh, I'm sorry, the, the state
forester was going to be here,
Laura McCarthy, Madam Chair, um,
she was unable to be here today.
We didn't know how quickly we're
going to be heard, so she's,
she's, we don't have anybody
from that office, but they're
definitely fully supported.
Oh, you are from the office. OK,
please come up, um, we'd like to
hear from you.
It's like you're not supporting
or opposing.
type thing and please introduce
yourself to the record.
I'm William Foster, I'm the
Forest Mars coordinator for New
Mexico State Forestry Division.
OK, and does, uh, the state
forester have a position on this
memorial. She supports this
memorial.
She does it.
She's my expert witness, so
yeah.
Great. Thank you for that.
Is there anybody in the audience
here to support this memorial?
We, we know it's kind of out of
order. Yes, please come on up.
Madam Chairwoman and members of
the committee. My name is
Jillian Joyce, representing
Rocky Mountain Farmers Union and
our New Mexico members, RMFU
strongly supports Senate Joint
Memorial One. RMFU supports
sustainable forest management
that reduces wildfire risk,
improves watershed health and
strengthens our rural and
land-based economies. This
memorial aligns perfectly with
these priorities and is a
win-win for our land-based
communities and our forests. We
urge you to support
Senate Joint Memorial One to
build a more resilient New
Mexico that protects both our
natural resources and our
agricultural and rural
communities. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anybody
online supporting or opposing?
To support
OK, Danielle, you're online to
support. Go ahead, please.
Hello, um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name's
Danielle Duran. I am the
intergovernmental affairs
manager for Los Alamos County.
We have long supported any
measures to mitigate wildfire in
New Mexico, being victims of
several wildfires, uh, in our
community are ourselves. We know
the devastation that it can lead
to in everybody's lives and the
danger to places like Los Alamos
National Laboratory. We deeply
support this memorial and hope
that this committee will pass
it. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, in the
room, is there anybody opposing
this joint memorial online is
there anybody? No. OK, we are
now to uh committee members for
comments.
We have Senator Cio Lopez and
then Senator Ruzel.
Um,
Thank you, Madam President.
Uh, thank you, Madam President.
Of course, this is a good idea.
However, there's a couple of
concepts or a few concepts
missing from the report that I
think are really important. Um,
you say in the whereas clauses
that wildfire risk reduction
statewide is important, yet in
the recommendations and the
study, um.
Uh
That's not listed.
Well, you know, uh, wildfire
reduction, and that seems to me
really an important concept.
And then the second thing that's
not.
That's that I heard from one of
the supporters.
Um, and I'm supporting this
concept, this that this be
sustainable.
And that's not all, you know, at
least sustainable should be
somewhere, um, because I
remember the bad old days when
they were clear cuts.
When they, when it was
disastrous, you could, you know,
just environmentally disastrous.
And so I can't support this if
those two concepts are in there
are not in there.
Um, and then I was just also
wondering.
For appropriate distribution,
just the secretaries, um, I
always see these memorials go to
the governor, and I just was
wondering if there's a reason
they didn't go, they didn't go
to the governor.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, uh, if they're going
to the secretaries, they're
going to the governor.
OK.
Yeah, I, I just and, and, and,
and on point number 1, I hope
that you will support it, uh,
Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair, um.
I'm interested in any language
you might think would be helpful
here, but I, I think that's
broad enough to where what
you're describing is actually
covered, but I, I don't want to,
um, you know,
This, uh, not done the way you'd
like it done.
I would be happy, Madam Chair,
to work on um on some amendments
including those concepts,
particularly in the report
because the report is going to
do what you ask it to do, and
there's nothing about
sustainability and not nothing
about um
Wild wildfire risk reduction,
which is the point, I thought.
Um, so that's concerning, and so
I'd be happy to uh draft an
amendment for for your
consideration.
So we will go on uh.
We will go on, we have a center
as well, Senator Scott, anyone
else? And Senator Charlie.
The police sent a result.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator Padilla
and Mr. Foster, welcome to our
committee.
I, I don't know if senator.
Has looked at page 1 line 25,
whenever it's talking about
sustainable tree.
And I'd like to defer to her
over this.
Thank you for yielding to me.
Um, those are in the warehouse
classes, but look at what's in
the report.
And that to requested to study
and jointly develop
recommendations. There's nothing
there. That's where I would add
it.
I don't think it's a hostel.
Um
I, you know, I don't think this,
this weakens it. I think it
strengthens it.
And because the purpose is.
Wildfire reduction and so the
report and recommendations
should revolve around that.
And sustainability needs to be
part of this.
So it, it's in the in the on
page 2.
A B C D.
Lists what they are supposed to
uh deliver.
And that consideration is not
there.
OK, but madam chair and.
Senator
If you will look at section A,
line 13, including to retain
workforce and succession
planning.
I think that gets it covered
right there. That's just me
though, but you can make up
whatever.
Amendment you want to have on
this, but I think that it it's
pretty clear there and Senator
Padilla and I on the right track
here whenever we're talking
about succession planning. Madam
Chair and Vice Chair, Madam
ranking member, yeah, I feel
like everything that's the vice
chair mentioned is actually
covered here, I think there's
nothing prohibiting this group
from looking at other areas as
well, um.
And as it's called out in the
whereas area that's, that's
absolutely the work will begin
with this document.
And I feel like it's covered
there, but I, I, I want to
satisfy whatever the committee
feels is most important. I could
see us, um.
We're gonna give the floor back
to center so when the uh vice
chair has an amendment, we'll
talk about it and see if it's
friendly, so let's just go back
to Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you very much.
Madam Tier in the past we have
seen the devastating effects of
our.
Wildfires that have taken place
not just very recently, but in
years past.
And what we are seeing now,
especially up in my area down
there in the southeastern part
of the state, we are still
seeing those forces that belong
to the US Forest Service and the
state as well we've still got
timber standing, and it's posing
a threat.
Because when they now those
trees are totally dead.
Uh, whenever the wind blows,
they do fall. It, it can.
Into humans, it can injure
wildlife, it can injure
livestock whenever we're talking
about that. What we're seeing
coming up, Madam Chair.
And Senator Padilla.
is we're seeing scrub brush come
up, we are seeing cedar take its
place, cedar, you know, is.
Drinks up water like you can't
believe so that therefore it is
depleting our watersheds in
those particular areas.
We have seen
I can't tell you the number of
friends that my parents used to
have and even I had uh whenever
I was growing up that did have
so sawmills located in up in the
mountains, and it was a viable
industry there.
And I think that we need to go
back.
To having a viable industry.
In conjunction with keeping our
force.
Healthy
And as I've told y'all before,
madam chair and Senator Padilla.
The Healthy forest has no more
than 50 trees per acre on it.
If we're going to
Promote our wildlife
expectation.
They have to be able to eat.
There is nothing growing under
these forests that are just so
packed full of trees that even
the spotted owl has left that
area.
They, they hunt.
On the ground and whenever they
can't get through it, that's a
sad state of affairs, Madam
Chair, I'd like to tell a little
story this past summer after the
fires.
Swept through the Ridoso area.
We, my husband and I were having
supper one night.
He said the couple was sitting
at across the aisle from us
where we were eating.
And uh
We could hear them talking, my
husband.
It has really good hearing
unfortunately, cause I mutter
under my breath sometimes.
He, uh, he overheard what they
were saying, and this gentleman.
Was importing wood chips from
Australia.
Wait just a minute.
ships from Australia.
In the state of New Mexico we
have.
5 horse tracks, race tracks
going on.
They bid those horses on wood
shavings.
Whenever there is a county fair
or a state fair going on, they
bid those animals on wood chips.
That industry should be taking
place here in the state of New
Mexico. Those are good paying
jobs as well.
Plus, after those wood chips are
spent.
They're very good for mulching
people's gardens and lawns and
everything else.
So we're just kind of adding
back to the soil, protecting our
soil.
I see that this is many
opportunities for us as
legislators to say we care about
our forest.
We want to be able to attract
jobs, create jobs.
Have uh
We need to have
Our communities get involved in
this as well because.
We have a
We've got to get those.
Those trees that have now fallen
that are gonna lay there and rot
until the next fire comes
through and it's going to add to
the fuel aspect of another fire
whenever we do have one.
Madam Cheer
And Senator Padilla, I was
looking at the which one is
this?
The office of the superintendent
of insurance, have you been able
to read that analysis yet?
Uh yes.
Madam Madam Chair and Senator
Padilla down at the bottom of
this, we are talking about the
memorial sets a deadline of
September 1st, 2025 within the
study is that your
recommendation there that it be
done by September.
Verse 2025.
Mount and Madam, um.
ranking member, yes, that's on
page 3, line 18.
And Madam Chair, can you tell me
why you are really pushing for
that to take place that soon for
this study to take place, Madam
Chair and Madam ranking member,
uh, because I want there to be
about, I think there's gonna be
a lot of that will come out of
this report, and I think that
there's going to be probably
multiple pieces of legislation
that will need to be worked on
before the 26th legislative
session. I'm hoping that we get
a lot of that done before we
arrived,
I agree with you wholeheartedly,
therefore that deadline there. I
hope they will be able to get
it.
done because
The factor that remains there
that it's going to be of.
Benefit to the state and the
hindrance to the state, I think
it's very obvious what's going
on there.
We have to get this done to
protect New Mexico.
We also have to get this done.
So we don't have any more
devastating wildfires.
Economic development department,
they need to be on board.
Uh working with energy, minerals
and natural resources.
And I think that.
With the bills that have been
carried this session in in
addition to the bills carried
last session.
It is very
Clear, I think.
To these agencies that we're fed
up with our state being burned
to the ground.
People losing their homes,
people losing their livelihood
people.
Displaced people having to move
out of our state because there's
nothing left for him here.
Whenever our watersheds are
being affected by these fires
and with what's growing in its
place where the trees once were
and where the grass is.
And Madam chair that we have
various.
Down in the southeastern corner
of the state that through the
effects of these fires, we have
soils now.
That cannot sustain anything
growing. So the erosion problem
is great.
A lot of these tributaries that
come down out of the mountains.
They do contribute to how we're
able to pay back.
Our obligation to the state of
Texas, and now we don't have
that opportunity because of the
cedars that are growing in this
place. Nothing will eat the
cedars.
Unfortunately
But we do have to have our, our
forest managed.
Whenever we are seeing what has
taken place because of these
wildfires.
Through
The cost of insurance on homes
now is unbelievable.
Uh, we do have a place up in
Rioso, and we got our renewable
on the insurance part of it.
And it was over a 300% increase.
And that's, that's unbelievable,
unbelievable.
And everybody is facing it,
those that did lose their homes,
sometimes the insurance is
saying.
We may not pay for this.
They're out of home.
We just have
Our insurance rates raised 300%.
Madam Turer and Senator Padilla.
What is the environment
department telling you about
this? I'm, I'm real curious to
know. I don't see an analysis
from an analysis from them in my
packet and I'd, I'm really
curious to know what they have
to say about this, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair I've heard
nothing from the Environment
department either other than in
the interim committee meetings
that we had on the topic when it
would come up.
And just that we need to do
something and that they're more
than supportive of.
Being a part of the
conversation.
Madam, two of them being part of
the conversation, their lack of
appearance here today is very
troubling to me.
And
They are the ones that.
In my opinion, started a lot of
this mess at New Mexico is
facing right now.
They are the ones that
effectively.
And all the
Whoa.
That gets everybody's attention
in a hurry.
I feel like
Environment Department is
responsible for getting the
majority of all the sawmills
shut down.
Um
The way it's affected lots of
people that were in the.
Wood harvesting business.
Um
It put a big dent in the way
they were able to make a living.
We
Thank you very much.
I wish that they would be here
today. I'd like to hear their
comments on this. I am going to
support this bill.
But whenever we're talking about
what we
And I'm going to say the
majority of all citizens.
Understand what has happened to
our state, the effects that it
had not only on just those
communities, but the smoke that
was rolling through there.
The way it was affecting those
that did have a respiratory
problem.
That was very harmful to those
people and to their families
trying to be able just to
breathe with all that smoke that
was going through.
Madam Cheer
Whenever we in the Ridoso area
and I'm sure that you have seen
the effects of.
The fire and then the flooding
that took place and what all
ensued from there, we have areas
up there in the Riddos area that
have literally been wiped out.
And that's unconscionable and
what's happened.
Madam Cheer, I think this is,
this is a good start to
Making the environment
department step up and let's get
together and let's all work
together to get this going.
There is a
An industry out there.
That does need to be put back in
place we have.
Lots of people.
That can make a living.
With the wood products that are
available by making our forests
sustainable, we could take a
real good example.
Um
Escaleros up there, the
Mescalero tribes up there, what
they have done with their force
and it's amazing.
Madam Chair
That's where that spotted owl is
now living because it can hunt
there again.
They have record.
Uh, boom and crockett elk up
there in that area because those
ilk do have a place to eat.
They did have sawmill. I'm not
real sure if it's still in
operation now.
But it is
One way that we can put a lot of
people to work and in turn help
our forest. So Madam Chair,
Senator Padilla, thank you very
much.
Uh, thank you, Senator Padilla,
did you want to respond to
anything before I go on to the
next person OK I tend to agree
with 98% of what was said there
and we do have the amendment and
I'm
I see it as friendly.
OK, so let's go on to, well,
let's back up then to to Senator
Lopez and the amendment.
That is prepared if everybody
would look at the blue sheet.
And uh Senator Padilla is the
sponsor is indicating it's
friendly. Yes.
OK. Senator Aidia Lopez to
explain the amendment.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator, I apologize for not
giving this to you in advance,
to be honest, I wasn't prepared.
Um, I was so busy yesterday that
I didn't have time.
But, um, but I think it would be
strengthened by on page 2
of on line 12 after fully
functioning.
Insert sustainable. And um on
page.
2.
Um, I mean, on page 3, on line
3, after the semicolon insert,
what incentives, legal actions,
and regulations are needed to
ensure healthy forests that will
reduce wildfire risk.
Friendly.
OK, so discussion on the
proposed amendment, Senator
Townsend on the amendment.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair.
De Lopez.
Would you
give us what you believe the
legal definition is for fully
functioning.
And why that is important to
add.
Uh, Madam Chair, fully
functioning is already in, in
the proposed bill in the
proposed uh memorial.
Um
After fully functioning, I want
to insert sustainable.
And sustainable, Madam Chair,
um, is very well known among uh.
Among horticulturists, among
forest people, among as
something that that is something
that's not depleting.
Um, and so that's all I'm trying
to get at is that the forest
would not be depleting.
That is my point.
Madam Chair, and I wanna make
sure we all understand and it's
over the record.
Sustainable.
In this case, if you say it's
not depleting.
And the report comes back from
the Forest Service that
A number of trees need to be
removed. Would you consider,
would you still support
Removing the trees because it
reduces the forest fire.
Um, madam, madam chair, my
understanding is that a healthy
forest, um, and I believe um
Energy Ael said this several
times, has about 50 trees per
acre.
And, and so I would totally
support that. OK, I just want to
make sure that we're not
tripping up because I was very
interested yesterday, and I
think it was correct, um.
Senator Stewart, when we were
talking about education
yesterday.
The question was posed for what
did we do wrong? And, and she
said,
Um, and
I'll paraphrase it, because I
don't want to, or I, I don't
mean to quote her exactly, but
she said we, meaning educators
across New Mexico were sold a
bill of goods.
that.
You know, if we did this to the
classrooms and made them more
friendly, etc. etc. It would
improve learning and it didn't.
We need processes that really
earning, learning.
And I think the exact same thing
has happened in the
environmental world.
About, oh, we gotta leave the
forest alone because it'll be a
better place and it really isn't
a better place. Water has been
depleted.
Species have been depleted and
they hid behind the ESA.
As saying, Madam Chair, these
are things, yes. I apologize,
Madam Chair and Senator, I am uh
absolutely needed in another
room, so I'm going to ask
Senator Charlie to sit in for me
with your permission, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I will come back if
needed, but uh I want you to
keep doing all the there for I
cannot miss.
Thank you. Thank you.
So, uh
So I, go ahead, please. Ma'am, I
just, I think it's really
important that we all understand
that and because we have to make
changes in
In our forests, if we're gonna
prevent forest fires and part of
that change is going to be that
we're going to have to remove a
lot of trees.
And, and I think it's important
and as long as you understand
that and support that, I'll
support the amendment.
Um, because I think they go hand
in hand.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Any other
comments on the amendment.
Is there a motion?
Yeah
You've moved to do, well, this
is on the amendment only.
On the amendment. You moved to
DuPass.
On the amendment. Is there, and
there is a 2nd.
Is there any opposition, the
amendment has uh been put on to
Senate Joint Memorial One.
So now back on the memorial, I
have senator Scott next.
Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Charlie's
The
to.
Relatively important.
Organizations.
It should be a part of this
conversation.
One being the US Force Service.
And the other being the private
sector.
So
It doesn't look to me like given
the amount of force in the state
that are.
Managed by the federal
government that
This sturdy
Would, uh
would be very beneficial without
those two entities involved,
could we?
Did we have a conversation about
why those weren't in there.
So Senator, let's have the
expert witness, uh, respond to
that since Senator Charlie has
just taken this.
Uh, seek temporarily.
Please, William.
You, Madam Chair,
sir, so.
The US Forest Service has been
involved in the conversation.
They are not directly involved.
In the Senate Joint Memorial.
Um, the private sector is a
major part of a fully
functioning 4 system for us. And
so the private sector for this
Senate Joint Memorial is going
to play a major role in us
achieving the goal of a.
OK, did we?
Do, do we know?
Monsieur.
What happened to our logging
industry.
Hm
Destroy it
Madam Chair, uh, sir, so my,
from my perspective, and this is
only speaking from my
perspective.
The way our forests are set up.
We are a slower growing, and so
we don't compete as much with
the organs in Washington states.
So that has put a strain on our
ability to have supply here to
create sustainable private
sector.
We are also like every other
state dealing with a workforce
challenge. And so what you see
in a lot of our firms here in
the state, is they are aging
out, um, and so right now in
pretty much every committee I
sit in with partnerships with
Colorado. That is one of the
first or two topics that come up
is what is the next generation
of firms going to look like? Who
are they going to be owned by?
And right now, that pipeline is
not being.
being supported or developed in
a way that it needs to be. And
so it is a major part of every
conversation I'm in. So, Madam
Chair.
Mm
There's
There's nobody coming into the
system.
That would be able to
To
Flog these forests and so
madam's here, sir, I, I would
say we have about another 1520
years. Um, so the majority of
our firm owners right now are in
the baby boomer generation, um,
and right now what we are
working on is to develop some
pipeline initiatives, so we are
working on something, um, called
the Smokey Bear Forest
Entrepreneurship camp.
Um, where we would develop the
forest entrepreneurs for
tomorrow, uh, but in that
window, we are, there is concern
that the expertise that is there
now may have a hard time
transitioning. One of the major
obstacles right now is the
training cost. So the firms who
have these equipments, um,
These are $100,000 plus
equipment.
A lot of them were not willing
to put 18 year olds on them, as
you may imagine, um, and so the
question is how do we train them
in what capacity can we train
them? There is some conversation
with Northern New Mexico's
community college, where we may
partner with them to develop a
training program, but right now
it's hard to ask firms to take
on that amount of risk on
equipment that is already hard
to come by and hard to finance.
And
I
Are we
Soliciting at this time.
Out of state organizations that
have the equipment and manpower.
To come into the state.
The
Help solve these problems.
Madam chair, sir, yes, we are.
So there's a 232 conservation
committee, uh, finance committee
that I sit on, it's a
partnership with Colorado. We do
bring in a lot of out of state
um partners um from nonprofits
to private sector to help us,
um.
It's obviously something we
would like to develop more
in-state capacity to do, because
everybody has a lot of heavy
lifting, but we are creating
partnerships.
OK, and last question.
Are there enough forests in the
state.
I think
Commercial logging outfits
recognized 100 years ago.
That it was appropriate.
To be replanting what was
harvested.
So that
Their operations would could go
on forever.
And I guess the question is, is
there enough?
Accessible forests in the state.
To provide for
Uh, logging sawmill operations
that would
In effect
Go on forever.
Madam Chair, uh, sir.
So there are traditional for
states, we are more in a
restoration situation here in
New Mexico where we are
rebuilding the healthy forest.
What I would say is that.
It's not so much a matter of, is
it just going to be wood
products. So, New Mexico has an
opportunity to be a leader in
forestry tech, so the picks and
axes of what allow for a healthy
force, uh, write down one of the
projects we have is uh a new
initiative called the Forest
Tech Collaborative, and it is
partnering with New Mexico Tech
and Navajo Tech to build out
databases that allow for us to
have a better understanding of
who our landowners are, what's
happening on their lands?
We're also building out a
platform that would allow for
our businesses, the private
sector that we do have here.
be able to export their
products. So one of the things
when I visit sawmills that
a major challenges.
They don't have great web
presences. They're not really
well known. They do amazing
work, but
I don't know who they are.
And so we are working on ways to
be able to incentivize.
our business and to have a
broader customer base, but also
so that they're more willing.
So one of the things that we
have the ability here for is
with our intellectual
capitalists coming out of our
hearts.
Community colleges and higher
education institutions.
to develop things that other
states will want to use.
So, so we may be developing
something.
Technologies that allow for
sustainable forests.
for healthy for
And also develop new
uses for um
For some of the wood products.
We, I've had a conversation with
you and know about designing a
bicycle around Pinon.
And so it's, it's what we're
looking.
Where the imagination for the
next generation of wood product.
Um, so I think.
There's absolutely enough. um,
there are new opportunities in
biomass and other wood products
um that have not been explored
yet, but in order to incentivize
that exploration. Obviously,
they have to be infrastructure
in place for them.
That's all for now.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Charlie, you
were on the list. You, did you
wanna make some comments,
especially for the department to
here or anything you'd like to
add into this.
Man, I'll make this brief, um.
would
Appreciate a we out clause in
this memorial, um, the
traditional knowledge systems of
tribes nations of my colleagues.
Have a name
Um,
and then just to make another
note and I'll, I'll talk to
Senator Padilla about this
because it insert that, but send
that memorial too which is on
the docket for us this morning.
I think that's a really good job
of it, of outlaying.
inclusion.
That, um, I think they'll.
I'll I'll leave it at that.
So, uh, Senator, do you want
that amendment to be developed
here or you'll talk to him about
it for the next committee.
Thank you very much.
Committee members, are we ready
for a motion on this joint
memorial.
Certainly, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I've been, I've just been a
little time looking back
historically what's going on
and, and
If you look back in the 1960 to
1970 era.
Um, the New Mexico was producing
about 250 million board feet of
lumber annually. A lot of that
came from
Big sawmills that were on tribal
properties, and and they they
flourished at that time.
Since then
Um
It has nosedived. So,
I think, I think you're right,
um, in your commentary about the
size of, of force and the fast
growing in New Mexico, but
When we opened it up and let
American ingenuity thrive, they
developed markets and jobs for
many New Mexicans.
And, and I think we have
Inadvertently or maybe
purposely, I don't know, that's
another whole conversation. We
destroyed that.
And we're, so we're gonna have
to spend time and effort this
report and probably some money
to help develop.
Those jobs in the future in that
market, but there is
And there was a market for um
that sustained in New Mexico.
Uh, sawmills for years and
years, and 250 million board
feet is not.
Some change. I mean, it, it is a
significant amount, but when we
do that, we also clean forests
and we do a lot of good things.
So, I look forward to the
report, and uh I think uh
If we, if we do that, we'll,
we'll build jobs and we'll build
careers and opportunities, and
maybe we won't have to worry
about baby boomers, maybe it'll
be Gen X's and millennials.
And in a workforce that um
Um, that provide a future and,
and also clean force. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senators, before we
go to a motion.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I was just wondering if
there was anybody here from the
economic development district.
apartment. Is anybody here from
EDD?
Oh, madam chair, the reason I'm
asking that I would like for
them to clarify.
They are stating that they
probably need one more full-time
employee just to make sure that
they can get this done by the
time frame.
On what ideas they should use, I
think that this committee has
been pretty.
Forthcoming and coming up with
lots of ideas for them and doing
their job for them, so I'm
concerned about why we have to
have another full-time employee
that's just my commentary, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
very much.
Thank you, Senator. I will text
the secretary just like I have
other secretaries from other
departments, uh, when we've had
bills that relate to them and
see what their response is.
Uh, committee members, are we
ready for a motion.
OK, there is a motion and uh.
Second on the bill as amended or
the sorry, the joint memorial
one as amended. Could the
secretary please call the vote.
Senator Cervantes.
Excuse Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Zel.
Sanel, yes, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. And her Pope, yes,
and her Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, San Dia Lopez.
Yes, Sandi Lopez, yes, San
Stephonics, Shonics, yes.
You have um you and Senator
Michael Padilla have a unanimous
due pass. Thank you very much
for sitting in for him. And um
we are now to Senator Woods,
Senate Bill 471.
Welcome, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods has a bill and a memorial,
perhaps we can get them both
done before I.
Thank you Madam Chair, we're on.
Senate bill
471, right?
OK.
Uh, Senate Bill 471.
Establishes a rainfall
enhancement pilot program
between Roosevelt so and Water
Conservation District in New
Mexico State University.
To study the effects of rainfall
enhancement programs in the
state, the results of the pilot
project were reported by
Annually by the state.
Uh, climatologist housed at New
Mexico.
appropriates 1.2 million from
the general fund.
And uh Mexico State University.
With the uh
Help of the climate state
climatologist.
We'll be doing that, so.
Um
I'll be happy. I've got some
experts with me here.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, first I want to talk to.
Uh
Let any vehicle
talk because I don't know
whether how well you guys uh
don't leave it.
Uh, how well you understand soil
and water conservation district,
but just a quick explanation of
that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eddie B.
Hill. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Soil and Water Conservation
Districts.
We are a political subdivision
of the state of New Mexico.
And uh
We're duly elected just like you
all are. We serve on the general
election ballot.
But we do serve.
pleasure of our constituents
just as you do.
Oh
Likein
The Roosevelt soil and Water
District is one of the 47
districts in the state.
And uh
Like I said, we do support this.
Rain enhancement project they.
They've tried this for a number
of years and uh
They've been very successful in
in what they have done so far.
Thank you. And uh Charlie Marcus
will be my expert witness also.
I'll let Charlie speak just a
second.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Charlie Mark is
registered lobbyist for the
Roosevelt soil and Water
Conservation District.
Uh, last year was actually our
first year, our first full year
of um.
Rainfall enhancement.
Uh, prior to that we had a a
very small appropriation where
we basically flew twice.
Uh, not enough to really uh.
Gather substantial data to
justify what we're doing this
last year, uh.
We flew, I'm not sure what the
number of flights were, but they
they were in uh June, July.
In August, uh, and the results
were really uh.
quite outstanding. We've got
somebody online, uh, his name is
George Beaumar.
He actually was the former
climatologist in Texas.
And he does contract for this
kind of work. Roosevelt soil and
Water has been using him for the
last
Uh, I don't know, 3 years or so.
Um, and, uh, again, he really is
the one that understands this.
We did uh partner with New
Mexico State University, uh, for
the New Mexico, uh, state
climatologist and he validated
all of the work that we did.
Thank you.
Madam Chair
Are, are sure enough experts
down in the dirt knowing what's
going on is online but instead
of going that way.
Uh, I will ask.
questions that he could answer
directly if you have any of
those.
Thank you Madam.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
the audience. How many people
are here to support this bill.
There's a couple people, uh, if
you'd come up, please. Is there
anybody here to oppose this
bill? Is there anybody online?
There's one in opposition. OK,
so let's hear from the
supporters in the room.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Debbie Hughes
with the on the executive
director with the Association of
Conservation Districts. Um, this
is a great program. It has been
used in, in Texas and
surrounding states for many,
many years. This is another
thing where New Mexico seems to
be behind on using some really
good technology. Um, so we hope
you support this. I'd love to
see it expanded up into the
mountains, although I understand
you have to use ground units
instead of airplanes, uh, if
you're trying to seed up in the
mountains.
So, um, we hope you vote yes for
this. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Jim Berlier,
uh, registered lobbyist with the
storil and water Conservation
Districts and I also would like
to ask for support for this.
It's proven technology, it's not
some experimental deal it's been
proven to work in Texas and
several other places, so I just
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, and let's hear
from your expert online. What
was his name?
George Beaumont.
George, do you want to say a few
words? Beaumar, OK.
Yes.
Uh, Madam Chair, my name is
George Beaumar. I'm a state
meteorologist, now retired, and
I
Advise Roosevelt soil and water
conservation district on the
practice and the promise of re
enhancement through cloud
seeding.
Most states in the American West
have been seeding over 50 years
in mountainous terrain to
augment the snowpack during
winter.
And for the last 40 years,
seeding has been going on in
states in the Great Plains.
To see thunderstorms during the
growing season in order to coax
them to provide additional
rainwater.
We've used Doppler weather radar
to verify that seated storms are
living 44% longer.
Then the neighboring storms that
are not seated.
The area where rain occurs is
nearly 50% larger.
And the total rainwater volume
is more than double that of
unseeded storms.
Seeing does not aggravate any
storm into becoming severe or
destructive.
And we've uncovered no evidence
that enhancing rainfall in one
area deprives other areas of
their normal rainwater.
Every vigorous study that's been
done, not only here but abroad,
and there are more than 50
countries that are using cloud
seeding now.
Every one of those studies has
found no evidence.
That seeding materials like
silver iodide pose any risk to
the environment.
Thank you for your time. I'm
happy to address any questions.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll go to
the opposition online, we have
Lorraine Villegas. Good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, can you guys hear me?
Yes.
Uh, thanks for giving me the
opportunity to comment, um,
I oppose this bill and maybe I
just have a lot left to learn
here because I'm definitely no
expert, and I don't represent
any organization. I represent
the working class, um,
And the taxpayer and the common
folk, and I'd like to see what's
being done with our taxes, and
I've been trying my best to
learn about the science behind
this project, and I know that it
was done last year because the
Senator Jack failed sponsored
the bill, and I, I hear it, here
it is again, and what I'm mostly
interested in because the
language in this is so vague, it
leaves too much room for me to
wonder, and what I wonder about
are the materials. I know that
silver iodide is one that can be
used.
Um, and ice nucleation among
along with silica and there's
one in particular that did catch
my attention and coincidentally,
it can be used in a lot of other
things that I've seen on the
table, this legislative session,
including environmental
solutions and climate, um
solutions such as carbon
capture, water purification and
water reuse, even soil
remediation and that material
is, it's called graphene and
there's a lot of scientific
journals and
s t ud ies and patents on it
that I don't mind sending if
anybody's interested in that
science, um, I'm wondering if
graphing is going to be used and
it's also a semiconductor, and
if it is, well, the, I know
there's an industry commission
that governs the licensing of
weather modification in our
state. So will this information
be disclosed to the public, or
will it be hidden? Is there
potential that it could be
hidden behind trade secrets. And
I also noticed in the language,
um,
The word liability that there's
no liability, so
As the burden going to be on the
taxpayers like everything else
is, but those are mostly my main
concerns. And until I learn any
better, I, I stand in strong
opposition to this bill, and I
urge
You guys to vote no. Uh, thanks
for your time and God bless.
Thank you very much. Is there
anyone in the room to oppose
this bill?
Thank you. We are now going to
Questions and comments from the
committee members.
Uh, Senator Townsend, Senator
Hamblin.
Please go ahead, Senator
Townsend. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator, for
your bill.
Um
I
correctly.
This
typically enhances
A snowpack by 10%. Is that
correct? Yes.
And
Um
Madam Chair
Senator
This increases.
Um
storms are seeded.
Or
About 40
4% stronger.
And the rainfall from those
seated.
storms
Produced twice.
The rainfall
That non-seeded.
storms produce. Is that correct?
That's, that's the what we.
Are sure that happens but again
a report will come back on this,
and you will have some data to
actually look at.
Now
This committee, Madam Chair, and
many of the members.
Sitting up here have expressed
concern.
About
Water
Um, there have been many
comments about
Um, the need for
More
You know, sustainable.
Uh, in your experience with this
process.
In other states.
Where it has been tried, they're
still doing it today, is that
correct, Madam Chair?
Yes.
and
Madam Chair
And Senator, are you aware of
reports from those other states
that also confirm, um,
The benefits of, of enhancement.
Um, Madam Chair.
We're getting into some pretty
technical questions if I could
ask my expert on the zoo.
John to
To elaborate on these.
These questions
Please go ahead.
Mr. Beaumar
Yes, Madam Chair George Beaumart
again.
Every state with the exception
of Washington, west of the
continental divide is doing
cloud seeding.
Uh, for snowpack augmentation.
Uh, these programs run
continuously every year.
And they do evaluations on an
annual basis.
They've shown consistently that
Snowpack is being increased.
That the 10% is a very
conservative estimate.
In rainfall, uh, we've been
doing it in Texas or
40 years now we've had access to
Doppler weather radar.
For the last 25 years.
And we've been able to document
that rainfall from ceded storms
is 2.3 times that of unseeded
storms.
Uh, we're using the material.
Paul Silver Eye died.
That is a very effective seeding
agent.
It poses no threat to the
environment.
Uh, we're beginning to use
salts, increasingly because of
the continental nature of more
of the rain systems that are
taking place now and that's a
reflection of climate change or
global warming.
So we see this as a, as a piece
to deal with.
The way our climate is changing
and not for the better.
Yeah.
Senator Townsend has you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Mr.
Beaumar. I, I mean, when you
have
Surrounding states that abused
who have claimants.
Typically like ours, Nevada.
Arizona.
Texas, Utah.
And my
My investigation say they use
it, they've been successful and
they continue to fund it because
it makes sense.
I think, uh, when you see that
kind of stuff, um,
Um
Uh, we're kind of missing the
boat, so I, I look forward to
supporting the.
Project because I think it does
exactly what we need, and that
is.
Makes more water available for
New Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I, I'm uh
looking forward to this project
because I think we do need to
try and come up with different
creative ways to help our
farmers, especially, so I do
support this. I do have a
question though, Senator Woods
and Madam Chair, is the bill
asks for 1.2 million, but
there's the House bill.
362, that is, that is exactly
the same and asks for 3.6
million and it's for three
years. And so I'm just
wondering, um, Madam Chair, and
Senator, why only for one year
instead of 3 years. Is there
some, uh, a rationale to that?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, I'll let Charlie
Marcus, he's, he's been chasing
these better than I.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Uh, Hamlin
What happened was we were asking
for 3 years.
But because we didn't get
included in the House
recommendations.
I said
I'm, I'm only gonna go for one,
and then we'll come back next
year with the results of that
study in hopes that we can get
recurring money.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Further questions,
comments, Senator Scott, and
Senator.
I mean, it looks like this has
been pretty successful.
In
9 states.
I guess the question would be
why are we
Just
Providing money for a pilot
program.
I
This is not considered.
proven technology in New Mexico.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
I don't know how to say this.
Sometimes
Sometimes we are led.
So much emotion.
That we're afraid to look at the
fact.
And what I'm trying to bring
forward here today is, is some
facts.
Um, I'm asking for.
A pilot
So that I can bring back to you
direct facts.
Uh
I think I have enough
information.
To show you facts.
But it's not New Mexico facts.
So maybe if I show you New
Mexico facts.
It will make a difference.
So
That's, that's
That's my thinking on the deal.
I don't know how it's gonna work
out, you know.
So
Madam Chair and Senator.
is one year's data.
Enough
To prove the concept of here.
And
We could have just had a wet
year.
Well, with
With Doppler radar.
We can actually see
storms within
Those clusters we can't, we
can't see them all.
So we will have that.
That sample that's unseeded.
And we will be able to see how
those storms react.
To it
So that's the thought on this
is.
With the, you know, we have much
better radar today than we did
just a few years ago.
So that's where I'm going with
this. We're gonna have
opportunities to see a a broader
scope of information right here
at home.
And Madam Chair and senator, I
believe I saw.
Somewhere here that this water
was being produced.
Or something like 1010 bucks an
acre foot.
That's a pretty good buy.
New Mexico needs water really
bad, Madam Chair, really bad
and.
You know
This should be a place that we
could.
try to actually make water.
And, and, uh.
That's a pretty hard thing to
do, making water.
But uh if anything New Mexico
needs right now is to make some
water.
The, the last question, Madam
Chair and Senator, being a
pilot.
I've spent my life trying to
stay out of thunderstorm.
If these
Aerial applicators go through.
These, uh
The storm systems to see.
Well it's
Underway
Is that
How that
process works.
Again, uh
Madam chair
haven't had a whole lot of
experience in, in, uh.
Small plane, but once in my life
I went up with a.
Uh, a little more of a
daredevil, and
He did say, let me show you
something.
And we just went over kind of
close to one of those
thunderstorms.
That old plane got hard to sit
in.
And so when you asked me,
About these guys.
I don't know, madam Chair.
Um, but I know that they're
experienced at what they do.
And so
I've got faith that they can,
they can do what they say they
can do. They are doing what
they're doing, but I can't
answer your question.
again, asked my expert if you
would like.
That's OK.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator, you
may rest assured that I'm not
going to apply.
For a job as an aerial cedar.
Thank you, thank you, madam.
Thank you. I have Senator and
and Senator Charlie, Senator
Rosel.
Madam
Let's take the comment, uh
please hold that motion. Let's
take the comment from Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator. I am curious about
any conversations that happened
with tribes, nations or pueblos
in the development of this
program.
And I'll turn that over to
Charle Marcus
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Charlie, uh, we actually in this
process, we, we have to apply
with the interstate stream
commission.
In the process, they take input.
And the uh Indian nations
will say uh did provide input.
They provided comment, uh, we do
work with them. Uh, we are very
interested in seeing in in those
areas as well.
Uh, and, and thus far we've not
had any negative uh input, uh,
from that area.
And, and Madam Chair and Senator
Charlie, we do have Frank Scott
here with the uh Interstate
stream if you would like to ask
him directly.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for that offer, um.
and I'll I'll pass, but what I
will say is, um.
The, the clouds.
For every single tribe nation or
deities are up there.
And this would cause extreme
disruption.
Or our deity.
And so if our tribes, nations,
and couples haven't come forward
with negative.
Um, I am curious what those
comments are gonna save us.
That conversation for today, but
it's just important that as
we're thinking about this
technology, which is absolutely
needed. I don't disagree with
that.
Um, that we are centering the
the indigenous knowledge and
history about how it disrupts.
Um
Culture
Practices, tradition, you know,
and in my tribe.
Which is, I, I'm a citizen of
the pueblo of Laguna. We, we
dance and give offerings for
rain.
Since the very beginning of
time, we were on this earth, and
this would cause a disruption to
the way that we practice.
And I, I am very curious with
the unintended.
Bizarre.
For enabling this this
technology.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Woods. I, I know
you've brought
Something similar
and passed
Um, quick question, um, do we
have any data?
prior bill or did that not pass?
and I will turn that over to
Charlie Mars.
Madam Chair, Senator Pope, uh, a
document was produced as a
result of this. It's a 100 page
document.
Um, what we do have here to make
it easier is an executive
summary.
And I brought that with me today
along with studies about silver
iodide.
And the um.
How, how safe it is to use, so
we do have that data.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I, I think there's
a lot of controversy with this
and folks have concerns and
You know, there's always the
stuff on the internet about
chemtrails and other show the
data to.
overcome a lot of these fears at
the same time.
Um, what we're collecting data
on silver iodide and things like
that. What are the law?
protecting in those areas. Last
question, Madam Chair, um, and
you may not know, uh, of the
chair of judiciary here. Is
there any
Impact with what we're doing.
Um, because in essence, it's all
the same water, we're just
choosing to really
Have it come down and, and it's
more and more in a specific
area.
And so are we going to get into
Legal matters when it comes to
New Mexico getting more of the
water before it gets over to
Texas.
Has there been conversations or
any issues regarding
seating
Um, from other states or fight
over that right.
We on that.
Mr. Beaumar, uh.
Madam Chair, our, our expert on
Zoom can answer that question.
He spent many years.
In the Texas area.
Yes, Madam Chair George Beaumar
again.
The cloud seeding that was done
late last summer in New Mexico
was confined to
Essentially, the eastern third
of the state.
We know that when we see a
storm.
That it will begin to provide
additional rainwater within a
matter of minutes.
And
The storm system would be seated
up until it.
Uh, approached a border such as
the New Mexico Texas border.
Uh, the storm would essentially
rain out before it would cross
the border into the state of
Texas.
If there were some residual
effect, it would be positive,
uh, all of the research that's
been done on downwind effects.
Indicates that a seated storm
will continue to rain more.
Even after ceding his ended, uh,
for as far as 50 miles downwind.
Um, we've had no, no feedback,
no complaints from anybody in
Texas about.
The amount of rainfall that's
been falling from storms that
were treated in New Mexico.
And I don't anticipate that we
will.
Thank you.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair. And so really my question
is not about the continuation of
the rainfall in Texas, but
What if we're in a situation to
where, where cloud seeding
making most, most, most of the
moisture here in New Mexico.
And then text is claiming.
They're not getting as much as
much of them.
I think that's, I don't need an
answer. I just think it's
something in the long term we
need.
consider states are gonna
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Madame Cheer once again, I will
ask for a due pass on Senate
Bill 471.
a second.
Senator Cervantes, Senator
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
No one to explain that Charlie
No, Santel.
Sanoel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. Our Pope, yes, and her
Scott.
Yes
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
And Townsend, yes, Senator Saa
Lopez, excuse Senator
Stephonics. Senator Stephonics,
yes, uh, center.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I do believe
there is a way forward through
this technology, but right now I
have to believe that I'm
standing with my ancestors and
our deities saying wait for us.
Of these conversations.
Thank you, madam.
Let me, let me look at that.
Amendment, please.
Does she have the right to
Mhm
OK, this is the one that I want.
I'm sorry, that last amendment
was put on.
And another committee.
So What committee senator did
you go to before here?
This is the first committee,
isn't it?
Then it can't the the memorial
can't be amended yet.
No, it can't be.
I, I tell you what.
Tell you what's happening, Madam
Chair, and I know that we're,
we're talking out of turn here,
but let me explain what's
happening.
We're trying to form a group, a
study group.
And every time I turn around
someone else wants on this the
study groups.
So
The, what probably happened was
I am I.
I have Senator, you went to a
rules.
Breaking the rules. No, you
didn't, you might be breaking
the rules.
Oh.
Ma'am, this has been seen in in
one committee. It was seen in
rules and amended in rules.
OK, so now you want to amend it
again. Yeah.
OK. I like.
That happened, but I'm so shell
shocked I'm, I'm surprised that
I, I.
So far out of line up all the
that's right.
Don't get too tired though. You
still have part of the session
to go. So, um,
Senator, could you explain the
amendment you want to put on.
OK. The amendment that I want to
put on.
Adds the superintendent of
insurance.
To this group that wants to
study.
This, uh, um.
Wildfire study group.
It puts one more person, one
more agency on that.
Is what it uh
This adds 2 more people.
Strike 11 insert 13.
It adds, it adds, does it say
11, it say now it's 13. OK, on
your
On your
Amendment that we're looking at
931.3. Yeah.
Well, I hope I didn't get it
wrong.
And I count them real quick and
see which one's right.
Madam
Senator, let's let the senator,
the sponsor, uh, respond first.
And what I count this would make
14 instead of 13.
So, uh, senator, the first thing
I see you wanting to do is to
strike rules Committee Amendment
number one. So you want to
strike the entire amendment from
Senate rules.
The Senate Rules Committee.
Amendment was the one that I
just tried to put on a minute
ago, right?
Or do you, well you wouldn't
know that, would you? You don't
have that.
We have the report. We don't
have their amendment number.
So first, let's just clarify,
are you trying to strike the
entire center. I'm not trying
to,
to
strike the
I'm, I'm trying to add one more
member on this OK, so I think
that what uh and Senator,
correct me if I'm wrong.
On Senate Memorial.
Two as amended from rules,
you're trying to strike number
one.
Of their amendment, which strike
11 and put in 12.
And now
But in 13 wanting to put in 13.
OK, so
You're wanting to strike.
Just number one from Senate
rules.
And in your amendment here.
You're wanting to put in.
13 instead of 11.
You are wanting to keep the
state land office from rules.
And you're wanting to add the
superintendent of insurance.
Here.
Correct?
Nodding my head, but that's a
yes. OK. So now we're to 13.
That is what the amendment does.
Senator Charlie, you had a
comment on the amendment.
Madam Chair, um, the age 3.
Line 9 as it reads right now, a
minimum of 11 members. I don't
know if we have to re-enumerate
of a minimum of.
Well, it was changed in rules,
so that's why he's asking me to
change it here.
I think.
Yeah, and it, and it says a
minimum.
So it makes it in a minimum of
13.
Because it was actually 2 people
came to me.
And it was because we didn't.
changed the 11 on the First
Amendment.
That this goes OK, the
amendments
questions, comments?
Could I have an adoption of the
uh a motion to adopt the move
that we that the committee
adopt.
I hope this is the right number
here because they're doing the
counting and everything, I came
up with this 23 0931.3 to Senate
Memorial #2 as amended.
OK, I will suck in that.
So is there further discussion
on that amendment.
OK, uh, is there any opposition
to
Senator Wood's amendment.
Yes, Senator Townsend.
13 and we added the
superintendent of insurance and
that's, that's a minimum so they
can be more than that, but
that's a minimum, OK, so, uh,
could the secretary please call
the vote on this amendment.
Senator Savantes.
Scuse Senator Charlie, yes,
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Zel.
Yes, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yeah, Senator
Pope.
Pope excuse and Scott.
And Scott, yeah, Senator
Townsend.
The Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez. Shoni Stephonics, yes,
your amendment has been adopted.
So,
now let's go to the bill. OK.
And then after you explain the
amended bill, we will go to the
audience.
support and opposition, and I
think we're gonna have another
amendment, so.
Uh, please go ahead, Senator,
and explain your amended bill.
OK.
It's a fairly small group in the
grand scheme of things, and that
will meet in the interim and
really look at the comprehensive
approach to Wi Fi mitigation
prevention based on the policy.
We may have already in place
best practices from our
neighboring states and the
expertise of the group brings to
the table.
If the purpose is to meet during
the 5 months.
Of the 2025 interim.
And there isn't a big financial
ass to pay someone.
From 4th Street to higher.
Or to hire contractor to monitor
the report back from the
appropriate interim committee in
November 2025.
What I'm trying to do here is
just to put together.
The different agencies and some,
some expertise from outside
those agencies.
To bring together what we know
and what we can do.
And and disused state
government.
As
I believe they should be used to
correspond with each other.
To talk to each other.
And say, well, I had this idea
and I had this idea of this is
the best practice as I see it,
and this is the best practice
and group it together.
And bring it to the legislature.
So that they can have some.
Some knowledge
To, to back up.
A decision making process.
That's what I'm trying to do.
Trying to give you opportunity
to learn.
From the expertise of the
different agencies and I keep
having agencies come forward
saying I'd like to get in on
this, uh, I would think if it
was a real bad deal they'd say,
I want out of this.
So Madam Chair, I'm sorry for my
confusion.
Fine, um, thank you very much,
Senator. So we're gonna go to
the audience. How many people
are here to support this
memorial.
And how many people are here to
oppose this memorial.
Is there anybody online
supporting?
One, anybody opposing?
OK, so let's start.
Uh, while the, let's take 5
people from the room to line up
for comment.
And let's take the uh person
online, Danielle, to go ahead
and make her comment. OK. Good
morning,
madam Danielle online and then
we will come to the 5 here. Just
stay right where you are,
Carlos.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is Danielle Duran from Los
Alamos County. Again, we support
all efforts to help mitigate
fire across New Mexico. Too many
of our communities have suffered
the effects of wildfire and then
subsequent flooding in their
homes and their businesses and
their communities, and we, uh,
really commend the sponsor for
putting this bill forward and
look forward to getting a
robust, uh,
and outcome from this study
group. Please support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now we're
going to support here in the
room.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Carlos Lucero
with the Public Service Company
in New Mexico.
And PNM serves um some
high-fire.
Areas in our service territory
territory, including Riidoso,
Silver City, Santa Fe, and the
East Mountain of of Albuquerque.
We are always looking and
improving our, our fire
mitigation plans and working
with our communities. We believe
Um, send a memorial to will
bring a balanced group together.
To do a study and build on
expertise and best practice, and
have a comprehensive approach on
wildfire policy that could be
good for all of New Mexico, you
know, we think Senator Woods for
bringing this to our attention
and we support Senate Memorial
too. Thank you.
Next, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Vince Martinez. I'm the interim
director or the CEO of
Uh, the New Mexico Rural
Electric Cooperative Association
as well as the senior.
Uh, government relations advisor
for tri-state Generation and
Transmission Association, as you
know, the co-ops are the front
line in New Mexico where it
comes to wildfire, as it
pertains to utilities, we serve
80% of the state.
As, as you know, the co-ops are
also the economic uh.
Cornerstone for economic
stability in in our rural areas.
And we invest a lot of money
into uh
Fire mitigation efforts through
our wildlife, through our
wildfire mitigation plans and
our vegetation management,
insurance costs have doubled and
our, our costs have doubled and
our coverage has been cut in
half.
Um, so these efforts to, uh,
that Senator Woods is trying to
put together in this memorial to
we will get.
The risk to, to the co-ops we uh
you know stand in full support
of Senate Bill 2.
Thank you. Next, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is George Dodge Junior. I'm
a registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association and also
for Western farmers, um,
electric co op, uh, GNT. I am
also the vice president of Farms
Electric Co op on the east side
of the state, uh, the board of
trustees and, and we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this memorial for, uh, we are in
full support of this.
Memorial and we look forward to
working with this study group to
help us with our mitigation
plans and get more and newer
ideas to uh to make sure that uh
that we're ready uh for the
next.
Wildfire because it will happen,
especially, you know what we've
got the North and we've got the
east side of the state where we
have our grass fires, and we all
saw what happened in the
panhandle of Texas last year or
the year before. So, uh, we look
forward to working with the
study group. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much.
Go ahead, please. Good morning,
Madam Chair, committee members.
I'm Melissa Robertson. I'm the
property and casualty bureau
chief with the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance. We
do fully support this bill, and
we appreciate.
Um, adopting the amendment to
add us to the task. Thank you.
Good morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Rico Gonzalez. I'm representing
El Paso Electric. I'm also a
member of the Socorro Electric
Co op.
Uh, and this memorial, I think
is going to be really helpful
for all of us to understand what
our places and how best we can,
can help to mitigate any of the
wildfire issues that, that we,
that we have.
We have uh 345 kV lines running
through some area through
through uh Grant County all the
way up into our territory and
even though our service
territory is filled with
mesquite bushes, so they don't
burn as well as, as, as trees
and grass. It is a very
important thing for all of us to
be part of it in, in, in trying
to help to mitigate the issues
that are coming in. We just want
to thank Senator Woods for, for
bringing this memorial up. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. So I want to clarify
this, is there any opposition in
the room?
Is there any opposition online?
Thank you. We're going to go to
the committee now, uh, Senator
Charlie has prepared an
amendment.
Uh, Senator Woods, is this a
friendly or unfriendly
amendment. This is a friendly
amendment, Madam Chair.
Senator Charlie, to explain your
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, um, in.
Several of the, the testimonies
that we've heard this morning,
the need to center indigenous
knowledge systems and uh land
management practices, I think
should be centered when we're
creating solutions for the
state, and I appreciate how your
bill goes as far as to include
individuals from the Indian
Affairs department, um, and has
made a commitment to that. My
amendment, Madam Chair, um, just
establishes some principles
around co-management.
Co-stewardship and indigenous uh
knowledge system.
Management. Thank you.
Thank you.
So, um
We are on the amendment to
discuss.
So is there any discussion on
the amendment from Senator
Charlie.
There is, there's a motion for a
due pass from Senator Hamlin and
a 2nd from Senator Townsend.
On the 2nd Amendment.
Really the 3rd, but the 2nd in
our committee.
Uh
For this uh memorial.
So
Is there anybody opposed,
anybody here that's opposed?
Do have a quorum.
And everybody else is excuse.
Senator Scott
So you do have a uh amended 2nd
amended bill from our committee.
So now we're back on the amended
memorial committee members.
Comments, discussion.
There's a motion for a due pass
this twice amended in this
committee Senator Townsend and a
second from Senator Charlie.
And could we please call the
roll on this?
Senator Cervantes, excuse sinner
Charlie. Yes, Senor Charlie,
yes, Santel.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Excuse, Senator Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend, Senator Townsend, yes,
Senator Dia Lopez is excuse.
Senator Stephonics, Stefaniks,
yes. Senator, you have a due
pass it's twice amended from
this committee. Thank you. Thank
you very much, committee
members, uh, we are in recess
until Thursday. We have 3 rolled
over bills. Uh, we will start
with the equine rescue fund.
Thank you. On Thursday morning.
And we'll see you at 9 a.m.
Thank you.
