Hamblen here Senator Neville.
Here Senator Gallegos here's
what.
Senator pope.
Senator communities.
You see him.
Senator sold their.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Senator Stefanics
thank you very much for Annika
for members of the public.
We are starting this morning I
have invited the dog how who is
the director of the western grid
group to come in and out
presented a short primer about
the causes of controlled rolling
cut offs
he will present to for a short
while there will be a short
period of time for questions and
answers from the committee and
then we will go on to the rest
of our agenda for today next
thirsty we have a range for the
I'll use the investor owned
utilities and the electric coops
to present and talk about their
plans for rolling cut off of
electricity so thank you for
accepting the invitation on such
short notice and he has a very
illustrious background for those
of you who don't remember under
governor Susana Martinez he was
appointed to fill a vacancy on
that P. Garcia he has quite a
bit of a national and
international and western
experience with the energy grid
so thanks for agreeing to come
this morning to spend time
committee members I know his
time is limited and he is
leaving at nine thirty and at
that time we will go on to the
agenda that please go ahead.
Thank you just annexin Good
Morning Senators I'm gonna try
and share the screen here.
And let's see if we can do that.
We tried it this morning so.
Everyone see the screen
hopefully yes thank you about
their okay good well again
thanks very much chairs to
CENIC's morning Senators I'll
I'll try to keep this short
because I know we have limited
time and there won't be too hard
to do because quite frankly
we're still in the middle of
this event that's going on in SB
intercontinental explain those
two agreements in just a moment
but we still don't have full
information so you're not going
to get a full root cause
analysis of what's going on we
just know bits and pieces of
what's going on at this point
there is going to be a full root
cause analysis those the first
the federal energy
Excuse me federal energy
regulatory commission and the
number the north American
electric reliability council
have announced that they're
going to do a full we're close
analysis and that's going to
come after we get out of this so
this discussion is going to try
to do.
Tell you a little bit about
what's going on here this is not
going to be an assessment of
where the false or let me just
add one other note though before
we get underway and that is that
we've been here before almost to
the day a decade ago we
experienced the what's what's
now come to be known as the
great groundhog day blizzard of
February the first through the
eleventh of twenty eleven and
I'm sure many of you will
remember that that was a
harrowing experience here in New
Mexico cut off of gas throughout
southern New Mexico cut off of
electricity and nurse came out
with a full report on the root
cause analysis the malice of
is and what the recommendations
were to be done.
I have a
I have a growing suspicion that
almost the exact same report is
going to get issue coming out of
this and the main
recommendations were that in
both Texas and New Mexico and to
the other portions of the
Midwest which experienced a
great groundhog day blizzard
inadequate protections
inadequate Representative
winterization of the generation
sources had been undertaken and
that that should be a high
priority on and I think we're
gonna find out whether or not
that that's been done but I
think what we see so far is that
largely that is not been done.
So let me start with this
beginner class because this is
where the real crisis is
unfolding SB is the southwest
power pool and that's that late
gray shaded section that goes
from southeast southeastern New
Mexico parts of Texas right on
up to the Canadian border costs
is the electric reliability
council of Texas and that is in
the polka dotted white section
that you see there caught it
covers most of Texas most of it
covers all the major metro areas
but it doesn't cover all of
Texas as you see so when we say
that Texas is experiencing a.
A certain level of crisis right
now what we really mean is that
the caught portion of Texas is
experiencing that and what we
know right now is that caught is
having a much more difficult
time of dealing with this crisis
that has to do is that's not to
say that the southwest power
pool is is having it easy
but they have come out of at
least for now of their last
rolling controlled outage was I
believe two days ago today is
the
I can't remember but I believe
there last rolling outage was on
the morning of the sixteen.
cut is still having many
controlled rolling outages are
and are having a difficult time
getting their generation
resources back on to the on line
now I want to bring up a point
here about the difference
between caught and has PPE those
little black triangles that you
see dotting the map there those
are what are called DC energized
and those are the inner
connections the electrical
interconnections between the
various areas and you'll see
that in the case of our costs
there are three interconnections
between it and the rest of the
world quite frankly and those
three are on the northern
section between the border of
Texas and Oklahoma.
You'll see that SBP has seven in
our connections with the
utilities west of it those are
also desiigner ties I haven't
indicated the interconnections
on the eastern side of SBP
because their number us there
several hundred of them and
their alternating current or AC
in our times now you know we
could do a deep dive on the
difference between AC and DC And
or ties well let me just explain
it this way DCNR ties or moral
act more like water or gas
pipelines there they go in one
direction at any given time they
can be controlled and shut off
in ways that AC interconnections
can't a senior connections can
literally be going in both
directions at the same time are
there much more fluid.
This this point while it's an
engineering perspective has a
political ramification and the
political ramification is that
costs.
From a statutory point of view
is not viewed as being and
Interstate Commerce it is viewed
viewed as being solely and
intrastate commerce and that
means it is not subject to for
oversight.
Every other transmission system
in the continental United States
is judged to be and Interstate
Commerce and it is in
under for jurisdiction that's a
relevant point here because not
being subject to for oversight
the state of Texas and the
public utility commission of
Texas has complete authority
over how COVID operates what the
market conditions are and what
rules and reliability rules in
particular it's going to follow
that is not true for the rest of
us okay in particular it's not
true for SPD it's not true for
PNM or I'll pass electric we
have to follow the rules that
the north American electric
reliability Commission has
established.
So I just wanted to get that out
there because what is happening
in our caught and what is
happening in S. P. D. right now
really are on different levels
of magnitude and I'm not gonna
spend too much time talking
about what's going on in the
year cost section of Texas
because with one exception it's
not going to be backing up into
the surrounding states as PPO on
the other hand is interconnected
to the surrounding states and of
course a speedy operates in New
Mexico so we have greater
concern understandably with
what's going on there.
So the winter event of twenty
twenty one what's what's going
on I think we all know what's
going on a very slow moving
arctic I moved through the west
in the Midwest starting on
Valentine's day twenty twenty
one by the fifteenth massive
outages were reported throughout
caught you can see this is a
national outage map on the left
and electric reliability council
of Texas is lit up in red some
oranges and yellows there's some
outages going on elsewhere by
the time we got to the
seventeenth
Texas is still impacted it is
still impacted today as of this
morning they are still in a
level three crisis and have
rotating controlled outages
going on throughout the state S.
PPE has not are at least as of
this morning experienced anymore
rotating controlled outages as
the fifteenth although it is
going between a level one and
level two alert it's it's
fluctuating back and forth
between those it is still at
risk it could go into outage of
the right now things are looking
more positive in the STP
footprints and they are and your
card foot prints.
So let me just kind of address
what we think we know right now
about what's going on in our
cut.
It it appears that all
generating resources were
impacted when coal gas and
nuclear and it also appears for
the reasons that I stated up
front that it is likely and I
don't want to go too far out on
a limb here but it seems likely
that are proper winterization
methods were not undertaken at
these plants following the
twenty eleven winter event.
So on February fifteenth
expected peak load was fifty
seven almost fifty eight
gigawatts extreme contingency
forecast was for about sixty
seven gigawatts the actual load
on that date was seventy five
gigawatts so so we have a load
forecasting problem here is what
that the short headline is there
that they're they're out you
know ninety nine percentile
forecast was for sixty seven
gigawatts and we hit seventy
five gigawatts in taxes that
tells us that we are we are into
uncharted territory the supply
shortage was about twenty five
gigawatts of which it now seems
about twenty gigawatts was gas
coal and nuclear wind was short
about five gigawatts.
Extended outages of the accord
but because our cut is isolated
from other grades the outages
there had not rippled through
into neighboring grades.
The concern though is with the
natural gas system and this is
where I think we're we we may
feel repercussions from kat
natural gas processing plants in
the you're caught territory have
been impacted by power outages
and those impacts have been felt
nation wide.
Cool price for natural gas on a
typical normal day were nothing
unusual is going on is probably
in the range of between two and
four dollars per million be to
use between two and four dollars
let's call it that.
And in California just yesterday
the prices soared two hundred
forty dollars at the Oklahoma.
At the Oklahoma gas of it has
soared to nine hundred and
ninety nine dollars per million
BTU which is the cat can't go
higher cannot go up to a
thousand so.
Those impacts are going to be
felt nation wide moreover the
governor of Texas late last
night declared a moratorium on
oil exports of gas from Texas.
Now it it's I'll just put a
disclaimer out there I'm not a
lawyer but I think it is
questionable whether the
governor of Texas can do that
I think we'll know by the end of
two more because I think that's
going to be taken to court
sometime today whether Texas can
actually experience or an act
a moratorium on exports of gas
out of California since it's an
interstate transmission of.
but never the less you can't
imagine a worse thing you could
do for the natural gas industry
and to tell the rest of the
country don't count on us when
you need us so I I think there
will be many political
repercussions coming out of that
particular move.
Let's switch over to the
southwest power pool for second
they declared their first alert
that EA's just stands former
agency energy alert
level one which is the lowest
one that they declared on the
fifteenth by ten that morning
they had gone to do a three the
highest level and by noon of the
fifteen they had started calling
for controlled rotating outages
now just PPE does not implement
the rotating outages they tell
their member utilities in our
case that's going to be excelled
in southeastern New Mexico they
tell their their member
utilities shed a certain amount
of load and it's up to those
utilities them to figure out how
to do that and they'll do it
through some form of control
over of taking out edges.
By six AM again on the sixteenth
they had again instituted E.
eighty three and controlled
rotating outages by eleven AM
they had returned to E. eight
two and seized the rotating
outages and since that time
they've been fluctuating between
one and two but no level three a
controlled adage is that
continue to warn though that
this this call period is very
extended the this is the big
problem it's not a fast moving
high this is a this is just
sitting over the Midwest right
now much as it did exactly ten
years ago.
and they're they're still
warning to concerts
energy conserve gas conserve
water because people are turning
their faucets on to prevent
freezing pipes from happening
and of course conservative
actress today.
So what do this PPE lookalike
during this event well all
categories of supplies were down
starting on the fifteenth but
this PPE does a seven day look
at on outages that they are
forecasting so every day they
look ahead seven days and and
they say this is what we we
project four outages in our
system on the the the seven day
look ahead for outages for a
cast on the tenth by the
fifteenth they would see about
fourteen thousand megawatts of
outages but by the fourteenth on
Valentine's day that's the same
day the seven day look ahead for
the next day the fifteenth I
forecast twenty one thousand and
I've gone up by fifty percent
increase in forecast outages we
don't know why there was this
sudden increase in outages and
this will surely the one of the
things that the fault analysis
is going to have to look into
why did so many more outages
start stacking up in the period
leading up to the fifteen one
thing we do know is that outages
increased on all categories
natural gas regs increased the
most and I suspect supply is one
of the main issues affected.
So in wrapping up here I think
we need to ask ourselves some of
the following questions.
Electric utilities all electric
utilities in the United States
pretty much planned to the same
criteria which is they plan
their systems to be able to work
through.
Many levels of contingency but
they planned for one in ten year
of that in other words they may
lose the system one in every ten
years.
And if that's the case then we
have to yes the question well is
the system operating as expected
right now it's this appears to
be a one in ten year of that
so is the system operating not
as expected is this not what we
want from the utility system so
that's I think that's one
question that policymakers such
as yourself we're gonna need to
consider is one in ten the right
criteria or is that simply a
politically unacceptable is what
we're going through now even
though it hasn't happened for
ten years is that an
unacceptable solution and we
need a bit a different a better
solution.
But there's there's another way
of looking at that.
And that is what we used to
think was a one in ten and that
may now becoming a one in five
or one in to your account and
that could be due to climate
change and is this are we going
to start seeing more extreme
volatile events happening both
in summer in the winter
wildfires in California
hurricanes on the coast and Bala
Thailand extreme weather events
are those not really going to be
one intent going into the future
are those really going to be one
and something much less and will
we be experiencing them more
often.
And I think the experience of
California and the coast from
hurricanes is these are
happening more often than once
in ten years and utilities are
going to have to up their game
in forecasting this.
Next to do changes need to be
made in our resource adequacy
planning to adjust for the
changing resource portfolio we
know we're getting more
intermittent resources into our
portfolio but we what we saw on
the California blackouts of
this was that the policy makers
who control in California what
support fully looks like had not
kept pace with the changes in
what was actually happening on
the ground and that was one of
the root cause analysis findings
in California that they needed
to pick up their game to keep up
with what was actually happening
to the resource portfolio.
And of course forecasting comes
into this did poor load
forecasting play a role it's
certainly did in California
under forecasting played a major
full role in the California heat
wave.
Or did poor wind forecasting
play a role in how good is our
when forecasting technology I
think these are questions which
are utilities are going to be
answering in the coming months.
We have more questions was
natural gas generation curtailed
and if so why what we're wind
turbines frozen and if so why
wind turbines are all over the
state of Iowa and they're all
over South Dakota in Canada and
they seem to operate through
cold weather if wind turbines
froze in Texas and Oklahoma it's
a very good question why did
that happen and the suspected
answer is because they weren't
properly winterized.
And how we're rotation rotating
Act I'll just control what was
the maximum outage time in
California during the heat wave
which dominated the press during
August the maximum outage any
residential customer experience
was fifteen minutes.
Fifteen minutes okay
that's unpleasant when you're
suffering a hundred fifteen
degrees outside I I I understand
that but I think fifteen minutes
is something that most people
can live with.
If you're out for several days
that's that's not doable so this
leads back to our one intend
plodding us planning criteria
you can plan for one in ten
criterion but if the one in ten
means that you're only going to
experience thirty or fifty
minute outage every once in
awhile maybe we can live with
that means are going to be out
of electricity for three days or
five days or ten days that's not
acceptable and we have to have a
different answer for that.
So what can we conclude well
look it's it in all honesty it's
way too premature to draw
conclusions from this working
for going to do a full
investigation it's not clear to
me that either of those
organizations
can do an investigation of our
cut because they don't have
jurisdiction there but I suspect
or costs going to cooperate
remember the California heat
wave rolling blackouts in August
as I just mentioned the final
root cause analysis of that was
just published in the January in
twenty twenty one five months
after the fact so I I think the
message here is we have to hold
our powder keep our powder dry
for a little bit try and avoid
the tendency to start pointing
fingers of blame whether it's at
wind or gas or nuclear whatever
we should probably all just.
Focus on getting through this
first thing and then let the
experts do their analysis it's
going to take several months I
would expect something by mid
June to come out and then we can
start thinking about what are
the proper policy responses to
that.
And I'll just leave you with
this parting thought after
August twentieth California
we have a heritages
well senator Cruz from Texas
put out a statement saying
California is now unable to
perform even basic functions of
civilization like having
reliable electricity
yesterday on the seventeenth the
put out a tweet I have no
defense.
And.
I'm not trying to point a finger
at senator Cruz but my point is
don't expect quick conclusions
here and if you get quick
conclusions from people don't
trust them we need to stop slow
down get through this crisis and
then figure out what the right
policy response to it is a we
need to have a policy response
so I'll turn it back to you
chairman Stefanics.
Well.
Thank Mr how thank you so much
for doing this on such a quick
notice of will this power point
be available for a committee.
Yes I believe you have it thanks
very much so running a let's uh
distribute that power point to
the committee and we do have
It looks like we have.
A few minutes eighteen seventeen
eighteen minutes for questions
if there are any.
From committee members this is a
good expert can just ask general
questions from.
Okay I see Senator Sedillo Lopez
and Senator Gallegos.
Remember we just had a question
is and so we can move on and
then Senator Senator pope go
ahead Senator Sedillo Lopez
you're on mute.
There you are you can see your
little Erro you just kind of
looking for the year
thank you that was very
very informative because there's
been a lot of stuff all over
Facebook that bunch of stuff
it's been posted on my Facebook
saying see this is the wind
turbines you can't rely on
random you know a bunch of a
bunch of stuff so it it's I
think that the advice to wait
for the experts and see what's
going on is is really good I was
curious I I.
I'm not to forget expert but we
used to work on for cases when I
clicked at the DC circuit and
this is the only but I didn't
realize that there were grids
that were outside of for
jurisdiction how how is it
possible in the.
It was impossible with that
Texas has excluded this from for
jurisdiction.
Well.
The transmission to the electric
transmission system in the
United States under the federal
power act was after a number of
K. courses.
Court cases
back in the early part of the
twentieth century was determined
to be
In the Interstate Commerce
essentially all right Alectra
city that is generated in state
a flows on to the transmission
grid and from there it flows all
over the place controller the
place even if the ultimate
consumption is in the same state
that electricity could do what's
called loop flows and go through
other states and affect their
electric grid and and so the
reasoning is sense all like
Tricity in a secret is in
interstate commerce this is a
federal purview and so for has
jurisdiction over transmission.
If you remember the map that I
have put up early on that grit
is wholly contained or cut is
wholly contained within the
state of Texas and is only
connected by three DC
interconnections which
effectively as a toll gate which
prevents interstate loop flows
so the argument that areas it is
not in Interstate Commerce its
Indian trust eight vehicle so to
speak and therefore it is under
that state's jurisdiction.
The only other states that have
this or Alaska and Hawaii for
obvious reasons there have been
a number of proposals to fully
interconnector kat to the rest
of the nation's grid
a I have they have denied that
every time it's come up it's a
political issue they do not want
to be under for X. jurisdiction
and if you remember here in New
Mexico almost fifteen years ago
a proposal was made for a super
sub station call pretty some
make us which was going to be
out in your Clovis it was going
to be the biggest interchange
are trickling or change in the
world if it were to be built and
it would simultaneously connect
S. P. P. the western
interconnection the most of New
Mexico was it and caught.
That never got off the ground
because caught up basically
blocked it said you're not
interconnecting here unless for
work says we will not extend
jurisdiction over you as a
result of this for example not
going to do that until it's
built and Kautz said I don't
build them so.
That's the story.
I'm.
Okay so
I'm gonna move on because I have
others hands I am a guy a ghosts
Senator pope Center Hammond so
Senator guy it goes one question
please so we can move on the
Senator pope Center Hamlin
because Mr how has to leave.
Madam chair thank you Mr
appreciate the discussion I
would.
I'm sorry he is a doctor so he's
Dr house sorry and.
So to anything.
Sorry about that doctor how I
was one of those that had
multiple outages in New Mexico
today and and what made it that
is if you're depending on your
wifi to support your legislative
duties in Santa Fe does not work
without electricity so what
questions I had Dr is up on
could we see or did were we able
to track the increase in natural
gas production for energy and
coal during this downtime or was
it the same as before the whole
healthcare.
So are you I did just take a
look at that for S. P. P. I've
not looked at that for caught I
looked at it for us PPE and
production is down on all of
those issues right now
why it's down I think it's one
of the questions it's going to
have to get answered the data
that we have right now doesn't
say why it just shows you what
the numbers are my suspicion is
that will provide the room
number of issues that were
spotted in the twenty eleven
outages
possibilities of frozen coal
piles for example even though
their solutions to that
possibility gas wells being shut
in of the equipment and
instrumentation that gas
processing plants freezing and
being inoperable have a reduced
supplies but I think we'll know
the answer much more completely
in a few months once the full
diagnosis is been made.
I'm not sure how thank you and
just in closing I just know
this shows to me at work for PNM
thirty years on the gas side and
I understand the grant and in
the parking system that we have
but it might be really good for
us to have a standalone policy
so that we're not Texas or
California a lot of our
legislation is geared towards
being California and I think we
need to re look at this so in
ten years obstacles cycle that
is nature impacted that we don't
have the same thing happened ten
years so with that I'll send
them madam chair thank you
doctor you information thank you
so much Senator pope please.
Thank you doctor how for this
presentation and ten years ago I
was actually working on current
airforce base and the gas got
shut off and we had to send
folks are from base housing and
I actually was working in
operations center and we had
snow again going on the east
coast and we still going to work
and provide support there so
definitely remember that I just
want to one question I just want
to confirm will there be a
report for S. P. P. as well as
for caught.
That is my understanding for
Connecticut both said they're
going to do a root cause
analysis and I'm quite sure SB
is going to do their own
analysis thank you because I I
think that's what we're going to
need to find out what we do
going forward so I appreciate
that's all I have chair.
Thank you I have Senator Hamblen
then Senator von case seven.
Thank you madam chair thank you
doctor that was very very
informative I'm I'm wondering
what were some of the key
changes that were made in New
Mexico that prevented us from
experiencing the same thing the
Texas did and did renewable
energy have anything to do with
that.
Well
you know I think that's a good
question and and I hope the PRC
is going to look into that to
make sure that we've followed
the lessons of twenty eleven and
actually implemented what we
learned in twenty eleven for New
Mexico and we didn't just get
lucky and miss a speeding bullet
your and I think we we have you
know all of that but I think.
You know my and my impressions
my got impressions right now are
that it it did not hit northern
New Mexico the way the twenty
eleven did we we got a lot of
snow up here don't get me wrong
but snow in itself is not the
big problem hi this is a problem
okay ice freezes machinery it
takes down electric lines of
someone and so forth and I think
you're gonna learn more when you
get the utilities in front of
you of I think over the coming
weeks of what they've done to
prevent this from from happening
to them here in New Mexico.
Well thank you doctor how we did
have that experience in southern
New Mexico where we had rolling
blackouts and because of the
transmission boxes and lines
freezing up and so I I am
looking forward to the
conversation from the utilities
thank you very much for your
informative talk thank you madam
chair thank you before I go to
Senator Montes I just want to
point out
PNM in the north and central
head rolling blackouts as well
an actual shut off so it's not
just the south west of this
Senator human case thank you
madam chair all know you can
move the committee into our
business but I had a nice visit
this morning what with governor
Lujan Grisham about the
circumstances on the eastern
side of the state my daughter is
clicking with the the judge in
Roswell and they've had the
rolling blackouts there the
governor reminded me I think
they're thirty seven New Mexican
households that are that are
customers of Texas our systems
and so this this affects our
state not just taxes and I
appreciate madam chair you
putting together this up
presentation today not my
question up for our doctor
expertise of great broadband but
maybe we can is and with your
general observations a lot of
the work it seems to me we're
doing here in New Mexico on this
committee and elsewhere the
legislature is really a
diversification of and I a
monopoly a regulated monopoly in
large large regulated monopolies
in the state of New Mexico by
things like community solar
systems by encouragement of
solar systems on individual
households etcetera in other
words in my mind almost a.
Regulation or what are you to
tell me what the right word for
it is but more of a everybody
relies on themselves maybe
cities becoming electric
providers counties become a
larger providers a small
companies providing electricity
in small communities.
Can you just tell me is it is
that a trend that you see
happening nationally as part is
seems as that we're trying to
move in here in New Mexico and
your money we have circumstances
like this are those systems that
that greater diversification of
many smaller systems preferred
to say one large provider.
Well it's a complex it's a
complex discussion so
we could go right down a rabbit
hole on this one but I'll give
you more or less the top of the
head thoughts that I have about
this certainly we see things
like community solar spreading
across the nation Colorado
California Minnesota of many
many states are taking up laws
to enable community solar's
solar and and I think that's
fine
but the the issue that we're
going to confront with that is
that those facilities.
Are also going to be vulnerable
to extreme weather events
whether it's you know hurricanes
fires tornadoes extreme cold
and.
So are they taking proper
precautions for backing
themselves up who's good who's
going to back them up if they
have not properly maintained or
winterized or summarized their
equipment they haven't looked
after appropriately and ten
years on it's not working very
well anymore and and this will
happen I mean I can I can almost
guarantee you that there will be
those installations where it's
kind of plugged in this is great
and then ten years later it's
not working it's broken
something went wrong and it's
like who's backing them up
so I I think the answer to your
question is that while it's
great that we're diversifying
into smaller resources it
doesn't look like we need big
two thousand megawatts
central's resources anymore
smaller resources around can do
the job and probably have more
security to them in the long run
but someone's got to be
responsible for backing them up
and who that's going to be is a
big policy question I think that
we're gonna have to answer
because of left to their own
devices.
Probably won't planned for back
up and then what are we gonna do
when we get in a situation like
this so.
I think it is an interesting
subject for me and and it's it's
just been my observation over
the last several years that we
we seem to be thinking that
breaking up the big monopoly is
a good idea very well may be
from but the same amendment
we should recognize the the the
planning we're gonna have to do
to do that effectively and and
we expect PNM we're all have
selected to be there well when
the smaller systems are
inadequate you know how we do
that how we look how we all the
more reason to continue to have
that capacity thank you madam
chair.
Thank you so much is there any
other are there any other
committee members that want to
Speaker.
Or ask a question.
Doctor how I really appreciate
your doing this on such short
notice thanks bill.
One.
I believe your power pointed
that provides a great primer for
the rest of for all of us as we
go forward in our next
discussion about this issue and
I thank you for taking time out
of your day.
Thank you on behalf of the
committee thank you.
Thank you.
Okay so committee members we are
proceeding to back to.
Bill one fifty six we did hear
the
Presentation we heard the
proponents the opponents
since then PNM did provide to
all the committee members a
statement this morning of all
their concerns and it's too long
to read stuff then heard me just
wanted me to point out that they
had sent something to all of us
our analyst did do an amended
committee and Alice's that
drunken did send out yesterday
afternoon are you might look at
it it's Senate bill one fifty
six as amended
Committee and Alice's.
And Senator soul is there
anything you want to say before
we proceed to the committee
questions and discussions which
we were on.
Ma'am and madam chair
I think we're ready for
questions from the committee
If anyone would like a little
refresher of any of it but I
think the new analysis is much
more accurate as to what this
bill with intent is and what it
actually does not with that it
has that amendment.
For people who haven't seen the
analysis are there any point to
that you want to bring up.
Madam chair mostly what the
analysis now indicate.
The actual pool that is
available to the PRC once it's
been determined how well at the
facility needs to be abandoned
and that it gives them a tool
for how to get the consumer and
that's the key point here is
this gets the consumer the
lowest cost bonding for their
obligation to cover utilities
when there's been a stranded
asset.
Thank you okay questions
discussion from committee
members Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you senator madam chair
one of the the issues that PNM
says.
Is that the that your bill would
force securitization even if it
wasn't and PNM is best interest
Is is that correct.
Madam chair and senator what
this does is once it's been
determined that there is a
stranded asset that there is an
amount that is the
responsibility of the right pair
this protects the rate payer for
the lowest cost all of those
other things happen I had a time
they happened up brought out and
so if in the view of the PRC
once there again there's a
stranded asset has been
determined and what that amount
is the PRC has a responsibility
for having the right pair have
the lowest cost to cover that
obligation.
And so yes the PRC on their own
motion could require
securitization if that's in the
rate payers best interest if in
the right bears best interest it
is the finance it through some
other mechanism through as
normal processes some of the
bonding mechanism that it
wouldn't be this only comes here
this is only the tool to protect
the right bear with the lowest
possible rate for their
obligation or a stranded asset.
So the answer is.
They may or may not be able to
force PNM to securitize.
Madam chair of the answer is the
PRC if it's in the ratepayers
best interest can't require
securitization as a mechanism
for paying off that obligation
if it's not in the right there's
best interest the PRC is not
required to do so if it's in the
best interest of PNM PNM can
request the securitization be
used and the PRC if they agree
can you securitization if the
PRC disagrees that there's
another mechanism for paying off
the obligation that the right
Hey your has.
Then they could.
Not you securitization and use
some other mechanisms
so under the ETA securitization
Savings are used for a lot of
the community the the just
transition projects I guess I'll
just column that and
With the assumption and it's
probably a correct assumption it
that securitize in the
obligation to pay that
ratepayers have will save money
to to PNM.
So if
So if the determination I guess
what I I'm looking at the
decision making here so you so
right now under the ETA it seems
like the determination is up to.
Is up to PNM and any money they
save would be used to fund these
projects in your bill.
The securitization the stranded
asset decision has you said
would be made and then the idea
of securitized in the obligation
to pay the stranded asset cost
would be
Up to the PRC.
Not not PNM and of quid the PRC
have authority to dictate any
savings how the savings.
Would be spent.
If they required securitization
or would it just be to lower the
rates for right to rate payers.
Madam chair and and as I tried
to get through all of this is
I'm not debating the ETA or how
it functioned up the only thing
that this does is it gets the
right pair the lowest mechanism
of bonding for their obligation
for a stranded asset.
So the benefit would flow to the
right pair not necessarily the
community or anyone else.
Or not PNM Madam chair there is
unity here there's a stranded
asset that has to be paid by the
rate payers this allows for the
lowest cost funding for that
obligation and that's all.
And it did so I I guess I'm
really trying to understand PNM
is obligation because it seems
like they would want.
Lower costs.
So why would they object.
I guess I'm trying I'm honestly
I'm trying to understand madam
chair I don't care you know and
and PNM you know the doesn't
have a lower cost obligation
they got a stranded asset
they've got an amount that they
have invested and they have a
right to to recover that amount.
The ratepayers have an
obligation to cover that about.
What this does is when that
amount that there is a facility
that's going to be closed it's
already been determined what
that amount is and that is the
obligation of the right pair
this set up a mechanism that the
PRC can use to get the right
care at the lowest.
Mechanism for paying off that
obligation.
There is that if savings to PNM
there in the savings to the PRC.
The all this is is there's an
amount that has to be paid and
it allows the room the rate
payers to pay it off with the
lowest cost bonds for their
obligation.
To their benefit.
So that gives you as much as I
understood you to say is a P.
Garcia he's supposed to look to
see whether it would benefit
ratepayers.
And madam chair and and senator
if it benefits ratepayers the
PRC can offer securitization if
there is another mechanism the
budget ratepayers the PRC can
offer that mechanism this is
just the tool of securitization
it doesn't require the PRC is it
it doesn't say that they can't
use it it's a toll if this
provides the lowest cost option
with all of the expertise and
things that the PRC uses to
determine those types of things
this is just the financing
mechanism for the ratepayers
obligation and protects the rate
payer by giving that obligation
the lowest cost for what they
are.
Thank you thank you but to
summarize PNM is probably
opposed because the choice of
securitization is not there
still it belongs to the PRC of
whether to securitize or use
another mechanism belongs to the
P. R. C. and not to PNM is that
correct Mr chair.
Madam chair and senator you know
I don't know the thinking behind
PNM and and why this all
happened after those decisions
have been made that there is a
stranded asset and how that's
going to get paid off of PNM
needs to be made whole this
makes them whole yeah they the
bonds are sold PNM is made whole
they would be required to
reinvested the and utility type
of service for customers but
there may hold for the
investment that they've got
sitting that which is where they
make all of their
Office but they're made whole
through best and the ratepayers
pay their obligation and PNM
chooses not PNM the PRC chooses
whatever mechanism gets
ratepayers the lowest cost for
that obligation this gives them
another option for getting that
lowest cost.
Just one more question but maybe
whole only if the investment in
that stranded asset was prudent.
Right.
Under
the lobby for that with that
that is.
It would happen a lot before I'm
not I'm not saying it's part of
this bill I I understand you
very clear that it's not part of
that bill but but I just didn't
want to
get a hundred percent Senator
Sedillo Lopez were on the bill
this bill so please ask your
question let the sponsor answer.
Thank you.
Madam director absolutely right
that has nothing to do with this
bill this all happens prior to
where this tool comes into play
thank you madam chair I just
wanted to clarify that because
it sounded like you like it was
a hundred percent cost recovery
and that's not what I understood
you to say thank you madam chair
that that's all thank you so
much we have center suite
Senator renewable and Senator on
K. Senator Schmedes.
Thank you
thank you madam chair just
getting my I'm still running off
my phone because its use use
that we can see you.
Madam chair and senator
so I I I I definitely understand
the the the gist of the bill I I
understand this is a.
In an option I I understand that
this is an instrument to try to
protect the right there are.
It you know what it is so I I I
get that
but I want to ask you to a
couple of questions to make sure
we're on the same page and then
really gets to the crux of my
mic my question which is risk
so.
My idea the stranded asset I
think the best example is a
Florida where where they've had
some natural disasters where
hurricane comes and doesn't get
to support of equipment on a
large scale and then you get a
stranded asset in and so these
utilities are per are protected
from these are the sorts of
things.
But yes in our situation what
your bills addressing we have a
stranded asset because of of
policy change it is that correct
would you agree with me.
Madam chair no I do not.
Madam chair and senator what
then what what what is your
understanding of why we have a
stranded asset.
Here in New Mexico retail these.
Madam chair and yeah this is
outside the scope of what this
bill does that's within the
scope of the PRC and other
things this bill is only when
there has been determined to be
a stranded asset this bill kicks
in as far as providing the
lowest cost mechanism for the
rate payer to cover their
obligation this has nothing to
do with the policy as to whether
there's a stranded asset are or
not this comes your way after
that.
Okay no I need and madam chair
center I I respect that answer
it's just it's hard for me to.
The you know look at this bill
knowing that that I think.
You know the that we're dealing
with a.
the in my mind a very a very
political reason why we have
stranded assets and that's you
know I think that's a shame.
And I think it's you know it's
it's hard on the right pair
that's why we built built like
this although I have great
respect for you great respect
for your your approach.
To protecting ratepayers but
just want to bring up bring that
up I think the context of why
why the rate payers are looking
at that higher bills now and
we're trying to look at other
other ways to to lower their
cost is is a result of of policy
but let's let's get if we go on
to the securitization piece
I have a concern because I I
feel like we have hopefully
learned a lesson from the two
thousand eight crash and then
there should be no debate on
this I think this is a well
known fact that the the large
scale securitization of that
into bond like instruments was
a key factor in precipitating
the two thousand eight housing
crash and so madam madam chair
and senator have you in in
looking at crafting this bill
has anyone brought up that
concern that if we have broad
scale securitization.
For these utility stranded asset
scenarios it is there any has
there been any talk about what
the possible risk could could be
like similar to what happened in
two thousand eight.
Madam chair I'm not sure I
understand this bill has nothing
to do with the region risk of
securitization that would be an
entirely financial situation at
the national level not whether
we sell bonds at a triple a
rating or a double a rating
which is what this deals with.
Yes and but but madam madam
chair and senator my I think
it's very relevant to this that
if if we are considering voting
to aggregates lots and lots of
debt.
Into a single security and then
we're gonna have a utility sell
that to a third party that there
is risk involved in that I mean
someone has to be taking on the
risk if we adjusted interest
rates.
You know you get a lower
interest rate with a lower risk
if you're willing to tolerate
and stomach a little bit higher
risk you can get a higher
interest rate that's exactly
what we're talking about here I
just I just want to know in in
with your bill I mean what where
are we shifting the risk yes yes
the the PRC were to elect to
securitize.
Madam chair and senator again I
don't think this is within the
scope of this bill you're
talking about the bond market
reassessed and all of that if
when something goes to
securitization that determines
what the actual interest rate
we're going to get and that's
what you know that moody's and
other people that the term of
those when those bonds are
actually sold once the bonds are
sold it's a done deal there is
no risk to repairs to the
utility or to anyone else that's
all this that's taken by the
financiers when they by the the
bond that the triple a rating.
And madam chair and and etcetera
I know that's that's precisely
might my point is that the risk
has to be transferred somewhere
and so I I just wanted to bring
that up because the risk is to
be at the absolutely as you say
the risk is not be transferred
on to this third party that
purchases those securities and I
I think we need to at least
consider that that this when we
aggregate debts
when things go south it's not
just a single rate payers
bankruptcy it's not just.
You know someone that that is
has fallen on hard times and
then PNM suddenly has you know a
hundred Bucks a month less I
mean that's you know that's not
a big deal for them no one's
going to it's a big deal for the
family it's not a big deal on a
large scale for our state but if
if if I just think that I just
want to bring it up that this is
the same type of financial
instrument that that has that
that led to some problems in two
thousand eight and I think the
reason I ask those leading
questions about the
politicization of why we have
stranded assets I feel like when
things become politicized.
and then we try to make up for
them by aggregating data in the
securities I I I feel like there
there is a real risk we we
cannot just destroyed respect we
can't just destroy matter you
know that the risk is gonna get
shifted somewhere and I think
it's a not here's my final point
you know I think if if enough
communities in enough states do
these do these sorts of of of
securities I feel like as a
society we're we are going to
be Kirk uh some amount of risk
so I I do appreciate that this
is a tool to help the right
pair.
but I also appreciate that.
That is going to number one I I
think there's a better answer to
help right there it's to.
To not rely so much on wind and
solar but that's beyond the
scope of the bill but but we are
we are certainly incurring the
some sort of risk here for
somebody but I think it's a
fascinating topic thank you for
bringing the bill and I look
forward to hearing the rest of
the discussion.
Thank you senator Neville then
Senator Montes.
Thank you madam chair of Madam
chair Senator the ETA and I know
your bill's not doing anything
to the J. but it does not
provide for any type of
securitization for gas or
nuclear in those other types of
deals is that correct or not.
Madam chair in the definition
section of the ETA if X. is
exclusively called.
What are the what I understood I
just wanted to clarify for sure
is there so this would now allow
guests and nuclear in those
other kinds of sources to have
the option of securitization is
out of their statement.
Madam chair and senator yes this
sit side by side and this picks
up other
resources it could you know
quite frankly could be if there
was a reason to shut down the
landscape scale of solar
facility securitization could be
used for this the stranded
assets.
Is just the tool that everything
except cold the DA covers
called.
Would be a from a legal
standpoint no neither one of us
are attorneys but from a legal
StandWithUs police fair to say
that any approved source of
energy solar wind nuclear.
Yes the PRC is already set as
legitimate way of generating
electricity.
would be legally prudent the
word prudence then thrown around
a couple times.
there was there were some.
I I think that to be in it the
PRC would come in and say use
bills that coal plant a hundred
years ago and it's it wasn't a
prudent idea well a hundred
years ago us but.
Now it's maybe not but to.
Don't we have to consider those
gas plants were built twenty
thirty forty years ago as
prudent investments from a legal
perspective.
Madam chair yeah as I said many
times I know I sound like a
broken record this bill has
nothing to do with whether
something was proving in the
past whether it they should get
a hundred percent should only
get fifty it has nothing to do
with any of that and I'm not
gonna get into speculating on
that you know that's that's
where I'm getting it can PRC
come in and say are you can only
secure to get securitization on
fifty percent you're stranded
assets could they do that under
this bill for gas plant
hypothetically.
Madam chair this particular bill
is one that has been determined
that's where this bill comes at
this bill doesn't affect any of
that decision making process.
That's fair enough.
Isn't for whatever amount is
allowed is there a can you
envision any time when
securitization would not be the
lowest cost.
Is how how else would recover
the money.
Maybe it's my screen.
My screen is frozen up and down
so I don't know whether that's
gonna be a problem here I can
turn off my video madam chair I
don't know if that would what
the hell you're back.
I did not the question was
can you envision a time when
securitization is not the lowest
faster recovery.
What other options would there
be madam chair absolutely
the there it this tool may never
get used rule out it might get
used every time there's a
stranded asset the whole thing
is it gives the PRC the ability
to use securitization if that is
the lowest cost mechanism for
the ratepayers obligation it's
protecting the right there to
get the lowest cost obligation
there are times where
securitization may not be the
lowest cost option it gives that
tool to the PRC work currently
they don't have that option.
That's good point and
Madam chair Senator.
What is their option now if it's
for a utility wants to shut down
the gas plant what is their
option options now do they have
any.
Madam chair I I don't know what
those options might be and I I
don't want to speculate I just
know other states
get closed down and ratepayers
have that obligation this allows
us to get the lowest bond rating
because securitization is
unavoidable and it gets clear
out of the PRC it's clear out of
PNM having any control over it
quite frankly gets the
legislature out of making any
changes into the future which is
why the bonds are the lowest
cost bonds that's the point of
securitization
the currently if of a gas plant
is shut down.
Does that asset continue on the
the balance sheet Montoya thirty
more years or however long is
set to is that what currently
happens.
madam chair and senator and
again I'm I'm speculating a bit
because this is not my area of
expertise on how the PRC
current.
covers stranded assets but yeah
they could sell bonds that are
not secure ties bought they
probably don't get this at the
lowest rate by doing that and
those are bonds that could have
very interest rates that could
change depending on what the
markets are doing the
securitized bonds means that
they are yeah they are walked
the and you cannot touch you
cannot change and that's why you
people get the lowest rates is
it the guarantee returns for the
investors that get those rather
than having something that might
get changed due to the next
legislature or whatever this is
a legal bonding naked as.
I'm just speculating that they
have had occasion somebody has
have indication maybe The New
Mexico of shutting down the
facility and
Because it they just did want to
run it was efficient it was in
the wrong place or any in any
reason you want to come up with
that was approved by the PC the
PRC or whatever the entity was.
and I just wonder how those
utilities are recouping those
costs currently if we don't
pressure bill.
And madam chair I mean those
would show up as as a cost on to
the bills are the ratepayers
have an obligation to cover that
spread the cost without a doubt
this is just the tool to get
them the lowest cost through
securitization.
I just wanted to take the
remaining ten years life on that
planet just charge it off for
the next ten years.
Even though it's not operating
is just sitting there.
That's all I have and that madam
chair yes that that very it is
likely yeah again I'm
speculating but I think that is
what the current mechanisms are
without securitization thank you
madam chair thank you I have a
Senator Cervantes and then
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Mondays thank you madam
chair Senators up you'll hear me
well
circles I think I. **** right
begin **** the other day but I
remember the answer to it tell
me a little bit about where this
bill came from another was who
wrote this bill.
Up thank you madam chair and and
senator of this bill was written
by the person who is the expert
and the PRC on securitization
and goes to the national
conferences of look at
securitization bills written in
other states that have been used
very effectively and also pulled
the the pieces off of those to
make it so that it fits some of
that I mean there's always
special the type things for each
state after it was written there
were actually some experts that
look at it and said made
comments that this is how
securitization bills ought to be
written and looked at this was a
national model was one of the
comments that was made in one of
that kind of internal
Publications for regulators and
Senator the person who wrote the
bill it is it fair for me to
conclude they were not a lawyer
Representative lawyer.
You madam chair and senator I'm
not sure exactly what go over
background or training and
things of that sort work so I do
I do the reason I asked senator
in fairness is this a long bill
to complicated bill like this
committee seem to go through
built line by line page by page
and all that we have the time to
do that today I will tell you
this bill is not been vetted by
a lawyer or by knowledgeable or
experienced lawyer and utility
law it doesn't go to Senate
Senate Judiciary which I think
is unfortunate but I as I
pointed out earlier I think you
already have to other Canadian
referrals after this one so I
don't think a fourth one is
probably a good idea but but
what the reason I tell you this
hasn't been really study review
by lawyers Senator and again I
appreciate that what I and I
support what you're trying to do
here but it is has many
provisions withdrawal awful
which would turn property law on
its head bankruptcy law on its
head this bill implicates the
uniform commercial code uniform
property code of federal bank
bankruptcy laws what it has a
lot of things in here the very
frankly are unlawful This bill
relates to lane's priority
interest security agreements and
a lot of things that mean a lot
to me as a lawyer may not meet
anybody else except maybe point
up my colleague and tenants of
the a little bit and I again I
don't mean to sound ever ever
condescending anybody I don't
mean that I hope nobody takes it
that way but but all of these
things you know with this bill
makes securitization a priority
over leans security interests it
makes me requirements for
security agreements to have
reference this act this law in
the bill this this bill would
preclude bankruptcy protections
in the event of insolvency
receivership and would make all
the obligations of this bill
survive any bankruptcy or
survivors that proceedings all
of those things I'm just kind of
telling you are all unlawful
management of that whatever
we're going to the law this
would.
Simply once again we one of
those up opportunity for a field
day for lawyers and and frankly
anybody who challenges law would
probably have a pretty easy time
of it to be honest with you
and so I I really appreciate we
trying to do I think it's a good
idea I I I I'm gonna have a lot
of questions for you about that
not and I'd like to kind of
illustrate those because I think
it's important for for the point
that I'll make sure at the end
of our discussion about why I
asked you who wrote this bill
and how bills are getting
written these days because I
have a of a big observation for
all my colleagues in the Senate
about how bills these days are
being written very differently
than they used to be written one
night when I came in twenty
years ago but we'll talk about
that just a minute.
On page six I I won't do a lot
of back and forth questions
answered by taking under a my
observations and I'll just
assume that you probably
disagree with my interpretation
of my reading and then instead
of us trying to work those out
now you may want to just the
address the mall globally and
then then frankly if your bill
gets through the next two
committees I guess we'll we'll
get a chance to work on between
now and the floor session but
the Senator Sedillo Lopez asked
the question I had asked earlier
it's a good question on page six
of the bill this is very
different in the ETA in the
sense that the ACA gives it a
right to pursue securitization
by the utility in this case the
PRC can as as I think you agreed
to center city of what was
question in this case the PRC
can compel it can compel
securitization and that's on
page six the bill the the the
interesting part for me is that
same page applies to in
subsection D. says that this
procedure can apply to
abandonment in a matter that's
now pending before the
commission on as of the date of
the effective date of the right
Karia relief at looking at
subsection D. on page six so it
says the qualifying utility may
file a separate application the
commission on its own motion may
consolidate the financing order
with a pending application for
abandonment so this language
would make your bill
Representative retroactive from
enactment to anything that's
pending on an application for
abandonment at can you can you
just tell me right now what what
that would relate to another is
what are the pending application
for an amount that are now
before the commission.
Madam chair and senator I don't
know that there are any you know
that I'm aware of there very
well could be because yeah those
are are fluid types of things
what this does is a pending one
has not determined yet what the
amount of the stranded asset is
yes.
And so it hasn't this doesn't
kick in because that amount
hasn't been determined yet.
Right and I appreciate that I'm
just kind of I'm always very
cautiously in the lan Act any
laws that are retroactive their
application you know that's
that's unusual thing for us to
do as well we're making a lot
today but we're gonna make it
apply to things that happened in
the past and that's something
sometimes meal hard for people
to to comply with exited no that
was a law at the time and so I
that that one section two
interested that this law was
enacted would allow the
commission I'm reading that
subsection begin commission on
its own motion could to
consolidate a financing order
here with anything that's
pending before the commission
now I would be addition on what
that what that is.
If you turn to section four had
this question throughout the
bill in subsection and section
four it talks about the creation
of property you'll see that
doctor for five lines down there
is a qualifying utility may
apply to the commission.
And let me know if I'm going too
fast I was about to move pretty
quick.
Not in session important page
seven is is the commission made
up of the utility may apply the
commission and it says and this
is and to create property
related to the abandonment of a
qualifying generating facility
what what what property we talk
about your bill here what what
what property is Senator could
you tell us which line because
there's all paragraph and I
think you start in the middle of
the paragraph somewhere you're
right I'm looking at the
reference online seven okay
where it says the the utility
may apply the commission to
create property related to the
benefit of mention what that is
how to how does the commission
or the to the create property
and what property we talk about.
And senator madam chair and
center I'm trying to read it and
the whole sentence so that I
understand where we're talking
about your.
And madam chair yeah I'm not
sure that I I could tell you I
presume that this is relating to
that.
The actual asset that is they
are that that is the property
that is being
securitized that's the property
that's being abandoned and that
is now the obligation of the
right pair.
Yeah well and that would that
would make sense if the property
were talk about is the is the
stranded asset to the band just
a but that's not what it says
and and and and this shows up
throughout the bill I would make
a big deal about exhibit it's
it's ridiculous as it talks
about creating property related
to the abandonment and and I
don't know what property would
be created by by the bill or by
the process but maybe between
you and I'll get a chance talk
more about that when you have
more time to maybe talk to the
the authors of this I couldn't
figure that out myself
and so
Let me turn to section five on
page eighty.
This is the section I'll just
kind of point out to you by the
title alone really got my
attention as it as a bill that
should be going to Judiciary
because as I point out last time
it provides for notices hearings
a standard to reduce data
reviews lawyer Representative
the lawyers alley what what what
the court uses their standard of
review.
Findings and so forth so again
at from my experience is really
should be referral to Judiciary
but but I also know of nobody
gets for for referrals so I
won't I won't even suggest that
to you
the section I prefer a requires
the findings the commission
needs to make to do a financing
order and I'll just tell you
most as language to me is
meaningless and very ambiguous
so the commission has to find
these things to issue of the
issue of financing order if you
look at paragraph to the
commission has to find that the
issuance of the bonds in Sudbury
are just and reasonable just a
reasonable does is really very
meaningless to me I don't know
what Justin meaning reasonable
we need that's what the
commission has to fine to do
this.
The madam chair up Senator if I
might that is the language that
the PRC functions under that is
the language that is everywhere
whether they are dealing with
utilities that is not language
that is new to this bill that is
the those are the standards that
are set in the PRC they are all
the way through all of the
statutes and the rulemaking that
the PRC uses on an everyday
basis and this in many places
and all I'm trying to find the
reference but runs exactly
parallel to the law that we
currently have in the you need a
way to talk about securitization
portion of it.
Well I and I and I don't doubt
that's correct senator in an
image and that's precisely why
this languages adopted my my
point is only to say that that
the standard by which the PRC is
guided to grant or not grant
this securitization is all
completely subjective and I'm
not saying that they don't do
that all the time anyway but but
if you look at the requirements
here it says it says here's the
issue that the commission will
issue the securitization if the
charges are just and reasonable
subparagraph be if they're
consistent with the public
interest subparagraphs state if
they're reasonable and prudent
and so those again are are all
trying to guess is those are
very loose subjective standards
and and they may already be what
the PRC doesn't maybe already in
the law but but I think that
that means that a lot of this is
just gonna be what the PRC
wanted to be and and maybe not
so much the control of the of
the utility which is different
than the TA and the TA the
utilities sites well I'll just
give you other examples ETA has
the utility go out and sell the
bonds as I understand it they're
the ones that market the bond
sell bonds put together the bond
issuance your bill has the PRC
doing all that which I'm not
familiar with the PRC ever doing
I may be wrong about that
attention learning of the PRC
does that but I've never known
the PRC to be the one who
underwrites issues and sells and
markets the bonds were is under
the ETA PNM does that here the
PRC does that that would be a
new a new area for the PRC.
if you continue on page nine if
you look at the line twenty two.
It really begins you need to go
up to pick align elevenses the
financing order shall then this
as with the financing order
needs to do and I twenty two is
is described the property that
is created and may be used to
pay and secure the payment of
the bonds and the financing cost
this again goes back to my other
question I don't know what is
means the I and I can't think of
what it means in and I and I I
don't know that to the United
will be able to figure that out
now we wrote this but but this
is the financing order shall
describe the property that is
created and may be used to pay
and secure the payment of the
bonds that's pretty important
you know that the property
that's created that's going to
secure the bonds would be
important for me to know what
that property is and and we
don't know what that is you and
I here today and I don't know
anybody on the call can answer
that for us but I I really have
no idea what that may be.
A page a page ten trouble made
online rate subsection eight
because we look at subsection
six online eight of that page
the securities or it is the
order says this it says it can
include a mechanism for making
expeditious periodic adjustments
to the charges the customers are
required to pay the financing
order this kind of mention
because this is essentially
saying that the commission can
make periodic adjustments to the
charges the the customers are
prepared to pay but but
throughout the elsewhere the
bills that you can't do this it
says it says you can't adjust
the the charges but here it says
the order shall include a
mechanism for doing that that
the adjustments are made and
here's and here's where it's
really troubling to me says
these adjustments can be made to
correct any over or under
collection of charges in the
past so it turns out that that
the the a utility or the PRC has
been under collecting charges to
meet the bond obligations they
can go back and and charge
retroactively what what are
called here adjustments
necessary to correct an over or
under collection and and it says
here or to otherwise guarantee
that the payment that can be a
real problem for for rate payers
of the in the PRC and utility
has a right to go back to energy
we have been collecting enough
from you to satisfy the bond
obligations we need to to charge
you for something in the past
and go back to that that was
troubling to me.
and you'll see more of the same
kind of a provision on page
eleven line nine.
this is subsection I says that
the the the the there should be
a future rate making process to
reconcile any differences
between the projected cost to be
financed by the bonds and the
final actual costs that may
affect the the utilities base
rates for the rider but shall
not affect the amount of the
bonds or the associated charges
to be paid by the customer so
this this language to me says
you can't do that you can't go
back and and affect the charges
paid by the customer but but the
preceding section I just read
says that's what you do you do
go back in and adjust the the
range of the right pair to the
give your projections are
inaccurate but here it says when
when the projects are inaccurate
that you you you don't do that
so I found that a little a
little problematic for me and
madam chair I I'm only about
halfway through the bill I I
will I will continue to do to.
Report your the committee with
my with my thought process but I
did I did want to I did want to
point out some of the things
that are most troubling to me as
a lawyer
which is
the if you look on page twelve
subsection C. once again there's
a reference here to the
financing order and and the the
sale or transfer of the property
to NSA need or to pledge of the
property to secure the bonds
again I what I'm only trying to
point out is that this bill is
talk about the property created
the the securitization of that
property the use of that
property to secure the bond is
that are and I don't know what
property we're talking about
life we can figure that out
the
if you look on the bottom of
page twelve subsection if this
is what I tell you have a lot of
trouble because here this is
where we're turning the law on
its head
subsection have says a financing
order shall remain in effect and
goes on to to read from there
but it also says is fine I'm
looking online twenty one so the
financing order shall remain in
effect and unabated not
withstanding the bankruptcy
reorganization insolvency of the
qualifying utility to which the
financing would apply so that
means if the PNM was to go
bankrupt reorganize or become
insolvent the financing order
remains in place that's just not
how bankruptcy law works the
whole purpose of bankruptcy laws
to allow bankruptcy court judge
to do all of those things to
allow relief from existing
contracts and obligations and to
the benefit of creditors and so
to put a lot of that that of
this order remains in place use
the word here remains in effect
unabated not withstanding
bankruptcy reorganization
solvency that would all be a
contrary to federal bankruptcy
law
the
the the let's see.
I just want to point out a
couple the other sections of the
existing law that that would
that would be inconsistent with
law.
Let's see.
One of the challenges I found in
the drafting of the bill again
wipe assume there was not a
lawyer involved is lawyers
understand the difference
there's two words that we focus
on when we write laws the words
shall and may you all probably
know that are familiar with that
Xiao's mandatory maintenance
permissive so if you look at the
bottom of page fourteen
subsection C..
The and and then continues on to
the next page that same
subsection on page fifteen line
one it talks about the
commission shall do
comprehensive due diligence on
the application it says in the
presenters as shall oversee the
process to structure market and
price the securitization bonds
that's part was talking about
earlier this is the commission
the commission shall oversee the
structure the process for
structure market and price
securitization of the bonds
but then if you go down on that
same page the line seven says
the commission may specify the
details to structure market
price that securitization bonds
almost the same languages of one
section says the commission
shall do it no one says the
commission made to it and then
it goes on to say the commission
may be in select the under
writer or the underwriters.
I don't know I'm not a bonfire
but I I presume that's probably
not lawful I don't think the the
the the agencies of the state
get to pick the underwriters for
the bonds and I assume there's
some kind of a procurement or
are if you're or a competitive
process by which they do so but
to have the commission pick
who's going to underwrite the
bonds with with the I think
invite corruption because those
those of those bonding
transactions of all the great
deal of money as you might
imagine sometimes very large
fees so for the PRC commission
to decide who's going to collect
those fees I think would be very
problematic to me we saw a lot
of that to one of the past
administrations where there were
a lot of placement fees paid in
the tens of millions of dollars
to certain New York of bonding
transactions and so forth
so madam chair I would but I
keep promising that I'm gonna
finish up at night and I I am.
Senator Brandt is my only
comment is that if this bill
does move on I believe you have
pointed out Senator souls the
several areas that need
the review or assistance of an
attorney but please finish yeah
I'll just jump around although
quickly look at section nine
subsection Hey this is on line
twelve this is an example of
good of where again it
enrollment the.
Is like in medicine there are
lawyers who specialize in
various areas I have my special
you can ask what you write a
will you tell you I'm
incompetent to write a well I
don't know how to write a will
believe it or not something
pretty simple but it's not what
I do.
wearing of in my opinion the
writing of laws is that
specializes in the area of the
law just like a specialization
Medicine and there are very few
lawyers who are specialized in
writing laws we have them up
stairs that's the Legislative
Council Service and and they're
supposed to be specialist as
lawyers can writing laws and
outside the Legislative Council
I would say there are very very
few lawyers in this state other
than maybe who served in the
legislature who have experience
a good experience writing laws.
received actually I was going to
end on a point the the my mic
and now my experience over the
last several years as the more
more bills are being written by
the organization special
interest groups nonprofit groups
lawyers who represent those
organizations and they all mean
well they'll intend well but
very candidly they don't have
the skill of the expertise to be
writing laws and it's hard to
tell a lawyer I know because
I've been doing thirty years
it's very hard to tell where
you're you're beyond your ski
your outside your lane and they
usually don't take it very well
and I'm not always the most
popular guy when I delivered
that message but I'll just give
an example if you look at that
page twenty section nine Hey it
because this was as banks trust
companies savings loans
insurance companies executors
administrators guardians
trustees and other fiduciaries
make it legally invest any of
their money in securitization
bonds.
That language is completely
inappropriate a statute has no
place in the meeting because
you're essentially saying that
banks and trust companies even
launch going to both invest in
bonds well of course they can.
That's what they do.
You don't need a law to tell
banks that they can invest in
bonds in the securitization
bonds we don't need a lot of Tel
Trust Company savings and loans
insurance companies and all
these other entities here that
that the money they have in
their banks in their control can
be invested in these bonds you
don't need to do that that it's
not our job to tell those those
institutions financial vision
what they can invest in in not
invest into the that's that's an
example of language is
completely meaningless and and
needless in a statute and you
wouldn't get that from an
experienced lawyer writing
statutes
a section twelve is a another
example of where years actually
turning of the law on its head.
This this actions as of any
provisions of this act conflict
any other law I'm reading on the
section twelve one twenty two as
of any provision of this act
like with any other law
regarding attachment assignment
perfection perfection and
priority of security interested
address our treasure property
this actual governor.
This makes this law superior to
all property law assignments
perfections priority security
interest transfers of property
this law prevails over all of
that law never gonna happen
center just never never going to
happen
and so whether it it doesn't
happen on this committee if it
doesn't happen to another
committee it doesn't happen in
governor's desk for the house or
didn't happen in the courtroom
with a bunch of lawyers charging
a pretty good hourly rate I just
got to tell you of these kind of
things just won't happen you'll
see that again on page twenty
four talk about pledges and
secure parties have.
And Dr take a lot of the
committee's time I did meet Liz
like I'm really trying to to
destroy the bill that's not my
purpose obviously pretty clear
I'm not gonna vote for it what I
really am trying to point out is
that Senator souls is been a
leader on an important issue and
I joined in him and I work very
very hard
okay we spent hours and hours
come up with alternatives in
alternate language and I still
feel like what United was very
good words our souls and point a
lot of issues out but but the
fact of the matter is where we
were in very complicated areas
of law very very complicated
complicated as it gets and it's
not the kind of thing that that
the you can just have somebody
start putting words into word
processor and and and cutting
and pasting I can usually see by
now after this years I can
usually sit and paste job.
We're folks take good language
from one area is a yes but this
over here let's put it over
there and after awhile you get
Frankenstein it is that you got
a so together.
Works with lots of pieces that
really frankly are are not the
cohesive and and clear so madam
chair Senator is what we do on I
I provision lot of work with
into this but it's it's far from
from ready to to pass committees
thank you.
Thank you Senator Rende Center
grey goose.
Madam chair thank you and and I
wanted to go down so what
Senator what this is done and
I'm not an attorney but I like
the way he was doing that in Mr
chairman madam chair.
Chairman sold.
Struck out on page twenty seven
a line for section eighteen of.
If there's about new material
ability on the actions.
Hello in bell the actors held
and fell in all online in other
states some worry they're this
carefree basically the prior
action allow up to percent to
the right carefully backed up
with that the way I read this
year again Madam chair souls I'm
turning with that restrict
future legislation on this bill.
Madam chair and senator I don't
believe so I think what that
indicates is if the
And and get your online tend to
validity of the prior action is
taken by the commission what
that's dealing with is if this
is something yeah they go
through try and sell bonds the
bonds don't sell it doesn't
change what they've already done
about closing up plant that
there's a stranded asset or cost
it doesn't invalidate anything
that happened prior.
Okay I appreciate that because
that's not how it right and I I
just really thought is an
interest
as legislator later down the
line my second question madam
chair and senator yes your bill
do you think you well it's equal
protection clause as far as our.
Anyone having the due process of
law now the commission makes
decision on the stranded assets
but I don't see in here for the
the way I read it and you do a
great job of keeping me up at
night
but the likely bills but I'm
just wondering if we're missing
the due process in this
situation.
Madam chair due process where.
I would say just for me
and stranded after just talking
about PNM if if they had a
stranded asset would it I know
the tool to the PRC but it
wouldn't be applicables that
they would still have any other
options
What do this winter and has
twenty five year lifespan at
that point when it is no longer
valid are they going to have any
other options
Or to be able protect can do
what they need to with that
stranded yes.
Madam chair after twenty five
year lifespan there is no longer
a stranded asset it's been
totally
Taken off the books.
Okay so with that the take me to
my next on on that then at that
time the.
Costs associated to dismantling
and storage because they can't
reviews on.
Is that become the rate payers
college or is that still part of
the PNM whoever owns the actual
last.
Madam chair and and senator I
again as I've said many times
that's way before this that has
nothing to do with
securitization that is all part
of the process is between the
utility and the PRC this all
comes in once that is already
been determined through what are
the the standard normal
processes now.
Okay madam chair and in center I
I I guess I'm still confused on.
One of the worst before the cart
but my next question is and and
I know we had the amended F. I
has the PRC taking a position on
this currently.
Madam chair as was mentioned in
the last meeting the PRC has
essentially stayed in the middle
of this they see it as strictly
a tool and so they have not
taken a formal position one way
or another this just gives them
another option and as I said
last time it's better to have
the tool and not need it than to
need it not happen.
Madam chair and senator I
appreciate it but I guess if
we're doing this to them I would
like to that amendment
For just I'm so with that you'll
think chair.
Thank you so much Senator
Gallegos is the committee ready
for motion.
Madam chair may I make a
statement or comment on some of
the things absolutely why don't
you do your closing of summary
Senator souls thank you.
Thank you and there's about this
brings up a number of very good
things but I would point out and
while he was talking I pulled up
the ETA for two thousand and
nineteen where and I think I'm
on page I'm reading this right
page nineteen of finance order
shall provide that the patient
energy transition property.
That's a lot of and that was
just one place and I didn't get
a chance to go through the
entire thing but much of the
actual securitization language
in here more as the
securitization language when it
gets to those questions that are
in the EPA also this is also bad
used affected Lee has not been
challenged to be inappropriate
in court in other states as far
as the.
The and I I will choose the
right legal language but that
you can't go you can't do take
backs that you once this is done
it is set and it's because of
those and it might be a priority
property abroad using a wrong
legal thing but when there is
any kind this thing is in on the
top this is in front of the
people that they put out the
money for this get papers that's
how you get the lowest property
right and so this is not
something that is new law New
Mexico this is why in many other
states New Mexico doesn't have
this tool available to it and so
when there is concerned about
the writings yes this is that
written by lawyers other places
it is already been used other
places it is not a challenge to
anything that I've seen and read
and I read lots getting prepared
for this I am not a lawyer as
far as the details but this is
something it's already in log in
New Mexico for power plants much
of what was brought up and is
also in law in many other states
and this is not creating or
inventing do think that weather
places where lawyers can you do
that lawyers absolutely will
challenge think that lawyers
wrote you never write things
clear that's what keeps lawyers
employed and so I'd be happy to
go through with their particular
ways we can write things cleaner
than this but I think it's also
important what we already have a
lot of very similar to this in
New Mexico that this was not in
conflict with what that was
state that those they ought to
work in tandem and side by side
in all of those kinds of cases
and so with that Mr madam chair
I'd be happy to to go for about.
Thank you Senator so most of the
presentation and answering as
many questions as we put out.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
I'm sure I move to table.
There is a table in motion it's
non debatable
would rank up please call the
vote.
Yes Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen no Senate Bill.
Yes.
Senator Paypen.
No.
Senator so.
No.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senator Stefanics.
No.
That the bill is not table were
I'm open to another motion I
move the past.
Is there a second.
Thank you madam chair.
The motion has been made by
Senator Sedillo Lopez a second
by Senator Hamblen.
Would you please call the.
No Senator Gallegos.
To try my vote Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Neville no.
Senator pope.
Yes.
No.
Senator so yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes I'd
like to explain my vote.
And CENIC's.
Yes.
I yes for no.
Thank you senator gray goes to
explain your vote thank you
madam chair again I'm just
looking at the expression when
sure sure what this product so
many issues that I do not
understand I'm not an attorney I
would rather have this fixed
here in our committee to be able
to have a good feeling of where
it's going next I hope this will
be corrected on the floor so
that way we look at it but thank
you for the opportunity by
Michael.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair Senator
souls and I attended a
conference on energy policy
together I think it was summer
of two thousand nineteen and I
have enormous respect because
what she is doing is he is doing
what we should have done years
ago and that is planning for the
closing of the of the gas
powered plants and planning for
the closing of the nuclear
plants.
I I read you this bill and while
I am not an expert I do not
claim to be an expert in
financing it's in comparing it
to other financing bills around
the country it is very similar
it gives the discretion to the
PRC to determine whether
securitization that is secure
daisy securitize and the
obligation of the rate payers to
pay for those stranded assets
and and selling a bond on it.
Whether that's in the best
interest of the rate payers and
I think that is four sided and
that's why support this bill.
Thank you very much thank you
senator souls thank you
committee we are now going on to
Senate bill two ninety six.
increased penalties for
environmental violations
Senator McKenna and Senator
Steinborn.
Senator McKenna here.
I'm right here okay so Senator
McKenna please go ahead and
present.
Good morning madam chair Stefan
exempt members thank you for
allowing me to percent SB two
ninety six increased penalties
for environmental violations to
you today.
I didn't have to subject matter
experts there in the room with
us today I like to introduce
them to you this mass Lund lock
and Mr Charles young they're
turned east with the New Mexico
environmental law center.
madam chair and committee I
would like to read a brief
summary of the bill.
And then agency lock would like
to present a separate step
statement if that's permissible.
Yes thank you.
Two ninety six will amend the
state's environmental wants to
address the maximum civil
penalties for the inflation that
has occurred since their
enactment.
Because the deterrent effect of
civil penalty has been a rope
and over time by inflation this
bill would align the penalty
amounts with the original intent
of the legislature.
The.
Control act water control lacked
the hazardous waste act solidly
stacked and the mining act all
include provisions for the
assessment of civil penalties
for violations of the law for
violations of regulations or
permits issued under these laws.
Penalties can be assessed by the
environment department.
Or under the mining act the
energy minerals and natural
resources department in
administrative compliance
orders.
These can also be assessed by
courts in judicial enforcement
actions.
Each of the statutes panel to
the provisions contained maximum
penalty amounts that may be
assessed usually ten or fifteen
thousand dollars per day.
Of the violation.
All of these penalty provisions
were enacted or were last
amended in approximately
nineteen ninety.
Over the past thirty years
inflation has steadily eroded
the value of those maximum
penalty amounts by roughly fifty
percent.
The deterrent effect of the
penalty amounts the primary
purpose of penalty civil
penalties as deterrents has been
a road in.
This bill will correct this
reduction in the value of
penalties by doubling the
penalty amounts in each statute
in effect it will restore the
penalty amounts the Legislature
enacted in the late nineteen
eighties and nineteen nineties.
Notably the US Congress has
enacted similar legislation to
adjust federal civil penalty
amounts for inflation.
Under the federal civil
penalties inflation army under
this federal civil penalties
inflation adjustment act of
nineteen ninety.
The amounts in federal
environmental and other laws
have been ingested for inflation
several times and now they are
being adjusted annually.
This bill does not amend the oil
and gas act will not require any
probation and will not
negatively affect the state's
budget it may it may however
enhance the state's budget by
allowing state agencies to
collect higher penalty amounts.
and with that
madam chair I would like to
welcome this lock to
Presenter statement thank you
miss lock.
Please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Senator
McKenna again my name is as a
lock and I am a staff attorney
with the New Mexico
environmental law center and ask
Senator McKenna said the purpose
of this bill really is simply to
align the penalty provisions and
I of New Mexico's environmental
statutes with the original
intent of the legislature I just
want to briefly mention two
things the first as a result
explanation of how we calculated
the new amount so the penalty
amounts when they were enacted
ranged in value from five
thousand dollars to twenty five
thousand dollars as maximum
amounts that could be assessed
for different types of
violations.
We chose the year nineteen
ninety three as the starting
point as that was really the
last year that a penalty
provision was implemented aside
from one section of the air
quality control act that was
implemented in two thousand six
using the bureau of labor
statistics consumer price index
inflation calculator we plugged
those numbers and to adjust for
inflation that had occurred up
through December twenty twenty
as that was the last months that
there was inflation data
available so the new amounts
account for inflation through
this past December and each
penalty amount roughly doubles
creating new values ranging from
ten thousand dollars to fifty
thousand dollars I want to note
that we did around the amounts
that came out of the calculator
a little bit just to make them
sort of.
Cleaner when your Environment
Department the court was doing
the calculation so the only
other thing I'll point out is
that New Mexico is not the first
state to make these adjustments
along with the federal statute
that Senator McKenna mentioned
Colorado is actually also passed
legislation adjusting their
civil penalty amounts in their
last twenty twenty session and
the penalty amounts were
adjusted to roughly the same
fifty thousand dollar maximum
that we have proposed today so
with that I will get back to you
all thank you madam chair
members of the committee and I
will be available to answer any
questions along with my fellow
expert Mr chair of the ceiling.
Thank you Charles did you have
anything you want to get.
No thanks I I madam chair
members of the committee I think
miss lock is covered the issue
quite well as as well as
Senator McKenna.
Thank you very much okay we
however we are now going to the
opponents of the bill.
And while we don't have ten sign
up we will take up to ten for a
minute and a half.
First we have Jim Winchester.
Chair members of the committee
just checking to see you can
hear me yes we can thank you
madam chair I appreciate the
time to speak today and address
the committee I PM does stand
opposed to SB two ninety five
six for several reasons first of
all the independent petroleum
association and our members
strongly agree that
environmental stewardship is
paramount to oil and gas
development and contrary to the
picture that's painted by a lot
of environmental extremists are
members do care about operating
in a responsible manner after
all these are the folks who do
work in the field and live in
surrounding communities in we
also do agree that those who are
responsible should be held
accountable but with SB two
ninety six I have taken several
calls from my members asking me
why such a bill like this looks
to punish the oil and gas
industry simply for being the
oil and gas industry along with
other industry
I'll show a sample those
questions to meet do the
legislators not know that we are
already the most regulated
industry in New Mexico do we do
not know that this bill
disproportionately and
punitively hurts smaller
operators who can be easily find
out of existence and perhaps the
most poignant question to me was
was this bill generated by
environmental groups in some
back room conversations saying
we don't like oil and gas or any
other industry so let's just
double the fines.
Despite these frustrations I can
tell you that our members are
resilient they're committed to
the environment and they are
committed to a flourishing New
Mexico but for the reasons as
expressed we do ask the
committee to not support this
bill thank you.
Thank you nextra were.
Might want I want.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
We appreciate the opportunity to
speak on this bill today my name
is Mike pro and on the executive
director of the New Mexico
mining association and why with
the association appreciates the
fact that occasion we have to up
the some of the amounts and that
we are concerned over doubling
it.
Not so much for our larger
operations but for the smaller
operations this is a really
significant increase in a
penalty.
Would also like to point out
that in the analysis.
As a.
The energy minerals and natural
resources department pointed out
that penalties collected on the
mining actors frequent and do
not provide a significant more
revenue.
Which we're proud of because
that would mean that the the
violations and mining industries
are minimal so big because we're
concerned about our smaller
operators we would ask that you
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Thank you for.
Tiffany Rivera.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning my name is Tiffany
Rivera and I'm the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau this
morning we respectfully stand in
opposition to Senate bill two
ninety six we oppose this
legislation as it increases the
penalty assessments for
violations under the water
quality act the water quality
act directly affects our state's
dairy to contribute left roughly
one point three eight billion
dollars to the state's economy
there's been little to no
discussion with the affected
industries including Derry on
how this change will affect them
further the increased penalties
in the bill could threaten the
livelihoods of our state's
dairies all of which are family
owned and operated I ask that
you continue to look more
agriculture in the state of New
Mexico and voting opposition of
house or Senate bill two ninety
six thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning thank you extra work.
Very very.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee I my
name is Amy there be and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association.
In contrast are for my PNM did
an excellent job of articulating
the substantive issues for that
oil and gas industry I would ask
you to consider the comments
that he made also keep in mind
that during the past two sixty
day sessions memo that has
worked very hard with
legislators and the state
agencies to increase bonding and
penalties so not having any I'm
outreach from the sponsors of
the Legislature on these issues
if they are in fact issues it's
something that we would like to
see addressed during the interim
thank you very much.
Thank you the next.
Beverly insignia.
I'm definitely it thank god it.
Your.
In in opposition to Senate bill
two ninety six because they're
already statutes in place to
deal with permits and compliance
and these agencies have a
collector of enforcement tools
at their disposal and our major
concern.
Really we can't hear you.
I'm sorry about that.
What we're gonna be moving on
from opposition in a minute.
You want to try again.
You hear me now yes.
Okay basically we stand in
opposition because it took the
better part of a decade to form
the Derry role which was a
unanimous agreement between the
dairy industry the environment
department environmentalists
coalition and to open that up
would be detrimental and having
to go through that process again
and right now the dairy industry
in the state of New Mexico has
the most stringent groundwater
regulations than any other dairy
state in the nation thank you.
Thank you very much next we're.
Trujillo.
But.
Madam chair this is TJ trio.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
Germany's TGH real registered
lobbyist for several clients all
name a couple that are very
concerned about this bill in
particular I have a low oil gas
I to have Occident petroleum and
plains pipeline I also a
registered lobbyist for Freeport
mac Moran a copper mine down and
and silvercity New Mexico.
chair members of the committee
for the reasons discussed by the
previous folks I won't go into
detail and for the same reasons
they expressed we have concerns.
I would raise two additional
points throughout New Mexico
statutes in many places it in
the statutes they put a of a
policy of Sikhs seeking
voluntary compliance as the
first ever before you go to
penalties note that many of the
statutory provisions you're
looking at don't have that if
you're going to double the
amount of penalties that could
be assessed at a minimum I think
as as if this bill moves on
there should be some kind of an
amendment to in each one of
these particular provisions
statutory enactments to have a
voluntary compliance provision.
Lastly madam chair members of
the committee I will make one
quick note that
the problem with this bill is
that New Mexico has.
The worst enforcement of
administrative adjudication
policies and practices and
here's the reason why New Mexico
is the only state out of all
fifty states that that does not
have an administrative
procedures act because of that
enforcement of these kinds of
penalties is sporadic is
ambiguous and vague oftentimes
in the process for those reasons
the clients I talked about
proposes bill would encourage
you to also up vote against the
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Matthew Thompson.
Thank you madam chair members
when is Matt Thompson I'm the
registered lobbyist for Apache
corporation.
For many of the reasons that
have already been stated and
then interest of time I'd like
to agree with with what I'm.
Mr keep Trujillo just stated and
we're in the opposition percent
built to ninety six thank you.
Thank you anyone else for.
That is everyone who signed up
to speak against.
Trevor I signed up Ashley
Wagner.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we oppose
this bill for a few reasons but
the first is because there's no
statute of limitations on claims
that can be made this bill will
also penalize municipalities and
other local governments because
they double the penalties for
the solid waste Act and water
quality act violations discover
landfills and sewage disposal
this can negatively impact local
economies around the state.
It should also be noted that
most federal statutes have caps
on administrative penalties but
there are no caps in this bill
is also don't tried contested
cases administratively this bill
puts a lot of power in the hands
of the department secretary by
allowing the secretary to try
multi million dollar
administrative claims a company
can contest but ultimately the
case is in the hands of the
department secretary or
specified Commission course
would only get involved to
review the department secretary
or the commission's decision the
only evidentiary hearing would
be before the secretary or the
commission in those cases the
rules of evidence and procedure
before the court is not followed
thank you so much.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else however.
We are now going to the
proponents of the bill.
Mary Feldblum.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mary
Feldblum and I represent
earthworks oil and gas
accountability project and I
want to assure you that there
has been no back room deals
least I certainly wasn't part of
it I was involved in a couple
years ago when we updated the
fines for the oil and gas act
which hadn't been updated for
decades and it makes a lot of
sense to update the these other
all fines I'd like to quote for
you Secretary McLean whom as you
know was appointed by Martinez
and he he are they the
discussion about the role of
fines and he said that I can use
coming from the industry.
Find were available to OCD I
think we we would see an
accelerated attempt to achieve
compliance I companies which
were not in compliance
compliance for oil and gas is a
complicated issue and regulators
need a complex toolbox guarantee
and assure state residents that
oil and gas companies are in
fact in compliance and having
the ability to assess
administrative fines I think one
of several components that could
be incorporated in that toolbox
and this is not only oil and gas
in a certainly not against the
good actors and there's so many
of them it's those who are
disobeying the law and it's not
just a question of a of an
impact on the industry there's
an impact on the public we the
taxpayer end up paying the bills
for the stills the and and the
club and and the other problems
of people of at the small number
of industry folks that actually
get away with obeying the law
disobeying the law because it's
cheaper for them to pay a fine
then to comply so I urge you to
support the Senate bill two
ninety six thank you.
Thank you next please.
Camilla I.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to speak in support of
Senate bill two ninety six
however I would like to object
to Jim Winchester's use of name
calling and calling all like me
an environmental extremist I am
a mother of a four year old and
an eight year old I am born and
raised in Albuquerque New Mexico
and a graduate of Albuquerque
high school how dare you name
call.
Okay now we I understand you
might have found that offensive
but we don't call people out by
name so please continue.
Thank you madam chair.
As a mother and other.
And a member of the family.
Representing the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club and
R. thirty five thousand members
and supporters.
Sorry I've lost my thread
because I find it so upsetting.
To be called an extremist in
this time.
We get ninety.
Thank you I believe next I would
appreciate that okay thank you
however is there anybody else
another proponent.
John Brown.
Thank you.
Committee chair and committee
and sponsor of the bill my name
is John Brown I'm the director
New Mexico interfaith power and
light and we work with these
communities and people face all
over the state and we support
just be two ninety six because
it seems to just something fair
and just that needs to happen
there has not been adjusted for
inflation in thirty years for
these penalties doesn't make
sense to to us nor I think to
the people that we serve I'm
I've heard many people in
southeast Mexico that we work
with talk about how they feel
they're left behind by the state
and that they're not they're
health is not really being
protected
Their health care costs have
increased over thirty years the
incidences of things that affect
their health have increased over
the last thirty years so we
believe this is just a simple
and it just fix to care for our
neighbors which is our
responsibility as people of
faith and to be good stewards of
our sacred air land and water
and it is not meant to penalize
those who are doing what they
need to do but to help those who
are not to do their ethical
moral duty so thank you so much.
Thank you.
So.
Ben Shelton.
Thank you madam chair pencil to
the conservation voters New
Mexico I want to just maybe to
the temperature down very
quickly on this and
contextualize this bill this
bill as part of a modernization
effort far more unfortunate
regime in the state that goes
back to two thousand nineteen
conversations about updating
these types of statutes of
providing more tools as as
Mary Feldblum alluded to
secretary McQueen back in the
day it's just a much more
complex and nuanced tool kit
it's we're trying to build here
in the process of building this
is expanding legislature there's
administrative actions that are
that are trying to build out
the the state's complexity and
sort of sophistication when it
comes to regulating sevens
industry and in most of use
those areas we're working hand
in hand with our industry
counterparts some of whom you've
heard from today madam this is a
fact so I would urge the
committee to overlook whatever
symbolic importance of safety P.
may be caused by this bill is
look at the actual impact which
is to just simply update us for
inflation and catch New Mexico
up even internally with its own
lost as well as catching up with
the region to provide a little
bit more stability consistency
and predictability for
industries when they think about
the regulatory environment is
going to be operating in thank
you madam chair.
Thank you extra work
Solomon.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Tom Solomon and co coordinator
with the New Mexico chapter
three fifty dot org.
On behalf of our eight thousand
members I'd like to speak in
support of SB two ninety six and
congratulate senator Brent
Brenda McKenna for bringing this
forward.
I just like to note that the
purpose of penalties in this
bill is not to collect payments
or impose financial burdens on
businesses to make sure that
they're sufficient incentive for
business and other entities to
take environmental regulations
seriously enough that they
comply with the agency avoid
those penalties that's how we
protect our health and our
environment and for that simple
reason and because it hasn't
been updated for thirty years we
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you next please.
We wanted to go back to Camilla
I own okay thank you comel yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee so much for the
second chance all point out that
these penalties have not been
adjusted for inflation for
nearly thirty years again
roading maximum penalties fifty
percent we saw the news from the
New Mexico environment
department that in a flyover
with the EPA late last year they
were seen double the leakage
rates and so we need to be able
to have a tool to encourage
industry to be good neighbors I
think this also speaks to an
issue that provides a bit of
contacts that are
environmentally agencies need to
be fully funded to do proper
inspection and enforcement I
will though point out that this
bill does not apply to the oil
and gas act so again we speak in
support of the bill and hope for
do pass thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other speakers Trevor I
believe Susan Sherman Sherman.
Can you hear me now yes.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm speaking
as an individual on the New
Mexico resident my name is Susan
Schurman I've lived in New
Mexico for twenty seven years
and I just wanted to speak in
support of us being two ninety
six
Basically to be fair of I think
that this bill I think the
provision was started to be an
incentive of to do the right
thing and over time.
With that not keeping up with
inflation that incentive has
disappeared it's it's been
reduced greatly so this would
just of all the original intent
thank you so much.
Thank you okay we're gonna go to
the committee and now on Senator
me the Kennedy is there anything
you wanted to say in response to
any of the testimony before we
go to the committee.
Thank you madam chair yeah I do
want to emphasize again my
opening statement this bill does
not amend the oil and gas act.
The federal government is the
leading offender.
When it comes to.
spillage of toxic chemicals such
as benzene.
And
again.
We would want everything else to
be adjusted for inflation
protecting our land air.
And water.
That should be one of the
highest priorities and with that
I will defer to this lock.
Or miss for Mister.
Or Charles if he wants to say
anything and add to that madam
madam chair thank you.
I think we all leave it to your
experts later on if you want to
defer to them on questions so
committee members
questions comments and Senator
Sedillo Lopez I hope you can
change the color of your hand it
just.
With the would.
Senator Sedillo Lopez your first
thank you thank you I just want
to congratulate Senator McKenna
on this bill I think it an
update is is way over due to
explain why it doesn't cover the
oil and gas act.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Sergio Lopez I would
like to defer that question too
my subject matter expert miss
lock.
This.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator the reason it does not
address the oil and gas sectors
because those penalty provisions
were updated a few years ago I
think in twenty nineteen and
Charles you can correct me if
I'm wrong but.
A few years ago those penalty
provisions are already updated.
Thank actually those County
prison of the authority of the
OCD to seek penalties was
actually inserted into the OCD
into the oil and gas Act because
they've been taken away in a
prior court case.
So it but I didn't
are on a different we are on
this bill please okay thank you
Okay well I like I said I think
that this this is a simple bill
updating it so that these
penalties I have some meaning
and I am looking forward to
voting for the bill and I
congratulate you on thank you.
Thank you I next have Senator
Gallegos David center souls.
Chair thank you.
In center create the discussion
I had a couple of questions and
when we get back to us right in
the bill another question bill
but
All these monies are collected
early to be distributed.
I understand they go to
different areas one goes
general.
R. how does how does that can
work.
Thank you for the question
Senator Gallegos and madam chair
and I have had some really good
conversations with my subject
matter experts but so that I
don't style of the language and
miss the departments that would
manage these fees I'm going to
defer to miss lock thank you.
Madam chair Senator
Just to make sure that I
understand the question you're
asking once the penalties go
into the general fund how are
they distributed out of it or
what funds the penalties
themselves are going into.
Let me just tell you about
process.
You go through the chair and
then to the senator with titles
please.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and miss lock up
both so I understand goes
general fund but so it has come
back to the department for the
enforcement piece how does that
work.
Madam chair Senator again as I
will actually pass this one on
two thousand ceiling thank you.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair
Senator Senator Gallegos the
the laws already provide for
where the penalties go to so
this bill would not change that
at all and actually the way that
the laws are written it varies
from statute to statute so under
the air quality control act the
penalties go to the general fund
match at
under the hazardous waste act
the penalties go to the general
fund to be allocate allocated to
the hazardous waste emergency
fund which is a special fund
that was set up by the
legislature and your to purposes
that that money can be used for
the first one is to address
emergency spells you know as a
there's a train crash in a
tanker tanker burst open and
instills a chemical the money
can be used to address that
emergency the second thing that
that money can be used for is
the state's cost chair of the
clean up of Superfund sites so
under the federal state
Superfund law the comprehensive
environmental response
compensation and liability act
or as we call it CERCLA
the state is required to pay.
Excuse me to pay a share of the
cleanup costs of those sites
we're there are no responsible
parties so that the hazardous
waste emergency fund can be used
to cover the state's cost here
of those cleanups
under the out of the water
quality act again the the the
penalties just go to the general
fund under the hazardous waste
act.
To me the the solid waste act
penalties go to the solid waste
facility fund
and that money can be used to
assist local governments and
constructing landfills and and
managing municipal solid waste
and then under the mining act
penalties go to the
well I forget I I'm sorry forget
with the fund is called
and but it's a a a fund to help
to reclaim abandoned mines.
Thank you madam chair connect
with us I appreciate that I have
some concerns the company I work
for we have to mines one Artesia
wanted Hobbs in I know what the
penalties are poor quality and
for the mines section of that
but B. NH state fifth generation
family business I'm just really
worried on and you know we heard
the opposition for many many
reasons of what these penalties
are going to be done as far as
the cost madam chair and senator
my next question goes to page
seven of the bill.
In line twenty.
Read one on my.
Once again.
In line twenty three.
It's got word.
Committee your second.
The work threatens in line
twenty three threaten violation
how's that determined.
And whose determination is that
as far as interpretation of
that.
Thank you Sir guy a goes and
madam chair I would like to
defer that question to either
miss lock or Mr Joyce Yang.
We would like to answer.
I'll defer to Mister sailing as
well.
I'm Madam chair Senator di guy a
ghosts
first of all that's not a
provision that this bill would
change okay that those those
words are already in the law
and the that provision would of
it in and it is are enforced and
administered by the agency in
this case it's the environment
department so in the first
instance it would be the
environment department that
would interpret that provision
but if all are you doing but you
know I just want to apologize
again for last night I'm so hope
you're on you're not muted.
You.
Thank you and center city office
you might mute.
Thank you madam chair Senator K.
because as I was saying that the
environment department would
interpret it in the first
instance of but if there was a
challenge to the enforcement
action the challenge to that
interpretation then ultimately
it would be a interpreted by the
courts.
Madam chair and effort when as I
appreciate that I just could not
see and and and and I know it
was new language but it still
bothers me that there's
Transportation threatened
without having somewhere in
their description of who does
that so I guess that gives me
comfort that they would have a
chance to go to court with that
to have a determination done so
how would that all yield I I
stand opposition to the bill
from multiple multiple regions
but I just want to clarify those
two points thank you madam chair
thank you souls.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and senator does
anything change where the funds
go from what's currently in law.
Madam chair and senator souls I
do not think so but I really
would want
one of my subject matter experts
to verify that.
That's correct nothing changes
the way the funds are
distributed.
Thank you madam chair and
senator does this do anything
other than update the penalty
amounts.
Adam chair and senator souls I
believe all this does is update
the penalty amounts to reflect
that thirty years of inflation.
Thank you.
Chair and senator does anything
change on what kind of violation
but the charge.
Madam chair and senator souls I
do not recollect that that is in
the language of the bill and I
will defer to my subject matter
experts if I am wrong test on
that.
Madam chair that is correct
nothing changes in terms of what
relief center.
Thank you madam chair is there
any increase in this bill that
expands what might be chart.
Chair and senator souls again I
don't recollect that there is
any language changing this
proposed statute related to that
and once again I will defer to
my subject matter experts in
buying an air.
Senator McKenna you're not an
error there is no expansion of
the constitution.
Thank you madam chair if there
are no violations with anyone
being in charge the new right.
Madam chair and senator souls I.
Could you repeat the question
yes I want to make sure I have
it correct in my mind.
If there are no bad actors if
there are no violations that
there does bills would anybody
be charge the new find great.
Madam chair and senator souls I
believe you anyone who.
Contaminates with the
carcinogens that we are.
We are concerned about would be
charged and I think there's
something really important to
from my really good to start.
Senator he was asking for yes or
no.
All right I'll defer to miss
lock.
Madam chair Senator souls if
there is no bad actor there
would be no charge under this
any penalty provision thank you
madam chairman that's all my
questions.
Thank you saying no further
hands what is the pleasure of
the committee.
Just.
I heard.
Motion for do passed from.
Senator Hamblen.
And there is a second from
center city on Lopez Senator
Schmedes I see your hand please
go ahead.
Senator sweeties are you on.
Yes.
Yes the one brief question thank
you.
I've been with this kind of
going but I just you know I I
think you know people do.
I'm sorry Senator we totally
lost you could you try again
speaking.
People do
subject to the.
More you know monthly or annual
payments for insurance premiums.
We caught part of your question
I believe you're asking.
If the companies would need to
increase their insurance is that
the question you asked.
We are we weren't really losing
you could you.
send your question.
To myself for my text or to
Trevor by text we could read it.
Madam chair I thought he said
yes.
To your question.
Okay so the question I think
Senator Schmedes yes was will
this
Require companies to increase
their insurance Senator McKenna.
Madam chair and senator smitteez
I'm gonna defer that question
too miss lock or Mr deshaun.
Thank you madam chair Senators
committee
All this bill really does is
change the amount of penalties
that an agency or a court can
assess and I'm not sure what
impact that might have on a
company's insurance rates
Charles I'm not sure if you know
okay I think that answer the
question so I if senators
Canadian census a different
question.
I haven't received one tribe or
did you.
No I haven't.
Okay we have a due pass motion
on the floor manager I'd just
for table okay so Senator gave
us just for a tabling that is
non debatable so let's Veronica
let's take the vote on the
tabling.
No.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes Senator Hamblen no Senator
Neville yes Senator pope.
No.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sauls.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Senators smitteez.
Thanks.
No.
No to yes and one excuse.
Okay so let's go back to the
past motion Veronica please call
the roll.
Yes yes.
My vote please yes I did you say
yes yes but text when we publish
thank you Senator Gallegos noted
likes play mobile Hamblen yes
sorry Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville so.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator Sauls yes.
Committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator committees.
Thanks yes.
Six yes.
Okay thank you very much the.
Bill has passed Senator von case
to explain his boat and then
Senator Gallegos yes madam
chairman I'm sure this bill goes
to Senate Judiciary.
Think that probably gives enough
with explanations all save my my
powder the committee for that I
and I also know that the the
fines and penalties are up to
their their maximum but I will
ask the senator at the time of
Judiciary some questions and all
all try and give her a heads up
in advance but what I would be
very should nine how many times
and if the maximum penalties
have been imposed so I I don't
think I heard that the debaters
special day but I'd like to I'd
like to know how many times
we've ever got to the maximum
this happens a lot of criminal
waterbody once increase
penalties all the time in
criminal law whenever.
Those even the bare minimums so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so.
Madam chair thank you I just
wanted to explain I know that
historically the session we've
done quite a few of bills to try
to our impact or heard oil and
gas this bill goes beyond that
impacting our Gary community and
given our chamber stood in
opposition to it so I think that
there's a lot more unintended
consequences just how to shut
down old gasoline with that are
you mmhm thank you so much.
Committee members I have one
question for you before we
recessed for the day because it
is a lot of an eighteen week on
the floor at eleven thirty.
As you now we're hearing Senate
bill three twelve on to state of
the.
Changing the department of game
and fish to the department of
wildlife.
We have thousands.
Of opponents and thousands of
proponents.
We can do here at ten on each
side or twenty on each side
twenty on each side would be one
minute ten on each side would
get ten two minutes please give
me your preference right now
madam chair could I would I
would prefer to hear more on
each side I think it's it's
Representative of the different
concerns of the of the bill.
Thank you any other comments
etcetera renewable.
Led to second that I've got a
lot of emails and texts from
the.
Constituents that they are not
being heard and I think this
gives us an opportunity that
they would be able to have that
chance I like to twenty I think
we would madam chair I agree I
think we need to this I've
gotten tons of emails both sides
it's not waited particularly one
with the other but I think we
need to hear the proponents and
opponents thank you.
Madam chair.
When.
Twenty Madam okay I was just
gonna say they get so repetitive
that if maybe if you could at
least ask them to stop repeating
the same thing over and over
again we will I learned the
sponsor of the bill and the
person organizing the opposition
to exactly that I appreciate
everybody's time today I'm sorry
I was a few minutes late and we
are now in recess in order to go
to the floor thank you very
much.
