Presented.
Centers.
And before we get started I
wanted to let out those of you
who don't know that center soul.
The gamble and peace and last
year I hit it so heard it flew
apart.
No doubt.
I thought I thought you were
madam chair I thought you're
madam character you're like the
mi.
Okay
so this morning we are starting
with center bill one and.
Thank you madame share good
morning everyone
so how is the bill.
Thank you madame chair I am here
this morning with representative
of chat field to present and a
bill one which is the bill that
was indoors by your interim
committee to wate.
This bill continues something
that we were able to accomplish
last session for the first time
in many years which is to
appropriate a hundred million
dollars from the general fund
into the water trust fund.
Are the water trust find is a
constitutionally created
permanent fund
which has a specific provision
that requires us by status you
to do an annual distribution to
the water project fund which is
the money that the water trust
for all the projects that come
in front of it we pass the
statutes
requiring a distribution of four
million dollars or four point
seven percent of the total
annual fund in that in the total
fund if the distribution would
be more than four million
dollars so prior to last year
are the fine had gone down to a
total of forty one million
dollars and we were spending
four million a year so it was
headed very quickly to
insolvency by putting a hundred
million dollars in we have
provided stability for that if
we could put another hundred
million dollars into this fond I
think we're doing something
incredibly important for our
long term future in the state
when it comes to water so again
I am.
Thrilled that this is something
when we're in a situation like
we are now with three point four
billion dollars of new money we
have to be very careful about
spending that.
And this is another example of
taking a recurring chunk of that
money and parking it into a
permanent fond which all of a
sudden will be over.
Rocks may two hundred and forty
million dollars if we get this
in which spinning of four point
seven percent will be more than
four million dollars and that's
a recurring a revenue stream for
the water project fund the other
thing it also allows us to do in
a constitution is to potentially
tweak that distribution by
statue so it's another option we
have so again i'd like to yield
to a representative chat field
are who can discuss all the good
things that happen when we have
money in this.
Except feel I represent sixty
seven I worked a lot it with a
conservation issues so three
point four billion dollars job.
That's how much money we have
that it didn't take to pay the
bills last year so in this
building what do you do if you
want to not s.
Yeah.
Years you're not spending.
Will be combined with nine
percent of this severance tax.
Revenues.
And it goes into the water
project fund the water project
for unpaid for wa.
Projects water she had
restoration damn recordation
endangered species and mutual
dem.
Water systems that all the
various.
There's nothing more important.
We will first go to the audience
how many it please.
Is there anyone here.
The.
So back to the audience.
So let's start over a couple of
the hearing.
Excuse me
you're gonna have to come here
to the middle.
For those of you who do not know
we are being web.
And we also.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair.
Yeah.
In the water transport's last
funding cycl.
Very promised chair.
I'm an environmental and energy
engineer I look for solutions to
the problems we humans have
brought upon ourselves
especially toxic air pollution
clean water and their current
climate crisis a retired navy
commander I raised my hand to
support our constitution and i'm
a question i'll tell me to
protect lives people need clean
air.
And enough clean water to
survive.
This bill needs to pass we need
to address the derth of water in
our state and I want to mention
one fact that i'll bring back
later far so fuely missions
account for ninety percent of
the air pollution just keep that
in mind where and supported this
bill I also represent the
environmental justice carcus
throughout the state.
Is there anybody.
Yeah.
The.
Apologize for the confusion of
I at least.
And I like what you're doing.
The.
Um.
Lfc.
Firms.
The.
Madam share and representative
no so the water this particular
earmark goes just to the water
project fund all those projects.
Okay and that's the distinction
also the water project act gets
a percentage of the water of the
severance bond as well so it's
represent chapter said it's both
buckets this is a specific
pocket that'll come from this
fund just for water and then it
also gets that alec earmark from
the severa.
Ill on housing that.
Or leader in.
I thought you guys were.
So I meant you want to take that
one report I can do it I just so
we put in a hundred million last
year so it's now at a hundred
and forty million so before we
did that this is one of the
funds that state investment
council was.
Flagging as basically being
distributed out because there
was a minimum four million each
year or four point seven
provided that was more and of
course four point seven for
forty million is la.
Now with a hundred and forty
million it's there and if we got
this additional we have two
hundred forty million taking
four point seven of the two
forty and all of a sudden you've
got a type of really I
sustainable funding that
sustainable to the fund itself
but also will prov.
Four million dollars a year.
A will have to have another bump
layer reason for that.
Yeah.
So I think I I hope we are
looking at it every year because
if we have resources like this
is represent chapiel said this
is a great way to use non
recurring money to create a fund
that's going to be sustainable
the good news I think four point
seven percent.
Investing this money they're
actually going to do far better
than four point seven percent if
you look historically so the
corpus is going to be growing
we're gonna have dis.
We do something like we're doing
here that corpus gets bigger
that means mor.
Yeah.
It was paying for.
I just want to make sure I got
regard.
To addr.
The.
What you just said is if the
interest is if the investment
retur.
The.
Then this.
The.
I guess which.
The.
So I I just I I think i.
I'm trying to think that's
exactly right prior to last year
at forty million dollars
spending off four million a year
at ten.
And that's why was flag at a
hundred and forty million
dollars
you know if you take four
percent of a hundred and forty
million
basically it would be
potentially a little more than
four million.
And so I just think any time we
can boost the corpus are and put
having it at two hundred and
forty million then we're really
in a good space where four.
More is always better and I
think this is an and again and I
appreciate a ton that the
interim committee endorsed this
and representative chat field
being on board I just think each
year last year.
Insolvency.
Range and now we're really going
to put enough.
I'm sorry.
Just just as a lead in madame
the other animated managers
though the water project act
that's different than the fund
this is a one spin off that
goes.
Right so what you're asking
about is the whole water trust
board process it's going the
next level right now.
Current.
The project.
So please introduce yourself for
the audience that.
Michael vin.
Yeah.
Efforts to.
Just will be funded.
We have emotional.
Senator diagos.
Send.
Yes senator souls yes center
city love is.
Committee members.
I'd like to let you know.
That because it.
So we are now on senate bill
nine.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair city bill
nine is follow up to senate bill
nine from last year if you
recall last year we passed
establishing the legacy per and
we didn't have that much money
in it we did put a hundred
million dollars in it if he was
to be expenditured and fifty to
be part of the endowment this
would increase the endowment to
a total of three hundred and
fifty.
Happens to stay in the budget
it's currently proposed in both
in some former fashion both the
governor as well as the lfc.
Like the governor's two fifty in
the lf sees at three hundred
well this is our vote for the
three hund.
Established and funded and we
can go forward with them a whole
wide variety of conservation
projects this funds everything
from a department of agriculture
about twenty two and a half
percent of the of the revenues
would go toward them.
But it's it goes across six
agencies and it resolves funding
problems that we've had in
matching funds with federal
federal programs and allows us
to accomplish a lot of the
things that we've been trying to
do with agriculture with the
various confirmed conservation
forestry game across the board
is conservation.
Something we've been working on
for a long time we've had a
number of proposals through the
legislature
we've tried a various methods we
put money out we've lost it and
legitimate process.
Or the revenue situation with
the state from time to time this
will allow us to establish that
maybe we won't have to come back
for a few years.
Thank you madame chair.
We are the really that the
legislative finance committee
has recommended fully funding
this trust
which I just want to remind the
center in a bill said it's this
didn't create new programs it
just earmarked percentages to
existing laws on the books a
many of which he and i've worked
on over the years they were just
unable to get a recur.
Again the idea here with a three
hundred and fifty million
dollars fund if you spend our
five percent a year you're
looking at somewhere in the
fifteen to twenty million
dollars a year that goes into
this funnel and then gets
allocated to the six state
agencies for a whole string of
important programs that we've
all discussed and voted on and
i'll just quickly highlight a
some of them the forest and
watershed restoration act force
conservation act prescribed burn
act healthy soils act a soil and
water conservation districts are
the game and fist recreation act
wildlife conservation act the
outdoor equity fund the outdoor
recreation trails and grant fund
the river stewardship program
and the prehistoric in history.
So the beauty and this is that
we didn't open these statutes up
you will all remember we had
quite a bit of pressure both
sides on this bill and again we
left the statute as they.
Nothing of course would prevent
a future legislature from tw.
Came up with a good framework to
move this forward and as center
never said that the fifty
million dollars which is
expendable portion of this
obviously would be gone and for.
With this corpus in place you're
going to be in a situat.
And this is a fund where we
could always put more money in
but I think this is what we w.
I think this is.
Now money making it future
money.
Thank you bef.
Is there anyone here.
Okay so let's have the.
Please introduce yourself.
As we stated last session there
are many section.
That includes healthy.
For the procedure from these
bands to allow any of the listed
agencies to use the phones to
acquire or match burns to
acquire more privately and in
the state new mexico when the
state uses tax payer moneys to
by agriculture and take it out
of production there is a
significant significant last to
our rule communities property
taxes come off of the tax county
base.
There's taxes on the cattle that
used to grace they are taken off
the tax.
If there's no agriculture in the
production of land we leave jobs
families schools in some all
businesses within our walking.
Utility or handing example that
it used to be used for.
While life uses our stock thinks
our drinkers in our pipelines it
is a ranter who repair.
When the ranchers are going
while i've also consumed the
thought the minerals and protein
that rangers put out for cattle.
Where do they get that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you very much for
supporters will take three from
this si.
Which happens to have one of the
largest growing outd.
Members of the committee patrick
killing registered obvious for
chevron chevron is the only
energy company to support the
land of in chairman legacy fund
during last year's session and
we are proud to.
We support the state taking bold
action on conservat.
We support center nevel and ser.
Members of the committee ralph
b.
We stand down in firm support of
this legislation one applied you
and thank you for bringing this
in bringing the sponsor to a
higher level that is more self
sustaining which will assist in
a second agricultural program
throughout the state which were
we're going to work with
agencies to ensure that a
seconds are included we have the
opposite in a lot of our second
traditional communities when it
comes to agriculture and
wranching that may be outside of
agriculture does an impact but
we're a thread of losing our
agricultural lands to not
purchasing for conservation but
to development i'm development
by big developers that want to
come in and use our river from
engine a second dream belt space
a week we feel that it's
important to keep a lot of these
areas especially established by
a s.
Our communities and the health
of our watership goes a long way
and we saw that what I got
devastated in a lot of those
traditional communities for
watership.
My name is.
We stand as well in full support
for many of the reasons that
have already been addressed.
To really help us.
Over thirty five thousand
members and supporters in new
mexico we strongly support.
I won't get through repetiti.
And so we're just we're.
Three hundred.
Support thank you.
So.
For online.
But they're saying they don't.
Get my good morning madam show
and members of the committee my
name is andrea but listen number
percent into some of your
project and it's an organization
the aims to activate by park
used on a climate crisis you
should by introducing them to
outdoors and i'm a here to test
if I and support of s nine first
of all I want to think to
sponsors for their continue
lettership and legacy fund and I
also want to thank you members
of the legislative finance
comedy for the recommend
recommendation of the rehability
and the budget this one they
will provide an opportunity for
buy perkutes in mexico to act as
the outdoors and the opportunity
to connect and protect the care
ecosystems upon which we all
depend I enterage all
legislators in this committee to
support the lfc recommendation
three hundred million in thank
you.
We are now going to questions
and comments from.
Madame chair thank you.
I really appreciate this.
I am going I am going to
support.
The.
It's going to do a whole lot of
good and if if you endures me
for d.
Had a horse one time.
His name was frosty and nobody
frozen years like this news a
great horse i.
Except about once a year he
would just bucky off and it was
like the worst so he is a lot
like this bill and that I love a
whole lot and hate just a
little.
And so and and and the portion
that I that I don't like is.
And and the major game
department to be able to
purchase private property
and the reason is may be a
little different for the reasons
that have been spoken but that
the fund could be swallowed up
in land acquisitions rather than
doing the greater good across
the sta.
As I dropped couple of bills to
help maybe focus where this
money is allocated and keeping
it in conservation but do
appreciate the sponsors madam
chair thank you so much.
Thank you sender hamlin and then
center gay goes
madame
we'll have to do a mike check.
Thank you madame chairman and
maybe it's from my years of b.
Projecting
sponsors for bringing this and
obviously i've been a big
supporter of this with the
outdoor equity fund because of
bringing black brown in and
digits communities out into our
public lands support this
continue to support that and one
of the things uh.
I have the jaypal tailor museum
like to give a shut up for that
that is now under.
The one of things and and maybe
I miss this is how will this
impact the land and water
conservation fund because that's
money that we are missing out on
at the state level that we can
since that fund is now fully
funded at the congressional
level how how will that be
impacted by that.
The.
So manager I believe we have
someone here from.
I don't want to guess it.
Right
my name is dillen huge on the
acting secretary.
The.
And no the funds set aside in
the land in.
Outdoor wreck fund and other
pieces that are there but I
would say r.
Follow up on that we're then
can't communities
what department do they go to in
order to try and get those
elder.
The.
Madam chair senator there's a
bill being heard later today in
the house to create a new mexico
match front broadly I believe
the proposal from the executive
is a hundred million dollars
funding stream like that it's
open ended it's designed to
match federal funding and that
in that would be sort of a
comprehensive source to do it
and again I bel.
The.
Thank you next I have center.
The.
That.
Of doing other things beyond so
in the.
Madam chair those are existing
phones.
It's in the last years and it
says.
Department of egg it's twenty
two and a half and there's other
percentages for the you've got
all that right in front of you
those it are existing programs
whatever their c.
That is what some of th.
There have been instances and.
Art of that I don't think the
really large land purchases
other th.
They're not willing nearly going
out buying ranches right left
it's just doesn't happen it has
happened that it's not a primary
goal of game in these agencies
to acquire a lot of land.
If eagerness had not been
which is now open to the publi.
There would be cabins all the
way around it because that
private land on.
There are reasons
see one of these agencies but we
chose not to tamper with
existing statue in the past so
what it is like the way game and
fish did things game and fish in
like the way
whatever four street things we
didn't want and the various
groups that you see behind us
they argued those points we
don't like.
We're not going to do that
whatever's current statue we're
gonna leave it that way so we
wrote the bill last.
We wrote the bill last year
where we didn't change anything
if you want to change something
if you don't give game and fish
to ever buy another piece of
land.
That's the issue is that this is
money to get programs because
we're missing out on millions of
millions of dollars in federal
dollars because we don't have
the m.
If you want to.
You know that most of these
federal dollar matches or
anywhere from two to four times
the statement so if we got a
million dollars state money we
make.
I don't know we could easily
offset the three hundred million
dollars just in federal and
maybe.
Sake full advantage of what the
opportunities that were missing
to help our rivers to help our
world life and help agriculture
in particular because they'll be
either directly or indirectly
benefited by most of these
programs
just one other thing manager if
I could on the bottom of page
for the fire I think it's a
really good chart which shows
the distributions by percentage
to agency is going out once this
three hundred million dollars
kicks in and just going to the
end of that charge game and fish
gets twenty two percent but I
think it's important highlight
that's two point eight million
dollars up to five point three
million dollars we're not
talking hundreds of million
dollars going to one agencies so
again you can see it it's a.
Pretty small amount of money and
it's for an existing program and
I just think the beauty of this
is that and it goes back to what
center hamlin was looking for
from a different match this
money and all these different
buckets is really going to be
used to magnify when you put the
federal.
That's a good that certainly
jumped.
The.
Thank you.
This is an issue.
The.
Manager senator lfc does have a
program where we we rate
agencies and how well they're
doing and so forth and this w.
These dollars
percent is twenty two half
percent game in fish it would be
the proceeds off the three
hundred and fifty m.
Be twenty two and a half percent
of the interest earned on.
It is not a huge dollar
amount
but it would go into their
program then they would be
evaluated by of sea dfa would
administer as we do all agencies
it would just become part of
their.
It would be part of the general
fund appropriation each year.
If I can out madame chair and
centers it does have to go for
the specified purpose in the
statute that's laid out.
Fell for example the the energy
mineral's distribution one of
those projects is one that I
passed the forced and water
said.
Specific percentage of the of
the twenty two point five
percent going to energy minerals
has to go into that specific
program.
That's that's a dfa
responsibility
thank you.
Any further questions.
Thank you.
Our guy goes.
The.
Senator ville.
Senator pope yes senator souls
yes senator to deal open yes
center ciphonics.
Do pass from this.
We are moving on to senate bill
twenty four.
Oil and gas development royal de
rates senator charman and
representative.
The.
The.
Okay good morning are you ready
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
I thank you for giving me the
sample to me to speak this
morning to be and this senate
bill twenty four i'm joined
today
with the sunday store who is.
The.
This is this legislation changes
the top royalty rate for state
land office oil and gas leases.
Unlike other types of land
office lease agreements the
specific terms of where I guess
leases are set by statue.
Seven reasons why.
Number one the last time the
role the rates were updated by
the legislature was in
nineteenth in the nineteen
seventies.
Well before the full economic
potential of new mexico.
Fully understood number two this
bill would only apply to new
leases and the most productive
oil and gas parcels with one of
the best oil and gas plays in
the world.
Should reflect the reality and
the ground number three the
value of our public oil and gas
resources is worth many billions
of dollars.
To get the benefit.
Of extracting these resources
number four this change would
put in line what is in line with
a private market rates being
charged in texas in mexico as
well as the twenty five percent
rate on texas as sta.
To earn money for our public.
And it just doesn't make sense
prohibit to state.
From charging the market rate.
Essentially the sale of a
public.
Resource so that only does the
commission republic.
As a legal mandate to earn money
for education.
Number seven.
Well I guess least.
Artificially capping the amount.
The land office can collect.
The.
Thank you so would your expert
witness.
Madam chairman members of the
committee as soon a store deputy
commissioner of operations that
land office i'll be real brief
this committee did hear this
bill last session and I did want
to just point out that I unlike
the other bill this one is just
purely a straight increase of
changing from twenty to twenty
five percent the market rate
of the bill may be is a little
bit long but those are all.
Had added.
That.
Thank you very much how many in
the audience are here to support
the s.
How many are here to oppose.
Okay let's take the opposition
for please.
The.
Yeah.
Here again okay great it's
working
no one on the webcast could hear
anything you said
they startled.
Okay once again thank you jim
winchester with the independent
patrol association of new mexico
representing small producers
again just want to reiterate
that we fully support the work
that the statement office does
and the money that we raise in
the billions of dollars from.
We do feel that this bill goes
just a step too far
a lot of the particular states
in the country that have oil and
gas understate lands charge on
average sixteen to eighteen
percent now the state of texas
charges twenty five percent in
that's obviously what they're
trying to do here in new mexico.
However if you look at the
overall tax burden on operators
from state to state in those
that produce oil and gas the
highest tax burn is two new
mexico well operators and this
is backed up by a study that was
done by the new mexico a tax
research.
We see from our smaller produce
service a more difficult time
operating on smaller margins if
they are therefore forced to pay
the higher percentage so for
those reasons we do stand in
respectful opposition thank you
thank you very much so this
makes system is brand new and
when one person has their mike
on everyone else.
That would like to speak.
Okay let's hear.
Hi the inacristed environmental
and energy engineer again
veteran christian and
grandmother I am very interested
in making sure we don't have
toxic air pollution keeping
going because basically we're in
a an emergency and fast or full
emissions account for ninety
percent of air pollution do you
want us to continue to breathe
the toxic causing premature
deaths and any chance of a love
planet for my granddaughters and
yours
b twenty four points out the
abusive financial advantage the
oil and gas industry has
utilised to keep our state
government and people be holding
to their products despite their
own scientists warning a future
climate problems it's about time
to increase that royalty rate
reparations to the state and the
world needs to begin and as to
local.
Maybe it's time for them to
transition to something else
thank you i'm in support.
Thank you matter members of the
committee and charles good
morning speaking today on behalf
of earth works.
And I want to think the sponsors
in the state land office were
bringing this bill.
The urger support for it the
impact on the oil and gas
industry of this bill will be
ex.
The impact for the future of new
mexico students and scores will
be enormously positive upon its
claim that the small additional
realties there will be paid or
not this bill will have a
negative impact on their
business that claim is supported
as he just heard because they
claim that total new mexico
taxes etc are higher here than
another state.
What was in for a minute that
that's true as anything that the
state of new mexico has done
including the financial cost of
doing business here at the
industry there's an emphatic no.
The oil gas industry in new
mexico is doing extremely well
the best in the world
in that extremely wealthy
industry in october of last year
in the current.
Argus of carl's bed was an
article.
Describing a sixty four billion
dollar deal that exim mobile
dead buying pioneer natural
resources with most of their
assets in the mexico marketplace
magazine worldwide publication
notes in january of this year
the premium based in produce
nearly six million barrels of
oil a day that's more than iraq
the united rebemerates or
kuwait.
The premium in the networks the
premium basin has another thing
going for it's almost like real
estate location location
location said robert mcnally
consulting firm rapid and energy
the cost of his bill is
extremely negligible the
benefits for new mexico
students.
Please.
Good morning again amateur and
members of the committee lease
care with a cyrcle of yoga on
the chapter representing her
thirty five thousand members in
new mexico
which were urging you that you
will support the spell leasing
rates in new mexico state lands
haven't been increases the
sixteenth the increase of twenty
five percent royalty rates on
leases is on part with texas and
colorado next door oil and gas
extractor from state lands
belong to the people of new
mexico these are publicly held
resources extracted off lands
for a private profit in new
mexicans and land office
beneficiaries should be fairly
compensated for this resource
some will claim that the
industry will leave new mexico
if they have to pay for
a a fair royalty but the only
factors that indicate where
distraction will a curious
equality of the oil and that is
of access to it and the price on
the global market so will ask
yes a you vote yesterday thank
you
we will now go to questions and
comments from.
I've always wondered about the
differ.
I'm sorry this.
Yeah madame chairman
senator it's actually the
reverse so
in new mexico we pay.
And we're that really makes a
difference.
Companies are able to deduct
in those deductions are quite
meaningful when we looked at
twenty fifteen till twenty
twenty.
Two I believe it amounted to
about four hundred million
dollars in royalties that were
not paid because companies were
able to to deduct those costs
of.
In texas it is gross
the opposite oh III heard the
opposite on
they pay on the gr.
The gross.
Madame chair senator this
change.
We make no substantive changes
to the leather.
It remains.
Madame chairman senat.
Senator
I think it's a really important
point we often hear about taxes
this is not attacks what we're
talking about here are public
lands.
Public resources owned
essentially by the school kit in
a royalty is.
We have a hundred percent
ownership of the r.
And our current law give us
twenty percent.
We're proposing to change that
deal to reflect the market rate
where the school kids would get
twenty five percent and
companies would still get the
remaining seventy five percent
of that public resource for the
benefit.
Where throughout the state.
I wish that this is actually on.
Thank you other questions or
comments.
Thank you.
First off.
The.
That's all facilities.
We did it.
With all.
The.
So all gas.
I'm just wondering if.
Is that part of the twenty
percent.
Madame chairman senator so it's
completely separate from all the
taxes and there is no doubt that
the oil and gas community
contributes a significant amount
of resources to the state in
mexico in a variety of
different.
That is not something that we
would ever argue
I I would know you know this
comparison attacks this that
they have some very low tax rate
overall in the burden in new
mexico is high it is actually
doesn't seem to bear out lfc did
a report.
A back in june twenty eight june
twenty eight two thousand twenty
three this year that said that
texas there if you add up all
their taxes it came to effective
tax rate of eight point three
and were at eight point five now
those are taxes over there on
this side what we're talking
about is royalty so it would be
separate and
but it's not just us in texas
what we're trying to match is
the market rate in new mexico
you know the little oil
companies that were referred to
earlier in the remarks if they
were to go out and sell their
lease it would sell it for
twenty five percent cause the
premium is an amazing resource
and that's the market rate and
so we're trying to hit that
market rate uhm in new mexico in
taxes overall but it is separate
from the taxes of them chair
missured thank you for that so
to me right now.
Roll get.
But I was going to ha.
We've been highest
for most except for texas at
twenty perce.
Madame chairman senator that is
correct and I think it's it was
referred to earlier location
location location I mean we have
one of the world the best
resource in the united states
one of the best resources in the
world incredibly cheap
production costs to get uhm uh
barely to market
so you know I mean yeah we can
compare with other states and in
a weaser past north dakota and
they've got a lower
rate than we do it's cause the
premium is exceptional and so we
we are higher right now than a
lot of states but it I would say
you know for comparing real
estates in manhattan compared to
albuquerque I mean location
matters and and and where
manhattan were downtown
manhattan were as good as it
gets.
I guess that shows we've been
over.
For all those years twenty
percent if others are rounders
except for texas or lower if you
want to let bounce.
Ordered love.
In at that point.
Remind.
But I see right there just.
Overcharging now I understand
it's the people's oil.
Or fiftieth in the nation even
with best asset in in the nation
but to me it looks like for a
long term since seventies we've
been over burning.
My next question material i'm a
short center is h.
So the the only gentleman stood
up in opposition was talking
about small producers so you're
lumping some.
As the majors have we ever
looked at taken this into a tear
system.
Someone with.
Madam chair senator I appreciate
that question because it also
gives.
So what we're talking about here
in terms of this statutory lease
is only what are called
development
these are for.
And then within that you have
iratian system of a regular
track and a premium tr.
They are the best of the best
and we have patrollem engineer
specialist and staff career
staff not political appointees
who pursue it to statute in raw
go through a ranking system in a
sign points to each parcel and
they're looking at what are the
the prices being charged nearby
what is the development per
potential what is the the
reservoir there all of those
types of things and based on
that you get a point rating and
that's really what it's used to.
You know the twenty five percent
if there's.
That is a cap.
Go out to auction so it's a
strange scenario where we are
literally at going out to
auction and companies would
easily pay right now today
twenty five percent.
But we're actually prevented
from going out to auction on the
market rate uhm.
But that is built in a little
bit into in terms of tier.
Thinking through there what
would be our average twenty
percent what would be.
The.
Madame chairman senator brought
that up to because i'm so the
way oil and gas lease is work is
once you start drilling at least
as is in good it stays in effect
and it's a good lease as long as
there's production occurring so
we have leases pretty.
Those are contracts and the.
The.
So we have and and at that time
we had so many leases at the
twelfth.
That if you actually look at our
overall lease profolio new
mexico.
About I think it's fifty seven
percent of our leases.
Are at the twelve point five
percent rate so are effectively
rate of our overall propholia is
only fifteen perc.
Because those newer leases that
you were talking.
Even though we've had that for a
while.
Still takes a long time to catch
up because we have so many
things older producing at least
and I I would not when those
listens are resold today on the
private market those companies.
Is you talked about.
I I guess my fear for the reason
that question is if we push the
shop or we push
operators.
Better chairman senator I don't
think so because you know they
will drill where the resource
says there is a map actually in
the FIR
um that lfc
has in there that shows and it's
got to different basins and as
you well well aware you know the
different basins have different
uhm
opportunities for the companies
so you know looking within their
you can kind of get an idea of
where our land is
a bit day we we think company as
well you know if they can make a
profit and they can
they're going to drill.
There they're not going to move
somewhere else and you know new
mexico I had mentioned is one of
the cheapest places.
For us to be able to develop
last time I heard it was in the
high twenties where if you had a
the price of oil as long as it
was in the high twenties
companies we're going to make
money you know and.
So I like the good look good
part if we're going to be open.
The.
Thank you senator center m.
Your.
The.
Madame chairman senator I
appreciate the opportunity to
clarify
it would be in the restricted
zone so it would apply to.
All of those counties in the
permit
now whether the decision is for
development leases of the range
of eighteen seven.
And and and the way that the
agency determines whether it's
at the lower end or at the
higher end is that point system
that I was discussing earlier so
I think if you had you know
upper roosevelt.
Be an exploratory but there's
not really demonstrated
production in an area that would
probably lean to be at the lower
rate if it's in the delaware
where we know there's produc.
The.
Is that something i.
Madame chairman senator it is a
section eighteen ten sixteen.
And also the statutory l.
But will that increase five
percent from the eighteen point
s.
Madame chairman senator it
expands the range so the
eighteen.
So we have more opportunity to
set.
The.
Madame chairman senator
you're exactly right in the map
that was indicated in the FIR
shows that uh most of our good
tracks have been leased
but they do come back to us and
when they do their incredibly
valuable and they stay in effect
for the long run at this last
january we made twenty one
million dollars on early sale
one lease went for twelve
million dollars and it was a.
There is zero dollars at least
would have been bit on and
secured at a twenty five percent
roll so that you're absolutely
right this is going to impact a
very small number because most
of our tracks have been least
but when they do come back the
school kid should get the far
the f.
I madame chairman senator there
are two ways primarily one is at
the term of a lease is five
years initially to begin to
produce
a company as five years too
start pumping oil
if they do within that period
the term stays in effect forever
as long as they are continuing
to produce in paying quantities
and that's why we have lea.
That are still in effect today
so sometimes production stops
and the lease expires on its own
term
and you know it may be there
were vertical wells and a new
company you know they don't want
to put it the investment in it
so the least will expire it
comes back to us and another
com.
Put in later olds or whatever so
I expiring on its own is a big
chunk the other is through uh
least cancellations.
So we have rules and it's a
contract uhm and if companies
don't abide by that
we can move to cancel.
The.
So
I I would submit the that the
federal.
Doesn't come from texas.
Yeah.
Madame chairman senator just
real quick on that
I think anybody who has worked
with the feds would say it's not
always easy and so on the
federal lands you can get caught
up in lot a lot more lawsuits
they're need a process their
permanent turn around times are
slower so there there are other
things that come into play in
terms of competitiveness
but you're exactly right that
they do h.
Thank you very much under pope.
Madame chairman senator the
analysis that we did that where
you looked back and said okay
assuming this lease rate was in
effect.
Analysis and their fire is we
would look at about fifty to lfc
estimates.
Dollars in.
I that is eight you know even
assuming that these are were
only talking about the small
percentage there.
Available but where you get the
real bang for the buck for the
state is on the investment side
so those dollar scodes state
investment council their
invested and of c FIR says that
by twenty fifty we would see an
additional value in the language
per minute between one point
five and two point five billion
dollars because of that group so
it's quite significant the
significant.
And so you also mentioned.
Madame chairman senator the
state does not benefit from it
so if you've got at least and
it's at a twelve point point
five royalty rate and the
company is sells at least to
come.
Kind of internally increas.
So in essence not.
Madam chair.
The.
Madame chairman senator yeah on
private land when you see the
private land.
You're going to have you know in
texas the same you know texas is
about two thirds of the premium
but we've got some of the better
plays over here but when I when
I talk about the twenty five
percent being the market rate
that's generally the rate
overall there are instances.
I've but that's because there's
an artificial statutory cap.
Just like we have it is.
Keeping us from charging the
market rate but in terms of
private sales whether tex.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you is.
The.
Senator hambling yes center i'm
a curtain.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator souls yes.
Senator side of us yes.
Yes.
Of six three bill has been
approved to move on.
The.
Oh thank you matter thank you
members
if you answer the center yet
thank you very much.
Okay we're now on to senate bill
twenty six existing lifestyle
compensation we have sendered a
brantley with this center wood
to the center courier
yes we need another chair.
Okay who would like to start.
The.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee we're here to
introduce senate bill twenty
sixth this is not a
what would we say compromise
bill I don't want to use the
word compromise this is a co
existence and I am cheaped up
with a senator crayon him pill
we represent the southern new
mexico southwestern area of new
mexico in the house right now is
we are before you a mirror bill
of this is being introduced in
the house by terror how to meo
and gilam strong so collectively
these are all the
representations all the
representatives of the the
healer region and science of
course with any good again need
senator woods on our bill so
we're happy to have him during
this time.
I quickly like to go through
this bell and then i'll turn it
over to uh senator him pill
section a is allocating nine
million dollars for a pay for
presence or I pay for
dependation when the mexican
great wolf was first introduced
the defenders of wildlife had a
similar
payment presence it's never been
properly funded and because of
that there's always kind of
intention throughout this and
what we're trying to do is come
in after the fact after because
this is the federal program
after all federal resources have
been exhausted this would
provide some sort of the relief
with the producers that are
impacted most insection one a
were allocating three million
dollars for a total of nine over
three years this is an existing
program with the current funding
mechanism.
Section two of that explains how
that payment process would work
this has to abide by the federal
standards including the wolf
dependations has to be approved
by those confirmed kills by
federal standards.
Number three we will we will pay
on that by fair market value and
that explains how fell market
value is determined and number
four we are asking in mda to
keep a a clear website post of
what that fair market about
value is which is actually a
benefit not just for a program
like that but at all times with
the fair market value of cattle
is and then on number five were
asking in mda to make sure in
the county live stark authority
to make sure that that
information is public who
received the funds how much and
when it was because we're trying
to be good stewarts of of this
land of course of this money and
of course on number see any any
remaining funds would still
revert back to the general fund
i'm gonna allow senator campill
to speak briefly on this and
then
thank you madame chair thank you
sanator brantley for that
introduction the spill
represents a bipartisan approach
and a new model that speased on
co existent like senator
brantley mentioned and our
federal delegations also working
on this issue and that is and
also a bipartisan effort were
hopeful that there will be some
four words similar for word
legislation at the federal level
but in the meantime we and new
mexico can take the lead on this
and service a model for a
program that really works for
co existence and we know at the
end of twenty twenty two the
mexican world population was
estimated to be about two
hundred and forty one and of
those around a hundred and
thirty six are in new mexico and
the population is rising so this
programs really timely we are
and need of this right now so
with that madam charle turn it
over to senator woods.
I think you madam chair just
really quickly I know that i'm
losing the audience.
I've got all your questions
so with that I would be happy to
stand for questions from
comment from the audience and.
Thank you all senators how many
in the audience are here to
support this bill.
How many are here to oppose this
bill.
The.
So
we're going to hear from three
people on each side so let's
hear from the supporters first
you need to come up.
Pick up at might know hi.
And pick up the mike introduce
yourself and make a brief
comment please and everybody
three p.
A good morning madam chair
committee members jenny burner
representing the sierra sole and
water conservation district we
serve ranchers and farmers in
the healer where we have a big
problem with with
dependation on cattle we want to
ask for your support of this are
very important legislation for
are constituents thank you.
Good morning madam church and
committee members my name is
address mcqueen amazing a mother
of four I operated cattle
ranched and reserved new mexico
I own an operator of he reads an
outfitter i'm a catering county
commissioner and i'm the
catering county commission
representative to the board of
county lifestyle class authority
we need to help this is a good
bell please support it thank you
very much.
The.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee carried
romero executive director and
registered lobbyists for the new
mexico council about fitters and
guides we also stand in support
of this legislation to add some
detail that hasn't really been
provided so far many other
hunting outfitters in the health
are first and foremost also
cattle ranchers they sell
hunting opportunities to
supplement their aging come as
both populations continue to
increase el cunning
opportunities are steadily
declining not only because of
protection but also because the
presence of wolves changes elk
behavior they move around more
often they become a more
scattered of course there's
nothing we can do about this
this is just nature but it does
have a negative impact on the
ranchers ability to generate and
come through hunting and that's
on top of the revenue loss for
their agricultural operation due
to wolf production of cattle so
these guys are really getting
hit twice this bill would
provide money to augment the
federal funds which can often be
unpredictable and sporadic this
money can help ranchers in the
health coexist with the mexican
wolf and will also help renting
families to remain on the land
many of which have been there
for generations and also remain
in.
Thank you next we'll have the
three opponents.
If you come up.
The.
Man i'm sure my name is brian
bird i'm the southwest program
director for defender's widelife
and I stand here today on behalf
our twenty two thousand members
in new mexico to hesitantly
oppose this bill as it's written
we do appreciate the code
sponsored initiative here it's
really important to the is was
referenced by a said abrahantly
at the state step up and put
some so called skin in this game
um however.
As was mentioned also by sand
apparently defenders of while
life has administered the
lifestock loss program comes
compensation program for masking
walls from nineteen ninety eight
to two thousand and twelve at
that time we turned it over to
the federal agencies and now the
it looks like the states are
going to step forward and help
with this wolf recovery program
defenders of wildlife believes
that a well managed compensation
program is part of a successful
world recovery and we are happy
to see the bill sponsors putting
the state's resources towards
the effort this is a really
important step sp twenty six is
a well intentioned bill but as
it is currently written we don't
support it passing out of this
committee without significant
amendments adding account
ability in particular defenders
a while i've is prepared to work
with the sponsors to amend the
bill in particular to add a
formula for compensation that
includes proof of producer
producers good lifestyle
husbandry practices that reduce
losses of are towards and other
prouders.
So in other words we would like
to add a formula that would
essentially require proof that
the ranchers are actually
implementing live stock loss
for reduction measures and
that's what defenders want life
specializes in and what we spend
of significant amount of our
resources annually helping
ranchers with but as it's
written we do not think this
bill should pass the committee
and we stand ready to help make
this a good bill thank you very
much.
Good morning again members of
the committee was good with the
sir club reogan the chapter are
representing or thirty five
thousand members of supporters
in new mexico we are in a very
similar position a couple years
ago while i've services revamped
how it came to the conclusion of
walls at the ones where the
corporate after complaints
after completely evidence
collecting an examination with
saying that scientifically sound
we have several concerns such as
if county investigators are
bound by these evidence
standards if not ranchers could
begin in compensation for
animals that wolves them and
actually kill how does
investigator actually become
qualified to do this is there is
there a class or certificate who
actually is the one that issues
also as their compensation for
production up by other species
if a cool cougar or bear kills a
cath the ranter get paid if not
there will be an incentive by
the county investigator to just
blame
and if the rancher is not
required to take action to
prevent producing it will just
keep happening these actions
include timing having to happen
at once read writers monitoring
and hurting lifestock removing
or rendering deadlife stock from
other causes in that
we again we urge for their
adjustments through this bell
and.
Thank you.
The.
The.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
is chris smith i'm here on
behalf of wilder guardian.
We also oppose this bill is
written
first and foremost there are
already funds that exist to deal
with this kind of problem
secondly is mister garamet and
we have real concerns about some
of the investigating.
Who have a history of falsifying
deprivation reports i'm happy
to.
And finally this bill doesn't
incentivise.
Further in the long term
towards.
The.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes we can please identify
yourself and a short comment.
The.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Can you hear me.
The.
I'm sorry I can't hear me.
Yes my name is tracy drummond I
ranched nearby core new mexico
and i've been the catching
county extension agent for the
past twenty seven years.
We've been dealing with problems
since the beginning and
ranchers.
You know we've looked at
alternative management practices
and to date we found none that
will mitigate the production
as the population continues to
grow we seem exponential
increases in that dependation we
also see other losses from the
presence of world such as
reduced.
The conception rates reduce
weening weight cattle just
completely disappearing and
never to be found.
Our producers don't get
compensation for any of those
other losses under the current
program.
Since the lost authorities
started we've actually seen
benefits to that that there's a
possible wide at the end of the
tunnel for these people to build
some of these issues I am
concluding chairman I just like
to state that
the ranchers and lifestop
producers the new mexico should
not be required to carry the
burden of the mexican world
program thank you.
Thank you very much mister
drummond.
Okay we are now to committee for
questions that comments under
him one to start thank you
madame chair and thank you
sponsors for bringing this you
know I remember when I was in
radio of reading about the
introduction of next can grade
wolf and how there were so much
of a concern amongst the
ranching community and we've got
you know a couple of decades
under our belt on this now
and and I do appreciate the idea
of a co existence and especially
for the money we have the money.
And I and I and I feel that this
is the opportunity for us I I
recognize carries you know
conversation about outdoor
recreation we've h.
For people to maximize and
capitalize on the opportunities
that ranchers would have with
the mexican grey warfa.
I do I I do support this bill
and I do think some of the
suggestions and I think that the
sponsors might also like
accountability of making sure
that we don't have people who
abuse the program and either way
and so and I I would encourage
i'm not going to make the
suggestions but I would
encourage maybe looking into
those opportunities for a c.
And so thank you for bringing
that it's mo.
Thank you senator souls thank
you madame chair very similar to
my my colleague i'm pleased that
there seems to be coming to some
agreement instead of constantly
fighting the wolves or here
they're going to be here they're
not going to go away and the
fact that we're now trying to
figure out how to manage
together.
Those who opposed it had to do
with whether the people that
making a determination as to
whether it was a wolf or
something else.
A what kind of safeguards are
there for.
If somebody.
How do we avoid fraud.
The.
Senator.
We're these people are going to
be trained by the same standards
as the federal vision while.
To determine who d.
So there are.
There's certifications
available.
So.
The I don't know how I asked to
say that there there's going to
be a report tr.
I could add to that on page two
number two it's very strict on
who was allowed to approve a
world walk kill number one would
be an inspector with wildlife
services they are professional
investigators number two would
be us fish and wildlife service
field team they are the
oversight in the management of
the mexican growth program and
enter ensure that if there are
any tribal kills on there we've
also allowed for a tribal
investigate or qualified and
wildlife predered her
investigations however they're
certified as well but we were
very strict on who was allowed
to actually approve or.
It is a wolf get determined
thank you and matter and I think
down towards the bottom on
number five on page two
thousand they'll be maintained a
publicly accessible case file.
That somebody was embellishing
that it was a wolf when it may
not have been would that be
considered fraud in a crime
under fraud types of of
accountability rather than your
under some brought some other
statute would that be considered
friday if somebody is saying it
was a wolf when it wasn't so
that there could be compensation
madame chair and senator souls
it would it would also be a
fraudulent file that approved
that kill we had several
conversations and not only that
was the number one concern is
how do we make sure that this
money is going for what we're
saying it is a senator him pill
and I report to senator george
many of us who is being very
very detail oriented to make
sure that there's actually a
returns on this the money is
going to where we stayed on I
really appreciate actually the
the comments at the end saying
we also need to address in the
guidelines in the rules you know
a best practices to make sure
that their meeting metrics
before they get payment that we
had those conversations as well
and we would encourage that to
go into the buy laws of the
county life like a loss
authority the bill outside will
govern this program rather than
very specific on the statute of
what that does specific process
practices would be.
Thank you matter and similarly I
think this is a nice movement
towards getting towards solution
and will support it but want to
make sure that we are paying
attention that if there's a a
big winter kill and then a wolf
comes in these on it later that
the wolf doesn't get blamed for
it for the compensation when it
was not impact of wolfkill and
having professionals doing that
and as I indicated that section
five where there's a a public.
Accountability for how many were
paid out and what the
circumstances and who did the
investigations and things I
think is is a good measure to
insure work controlling for the
for that friday.
Ranter buddy is getting paid
for.
The.
Thank you is there somebody here
from the new mexico.
You are.
Okay so if there's any questions
we could direct it to you so
center city a lot because I have
as my last questi.
Some of the questions dealt with
the capability and I think that
was really covered well and
senator brantley.
Really important.
I think that you're.
Is that something we want to
department of agriculture to
come in on so could you please
come on up or put your exper.
I think you madam chair.
The.
And you need to the question
repeated or can you.
So
one of the concerns about this
w.
And my thought is it would
probably be better in the r.
Is the term of sight is
determined in the arms yellow by
laws it is
per a quarterly report that's
determined by I think three
different experts including mse
faculty in their agriculture
consumer.
Sciences program
and so yeah so it's based on
reports from different indexes
to average cattle prices there's
different prices for cows and
per cabs
so madam chair it seems like it
would be better left.
That's been working.
They formulate this exact if
you'd like to talk to mister tom
patter center okay you could
talk to mister patterson but the
the basic question is is the
state or the federal government
controlling these formulas or
are we making him up.
At the county level.
The.
Yeah oh it tom answer.
Madame chair.
Members of the committee good
morning tom patterson.
Throughout the fall we listened
very closely desired my knows.
With his concerns about this
bill.
What you're looking for sitters
to the olos is in the by laws
and the operating agreement of
the county live stock loss
authority we have spent enormous
amount of time going through
theirs too put in specific
formulas we're working with a
fish and wildlife service which
has years of experience on these
issues the forecategories of
indirect damages were talking
about came directly from the
fish and wildlife service about
what producers are not getting
compensated for so those issues
are all being have already been
dealt with and on a continuing
basis are being dealt with in
the regulations that the county
livestock glass authority is has
establ.
The federal government
compensates only for.
Confirm dependations.
The these funds would be used
for probable depart dependations
a confirm dependation means
beyond a reasonable doubt the
same standard to send someone to
prison these standards would be
if it's more likely than not a
woof dependation they be paid
for but in addition to that.
These funds would be used for
the indirect damages the damages
to live stock producer from a
lower
conception rate on their cows
because the wolves put them
under stress from
lower weening weights when it
comes time for us to sell our
cabs from the missing cattle we
put cattle out twenty thirty
thousand acre pasture and they
get killed we may not ever find
them even after you've gone
through and gathered and
gathered regathered we would
never find them.
And then forced late the costs
that producers incur from
managing around the wools and
specifically conflict avoidance
so sending someone out to make
sure the wolves are over here
we're turning off our drinkers
were not put insultant protein
out there were moving to a
different past year or two
different side of the past year
those are the this this funds
would be used for that in each
one of those is clarified in the
cla by laws.
At this time yes we are working
aggressively with a
single lohan and with
representative voscus who are in
turn working with their arizona
colleagues and with her texas
colleagues to address these
issues.
So so thank you.
Thank you very much thank you
center guy goes
here thank you and sandra.
Like your bill do a quick
question though so in the fir.
That if it's not inacted then
they'll continue to compstate
impact ranches for life.
With federal.
And I understand that they.
Reasonable doubt.
Do you know what your number.
The.
Am chair sergeant goes that's a
tough question.
Because the rules have been
changing with the federal
government.
As of a year ago this time
wildlife services would look at
eight categories of evidence to
determine what's a confirmed
kill today they look at one
category of evidence they don't
look at all the evidence which
were doing law enforcement
investigation only look at one
category of evidence so they're
raising the bar on what's
required to prove behind a
reasonable doubt that a wolf is
responsible for the dependation
if we were to.
Have this go through the county
livestock loss authority or
compensate under whatever that
standard is plus for probable.
And what compensate for the
indirect damages that I went
through this four different
categories of interact damages
which are federal government
doesn't do anything on at this
time.
Thank you for that in in the
reason for the rush now for the
question I had a ranch
and I worked with the all right
game and fish there ill dead on
my property mi.
The.
Walk away.
So my fear is on your side that
I could see unless you had
something so.
It's going to be hard for the
ranter to get their loss is the
other thing that I liked on just
looking at the fire it says.
I think we stayed in a mexico
been a part of.
Replacement c.
Dispate efficient while life or
participating with the a wolf.
I.
Carcus.
The.
Thank you
madame jone know it just as I
looked through I mean some of
the things about the last dress
and things that's not in the
bill the bill very clearly says
for a.
That that set quarterly by new
mexico state university so it
seems pretty clear what's in the
bill and w.
Thank you
very person there is a motion
for a new pass in a second.
The.
Centers.
Senator guy goes.
Senator hambling yes.
Senator mccatchen.
Center in a bill
center p.
Yes.
The.
You have a unanimous approval of
this bill thank you very much
members we don't go on the floor
to eleven thirty we have one
bill that I think might be
simple yet senator brantley on
buyings and root stock for
vineyards.
I also signed on to the.
Thank you madame chairman this
is a very black and white bill
like you said or red and white
bill.
Madame share this is a bill that
has been endorsed by the excuse
of the audience leave in quietly
please.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee this is a bill
that's been endorsed by the rule
economic development policy
committee over the internet we
had a fantastic presentation and
update from the wine industry on
the success of money that we
appropriated two years ago we
made an appropriation to the
mexico department of ag to
provide root stock or vines for
new mexico vineyards and and
it's interesting presentation
over the summer we were reminded
the new mexico actually used to
be great growing capital of of
the nation over three thousand
violence rounder californiation
and at the time now dwindled to
less than eight hundred minutes
two years ago the state
legislator allocated one million
dollars towards this program and
it's not often that we have such
accountability and government
because we were we were pleased
to see that all of that money
had been encompared and they had
actually exceeded the
expectations when it came to the
the acridge of what was
predicted that they would be
able to plant with those bingers
so they have to date put in two
to date they had put in two
hundred acres with this
additional one million dollars
we had heard that there were
requests that there was some
interest from some of the tribal
lands it come forward and said
they may be interested in it and
that there are current
applications that still have an
interest in this and so what
we've done here is we've just
allocated an additional one
million dollars that is the
appropriations good from twenty
five through twenty eight it
will also be managed through the
new mexico department of
agriculture I want to give some
really interesting roy at fax
four hundred acres by the time
we were done with this
additional one million so for
the state will have spent two
million dollars with four
hundred acres new mexico will
produce one point two million
bottles of wine at battles and
wine will gross sales and an
average of twenty dollars a
bottle twenty five billion
dollars and grow sales and so
the grt that this state will get
back alone is one point seven
million dollars a year and they
are on track to meet that and so
their return we were very
pleased with their presentation
and is a committee we were happy
to bring forward a bill that
would allocate an additional to
allow him to continue that
program so.
Myself and our expert written a
stand for questions if you have
any.
Thank you do you have any for
the comment.
Okay speaking with mr
going to the audience anyone
here in support of this bill.
Opposed to.
Okay questions come and there's
a motion for a due past there is
a second from
okay so i'd like to be just.
The.
The motion the second from
center souls comment from center
ham thinking madam chair and
this is just brief had the honor
of chairing this committee
during the interim i'm very
excited about this when we had
had these conversations looking
at the opportunity of keeping
money here helping our growing
industry you know we I often
say.
The wheel of.
And how else to help our wine
and spirits industry and so I
look at this as one of those
folks that in order for us to
help make sure that that a solid
and continue to thrive in our in
our state and our communities
and specially our small
businesses and our small wine
growers as well that they have
they have an equal shot at doing
this and comparison to other big
distributor so i'm grateful for
the sponsor for bringing this
and.
Thank you
very much with the secretary
please call the boat
senator savantes
if that used
senator guy.
Yes senator cutting.
Then on a villa
senator pope yes center souls
this center city locus yes
senator stephanie yes you have a
unanimous due pass thank you
very much
committee members we are now in
recess until thursday and we
have a practically the same
number of bills thank you.
And come a few minutes early for
breakfast on thursday the agg
community will be providing it.
