Would like to go into
Representative we're all set
feel sixty nine.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I don't know if this is on the.
That.
Thank you madam chair and we
will go ahead and start and I
have a few points and then we do
have all.
All you know from all different
parts of
Testimony that probably will be
provided to you and then I also
have a.
Representative
That will be also money money to
witness.
in early nineteen eighty the
former quest the money acquired
significant amount of water
rights in the sunshine valley
and transfer them to the quest
the money under a permit granted
by the office of the state
engineer through the year of
twenty one twenty seven.
The the money permanently closed
in twenty fourteen resulted in
job losses impact of local
businesses and reduce tax
revenue.
A close mind poses a significant
amount of adjudicated Water
Rights all of which are valid
for transfer change of use and
environmental remediation work.
In twenty fifteen the village of
course the New Mexico state
economic development fund a
local nonprofit.
Completed a comprehensive
economic development plan which
charted a course towards the
people's money and economic.
A major component of this plan
was to utilize the surplus of
mine water rights for poverty
reduction economic development
in the area of the local
sustainable agriculture food
security affordable housing
renewable energy and like many
factoring.
All negotiations between the
former money in the office of
the state engineer I feel that
this legislative body can add
further impotence towards
resolution of any water rights
issued us the office of the
state engineer the former put
some money in the village of
questa and of course they could
on the development fund to
embark on an action plan that
will support environmental
remediation work.
Of the money flow enabling
divestment of water rights for
the benefit of the surrounding
communities I want to just love
the the watery slide please
support the memorial in support
of course the Taos County and
all of New Mexicos rural
community so with the the madam
chair I will heal
also to Representative Joseph
Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair
I see here in your next to us
Senator Gonzales in support of a
diligent quest on I know this
means a lot to them.
I have part of Toscani my
district quest does not there
but I I have a lot of close
friends
including the more that appears
to show support so I think this
is very important to them
I know what's been done to this
to the nonprofit to the economic
development fund has has meant a
lot and I think this water the
things they're doing without
water currently is really
helping the community so I guess
so I'm just here to the to
support and hope that they can
continue going through the often
are that we can have discussions
between the entities discussed
or mentioned so that we can do
more than they're they're doing
right now because I know there's
there's some big plans to do
potentially some transfers
that'll really benefit the the
community of Cuesta thank you
madam chair.
Thank thank you
who in the audience is support
is in support of this memorial.
Is there any in the audience
opposed to this.
And online we have Dakota via
who's in support and we have
none in opposition.
So let's go ahead and here from
individuals would like to speak
in support of the memorial.
Yes Chris.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning.
My name is John Ortega I'm the
mayor of the village of questa.
I'm here in support of this
memorial.
I'd like to think Representative
Sanchez and some delays on the
Supreme this forward.
The village of questa is
currently.
Partnering with two EDF quest
economic development fund.
On several economic development
projects within the village.
These water rights.
Would be necessary to move
forward with a lot of those
projects including housing.
The realm of our business park
we're also working on.
Senator our green initiatives to
request a greener place.
I'd also like to thank the.
State engineer might come in and
just affect them working with
the village on some of these
issues and some of these
projects and.
Moving forward I would like to
continue working with us Mr
Herman and his staff in fact we
have a.
No the meeting this afternoon so
after we're done here and over
there so thank you are Senators
thank you Representative for
thank you so depends on the
second.
Thank you more.
Morning madam chair.
The person good morning madam
chair the committee members my
name is Christian isolate
original lobbyist for the
chevron questa money I am happy
to say I lived in the village of
questa for the past eight years
of my life I started a family
there it's a rock solid
community and they need your
help we think Senator Gonzales
for sponsoring this bill in
recognizing an undisputable fact
all of the quest of mines
educated water rights are valid
for transfer change of use and
environmental remediation.
We can accomplish the successful
environmental remediation of the
quest a Superfund site while
also ensuring quest and
surrounding communities do not
languishing economic despair.
If we reach a satisfactory
resolution with CYFD with your
support the money will
immediately be able to donate
one hundred twenty acre feet of
water rights to the village of
questa municipal water system
will be able to find a hundred
thirty three acre feet to Talis
area mutual domestic water
associations under the a beta
settlement.
We will be able to sell
discounted water rights to local
farmers at an eighty percent
discount to market value to
promote agriculture and we will
be able to support renewable
energy in a just energy
transition all of this is
possible I also want to
reiterate reiterate that some
people may say that this there's
an ongoing litigation going on I
want to clarify that this is
going on under an administrative
process under the state
engineers office and this is
currently not under any
litigation in any district court
or state court in New Mexico.
Please support the hard working
people of quest tells County and
all of rural New Mexico by
voting yes on S. M. sixty nine
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr I think.
The rest madam chair keep keep
the press center members of the
committee Robert Romero
registered lobbyist for key
questions like to call up and
the village aquesta we're
currently working on a green
hydrogen project in questa we
we're hoping to use reclaimed
water for the from the quest of
mines we support the and we do
support this this memorial also
been working very closely with
the state engineer would like to
thank him for being open open to
meeting with us on these issues
again like to thank the sponsors
we hope you support this
memorial.
Thank you Mr America.
Good morning committee members
for the record and referred
tried on the muted we have a
long and very fruitful
partnership with the village of
questa and also partners inTaos
that began probably over a
decade ago round efforts to
restore the Red River and create
a vibrant and healthy fishery
there today that work is
involved to include and emphasis
on getting youth outdoors and
creating new economic
opportunities in a restoration
based in an outdoor recreation
based workforce we consider both
president house a really
important community partners of
ours Water so essential to
everything in those communities
are really here today just to
stand in support of our
community partners thank you.
Good morning madam madam chair
and committee members my name is
Mukesh rail I am all the chair
of the quest economic
development fund resident of the
village request of my family's
been in quest to for generations
also former mayor and councillor
for the village request a.
As our senator mentioned earlier
that dean twenty fifteen least
developed economic development
plan to to to see the path
forward for Cuesta.
And one of the most entire table
parts of that was the the
utilize ation of the Water
Rights that chevron has and
we're hoping that we can use
those water rights to do all of
our community and grow our
community without water our
community will either stay the
same or shrink in size and
becoming a relevant part of the
New Mexico so we're hoping that
you of what favorably in for
Senator this in a memorial
number sixty nine.
We're confident that we can
encouraged the discussion and to
re validate the water rights
that to run has fourteen hundred
eighty feet is a lot of water
and not to be able to utilize in
our area is doesn't seem correct
and doesn't follow anything that
I think our society would like
to see the water is there and
you should be there should be
use their and our communities
can grow there's a lot of room
for agriculture there's a lot of
room for housing there's a lot
of room for renewable energy but
without the water you will just
be stagnant community which we
are not in the mood for and want
to do I want to thank you for a
for your time and for allowing
us to speak and ask you to vote
favorably for seven more sixty
nine.
Thank you we have three people
online let's go ahead and start
with Michelle Vogel and if you
could be brief all three of you
online please.
Ms look.
Yes hello can you hear me.
Hello.
Yes we hear we hear you.
very good thank you I have
Year one.
Forty acres that chevron old and
so
It's not a and a grades that I
would use for arming for state
when I I when I did have the
intent on making this.
And I did have to apply to quest
that could you speak up while
doing all of.
Hi and yet you go.
Yeah could you start.
In and out and if you could
please speak up.
Well how is this is this better
yes that's better.
Okay thank you
I bought one of the forty acre
pieces of chevron land and and
when I bought it I had to apply
to the town of quest to to see
what I was going to do with that
land and though it may not be
something that are mobile I did
have the intense when I moved
there to to make a living there
and to be able to do a return to
the town of.
with taxes and whatever I need
to side to do there and I just.
would like to see that I do very
much support the measure and
I would like to return I would
like to make the turn by taxes
and and and make my living there
and I just wanted to present
that you all but I do live there
and I would like.
As I did say when I bought this
land to make that turn to.
Thank you.
Thank thank you Mr of
Mr.
Mr.
Can you hear me yes yes Mr that
a.
Good morning madam chair
committee members.
My name is the Senate on and I'm
the president of the young
community association hearing
quest up.
I represent a hundred sixteen
ranchers we call percent this.
The other community association
strongly supports Senate
memorial bill sixty nine we
really think Senator Gonzales
for sponsoring it.
The entirety of the customize
Water Rights are valid for
transfer change of use and
environmental remediation.
Want to thank the quest to mine
for making water rates available
at a discount to our local
farmers ranchers at three
thousand dollars per acre foot
compared to twenty thousand
dollars per acre foot that's a
selling inTaos County.
This is all because the money is
placing a deed restriction on
sales at the water rights cannot
be taken out of the area for at
least seventy five years.
I understand the state engineer
disagrees with this approach and
instead seeks to remove water
because you like to move the
water downriver to places like
Santa Fe or Albuquerque.
All this memorial Memorial does
simply ask the state engineer to
work together with the quest of
money The Village request on and
the quest economic fund
development fund board.
So that we can have an action
plan that will enable the money
to continue the environmental
remediation work well providing
water rights to our rural
communities.
I ask that you please support
quest Taos County and all rural
communities by supporting Senate
more bill sixty nine thank you
very much thank you Mr that and
now of finally of Mr lied to
cultivate.
Mr via will you no.
Yes Dakotas.
Ms I.
Can you make a mistake all.
Okay.
There is an echo.
Okay.
Mr.
You re yes.
Yes hello good morning madam
chair committee members of the
name is Dakota by I move to
Cuesta about three years ago
and heard about the land being
sold out there and I was
immediately interested after
seeing if you do the landscape
and everything that that that
the community has to offer
I've recently moved down there
after completing my purchase and
I would like to begin the.
Sustainable agriculture on the
land.
I've been trying to pursue Water
Rights after learning about the
issues with
from the OSCE for about two
years I've come to find that
they're very rare and very
expensive
Then that goes on outside of
what I'm doing I'm sure it's
very expensive for other
businesses and other people to
get access to them I think it's
very important to give people
the opportunity to start new
businesses and to boost the
economy and people's
livelihoods in the town questa.
These water is gonna find a
significant amount of growth
that would not otherwise be
present
most people already had the
funds to buy these other
expensive Water Rights private
sellers.
Thank you I ask you put we're
just and sixty nine.
And have a great day.
Thank you Mr vice we have two
other people online in support
on on zoom that's Lynn school
and John Johnson and I'm I'm
sorry just in the interest of
time what what will just to
mention that they support the
memorial and will now turn to
the opponents of the.
Of the measure.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this to a memorial
forward of because the office of
the state engineer substantially
supports this it pains me to
actually rise in opposition
because I grew up in the Tulsa
area I am very familiar with the
needs of of and and we the state
engineers office has been
working for a long time to
implement the Tulsa area
settlement
and also have been working
closely with the village of
Cuesta to address some of their
pending water rights the issues
and needs and we we've had also
worked
of originally closely with the
the questa mine owners and
discussion of there are
particular water rights but I.
we have a technical issue with
that that we want to make sure
the committee is aware of and I
want to turn the microgrid to my
general counsel to describe this
because I am a decision maker in
this matter
appending Water Rights
applications and a want to make
sure that the committee fully
understands where we where we
are on thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair and just
so the committee I'm not going
to do I don't know if this is
you know the committees
preferences we it's not our
preference to litigate the
differences out on could you
introduce yourself for the
record please madam chair that
she christened the general
counsel for the state engineer
it was presented is undisputable
fact that all of the chevron
Water Rights are available for
transfer and then presented to
over there's litigation going on
about it and so it just sort of
to reconcile those two points
there is a dispute going on
between the water rights
division of the state engineers
office and chevron over the
transfer ability of the portion
of the shop around rates not all
of them and the state engineer
is trying so justly to be fair
and impartial decision maker in
that administrative hearing
the attorneys for the water ice
division in the attorneys for
chevron have been in talks I
think that there's been some
proposals on the table from the
waters Division folks that would
enable the state engineer
himself to roll up the sleeves
and dive into this.
Essentially putting the
administrative hearings on ice
it could be done for example by
the withdrawal of the
applications without prejudice
that are the subject of the
hearing social run this is
nothing but then the Senators
free to dig and and and and
involve himself in in these
discussions that he very much
would like to be part of but.
If we're you know if it's sort
of orders to do to get a
litigating this dispute here
that's that's why we at the
moment the state injure would
you know have to express that
that we can to support the
memorials written if the first
whereas clause simply ended
after the COVID water rights.
We would be fine with that again
we support as the state engineer
said everything that all the
committee members have said
about the need for for future
development request area it's
just there is a dispute about
the transferability a portion of
the chevron rates we don't want
that to get in the way of what
we're actually trying to do
which is which is San of many of
the problems in the community
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Charest
So now we'll turn it to the
committee I have a are there any
other yeah are there any other
opponents that they were the
only to the resurgence but are
there any other opponents that I
might have missed okay so now
we'll turn it to the committee I
have chairs to phonics.
thank you.
Madam chair and thank you
senator and representative for
bringing this forward I'm
assuming that you brought it
forward for the community of
Cuesta.
Is that correct.
Madam chair home it is from the
committee of course to test it's
not from the company.
Madam chair.
Is this it my question is is
this memorial from the the
community quest to or the
company of chevron.
It is from the community of
course the madam chair thank you
so then chair.
And our Senator and our
Representative.
I'm sure you're you've been
aware of this
On going dispute and dialogue.
Sure that is correct.
So madam chair Senator
Representative do you believe.
That this will advance any
solution I bring this forward.
Madam chair madam chair of.
I would say yes you know because
the the the awareness of the.
Also the ability of everyone
working together.
And also time is the essence of
the.
And working with this you know
but I do believe it does you
know bring up some more clear
and the more way of getting
there one together to work with
this.
Representative and madam chair
just to out I think of what this
does it's a memorial it's just
encouraging the discussion which
is what we want
so things can get get move
forward it's just see the
legislature's really interested
in these discussions moving
forward in the the they get
something done.
So madam chair I think I'll just
wait to listen to everybody else
and I am hearing.
Concerned that of maybe a piece
of this should be fixed in order
to move forward I heard a
concern that maybe since the
Madam chair of the state
engineer could not participate
because there is an open process
within his department so I'm
just wondering if this is.
Really going to help move it
along that's all thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair of.
Council I guess for the engineer
said.
If the first we're just is that
what you said if we scratched
everything after Water Rights.
You're happy with that memorial
otherwise.
What it says if for the
committee is this is all of
which are valid for transfer
change of use and environmental
remediation your court you don't
know is what you're telling us
is you don't know if they're
valid for transfer and all those
other conditions is that what
you're telling us Madam chair of
the council could answer.
Much of Madam center twenty
three percent on this there is a
portion of the everybody agrees
are valid for transfer there's a
portion there's a dispute on.
Well that's what I'm getting is
that with the concerned with
this memorial I'm not sure that
hurts the memorial for scratches
last that last half of the
sentence out but I'm I'm
throwing that out as a with the
sponsors consider that a
friendly amendment if we
scratched everything that first
were as after Water Rights would
that be a reasonable.
It doesn't particularly change
the intent of the memorial I
don't think it's a memorial has
no legal bearing anyway.
At and the I just on that point
some of that is a legal
conclusion that's that's what I
think the concern is some
engineers it may be worse than
the legislature this could be a
documents as a legislature
thinks this is all legal and it
really may or may not be so.
that would might resolve the
conflict and then everybody's
come by up I'm just throwing
that out Senator with with that
be acceptable.
Madam chair and senator Neville
can you repeat that again test
on the line eighteen page one
after Water Rights strike the
rest of the paragraph.
Down to end.
So you would strike out all of
which are valid for transfer
change of use and environmental
review remediation or
reclamation point from the COVID
to the edge yes Representative.
We need to the the so called one
and then yes you do.
That's.
I'm not making that Mr with if
it's not agreeable to the
sponsor I don't want to mess up
this deal that.
I think that makes everybody
happy would that be a friendly
friendly amendment.
Madam chair of the would be fun
though to be considered fun okay
I'll make it amended the motion
and madam chair affected okay is
there anybody opposed to that
the amendment.
And I guess the drafters got it
the you've got a great all right
so what with that we will amend
will consider the amendment
adopted.
Back on the bill back on the
moon we had moved to pass but I
know you've got other people on
the list I have Senator Gallegos
on the list.
Madam chair members chair in
center Representative up I love
the discussion because concerned
time is going to simmer stoppers
is rotted pipe but I had a
question for net from the
Let's see on the undisputed part
of water rights you know how
many acre feet those are.
I don't have the exact number on
on off the top of my head in a
portion of those are being used
for for ongoing remediation
efforts but it's it's on the
order of sieve a similar order
of magnitude to the to the
undisputed about half roughly
half and half of the water well
Mister Madam chairman of and
vice chairman don't leave yet.
Representative so is there any
problem in the undisputed part.
Already being used for other
uses up I have so I know were
questions she had a family
members worked at the money a
right not to make the land of
the Ortiz area and I know the
value of water so my thought is
if we have some that are in
dispute if we hold those off to
the side.
And look towards the undisputed
part would that solve some of
the need the current need for
the community quest.
Chair Senator.
Speaking from my capacity I I
think so yes.
Madam chairman vice chair center
Representative I think that's
part of the problem is if we can
look at the quickest solution I
know that everything else has to
be worked through but I think
the main thing is getting the
water use.
as soon as you can for the
community and those that are in
need I did have a question for
chevron Madam chair Pickett.
Yes Mr Isaac.
Is that so and I appreciate you
I I know that you do in are you
help out communities as well but
in the remediation piece of the
money do you know how long that
can take Madam is a Madam
chairman and vice chair a
Representative it will be going
into the twenty forties on a
very large scale we still have
right now we're working on to
rock piles that are a lot of the
more thousand feet tall it's a
total of nine so imagine the
scale it will not be completed
until the early mid twenty
forties approximately Sir and.
Madam vice chair Senators
Representative up.
How much the water right you
have to retain just for
mediation.
Madam chair representative.
We do not yet know because the
design work is not completed yet
for the remaining tailings
portion and for the rock piles
there's a process under CERCLA
word has to go to the EPA Mexico
and of are doing Department
mining and minerals division we
are probably five to ten years
out in terms of design work
being completed for the rock
piles so we do not know yet know
how much water will be needed
but it will be sick a
significant amount of new need
for for a future mediation work.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator Representative I would
hope that those entering
question.
Could be retained for that so
that way those you're able to be
transferred would be able to be
of significant use for the
community so that's just me and
my questions I just wanted to
find out if there's a way for
state engineers office look at
two different issues.
You need water.
If those are in dispute are your
usable water for you and the
others could go the community
but with that I yield thank you
for the answer thank you for
allowing the community to get
some more water if thank you
Senator
thank you senator Vegas
Anyone else.
So I I have a question about
whether we're talking about
people rights and what water or
with water what is the.
Do we know.
So Mister state.
Madam chair the has the memorial
as amended now reach these water
it's we're educated originally
as agricultural use water rates
Think about that the error there
then moved as as chevron stated
in the nineteen eighties to the
money in twenty fourteen when
the money shut down the money
submitted a proof of beneficial
use of how much of this water
rates that it's been transferred
in had been used during active
operations so the portion that's
in dispute for the ones that had
not been used by the money for
mining purposes.
that's so that they may have
forfeited the amendment by not
putting them to bed beneficially
use or or through.
We actually regulations
regarding if water rates are not
what what happens to water
rights if if they're not proofed
up through pre finished you so
wouldn't wouldn't.
Okay that's it that's the issue
so so it is is correct these
water rates.
At a point in time were educated
in used subsequently were
permitted for a different
purpose of use some of them were
approved up at that subsequent
for.
for season again Senator has not
taken a position on whether
they're valid for transfer he's
got an open mind in the dispute
he'd really love to roll sleeves
and actually get into some
practical solutions that that
like phones or talking about
today four I would hope that
chevron would be willing to step
aside and get into it and
resolve this early especially
because they have such a long
time line for for reclamation it
would be it would be good well
what's the will of the
committee.
Which we already okay and and
then the second I all right so
madam secretary we take a vote.
Senator boxes excuse Senator
Gallegos business Senator
Hamblen.
Senate Bill yes.
Senator pope yes thanks
committee excuse Senators souls.
The office yes Senator panic
yes.
With a vote of five zero you you
have a do pass good luck to him
and has amended yes thank you
has amended and thank you madam
chair thank you members good
luck.
Representative yes I did and I
guess I should think again of
the individuals was what we're
still in committee please okay I
want to thank The New Mexico
voter conservation action fund
and the natural resources
defense council again for
breakfast and thank you with
that are a well I guess.
It over to madam chair okay so
we of members there are fix
potential bills that are
Thirty six potential bills on
the house floor calendar that
might come to us so we're we're
in recess for today but hold out
for later today or tomorrow and
we do have a room reserved for
tomorrow morning if we needed we
recognize that people have dual
committees but if we can get a
quorum of those who don't we
will let you know by tonight
