Dissipation from tomb of course
for this but for this
presentation.
I'd like to remind everyone that
if there are amendments to a
bill we'd like them twenty four
hours in advance so that our
analyst can do the analysis and
provide them to all of the.
Committee members and analysts
of both parties so with that we
are going to carry over just a
minute.
Madam chair click to winter yes
please Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank thank you madam chair I
have an intern with me today
Ramon and he gets from he's a
junior gaps in high school and
he's interested in politics he's
been in school leadership since
eighth grade and he's right
there were to stand up and.
Thank you.
Thank you very much senator
Senator hill and you have an
intern you madam chair it I want
to make sure I get her
information all correct.
If you don't mind
madam chair I have met the
ground that the issue was a
seventeen year old student
against in high school here in
my part of the state in southern
New Mexico.
And Samantha is in her first
year with the in Los a program
which is a statewide
collaborative that focuses on
student access and success
family and community engagement
leadership and professional
development policy development
and they provide coaching and
mentoring and tutoring to
increase retention and promote
graduation elementary middle and
high schools Smith is the
treasure of her lawsuit program
and when she graduates she plans
on pursuing her bachelor of
science in nursing at New Mexico
State University so that she can
become a pediatric registered
nurse very excited to have a.
Thank you for coming and joining
us today both of you.
the other comment I'd like to
make to the committee before we
go on to the AG is we have
another Senate bills to take us
through next week if we do of
about six a day if we cannot get
that accomplished will have to
do a Saturday so
I know there's a growing there
so
we'll see if we can keep things
trapping in this committee but
in the meantime I'd like to
welcome the attorney general's
office the Interstate Stream
Commission The state engineers
office to this presentation
I believe of the Attorney
General is not here but you're
get his W. is correct that's
correct chair okay so I'm gonna
let you all introduce yourselves
in individually and welcome to
Senate confirmation thank you
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for giving
us the opportunity to present
this information to the
committee this morning okay so I
think you're gonna have to use
the hand held Mike and the that
it's very some because you have
to hold the button down the
whole time.
That the people on the webcast
will not be able to hear unless
we project thanks madam chair
members of the committee my name
is James grace and I'm the chief
deputy at the attorney general's
office and I want to thank the
committee for allowing us to
present this information to the
committee this morning.
Good morning madam chair
Senators good to see you all
today Rolf Schmidt Petersen
Interstate Stream Commission
director.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee Jeff Wexler I'm
outside counsel on this case and
served as lead counsel from
upcoming entries thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's John
Longworth I serve as a senior
adviser to the state engineer to
the Interstate Stream Commission
director I served in this case
as a adviser for the technical
questions and also policy
portions of the negotiated
proposed agree right thank you
welcome to also wanted to move
right ahead.
Thank you madam chair and I just
want to confirm that everything
we discussed can be in open
session correct that is correct
chair.
And with with your permission
madam chair Jeff Webster will be
presenting to the committee this
morning absolutely go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and we
thought this morning
representing primarily on that
consent decree which has been
presented to the special master
at because we hope that we're at
the end of that case we thought
it would be helpful they've just
remind you sort of where the
origins of it I'll run through
that quickly keeping in mind
will try and keep our
presentation to fifteen minutes
so that there's time for you to
give question so it if you
recall this case really traces
back all the way to two thousand
and eight when reclamation
entered into an operating
agreement that change the way
that device Water was divided
amongst the two districts and
because it changes the way the
water was divided between those
two districts it changes the map
out of water that citizens in
each state Texas in New Mexico
are entitled to that was a
concern for the office of the
state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission
because the compact governs the
division of water that led to
after negotiations fail fail
that led to a lawsuit filed in
District Court by the state of
New Mexico seeking to ensure
that we protect our share of the
Rio Grande
and when the judge to declined
to dismiss that case that was
when Texas filed suit in the
United States Supreme Court so
that's sort of the our origins
about our
positions in this case really
the biggest question there was
at what's the baseline in other
words there's a lot of water use
down there below elephant Butte
and this case focuses only on
the area below elephant Butte
and when I talk about the
baseline it's the amount of
water use that is allowed before
you divide up the water and
really what it relates to is
what level of groundwater
pumping is going on is as you
all are aware there's a
significant amount of
groundwater pumping in both
Texas and New Mexico and the
question was what amount does
the compact tolerate before you
then divide the water who is our
position that it was basically
that amount of water that went
or groundwater pumping up
through nineteen seven.
D. A. and that we call that they
D. two period and the reason
that that was true is because
that's when reclamation took
over operations and they sort of
put in place at a program that
divided the water and we said
you know look it's that amount
of groundwater pumping that
ought to be allowed that was the
biggest issue in the case the
other question was simply did
New Mexico actually even have a
an apportionment and about a
right to water below elephant
Butte Texas said we did not and
we said we did and that
entitlement under the compact
was fifty seven percent of the
water and then there were some
other issues which were sort of
Not as front and center.
Heading into trial there we we
had some rulings from the
special master that we're quite
positive he ruled he did confirm
that New Mexico had an
apportionment under the compact
we had rights under the compact
below elephant Butte and our
entitlement was fifty seven
percent of project supply so
then the the real question
heading into trial was that
baseline how much groundwater
pumping is allowed in each state
again our position was the need
to level and Texas in the United
States said no it's that level
that was at nineteen thirty
eight and again as you all are
very familiar that would have
been very devastating very
difficult for New Mexico for our
economy down there both the act
community as well as the
municipalities who rely on
significant groundwater pumping.
We had trial in the fall of
two thousand and twenty one
proximity twenty four days we
felt like the trial went quite
well there was then a pause and
during that pause the special
master encourage the states to
head to mediation which we did
before it
Judge out of Minnesota of all
places he was actually the
person who IT help the NFL and
the players you get together so
with was quite well well known
and that and and so we engaged
in about ten months of of of
settlement discussions at the
end of which unfortunately we
were not able to reach a
settlement with the United
States but we were able to reach
a settlement with the contacting
States so we reached a consent
decree with Texas and the United
States as sorry in Colorado and
and basically what it does is it
settles the issue of the
equitable apportionment how much
water actually goes to Texas and
and the way we do that is
essentially that the heart of it
is a what's what's known as an
index and what that means is
based on the amount of water
that leaves could bio or
elephant Butte basically based
on that amount of water.
There isn't a certain amount of
water that we are obligated to
deliver to Texas so it basically
sets an amount that's certain it
gives
everybody an expectation and an
understanding of what's
necessary for compact compliance
that's good for both the
upstream state as well as the
downstream State and the most
significant thing about it from
our perspective is that at the
data that goes into this index
is the D. two baseline it's
based on a D. to baseline so
that means that that primary
issue of how much groundwater
pumping was allowed has been
resolved in the consent decree
in our favor in the way that we
thought was important and so
what that does is it locks in
that amount of groundwater
pumping that occurred up through
nineteen seventy eight and as I
said that's very significant for
the state of New Mexico
it also it provides Texas the
kind of assurances and and
certainty that they wanted one
of that was one of the reasons
that they were willing to at to
concede that
it we think over the long run
you know we've done an awful lot
of studying evaluation with our
experts and we think over the
long run that this allows us to
get our fifty seven percent of
projects apply so it protects
New Mexico whereas the old
way that things were divided
under the operating agreement
did not in entitle us to get
that fifty seven percent this
does and so it should be very
significant our expectation is
there will be a lot more surface
water available for New Mexico
farmers that means that they'll
be less groundwater pumping
which is both more costly and
also very difficult on our
aquifer which we were seeing
dropping at alarming rates said
so overall was was very helpful
there were other provisions for
example one of the underlying
issues but that was separating
all of the state's was this
issue of our credit water and
how things were done under the
compact that again has been
resolved in the way that we
wanted to have.
That resolved and in fact some
water came back
to the the the state of New
Mexico as a result of that
agreement
The.
The way in which the index works
is by you know we have that set
amount of water depending on how
much is released there's also
sort of wide a little bit of
wide latitude we call
departures.
And what that does is it
It means that.
You know water management is a
complex undertaking and it's
hard to be exact you know if you
release X. amount here it's hard
to ensure that exactly why
amount will get here and that's
because there's a lot going on
in between there's a hundred and
twenty miles there's a lot of
different water users there's
water supply conditions the soil
is maybe dry all of these things
that affect that amount and so
within this consent decree it
gives us sort of a wide latitude
so that at the and there's
departures are sort of debits or
credits that are built in up to
a hundred and after five years
it'll be a hundred and twenty
thousand acre feet and what that
allows us to do it sort of takes
into the account that that
uncertainty that is inherent in
water management.
there also are provisions that
say you know basically if we
over deliver water which is of
course something that we're
trying not to do but again it's
it's in in perfecting at that
water will action there's
mechanisms by which that water
will actually come back to
ensure that New Mexico gets
fifty seven percent and this in
the same way if we under deliver
water then there are mechanisms
that ensure over the long run
Texas gets its forty three
percent and so in that way we
think it's overall fair in in
the way that it works
I know that one of the things
that is is is.
Being considered by the
legislature in this session some
of the mechanisms by which
depletions can be reduced and
what I can tell you is that
those
offsetting the depletions that
we have in the lower Rio Grande
will be very important for New
Mexico compliance and ensuring
that we achieve a fifty seven
percent of projects apply and
the reason is while we were
successful in getting that do to
level locked in we have a little
bit more than they do to level
right now in terms of
groundwater use in the lower Rio
Grande it's approximately
seventeen thousand acre feet or
so that we're using above that
level and so to ensure that we
enjoy all of the benefits under
the compact in the consent
decree it'll be important for
New Mexico to sort of at reduce
those depletions and I know
there's a number of mechanisms
or or bills that are sort of
evaluating that and looking at
ways to to have that happen
the.
The final thing I'll mention to
you is where we are in the case
now and and sort of next steps
so the contacting States
presented that consent decree to
the special master that was
appointed by the United States
Supreme Court to hear this case
that hearing actually just took
place on Monday
Again we felt that very positive
about our presentation there and
we're cautiously optimistic that
he's going to recommend to the
Supreme Court that that consent
decree be approved the United
States opposes it and so I'll
tell you that the there two
primary arguments their first
argument is that the consent
decree because it is setting the
division of water and they say
well that takes away our
discretion the United States
discretion really we operate
this project and we ought to be
the ones who are
putting into place all of those
mechanisms the second major
argument that they have is
essentially
it doesn't do enough in terms of
requiring New Mexico to take
specific actions within the
state of New Mexico at you know
they would want specific
provisions are specific water
administration measures spilt
spelled out in the consent
decree and as the consent decree
sets it believes that discretion
really to the state of New
Mexico you know we have made a
commitment to honor that consent
decree and and how we get there
is up to us but the United
States has as concerns about
that so the the special master
within somewhere around I would
say three to four months is my
estimate will make a
recommendation to the Supreme
Court he'll send that up in
what's called the an interim
report and then there's an
opportunity for briefing and
potentially argument before the
United States Supreme Court.
our hope is at the end of the
day the court at agrees with us
enters the consent decree which
would resolve that the inter
state dispute sort of set that
amount of water which we think
will add to stability and
clarity in that area and and as
I said we think it's a fair
resolution and one that's very
very good for the state of New
Mexico so unless any of our team
has anything to add to that
happy to.
Thank you Jeff I'd just like to
add up that two things to the
aspect there what New Mexico
needs to do I I agree there you
know under this proposed decree
there's no payment by a New
Mexico right to Texas as was a
let me it was alleged in.
When we when this case was for
first brought but there's also
not surface water that comes
back to New Mexico right which
is what the the claim that we
made and and so in that regard
we have a a drawn down ground
water aquifer in particularly in
in many parts of the Misia and
that results in the less
efficient delivery of water than
during that D. two period and so
we we really have to a request
that are in now to the
legislature one
from that's for seventy five
million over five years really
to help with
infiltrating getting more water
into that aquifer system making
it more efficient use of of some
of the the water supplies that
are available to New Mexico in
that that part of the base and
maybe looking at the sell off
activities or brackish water
treatment into the future
because there's not really a
mechanism for new uses to come
on and then as Jeff mentioned
these seventeen thousand acre
feet of additional kind of
consumption that we need to
reduce with it would be a pretty
significant program probably
somewhat similar to the rate
goes but learning from our pay
because experience two right you
know to fallow irrigated lands
but in the in a way that
actually works for the
irrigation district in the
communities in that area and we
have a fifty million dollar
requests for that piece that was
ten million a year for five
years now yesterday the house
appropriations and finance
committee
recommended the legislative
finance committee
proposed budget and and for
specials and that was twenty
five million over a shorter
period while recognizing there
would be more need in the future
for the special and they also
have thirty million out right
away in capital that we go to
these efforts.
That's a good sign anyone else
want to make a comment before we
go to discussion.
Thank you very much for the
presentation questions and
comments from committee members
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair that was a
really informative presentation
and congratulations on on the
success of what would happen if
the special master adopts the
United States arguments and for
the Supreme Court adopts the
United States or to the if if
that if either one adopt that
agrees with the United States
and it refer declines to enter
the consent decree then we'll be
back at trial that's that.
Exactly right.
At that at dawn.
Was.
Sorry please go on.
Yeah that's it so we would we
would return to trial and and we
have the second half of trial so
we better be presenting about
thirty different experts in in a
lengthy trial
and I you know at the end of the
day when one important thing to
understand is you know Mr
Schmidt Petersen just talked
about the the need to reduce
depletions and that sort of
thing one thing that's really
important to understand is even
if we win our case in other
words we're successful on every
one of our arguments.
We are still above that do to
level you know our litigation
position as they do to so if we
went back to trial and we won we
would be right back before you
explaining that you know we're
very happy to report we won the
case but we still need to reduce
these depletion.
And if we lose.
If we lose that the consequences
are quite significant I mean if
the special master were to adopt
in nineteen thirty eight
condition then that means that
New Mexico's groundwater pumping
is tens of thousands for really
hundreds of thousands of acre
feet over what we are allowed to
do so then in those
circumstances there would be
some very very significant and
draconian measures taken below
that below elephant Butte to
severely reduced depletions and
water use.
So what is your assessment of
the U. of the United States
position about taking away it
didn't whether this agreement
takes away the discretion and
does enough to require the
specific measures what what's
your assessment of the we we
think we have the better part of
the argument and the reason is
while it's true they would have
to conform some of their their
practices to the compact our
argument is the compact is what
sets the division of water
between the states that's the
whole function it has a unique
place in the constitution as it
as part of the compact clause or
approved under the compact class
and so that's not unusual they
they have a pre existing
obligation to be operating
consistent with that the compact
and then other than that so long
as they are being consistent
with the division of water they
have all of their discretion
they can operate in any other
way choosing to do you know it
exactly what the
what they want to so long as
they're complying with other
laws and so again we we think we
have the better side of that
argument but the mess the
special master will will tell
us.
Thank you and then this is just
a little question of of the
phrase you used he said if we
overlook over deliver water the
water will come back and so I'd
like to know how the how the
water's going to come back as a
credit for future years or what
it is a so basically what
happens is that the way the
index gets measured is it gets
the estimated at the beginning
of the year and then at the end
of the year there's a look back
to see you know where are we if
we over deliver water and that
over those over deliveries hit
thirty thousand acre feet at in
the aggregate over however many
years then there's sort of a
three year period in which more
water would be
allocated to the New Mexico
water users in order to get us
back to that zero
point and by doing that it sort
of sets guardrails to make sure
that New Mexico gets its fifty
seven percent.
Excellent will again
congratulations and I appreciate
the opportunity to to hear
about.
Thank you Senator Senator Nobel.
My current budget real quick.
A bill from these been running
what three to five percent
capacity on what is now if it's
much better than that.
Close to two hundred thousand
interface with that ten percent
of us better but that's a very
simple on the Mike so that the
people watching and listening
can see here I'm.
Madam chair Centerville at all
from the reservoir right now is
around two hundred thousand acre
feet of water and that's about
ten percent of capacity.
Never the less it's very low and
how much of that water is
obligated to Texas you said I
think that some of that would
be.
Go to Texas some of the state of
New Mexico I suppose what yes
madam chair senator so that's a
really good question because
there's it there was an article
in the newspaper today about the
about the proposed decree and it
it it stated that you will have
a delivery to Texas essentially
at the state line here Paso
which is true under the proposed
to create but our our existing
delivery obligation to elephant
Butte remains and needs to be
tracked and so we deliver water
Intel offended reservoir and
that water then is split fifty
seven percent for what we call
lower New Mexico state of
compact Texas which I think is
completely gone from should be
gone from all of our lexicon but
to lower New Mexico and then
forty three percent the Texas at
el Paso at the el Paso gauge.
To measure it to different
places.
Madam chair etcetera that's
correct we have to delivery
obligations on with this part
proposed decree coming in play
place we have the existing one
under the Rio Grande compact at
elephant Butte reservoir and
then a new one at the state line
with Texas so the fifty seven
forty three split does not
include the water that's in the
upper Rio Grande Albuquerque
madam chair etcetera that's
correct.
That's all madam chair thank you
thank you any other questions or
comments.
So gentleman what when would we
expect the next update you
mentioned maybe three to four
months.
That correct Mr Wexler the the
next that significant
change in the the case we
expected three to four months
and that would be when the
special master makes a ruling on
our at request to enter the
consent decree great and on a
personal note are you related to
the former judge
I am fortunate to say he's my
father.
Did a great job thank you.
I want any further questions or
comments before in this period.
Thank you very much for coming
today it was very informative
and we appreciate it.
Reflected with.
Okay we're now moving on to our
first bills which is a carryover
Senate bill one sixty five local
choice Energy act Senator
Hamblen and others.
So there is committee members.
And Senate bill one sixty five.
And there is an analysis on that
as well that you've all been
given.
So we're going to ask
We have many of bills on today
so we're going to ask that each
of presentation introduction not
exceed ten minutes then we will
go to supporters and and
opponents and then we will go to
questions and answers we have
people watching on webcast we
have people on zoom yesterday
though in rules we we found out
we went down several times with
the internet but we found out
that it continues to be
recorded.
So if we go down we will still
continue the committee hearing
because it will be recorded for
posterity if people really want
to watch it okay.
Senator Hamblen thank you madam
chair feels like just two days
ago we were here in this very
same situation so thank you very
much.
I come to you today with
legislation that will empower
counties municipalities and
tribes to generate or purchase
and price for renewable
electricity to and sell it to us
the electricity will be
transmitted over the existing
grid in partnership with the
existing utility for the same
fees they charge their customers
this is a proven policy that
exists in ten different states
serving millions of Americans
and more than thirteen hundred
communities local choice energy
providers have proven to offer
safe reliable electricity that
frequently exceed state
renewable portfolio standards
with many offering one hundred
percent electric electricity
these not for profit local
entities have demonstrated the
ability to deliver cost ability
competitive pricing and lower
cost electricity sometimes as
much as twenty percent less most
importantly gives communities
choices and community control
over how their electricity
sourced and priced at the moment
the problem is that we don't
have a voice to be able to
change the trajectory of the
monopoly investor owned
corporate electric utilities
that serve seventy three percent
of New Mexicans we don't have
any control over the policies
their pricing and no way to stop
from obstructing critical
policies like our state landmark
community solar program that
we're all very familiar with and
your feet if you're New Mexicans
who lives in the service area of
a monopoly utility you are power
but you have no choice but to be
subject to them.
They charge higher rates to
exporter money and as you know I
like to keep more money in New
Mexico in our communities rather
than going outside of our state
and yet we have people in
households that have to make a
choice to feed their families
were to heat their homes just a
quick summary Senate bill one
sixty five would give our
communities a choice in local
control over electricity
procurement generation in
pricing it will give our
communities power to create
programs that meet community
needs and re person re purpose
revenues into our communities it
will empower communities to have
a voice and input into how local
choice providers structured and
accountable it will allow our
communities to choose the kind
of like to see they want to
purchase and how it is priced
and finally it will support our
communities to lead the way and
accelerate the state's
transition to renewable energy
madam chair we do have some
proposed amendments to make to
the legend make the legislation
even stronger this is the third
time this legislation has been
brought forward and it already
has been changed for the better
to support our state's
burgeoning solar industry
community solar and rooftop
solar and includes provisions to
support workers and unions and
to give rural electric
cooperatives the ability to opt
in to participate in the program
so at this point madam chair
before I introduce up my experts
if we can go ahead and move on
the amendment or have a
discussion on the amendment.
Purposes.
For the session.
Basically sure thing madam chair
thank you very much the
amendment to this as a summary
I it includes provisions to
ensure just and reasonable rates
bolster consumer protection and
create a compliant process
clarify that contracted
electrical workers would not be
public employees requires
verification a professional
professional licensure to ensure
safety and competency clarifies
that the PRC approves local
choice providers and
implementation plans and gives
the PRC a year to undertake
rulemaking to implement the act
instead of six months.
The committee members other
questions or.
We have a motion.
There's.
The amendment.
I.
Okay so please go on.
Thank you madam chair to my
right is former PRC commissioner
and chair and former state
legislator Stephen Fischmann to
my left is Alisha Shaw who's the
campaign director of public
power New Mexico which is a
grassroots statewide coalition
working to advance the policy
and on zoom there should be tied
PTA's Dale who is a utility
regulatory lawyer who has been
involved in the creation of
local choice providers
elsewhere.
So would you like.
if we could have brief comments
all have former appears to
commissioner Steve Fishman speak
first and then Alicia and then
tie but they've all been
instructed to keep their
comments brief.
Welcome to the committee.
Thank you and good to see you
thank you for having and
madam chair and senators I think
the main message that I want to
convey today is there's nothing
scary about the transition that
this particular legislation
would take us through there's
nothing scary about community
choice there's nothing that's a
big risk to ratepayers in fact
primarily it presents advantages
and as many of you probably know
rather whether it's through
restructuring or other
mechanisms utility monopolies
across the country have been.
Shrunk to the the exclude
generation so when we take
generation and we say Hey local
communities you control what
generation you by that is
perfectly consistent with what's
happened across the nation and
that's because of for generation
there's no.
Natural policy reason that you
need to meet up with because
there's but there's plenty of
competition out there in
Local communities have the
opportunity to take them to take
advantage of that competition.
I want to.
Point out one thing that's
happened and that I think
illustrates one of the the
advantages of going to this bill
a real quickly and again you're
probably all familiar with
what's happened with the San
Juan closing and probably all
familiar with the factor the
state hope you are that
when we pass the ETA there was
an expectation among many the
two things would happen.
What is make it yeah I'll make
it real quick.
But I'm sorry your what is that
There would be a reduction in
bills immediately upon the
closing of San Juan because
there'd be reduced expenses for
PNM.
At the PRC rule that that should
happen but it has not happened
it's been appealed to the
Supreme Court.
and consumers are not getting
the advantage of that cost
reduction if this had been a of
local choice situation.
That reduction costs would have
automatically roll through to
all consumers.
second thing that happened is
that they were supposed to be a
bond that was issued that has
not been issued at the closing
of San Juan.
and it's costing folks a lot of
money because that bond was
supposed to reduce costs for the
transition.
Well you know what it was
community choice.
Admitting that community choice
but local choice
they're already would have been.
Low cost financing in place at
about two percent a lot lower
than even the ETA.
There are some huge structural
advantages to having local
choice so I just wanted to point
out that Hey this is real stuff
that means real money and real
savings for consumers thank you
thank you.
Good morning madam chair
Senators my name is Alicia
Cheyenne the campaign director
for public power New Mexico a
grassroots statewide coalition
working to empower communities
to generate affordable renewable
energy that creates jobs and
invest in local economies more
than thirty grassroots
organizations as well as
Bernalillo county Santa Fe
County city of Bayard and the
town of Hurley have endorsed
local twice energy and that
number continues to grow the
full list is in your packets
toward the end as well as the
resolutions I referred to and I
want you to know that we've been
engaged in conversations with
folks all throughout the state
and we know that people from all
sorts of backgrounds all over
our state have support this and
we already know some of the
reasons why actual skip that but
this policy is proven safe and
reliable the transmission and
distribution remain with the
investor owned utilities and
that utilities and they are
fully compensated for those
services in other states with
this where this is law we've
seen realize that that's as
reliable there are no service
disruption issues the investor
owned utilities co exist with
the local choice providers and
consumers in those states have
choices many of the renewable
energy generation projects that
have been built to power local
choice providers nationally have
been built locally by private
you labor and we anticipate we
will see the same here this is
the law in ten states and our
neighboring states Arizona and
Colorado are considering similar
legislation and there's interest
in this policy on our own state
and nationally because our
existence our existing system
fails to meet the energy and
economic needs of our
communities I ask you to look at
page eight of the presentation
in your packets look at that one
example of stable rates and cost
savings offered by a local
choice provider versus the
investor owned utility there
there are many more we've also
added a press release about a
study that came out this Tuesday
from UMass Amherst that shows
cost savings and accelerated
renewable transition with local
trades providers in
Massachusetts and there are many
more studies like that imagine
if we can have local choice
Energy in New Mexico we could be
the first one hundred percent
renewable state in the country
and be a shining example for the
rest of the.
World thank you so much for your
consideration of this important
legislation thank you and you
have someone on the gym yes Mr
Thomas Dale tie few might make a
brief statement.
Thank you good morning madam
chair Senators my name is tied
to also on a journey with
tosylate PC I have practice
energy regulation and litigation
for ten years primarily in
California and also in New
Mexico I haven't currently
Representative several community
choice or local choice providers
and I drafted major sections of
the bill today I have a very
brief comment regarding
regarding an important aspect of
this bill and that is
implementation before a local
Jewish program serves customers
is legally required to adopt a
detailed implementation plan and
submit it to the public
regulations commission the plan
must include among other things
an organizational structure a
rate setting process a customer
bill of rights and importantly a
resource adequacy plan to ensure
that the local choice energy
provider secures adequate
generating resources to meet
customer needs.
Once the implementation plan has
been submitted the bill
authorizes the local choice
provider to issue are if those
are fees of ten responses from
energy suppliers and transact
for power and finally before a
concert customers a local
service providers required to
adopt and energy procurement
policy an annual budget and the
fiscal management policy with
that I'm happy to answer any
questions about the bill thank
you thank you very much okay now
we're going to the audience
could I see all those hands in
support of this bill.
and could I see all the hands of
those opposing this bill.
Okay online we have
C. one two we have about four.
People supporting five people
supporting and I people posing.
So we will now go to the
audience for comment if you
would like to make a comment
based on how many people we
identify you need to walk to the
middle line up and be ready to
speak on the handheld microphone
to that it's picked up by the
webcast please let's take three
from this side and three from
this side in terms of supporting
so if you want to speak please
come over that means six people
get to speak in support here.
Just to see.
Is it like school.
Okay isn't three three six.
Okay the state land commissioner
please thank you madam chair I'm
Stephanie Garcia Richard the
state land commissioner in the
state land office stands in
strong support of this
legislation and we think the
sponsor for being out front on
this issue if you look at some
of the landmark climate issues
at this body has looked at over
the past few sessions community
solar the ETA I mean they they
started out much like this one
with with lots of folks coming
to gripe and complain about
certain aspects of the bill but
they got better as they went
along and I I believe that this
one will be the same it seems
like the sponsor already has
made a number of changes that
make the bill better and so the
land office is very happy to be
on the front end end of this you
know transformative bill for us
at the State Land Office you
already know that we are hyper
focused on using our state
resources to do build out of
renewable energy so we feel that
this bill is right in line with
our efforts as well so thank you
for having us chair thank you.
Next.
Commissioner.
The what about.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Hank Hughes Santa Fe County
commissioner and I'm also
Representative today the
coalition of sustainable
communities
Santa Fe County commission voted
last week unanimously to support
this bill we really want the
option to pursue local choice if
that in make sense when it comes
around Santa Fe County is
committed to making our
community a hundred percent
renewable as quickly as possible
and this bill would help with
that so we urge you to support
it thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Gibson.
Chairs to phonics committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of SB one sixty five is this
working if you push down that
you have to hold it down yeah
and then introduce yourself all
if my name is Paul Gibson co
founder retake Our Democracy a
statewide five oh one C. for non
profit with over four thousand
members for the last year retake
our democracy has been working
with a coalition of nonprofits
the public power New Mexico
meeting weekly together the
experience of renewable energy
experts around the nation to
identify how New Mexico could
best benefit environmentally and
economically from its wealth of
renewable energy options after
months of research we agree the
best fit for New Mexico's local
choice Energy or community
choice aggregation as it is
known some states SB one sixty
five changes the law to allow
municipalities to the option to
choose the electricity
generation sources and expand
energy options for tribal
nations while saving up to ten
percent rate payers right now
there are three investor owned
utilities serving seventy three
percent of New Mexico households
PNM Xcel energy in el Paso
electric they were granted
monopoly rights.
But L. C. E. local choice Energy
would give local governments the
option to compete with the
higher used to build and or
purchase electricity while still
utilizing transmission and
distributions for service from
the existing utility provider
despite three hundred days of
sunshine and abundant wind Rick
resources these three I use are
not exactly in producing
renewable energy in twenty
twenty one PNM at thirty percent
solar and wind excel had thirty
six percent help House Alectra
just five percent twenty twenty
they continue to cling to fossil
fuel generation because it is
more expensive and generates
greater profits for the Wall
Street shareholders the charge
seven percent more than public
utilities and extracted more
than two hundred eighty million
dollars profit from the state
setting that profit to Wall
Street could you summarize them
okay.
insured this is not this is not
a pipe dream this program is a
operating in thirteen hundred
communities in the state in the
nation and you can draw from
that experience and have
confidence that this will work
in New Mexico thank you very
much thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning chairwoman and
members of the committee my name
is up for how to me and I come
from the publicist because a
little louder.
The.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is up for how to me and I come
from the pull those of a ****
and simply being I'm here today
to give a statement on behalf of
youth United for climate crisis
action yucca has thousands of
members and supporters
throughout northern and central
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of SB one sixty
five because well competition
might scare some in this room
it's long overdue that we break
up our state's authorize
utilities madam chair local
presented is not a new idea it
already serves millions of
Americans across ten states and
what we learned from each of
those states is that service
quality goes up and rates go
down it's time to give New
Mexicans a choice in how the
energy is generated bought and
sold not only does this bill
serve as an economic engine for
local development and
competition among energy
providers it will allow our
communities to transition to one
hundred percent renewable
energy.
Much much faster and we know all
know that we would have way more
than six point five percent
solar in our energy mix
statewide but for the
obstruction of the admin
investor owned utilities just
like their fight against
competitive procurement just
like they have fought against
rooftop solar just let their
fight against a continue to
obstruct community solar they're
fighting local force energy and
we're proud of our climate
champions have brought this bill
so thank you Senator Hamblen
thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing for this vital
piece of legislation and we urge
the committee to unanimously
passed SB one sixty five thank
you very much.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee on the revenue Holly
Beaumont organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico we are a network of
people of faith and people of
conscience to advocate for
workers rights and economic
justice and this bill is
definitely an issue about
workers rights and economic
justice we believe that a vote
for local choice choice energy
is a vote of confidence for the
people of New Mexico for far too
long the workforce in New Mexico
the men and women who comprise
that workforce both union and
nonunion have expanded their
blood and sweat to create
profits for out of state
corporations and watch those
profits be reinvested out of
state if California
Massachusetts and Illinois for
example can make this work and
see millions of dollars of
profit reinvested in their
communities New Mexico can make
this work.
again I would close simply by
saying that a vote for local
choice energy is a vote of
confidence for the people of New
Mexico thank you.
You have to hold it down the
whole time.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Nicole my S.
does a lot of it and I'm the
president of the New Mexico
solar energy association for a
fifty year model is a just and
equitable transition as a low
income disabled veteran exposed
to environmental toxins in Iraq
and as a first time mother to an
infant we need to be taking
every action towards remediating
the climate catastrophe now
local choice Energy does does
does back to see PNM come out
egregiously with claims asked
why renewables and local choice
do not work and specifically
intimidate folks into believing
this bill will not lower rates
have failed and even dare to
negate a renewable portfolio
standard shows just how far
investor owned utilities we'll
go to protect their profits
while speaking with other
renewable industry to gain
support for this bill I was
shocked to hear how afraid they
are to come forward because a
retaliatory behaviors since they
install solar panels for PNM
it's time we legislate for our
future not profits ask yourself
what is the Wall Street value on
a six month old future
respectfully The New Mexico
solar energy association request
alongside the environmental
justice caucus and all Adelante
progressive caucus thank you
please support Senate bill one
sixty five thank you thank you
okay we're gonna hear from two
people to supporters online of
Gail Evans and either is here or
have here allows us.
Go ahead Gail.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Gail
Evans I'm an attorney with the
center for biological diversity
excuse me Madam let's see if we
can get any louder.
Okay on your side Gail you're
gonna have to speak louder.
Okay thank you again my name is
Gail have implemented an
attorney with the center for
biological diversity I live in
Albuquerque and we stand in
strong support of local choice
Energy and stand with the local
governments such as Santa Fe
County in Bernalillo county that
have expressed their support of
this legislation simply gives
local governments the choice to
create and sell their own energy
rather than being forced to rely
on an investor owned utility to
do that.
It doesn't force any government
to do anything it just gives
government a choice and it means
that opens up a possibility the
local governments can create and
sell their own energy and
therefore keep the money that's
made from doing that in our own
communities and of course it is
on the opportunity to transition
to solar and wind as they have
expressed the desire to do so.
So if they have course it
benefits us economically and it
benefits us environmental and
the investor owned utility would
still be able to transmit and
distribute this energy and be
paid fairly for that service and
finally the evidence shows that
as we transition we have to
start generating our energy
locally in smaller systems and
this is a turned in that
direction so please support this
legislation thank you thank you
so next we have the last
supporter getting here from is
it's either Xavier or have here
Rossa.
Absolutely can you hear me yes.
Excellent my name is exhibit
about us and I am here with loss
of the agency Institute and an
awful solutions coalition in
absolute support of local choice
Energy I want to re emphasize a
few pieces that maybe haven't
got as much emphasis one is of
course it's parallel it's a
parallel pathways this is not
about antagonism in the energy
market this is a write up about
all building alternative and
additional pathways for maximum
success for our communities and
for our state and for energy
economy and so I think that's
the first pieces that this is
about parallel pathways that get
us all to where we need to go
the addition is that absolute
protections for workers and
unions this is the type of
robust adaptive response system
for our energy that allows us to
get new energy workers on the
work force will also
transitioning other fields of
the work place and energy and
getting workers into the
direction of where we're going
with renewable energy and then
lastly additional support we
have we've been talking with
communities across the state and
across the nation and this is
absolutely the direction that we
want to go so that we can have
an energy a powerful energy
people on future so thank you so
much and I absolute support
thank you very much now we're
going to the opponents of the
bill and I'll hear from six
people
maybe not three from each side
six.
If you can get a little.
And speak.
Which is but so
we don't want twelve people
rushing up we want six.
Thank you very much go ahead
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Terry Cole
I am the president and CEO for
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we are respectfully
opposing SB one sixty five.
This is an unnecessary and
disruptive proposal that would
undermine the reliability and
affordability of electricity in
our state it contemplates a
dramatic restructuring of power
production and to solve what
problem it's not a parent to us
as an organization we have been
strong supporters of the Energy
transitioned Act which
represents an aggressive move to
clean power production we are
well on our way to making the T.
A.'s goals we should be proud of
our progress and we should stay
the course this bill would raise
utility costs and provide less
cost protection for especially
low income and rural New
Mexicans states like
Massachusetts and Illinois
provide a cautionary tale it
would hurt economic development
efforts by making it harder to
convince companies that want to
locate or expand here and they
will have access to reliable and
stable power.
As and local government shell
out a lot of money trying to
recruit and hire new personnel
who are capable of all of a
sudden being in the power
business the people with the
most to gain financially will be
out of state power brokers are
legislature and governor have
put the state on an aggressive
path to a cleaner energy future
but it's also a stable pack that
keeps consumer costs in mind
there's no need to disrupt
things now respectfully we urge
you to oppose the bill thank you
madam chair very much thank you
next.
Tested you have to think of
great help time good morning
madam chairman Senators my name
is Scott Lopez I'm a native New
Mexican from Espanola where I
live I'm a UNM graduate a ten
year marine corps veteran and I
work for Kelly table.
Kelly table is not from Wall
Street and neither my.
Kelly table is a thirty year New
Mexico company with more than
two hundred fifty employees
across five offices in New
Mexico.
We are a major subcontractor to
local electric utilities.
Regarding SB one sixty five the
real uncertainty of local jobs
being lost due to local choice
energy is a significant concern.
But local choice energy
providers are more likely to be
from out of state and so will
the Energy the broker.
To be clear we support New
Mexico companies serving New
Mexico communities and
respectfully we oppose SB one
sixty five thank you thank you
next.
Right here on madam chair
members of the committee can you
hear me yes expert Fischmann.
Think on that executive director
New Mexico building construction
trades council a fifty year
member of international
brotherhood of electrical
workers local six eleven this
bill is very concerning to us as
we've started into the
transition three years ago to
right after four years ago when
we pass the Energy
transplantation Act it was
immediately appealed to the New
Mexico Supreme Court.
By some of the very people in
this room it's stalled the
implementation of that plan by
here after they got their very
brief a dismissal from the
Supreme Court another lawsuit
was filed in that tied up for
another year.
Who's standing in the way of
this transition to renewable
energy it is certainly not us.
This bill is very concerning to
us on a number of levels
including the questionable
health barrel health health
benefit portability components
at the original bill intended
to establish
this bill will undoubtedly
affect our establish bargaining
units you took out the provision
of saying that they will be
public employees which we didn't
understand now we don't know
what kind of employees they will
be I guess it will be determined
in the future up.
It's.
Very concerning to me that we
take energy policy utility
policy regulation policy Slamat
together with health care
provisions budget
Assignment of
Representation issues and most
importantly the dangerous in a
responsibility of that
irresponsible total deregulation
of power generation in New
Mexico.
Deregulated power generation I
know the experts at your
understand we have power
generation we have transmission
we have distribution one doesn't
work without the other we are
contemplating today
deregulating.
With whoever these aggregators
are are I assume maybe some of
them are in the room thank you
summarized please please all
try.
The bill conflicts or yours
important provisions contained
in the TA including a hard
fought language that we put in
to require the utility
utilization of registered New
Mexico premises scrape the
completely off.
That in the long run.
Will overcome any potential.
Professor savings.
That they let me I will wrap up
madam chair cities and counties
have their hands full.
They have their hands full we
work with the counties and the
cities all over the state and
they're not utility experts I
assure you I guess I can hire
some experts the fantasy savings
of this bill is not going to
come off of our members tables
we will fight this approach to
the transition to a clean energy
economy.
Vehemently I want to end on a
positive note I am very happy to
report that in this state in New
Mexico within the next hundred
and twenty days we will begin
the largest renewable energy
project in North America and
we're doing it in collaboration
with utilities developers the
communities and some of you.
So anybody that state and we're
not moving fast enough needs to
take a look at how far we've
come and eight or ten years okay
thank you Mr thank you yes let's
pass it on.
Is going to be difficult for me
to follow that.
My name is sherry Swanson madam
chair and members of the
committee and the CEO of the New
Mexico rural cooperative
association the electric
cooperatives and we appreciate
the opportunity that we are an
opt in provision within this
bill however we do feel like
this could affect us in the
future we are local control and
I represent fifteen of the
electric coops that are in rural
New Mexico we are also costs
based we also have generation
transmission suppliers who are
costs based and non profit we
have two sources of income
that's our member owners that we
have and we also are long term
debt and we rely on our load and
are planning for that load to
cover our long term debt so we
are concerned that this would
affect that in the future we
echo that the ETA was put in
place for renewable goals in for
to become zero carbon
Because of that we also oppose
this bill.
Respectfully thank you very
much.
Okay there we go hopefully can
hear me madam chair members of
the committee my name is Laura
Sanchez the executive director
of the government and public
affairs department at PNM and
I'm we're here to oppose this
bill there's been a lot of
information provided to a lot of
allegations about utilities not
providing not having money here
community support stay in New
Mexico I took delivery of
passing around a card to each of
you that contain some
information about our impact in
the community
millions of dollars worth of
impact that we've had on our
nonprofit giving
yes I'm sorry it is that card
there we also have approximately
twelve hundred employees in New
Mexico that all contribute along
with their families to this
economy so I want to make sure
that it's clear that we
definitely have a big impact on
the state in addition to
employing being the largest
employer of you workers which we
take very seriously and are very
committed to in addition I'll
give you three reasons why we
oppose this the main three
they'll talk about reliability
impact to customers specifically
low income customers in rural
communities and the third one is
just the transition to the ETA
which I know you've heard about
multiple times here as Mr Condit
said this is really an approach
towards deregulation and if
that's the conversation policy
wise that this body wants to
take I think that that's
something you can do but to do
it piecemeal through a bill like
this has serious ramifications
you just confirmed three new
commissioners yesterday
unanimously
and they need to be given a
chance to do their job and that
includes regulating utilities I
think one of the things that
many of the speakers in support
of this bill said today they
kept calling us a monopoly
they're forgetting a very
important word where regulated
monopoly and with that comes a
lot of very important
requirements that this bill
would.
Not require of local choice
providers it is true that they
are required in the bill as the
gentleman on the phone or on
tomb said the required to file
plans but it says explicitly in
that section which I believe is
section sixty on page six that
they are not required that
there's no oversight by the PRC
so essentially they file a plan
but then they're not subject to
ongoing oversight we all
remember what happened to Texas
in twenty twenty one when they
suffered a winter storm and
created the worst outages in
that state that's a deregulated
decentralized system and one of
the reasons the main reason that
they suffer that problem in
twenty twenty one was because of
generation shortages and what
will be facing here if this bill
goes through as a lot of local
energy providers that will have
to figure out how to purchase
energy on the market and
therefore face a generation
problem so for that reason I ask
you to vote no thank you thank
you so much.
Our last speaker in the room and
then we're going to hear from
two opponents on zoom.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose SB one sixty
five creating a local choice
Energy option would affect New
Mexico's ability to meet clean
energy goals there is great
reliability and affects
customers including New Mexico
businesses and MCC is concerned
the SB one sixty five if passed
would have severe multi
generational impacts on New
Mexico greatly reducing our
state's ability to diversify our
economy this proposal creates
many uncertainties for all
customers companies relocating
to New Mexico as well as our
existing businesses need a
reliable source of power to run
their businesses in fact
economic development experts say
virtually every company looking
to relocate or expand its
reliability and affordability of
electricity near the top of
their top near the top of their
list of considerations.
New Mexico is a national energy
policy we are today because of
the goals set forth in the
energy transition act local
choice of the divergence from
the path utilities are required
to be on right now making it
impossible to conduct resource
planning into the future to me
the renewable energy and clean
energy goals in the ETA SP one
sixty five automatically
enrolled customers of an
electric utility and local
choice energy provider whether
they want to or not this could
increase costs for the customer
by having to pay exit fees for
opting out of the program and
allow for cost shifting to low
and limited income families.
And our rural communities with
large industrial customers those
most likely to four exit fees
shift these costs to customers
for these reasons we
respectfully oppose SB one sixty
five thank you thank you very
much online we're going to
opponents and we've I I've
identified Carla Sonntag and
peak Trujillo.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity to speak with
you this morning I'm Carlos
contact with the New Mexico
business coalition and we
respectfully oppose Senate bill
one sixty five.
You're creating what is a pass
through entity for energy.
Which is only gonna drive up
costs and drive down reliability
any time you put someone in
between where the energy is
produced which is not by this
pass through entity and the
customer you are naturally going
to drive up costs to pay for
that passed through and they're
going to endanger the
reliability that we have from a
qualified utility company you
talk about this pass through
entity is going to buy power on
the market and we have seen
currently what is happening with
purchases of power.
On the market it costs a lot it
is cheaper for a qualified
regulated utility to do the
production to maintain the
reliability that we all need to
power our economy into the
future when you're talking about
the people in New Mexico energy
costs have gone up tremendously
especially over this winter and
to put more costs on them is
just not a bearable thing to do
right now I'd like to point out
that you have received hundreds
close to a thousand emails in
opposition to this bill.
And I urge you to say no to the
passage of Senate bill one sixty
five thank you.
Thank you
P. Trujillo is no longer online
so we're going to.
John Dennis.
Okay John.
John Dennis can you hear me yes.
Is this picture here we're both
at the same location okay I one
of you can speak.
House speaker future business
manager and national brotherhood
of electrical workers
we represent close to twenty six
hundred members in the state of
New Mexico all the cooperative
bank all the passion in the room
on both sides of the issue we're
now going to questions and
comments from committee members.
Would like to start center
renewable.
I'll jump in first madam chair
thank all kinds of things if you
have a.
Organizations
safe PNM or somewhere like that
and they've got a significant
percentage of their.
Of.
Capacity other.
Work area under a local choice
arrangement of some kind so say
ten percent all of a sudden we
have a problem.
And PNM is been providing ninety
percent of this other
organizations been providing ten
percent things go bad for the
ten percent company
who steps in to fill a need to
say about off the grid was not
quite that simple how do you how
do you deal with the extreme
situation when they do happen we
settlement with guests in New
Mexico's electric south.
So it shouldn't madam chair I'm
going to go ahead and give Mr
Fishman opportunity to speak
Sean needs to change why don't
we let Mr Fischmann speaking of
the answers the question that we
don't need to keep going got
hurt so going long on this.
so the key point here is that
you have balancing authorities.
in the south it's el Paso
electric in in the north it's NM
and under this legislation they
continue to be the balancing
Authority the controls which
energy gets delivered over which
lines where to be sure that the
system is still operating none
of that changes none of that
central control changes
and I think that really
addresses the concern that
you're talking about certainly
the short term I think it does
change because if you're over
time if you've reduced your
capacity to provide electricity
or growth of the community
whatever
to where you're only expecting
to find ninety percent of the
power and something happens you
could be affected too but you're
maybe the however this at other
companies getting their juice
from
is is affected adversely and
can't find it yes there is I
understand the grid a live right
in the middle of all that stuff
up in the northwest Rep power
lines everywhere
so I understand a lot of it but
also understand that sometimes
it doesn't work as good as you
want to and if you have one
company that cannot find.
On a small company that speaker
providing small percentage to
the PNM surveil passes looks to
me like we could have a real
serious issue that will evolve
over time it won't happen
tomorrow but as this happens and
people up to and over an
extended period of time in the
community grows and so forth the
ability of the larger monopoly
that's been there forever
to meet our needs and something
happens adversely happens.
How we deal with that I I just
don't quit I'm concerned about
that more than anything with
the.
The the situation you're
positing.
Presumes that local choices
eighties will bring on board
less reliable sources of power
then our current incumbent
utility and to remind you that
just this last summer we were
facing potential shortages and
we had to scramble with our
centralized utility.
And I might point out that by
distributing that responsibility
you might be less likely to have
one player make a goof and then
have half the state or more than
half the states suffer as a
result and that in fact you
might have more reliability and
more resiliency so I I think you
need to avoid that kind of
implicit assumption that somehow
a local choice city would have a
less reliable support supplier
because I don't think that's at
all the case.
Share senator if I may add to
this Texas is a deregulated
market and does not have this
the local choice policy that
we're discussing the local
choice policy is significantly
different from Texas's
deregulated market in addition
in the ten states where this
exists there have been no
service disruptions no
reliability issues tied to local
choice providers at all they
have they provide affordable
safe reliable service and I
would just add one more thing
and say that the utilities
already distribute to multiple
multiple power generators and
and introduce so we're actually
not changing that much of the
equation and it's proven that
it's safe and reliable there
have been some complaints issues
with the Massachusetts to
California in the some of those
are having issues so US claim
that I'm sure senator if I may
that's actually incorrect I have
seen the information that PNM
has shared the issues in
Massachusetts and Illinois are
not local choice providers those
are alternative energy providers
that are part of the regulated
markets to go door to door
selling power
and raised prices significantly
after six months those are not
local choice providers in your
packet there is a study that
just came out Tuesday from UMass
Amherst that shows and proves
that the local choice providers
in Massachusetts eighty percent
of them have lower costs as well
as xcelerated renewable
transmission and then I've seen
also the San Diego examples
that's also very much not true I
see NDA goes community choice
providers offer lower rates than
the utilities there I think are
facts and fiction she in your
packet
thank you okay just the couple
more thoughts here.
How does this how this affects
immunities will owned utility or
of our co op how to with this
situation work with those Maddow
Senator Hamblen is the question
not related to it's the my
understanding Senator is that a
municipal on is already local
choice that's what I I'd like
Senator to answer that.
Madam chair yes.
Okay so Farmington which
operates the whole northwest
corner of the state would not be
part of this program Madam chair
of the missile would be able to
expand on that a little madam
chair senator existing municipal
utilities are currently exempted
in this legislation and are the
rural electric cooperatives are
given the opportunity over the
latter given the opportunity to
opt in if they voted do so if I
live in Albuquerque or Los
crucis were under utility.
How does the opt in opt out in
the real quick fashion if I
decide I want to opt into a
company.
And I don't like it and I want
to opt out a couple years later
how does that process work is it
see most I just say tomorrow I
don't want to do it.
Madam chair of the oil changes.
Fair enough.
Let's see I think that's the key
ones and I don't want to take up
all the time hello to questions
and thanks I have a Centers deal
Lopez and Senator souls.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
I had a visit yesterday about
from from some with PNM and also
somebody who advocate for of
people color communities and one
of the things that they claim
was that
This would not insure that
people of color would get the
benefits from it and so I'd like
to ask you how would people of
color get the benefits from from
the this transition Senator
Hamblen is thank you madam chair
and senator all help briefly it
address that but I do think the
shop also can address that as
well we're talking about rural
communities which are typically
occupied by communities of color
an opportunity for this to pay
lower electricity would be
available to them matter fact in
Los crucis we just had our gas
utilities go up almost three
hundred percent to where
individuals are having to decide
whether or not they can heat
their homes or if they're going
to go ahead need assistance and
putting food on their table and
given that so The New Mexico is
predominantly Latino and of
people of color I see this as an
opportunity to help those
communities as well.
And if Michelle has anything
else to add to that I'm sure
madam chair senator I would add
that our coalition is full of
I talk in front line communities
that are and they're very
supportive of this legislation
because of the opportunity to
lower bills for people on fixed
incomes to of the resolutions
also included in your packet
from figured in her early in the
mining district in southwestern
New Mexico are also I would say
probably frontline communities
and they're interested in this
bill for the economic
development potential as well as
the opportunity to lower bills
and improve the environment.
Thank you madam chair and how
many communities do you expect
to participate early on.
Madam chair and senator I mean
we have so many different so
supporters of this a shot has
been doing a lot of the
conversations with these
different communities and we've
seen this and all of us have
received emails from all over
the state regarding the
implementation of this so I do
see this is something that would
be a lot of I have a very large
impact as it is it's it's moving
forward.
Thank you and I was concerned
about the the concerned about
New Mexico apprentices that work
that is a need TA
in a I understand.
Well so what's the relationship
there is is would these be bound
by the ETA and have that those
things obligating same
obligations for should we insure
that of New Mexico apprentices
do you have the same
opportunities in this.
In this bill madam chair senator
I'm going to go ahead and let me
show answer that question
actually tie online with the
best of this answer that thank
you Mr Mr Todd Stephens please
respond to that.
Based on mute yourself.
Madam chair Senators thank you
for the question can you could
you just repeat the question but
it is in regard to repent to
ships.
I'm.
One of the one of the comments
about this is was that this
would not provide for the state
of New Mexico apprentices that
the ETA requires of the
regulated industry now and my
question is is would
would local choice
Facilities would they be bound
by the ETA with regard to New
Mexico apprentices or how do we
ensure that New Mexico
apprentices can can benefit from
this.
Thank you senator the bill Lee
would if it were passed with
leave control of transmission
distribution in the hands of the
utilities and so to the extent
that the ETA applies to those
types of tasks the apprentice
rules would remain in place we
did in drafting this bill in
preparation of this bill it
includes language regarding
electrical licenses requiring
that the work performed for
local shows providers be
performed by local looked
logicians who are certified the
Legislative Council however push
back on that and said that was
already state law and so we did
across include some language
that was accepted regarding a
professional appropriate
professional licensure and so
that that is that is how we
address the the issue around
workforce qualifications.
Kim also said that this was a
motivation killer under the
under the EPA would PNM get
credit for under the ETA for
participating in this or I guess
I want to understand how it
would be a motivation killer to
PNM under the TA madam chair and
and and committee and went ahead
with Michelle madam chair
senator I think that we need all
strategies to get to the
renewable goals we need to
achieve and I don't think this
is a zero sum game I think that
when local choice energy is the
law of the land the the
utilities will have more
producers of renewable energy to
choose from to help them meet
their goals so I think this
actually does support PTA okay
thank you and then to list okay
I'll just one more question and
tried can already do this is
that correct.
Madam chair Senator that is
correct one thing that is
different is that it would allow
for a wholesale market so local
choice providers could sell
wholesale to other entities are
surplus electricity and that is
something that they cannot
currently do that the tribes
could not complete okay thank
you madam chair thank you I have
Center souls and Senator
committee thank you madam chair
just a couple of quick questions
and comments.
As.
The.
Customer of Bill Paso electric
to have choice now is for my
electric madam chair and send in
committee now.
They are an investor owned
utility regulated Mastro utility
the role of the PRC is to watch
out for our interests is that
correct in the regulation
process madam chair committee
yes thank you
all of the faster transmission
that the I use the investor
owned utilities have on getting
you know if we were to do these
are they fully compensated for
all of their transmission costs
other of moving that the energy
to my house are they fully
compensated for that madam chair
and committee yes and madam
chair and and senator due to the
utilities get to recoup their
guaranteed return on investment
for those lines and assets and
and other pieces.
Madam chair and committee just.
So I guess what I'm getting at
is there a cost to the utility
for doing any of this other I
mean they're fully compensated
for their portion is that
accurate.
Madam chair and committee yes.
Is there anything in this
legislation that prevents money
investor owned utilities from
competing with local choice to
lower energy costs madam chair
and committee known.
And so if they choose to offer a
lower rate to compete with this
they're allowed to do so is that
accurate Madam yes.
So the reason I ask a few years
ago we have a huge number of
wind turbines out east of
Albuquerque I was talking with
one of the companies and the
power comes off of that they
sell the power off of those
turbines at twenty dollars a
megawatt hour two cents a
kilowatt hour.
Most of that energy goes
California.
Is there anything that would
prevent these
Local options from buying that
power at two cents or with some
transmission in between at
substantially lower than what
we're currently paying through
the investor owned utilities
madam chair and committee now.
It's been brought up a couple of
times then chair up about grid
reliability I think it was last
year the year before I believe
we passed the grid modernization
bill.
In that in this may be a
question for Mr Fishman in that
is there anything that prevents
the utilities from using those
monies to to ensure reliability
as more of these local choice
options come online can they use
that to upgrade their systems
and get full compensation for
the investment in their assets
manager Community going to let
Mr Fishman answer that question.
there's nothing that limits
utility management with the
great in any way shape form or
that limits the way they invest
the revenues that they get.
So madam chair of that good
modernization the utilities can
make.
Investments get their guarantee
return on investment for grid
modernization to ensure the
reliability as local options go
forward is that accurate Madam
chair committee just.
Madam chair I I guess I don't
understand it if I struck it's
B. is a little curious that much
of the business community is
against competition and choice
when that seems to be lots of
what business is based on is.
That that competition to ensure
best product at best price okay
Madam thank you thank you I have
Senator Schmedes and Senator
rockets finish meeting thank you
very much madam chair thank you
all been crossing out my
questions have been answered so
is going to cover a few new
things
I page thirteen is says the
commission shall.
expedite these disputes
or the.
You know.
Resolving these disputes in a
hundred eighty days.
what if the court the judge
comes in and issues injunctive
relief for the temporary
restraining order and all of a
sudden we're starting to push
out the hundred eighty days are
are we going to start to push
back at what the courts are
doing what judges doing could
that be a problem with setting a
time standard there madam chair
and committee I would prefer
that Mr tossed out ensure that
question if he doesn't mind
chiming in.
Thank you.
Madam chair Senators thank you
for the question
want to flirt.
Sure no problem chair thank you.
The of the want to clarification
one of our amendments extends
that time frame to three hundred
sixty days in addition to that
if there were a court order that
both the PRC and the parties
bigger part of.
The.
That.
Representative in a scenario
that you describe.
So for some reason we got the
fact that it's in the amendment
three sixty but in recent.
It's line your sound.
I am sorry I am sorry madam
speaker can you hear me now yes.
Okay present
I am so I I apologize for that I
will it I did my last point
there was simply that if there
were a court order regarding the
timetable for implementation by
the PRC and the scenario
described by Senator that the
court order would prevail and we
would be required to follow the
the court's instruction on that.
Mr chair Senator Wilford expert
at what we're is that in the
bill what we're is that in the
bill I mean if it just says one
year I mean they're gonna be in
violation of a goes over one
year what we're in the bill
would it say that that
supersedes the state statute.
That a constitutional provision.
That's just how the how the law
would be interpreted as senator
madam chair Senators how the
path the the law would be
interpreted in that scenario the
court the court would
acknowledge that the legislation
has been passed and is in place
and would put provisions in
place in the consent to create
probably I mean this is a a
scenario that we're not we're
not looking at the actual order
but this is how I would it's
anticipate that it would play
out and the the the court order
would specify that
presumably that the the time
frame there would be state and
so that we up here see would be
in violation of the timetable
okay I'm okay with that thanks
chair last line of questioning
is the very end of the bill the
section fifteen come about local
you know local stuff.
so section fifteen and sixteen
so we have session fifteen
procurement.
And I I'm I'm a little concerned
that the procurement policy
Does not seem to be very
specific I mean it says local
workforce development.
it it it doesn't say anything
about
The these for these third
parties needing to be instated
says they may enter into
contracts with third parties
purchased production
acquired generating facilities
is there any requirement the
bill requires generating
facilities for production to
come on in state.
Madam chair and committee Mr
Thomas Dale can you answer that
question.
Yes senator madam chair Senators
there is no in state generation
requirement the bill does
contemplate that local energy
providers will look to and
examine the opportunities to do
so but establishing in state
requirements could potentially
raise costs and rates for
customers and so the there is no
in state requirements.
Thank you chair Senators yeah
and I I think the you know.
Competition wins right so I
think the the point is I think a
lot of this is going to you know
could potentially go out of
state and he just said it could
be race race costs right so that
that's a concern
now say it it it is not a fault
of this legislation a lot of the
other stuff out of state to with
the other utilities right so
But
Really one of my last questions
madam chair and centers is.
The the the the the brokering of
this
my understanding is law this
these brokering this these
brokers are gonna be out of
state or do they does any of
that economic activity generate
G. R. T. for New Mexico for like
it energy broker that's helping
out a local choice util.
And madam chair Senator I can
add some answered this partly
and I think maybe Mr Todd that
very in a brief yes very briefly
across the country we see a lot
of local generation and having
done a lot of outreach in New
Mexico I can say that most of
the folks that are interested in
this are interested in local
generation there are plenty of
examples in New York for example
where they do actually use third
parties that generate locally
and provide low cost electricity
with renewable so I can I and
with New Mexico's renewable
potential I think we will
actually see quite a lot of
local generation and that is
certainly the intent but we
don't want to be too restrictive
on these entities so that they
can create the kinds of programs
that serve the communities yes
Representative thank you for
your question answered on the
tax it was on it is to have the
tax code.
yes it wasn't real I mean I I
think the answer is is a lot of
this economic act is gonna be a
state but it's not once again
it's that they're wanting to
allow it to be more flexible for
you no competition out of state
in this in the cheaper stuff at
us out of state as well so the
does it does answer my question
and then finally chair Senators
I and I I'm interested in local
generation as well I mean we've
we've on a very very small scale
I I think it works quite well.
Thank you that's all I have
thank you so find K. the manager
of.
We're gonna take your questions
that we're going to go to a vote
and then we're going to the next
bill.
I know that.
Sorry I'm not as old as your
grandmother.
Is it Madam this does go this
year and next.
What do this.
always tell you that I'm looking
around the room on the ETA on
gender out working on the VA but
reminder for my.
Years probably twenty years.
Right.
Will stop.
Senator could you turn your Mike
on.
that we're still seeing many the
problems with the ETA now years
later with all the litigation
there were there were problems
with the but but I just want to
remind everyone that that all of
those problems with the A. T. T.
A. and all litigation ensued
we're even after two or three
years of writing and rewriting
that building trying to Polish
it off and countless hours and
days it took a lot of work so
madam chair I I bring that up
because this bill is going to
take a lot more work before
would ever be heard or worked on
a Judiciary
and I I encourage Sanchez I'm
not making any judgment at all
on whether I agree with the
policy or not right now in fact
I I think some of the I
appreciate some the IdeaCentre
souls talk about competition and
I'm a very big believer in
competition I think that's a
good thing and so we're going to
have a competitive market which
is your regulate the whole thing
and and it does make sense to
have part regulation part non
regulation because then you're
not really talking about
competition at all you're
talking about the government
putting its finger on the scales
and and picking winners and
losers and that's always in my
mind a bad idea because that
comes out of political influence
and of leads to corruption and
that's one of New Mexicos
biggest problems is that
insiders came that we that we
all fly but I won't I won't go
to his manager I would just
encourage budget you need a good
lawyer really good lawyers
working on this of this bill
right now is full of ambiguities
and inconsistencies things it
does are meaningless to me
and again we you know we don't
have the time or the interest I
think it probably trying to fix
it here but I I've you know we
with one of things I would just
tell you as a general matter
this important to those of us
that are lawyers were here
lawmaking and so when we make a
lot of we we might I always use
the example of you know as usual
drive fifty five miles an hour
you do not you shall pay a fine
of whatever you know there's a
clear a clear direction what
people do not do and I and I
would just tell you that the.
This is full this bill right now
is full of things that are not
really loss or aspirations or
just give you some quick
examples of that so
really and I might be getting I
got the to the chairs fingers so
I
so I know she has to go through
this line by line wasn't that
finger but it was a different
thing or so
my mother would have been
appalled if I have used the
wrong finger.
Well mine would have done
something more than being all so
There were severe consequences
raised by nuns so you get the
picture you know if it so you
look at section four just as a
quick example of things that
puzzle me.
So section four in page three
search talking about renewable
portfolio both were previous
owners which really I really and
I am convinced I think everybody
in this room there by the state
once once this once renewable
energy resources and sees as a
future but then like the ETA
sort of the start getting into
part of the press of a one
through four and you start
seeing some of these renewable
standards so if you look at the
program once is by January
twenty one twenty five renewable
energy show comprise no less
than forty percent of the local
energy choice providers retail
sales to Mexico because good
standard policy by certain here
this is good law this is by a
certain date shall is mandatory
and you shall do certain things
but and this is a requirement of
the local choice energy
providers retail sales I don't
know for small retail sales
how's that measures that rate
measured by
of energy for that matter when
you say retail sales that
usually to me means dollars
so so you know how to meet that
standard was what is what is
retail sales mean in that
context for example madam chair
and committee would go ahead and
that Michele answer that
question Senator I would just
say first that this is exactly
the same taxes a renewable
portfolio standard from the ETA
and I'm gonna defer other than
to Mr tonsil whose employer can
better answer that.
Chair Senators thank you for the
question the language in the in
the local choice Energy act here
is identical to the language in
the ETA and so we I I can tell
you that we expected to be
interpreted in exactly the same
way local two hundred providers
the subject to identical
requirements as a public
utilities the the language and
section for
a sub for their zero carbon
resources shall supply one
hundred percent of all retail
sales of electricity simply
means that all the resources
sold half the.
Zero carbon by that let me just
let me interrupt you madam chair
because you're gonna be limited
time and I know you want to move
on other bills and things of
none of that answers my question
I hope you understand up telling
me that the definition of retail
sales would be interpreted here
by using because it comes from
land from the ETA doesn't really
answer the question who knows
what you know if you give you
say you have to meet the
standard by a date based on
total retail sales what is that
what is retail sales me and and
normally in the law we would
define and prescribe what that
means in a PTA didn't do it we
did a poor job of the EPA which
I'm gonna be the first one amid
the dust mask and I'm looking at
I'm looking a lot of my buddy
Center souls because him and I
fought and fought and fought for
better clarity and better work
and ETA in in the in you know
the pressure was just so great
to get it passed but it wasn't
ready and and we've learned that
since and so that you rely on
the fact that that well this
from the J. for me anyway is
going to be kind of these rivers
eyes my point that the TA
probably didn't say what that
means either and so I've made a
point over the last few years
everybody says the TA means
you're going to meet certain
targets and so forth it doesn't
it doesn't say that all the TA
doesn't have any consequence of
not meeting those standards and
the standards are very ambiguous
and lose and so we don't need
them so what there's no there's
no harm no foul so that's not a
lot to me that's a memorial
right that saying Hey we would
like to really do this and we
don't get their act you know so
but you know as we as
politicians all talk about PTA
like it's creating clear
requirements and it doesn't
those are not requirements in
that in that will so anyway back
to here when we say okay you've
got to meet certain dates the
interesting thing about this is
if you look in paragraphs one
and two these are target
requirements for a local choice
energy providers so a providers
going to do this has to meet
these targets but then in
paragraph three there's a shift
in paragraph four and eliminates
the language for the requirement
to local energy choice providers
do you notice that just wanted
to talk about the.
Requirements is applicables to
these local choice providers
with one to get a progress
report that language is to
remove.
and so now the requirements are
not on the local choice energy
provider but everybody right so
program three says by twenty
forty renewable energy supports
this also apply eighty percent
of all retail sales of
electricity New Mexico right
that's everybody that's all
utilities or maybe that's the
goal here but it goes far beyond
what this bill is being touted
as which is to create this type
of a local choice provider in
allow local cause customers to
participate so with that
language alone would say that by
twenty forty all utilities have
to have eighty percent of their
whatever retail sales is we
don't know what that means and
then if you look at paragraph
four by twenty forty five a zero
carbon resources shells while
hundred percent of all retail
supply of sales electricity
Mexico that's everybody right
that's all co ops all utilities
by that date you've you've taken
out these standards for a local
choice energy provider impose on
everybody that's sweeping and
and maybe that's your intention
Senator of and if it if it is
it's very clever
of the people who wrote this but
we ought to be at least talking
about what this bill reads and
outing it so you madam chair
that's that's just be on the
fourth section out of many so R.
I look forward to maybe hearing
this and Judiciary we have very
different procedures and
processes and Judiciary and and
we're more than willing to spend
days and weeks and hours doing
the work that this bill would
require to be for candidly
largely re written
from from where it's at right
now there's just so many
ambiguities and I'll follow for
to talk about those at that an
appropriate time but I will just
tell you that one of things we
really look for a great deal
with is a law that is the law
and and I'll just give you as a
as annex just a low elected
madam chair and an example of
what I would have you looking
for Senator when you're.
Trying to really Polish this all
If you look at section six
subparagraph a was on page five
the just begins this way it says
it says a local towards energy
provider shall develop an
implementation plan detailing
the process in characteristics
of local choice energy program I
hope you understand they don't
have to be a lawyer to realize
that doesn't really say anything
it says the Energy professional
development plan.
detail in the process and
characteristics of of a program.
that the meeting really and then
it goes on to say the
implementation plan and any
subsequent changes shall be
considered and adopted a duly
noticed public meeting well
That doesn't make sense to me
necessarily because you're
saying to local choice provider
shall develop a plan and then
is to be considered and adopted
a do do we put a notice public
meeting of who
of of the provider or of a
municipality or county that's
going to adopt and so forth so
the in that's nonsensical to me
and then it says if the plans
adopted it shall be filed with
the commission and it goes on to
say with the the plan shall be
but if you look at all of that
language on really K. five and
six you'll find that most of its
pretty ambiguous three years
notice the plan shall
if you look on top of page six
the plan shall include methods
for entertaining and terminating
agreements with other entities
what does that mean you know
that that's really not a law
your your plan shall have a
method for entering in
terminating agreements with
others.
That that's meaningless to me
it's not that's not a law that's
telling the usual have a plan
that you come to agreement with
other people.
that's not going to give anybody
the direction will be a
disagreement about power aware
that we're
the plan show including program
for the rights and
responsibilities of customers.
What is that me
Your plan should have the rights
response was because there's no.
I can make a what are all right
there and and and you're smiling
a lot centers of unity I I think
maybe you know what were you
noticed a lot of time together
it down the road but any anyway
madam chair I'm going to
probably and with that and and I
will try to devote the time that
I think this would need and and
just and on that point that that
please on the ETA know that
countless days hours meetings
hearings years of getting there
and again I keep smiling back at
my good colleague from W. County
center schools because he we
work very very hard on that with
a lot of amendments many of them
taken many of them not taken
many of them regrettably not
taken it now in hindsight and so
let's not make that mistake
madam chair let's not just
create something that really we
look back later and said we we
wish we would have done a much
better job thank you madam chair
thank you senator souls thank
you madam chair and I think as
far as for this committee this
stuff Chiles valley pool really
there is fully roasted of and so
I move do pass second.
There is a motion and a second
on a do pass with this committee
secretary please call the roll I
yes interest of this yes and
that goes to excuse Senator
Hamblen yes Centerville no.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator Mary's.
The process also yes as the
office yes Senator products yes.
By a vote of six in the test to
in the know you have a due pass
for this bill Committee members
I am starting Senate bill one
sixty nine because I have some
of the state
the for the thank you and the
vice chair will take over.
Senator Stefanics yes there we
gonna continue beyond eleven
Miss Vigil I think we are
because but this is an
investment fund for the justice
renewable or going to do the
right hole Gen health justice
bill okay.
And Committee for the audience
were only going to do this one
next bill we're not going to
keep going we're just going to
Senate bill one sixty nine the
rest will be a carry over.
With this.
Yes this is.
The state knows the need.
We did at the very beginning and
of course this is the I I I
moved it in and nobody opposed
to.
We did overall she did what she
just said any of.
Yes.
Like this.
Yeah making sure.
With that.
Thank you should.
Barbara could I have that other
chair of your.
Right.
Okay.
It is seven.
What is the committee seven here
it should be okay.
Madam chair ready I am all right
go ahead and begin do you have a
complete committees of.
Madam.
Okay could anybody not involved
with this bill please please
step outside.
So thank you madam chair today
I'm here presenting Senate bill
one sixty nine but we need a
motion on a do not pass in a two
passed for consideration on the
substitute okay just a minute
again I'm asking anybody not
involved in this bill to step
outside or people involved in
conversation please step
outside.
Committee members do I hear
motion.
Madam chair I move do not pass
on Senate bill one sixty nine
and a due pass for discussion
purposes on.
The substitute for once in a.
Anyone opposed.
Thank you madam chair for
discussion first of all let me
introduce all my experts I have
Beth Beloff next to me who is
the director of the coalition
for sustainable communities I
have Henry Lippman from the
national coalition for green
banks around the country and I
have Dave buckle to is a
monetary that's insisted the
state in past so madam chair the
reason we have a committee
substitute if you look at the
bill and then you look at the
committee substitute this is the
ninth iteration of the writing
of the bill and it was
determined that it needed to be
written totally differently
because it is setting up an
investment fund in state statute
of which we do have other
precedents for and Mr about
cults is here to answer any
questions about that the first
of all madam chair this is the
Climent investment center act
and it is building on an
opportunity for the state of New
Mexico to access part of the
twenty seven billion dollars of
federal funds that is in the
inflation reduction act for this
purpose and so this bill
hopefully will not be
controversial finance will of
course.
Fine to see language if they in
fact decide to go forward with
this but the climate investment
fund would really offer our
state the opportunity not only
to access the funds from the
federal government but several
local entities cities and
counties have offered to put up
money to also match state funds
so it is an appropriation bill
it will be going on to Senate
finance there is a huge
opportunity
I have many pages of comments
but I don't think you really
want to hear me talk about it
all so I'm gonna turn directly
to my experts miss Beth Beloff.
Is the love.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I forgot to
mention there are for state
agencies the governor's office
the State Land Office the
environment department energy
minerals that have offered their
support for this as well.
Thank you.
Know your internet quickly yeah.
Okay thank you on.
You have a power point slides in
front of you and some of the
comments that that will be
making are referenced in that so
and it does in that describe
what's in the bill in summer
eight but how how is the climate
investment center structured as
a green bank
first I want to mention this is
not a bank it is not that
deposit taking entity it is an
investment fund it is a
financial platform that uses a
limited amount of public money
to attract private sector money
for investments in projects to
reduce pollution and boost
equity typically where are other
sources of financing are not
readily available.
it brings together commercial
public and private capital to
drive clean energy investments
in New Mexico communities it
develops local expertise to
break down market barriers fill
financing gaps and connect
projects with capital.
It leverages public money to
attract private funding on
average nationally that leverage
is one dollar of public money to
create four dollars of total
investment while working in
partnership with local lenders
and banks to create this
multiplier effect so it is not
competitive with local financial
institutions green banks our
proven model with twenty three
in seventeen states and DC and
they have been successful over
the last ten years deploying
billions of dollars into the
clean energy economy as of
twenty twenty one two point five
billion dollars a public
investments created nearly ten
billion in total investments
from green banks green banks are
ideally positioned to receive
significant funding as you've
heard under the inflation
reduction act a key lesson
learned in the green tank space
and this is now slide six.
is to create green banks as
nonprofits.
Supported by government.
I'm why because
Nonprofits provide the freedom
to quickly pursue financial
opportunities that may present
themselves it provides the need
to be flexible to meet local
communities needs and investor
uncertainty
created by political change it
does not occur in a non profit
the nonprofit forms have proven
to be successful and popular
green banks as seen in Colorado
and elsewhere in the nation and
you have a a map that will show
you that the other states
slide seven provides examples of
types of priority projects for
green banks
residential energy efficiency
and solar landing especially for
low income households
electrifying municipal bus
fleets and other
local government fleets landing
for community solar ET charging
stations among others.
bring banks are are
potent tools.
For energy equity and justice so
slide eight
shows both existing and emerging
green banks in various stages of
development you'll see New
Mexico is in light green and we
are being looked at carefully
across the nation as a model
piece of legislation
it also shows the grain banks
that do significant lending to
low and moderate income
borrowers.
In New Mexico over one hundred
and fifty thousand households
spend over fifteen percent of
their income on electricity and
heating compared to a national
average of two percent so energy
efficiency measures can drive
down those costs and improve
living conditions through low
interest loans to low credit
customers and with that I'd like
to turn it over to our partner
Henry let men.
Down thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for the
opportunity to speak with you
this morning hi my name is Henry
let men I'm senior director of
the coalition for green capital
which has been the leading
national advocate and technical
advisor for green banks in the
United States for over a decade
we also manage the American
green bank consortium of the
existing group of the twenty
three green banks currently in
existence today we played a
leading role in including the
greenhouse gas reduction fund
within the inflation reduction
act which is what I'd like to
speak with you about right now.
This twenty seven billion dollar
provision within the inflation
reduction act is designated for
the purpose of accelerating
public private investment to
deploy technologies that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and
other air pollution.
Usually environmental equity has
been built into the statute of
this portion of the I. R. A. as
at least fifteen billion of the
twenty seven billion is
specifically designated to
primarily benefit low income or
otherwise disadvantaged
communities this intentionally
exceeds the forty percent set by
president Biden's Justice forty
initiative indicating the
commitment to use this money in
a way that advances justice and
equity and reaches to every
single community in the United
States.
Senate bill one sixty nine
presents an unprecedented
opportunity to get New Mexico's
fair share about twenty seven
billion dollars delivered here
you can see on slide nine that
the greenhouse gas reduction
fund includes three pots of
money we don't need to dive into
the technical details of each
pod but each one is designed to
support investment in product
projects that reduce or avoid
greenhouse gas emissions and
other air pollution they may
also be used to assist
communities in their own efforts
to do so which might include
workforce development and job
training programs as designed in
Senate bill one sixty nine the
climate investment center would
be eligible to access funds from
all three parts.
I would also like to note that
this bill is extremely well
aligned with the purposes of the
greenhouse gas reduction fund
and sets New Mexico up well to
receive the maximum out of
federal money possible my
organization and the coalition
for green capital sees this bill
is a gold standard green back
bill that we will promote to to
other states that are interested
in doing something similar in
the coming legislative sessions
and if if the bill is passed we
will be holding it up as a as a
gold standard and and are
encouraging other states to pass
similar bills thank you for the
opportunity thank you Mr
Buckel's doing this anything to
stand for questions just the
fact committee I am here I'm in
this case representing the
couple coalition that works for
us I will tell you what I'm not
I'm not here for the state board
of finance I'm not given New
Mexico five thirty am ninety
percent one thousand I'm here
for okay so you have I'll be
happy to answer questions I have
a lot of interesting challenges
that can be overcome regarding
how do you structure this on the
New Mexico will Mexico
constitutional principles with
the comments that we heard about
this is the model that will work
to get the most credible morning
I'm happy to answer questions
that come up with thank you Mr
because that's that's that's
what we're ready for our
supporters or opponents all
right let's get a sense how many
people are are here to support
this bill.
We.
That's how we do it is there
anyone here a post.
Well because we're supposed to
be down at the floor I'd like to
limit if we could limit it to
three people
just to speak in support and of
I'd like to invite for more more
the honorable Marty Chavis the
and then if you want to select a
couple more people can use here
and
Wells so if we if you can okay
okay okay.
And this is just in the interest
of time because we don't have
any up opponents so I apologize
to those of you who would like
to speak and really thank you
for coming.
Madam chair members of the
public but.
We are you have to hold the
button the whole time the whole
time yes what will they think of
next madam chair members of the
committee thank you I'm here
representing the governor from
her perspective this woman whose
early on a no brainer her
directive was to draft in a way
that will maximize the receipt
of federal funds with this bill
as drafted now we should expect
at least a hundred million
dollars maybe half a billion
dollars if not more but even
beyond that is it goes down the
road and turns in this
standalone entity who will be
financing all kinds of wonderful
things for individual New
Mexicans whether it's solar
panel he pumps you name it but
also has the ability to partner
for large projects so go south
of Lordsburg to lighting doc
which is due to thermal plant
the only one we have in the
state and it's a shame we with
some acute thermal this will
this is to be able to partner
with the private sector to to do
those types of larger projects
as well so it's scalable
Connecticut is getting seven
dollars back every dollar
invested so it's it's a good
thing.
Thank you Mr Chavis.
You madam chair members you have
to hold the whole total down
please good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Claudia Borchert I am the
climate change bureau for the
New Mexico environment
department the New Mexico
environment department stands in
strong support of the Senate
bill one sixty nine our agency
as you've heard sees this bill
as a necessary enabling New
Mexico to receive millions of
federal dollars from the I. R.
eight the center will allow
greater economic investments in
new mode in New Mexico as you've
just heard and support our
communities infrastructure needs
as well as help meet the state's
climate goals thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Hank his Santa Fe County
commissioner I just want to say
that
Santa Fe County strongly
supports this bill we see a lot
of benefits for our constituents
and we are interested in
participating in whatever way
makes the most sense but the the
statewide set up of this entity
is very very important thank
you.
Thank you so with that since and
I'll just repeat of no one
online in opposition.
What what let's hear I guess
just from one person online how
about Randy Randall Ryti.
You for the opportunity yeah can
you hear me yes.
Great thank you thank you madam
chair no members community the
committee I'm rental righty a
Los Alamos the council really
ready Los Alamos County plus
almost counties member of the
coalition sustainable
communities New Mexico my
pleasure speaking favor of the
climate vestment Center built as
a provide mechanisms of fun
Environment projects benefit all
New Mexicans was almost County
has both local and regional
projects that could benefit from
such legislation urge you to
vote in favor of Senate bill one
sixty nine thank you for the
opportunity speak today.
Thank thank you Mr writing so
now let's go ahead and turn to
the to the committee.
Senator Neville.
Thank you madam chair just one
quick question on.
Page four of the server believe
you're pointing committee
consists of seven members the
governor this three I guess and
the legislature does for we've
always in the past allowed one
from the speaker one from the
protium won from the minority of
each side this is different this
is a little different that's
been our traditional way I
described it and.
Is there a reason why we
wouldn't do it similar to what
we've done in the past for the
investment counsel for the on on
on that's been our format and so
madam chair and senator we would
be happy to make that change of
that's a formal here or in the
next committee if it's a simple
amendment I'd like to do that
but if it's not fifty five year
were to change it is an
amendment that would be I may
madam chair.
Do you it's a pleasure the
committee you want to do it here
or move on to the floor and have
it from the waited to finance.
Any thoughts.
Can be looking to me.
Not going to Judiciary guys.
All if this is trusting the
sponsor to make the change on
the way to finance.
you know my suggestion for the
committee is always always put
out our best work of this
committee not leave it to
another committee to do our work
it's fine that the analysts are
ready to help of take down
whatever we want to do for
motions.
Madam chair of always complain
about Senator bases well let's
senator Joseph fix it over there
it's coming up well maybe we
will maybe all.
Madam chair how about and and
senator bill how about
Would we take that the take it
away from the president pro tem
the speaker or the governor you
would change would strike to
make that one member appointed
by the pro tem.
One member appointed by the
speaker of the house and one
member each for the two minority
leaders hi everyone were that
but that's what it would be.
The more one member but month
Morty the the minority leader in
the house when member by the
Majority Leader in the Senate.
That would make that motion if
this analysts have it down.
Do you have it yeah okay okay
you don't need to live a life.
Okay is there any opposition to
that motion.
Thank you for that motion is
accepted.
Okay committee members any other
comments or questions.
Senator senators about this and
then Senator Schmedes thank you
so little puzzle what this is
I'm looking at David mostly with
David Buckel's I have the
privilege of working with when I
was in law school back in the
day so you know if you look at
page two.
all of section three says the
climb investment centers created
as a nonprofit independent
public corporation.
So I'm I'm a little puzzle right
now why do we have a law what we
pass a state law that says that
somebody can create a nonprofit
independent public corporation.
That now without a state law.
And so I I heard earlier
statement that we do something
like this already in some
contexts I'd like to explore
that a little bit because I
remember we've done something
like this for I'd like for it
whether that's worked out the
way we thought it would cause
most of this that I'm looking at
we created investments that are
I can go do this tomorrow right
I think we'll create a nonprofit
independent public corporation
and I guess the first question
is what what is a public
corporation I guess that's the
first question so in the in the
context of this.
Madam chair we will have
Mr vocal to answer but this does
have a state appropriation going
into it so we do need of conduit
for that so Mister buckled
and regular and that'll be one
of my coming questions which is
how do you avoid I donation
issues right no to be create the
nonprofit independent
corporation in state law and
then put in appropriation and do
it.
I was and then that that
corporation and center makes
grants and loans and funds other
things how how does that with
your determination which is.
Madam chair senator Senator
pledge to be your.
there are several models in
state law and it's like which I
believe was adopted of
specifically from state law up
both something called the
employers mutual fund which was
the entity that was set up I
believe we may Travis was in the
legislature and help page that
workers comp reform about
languages there and then also in
from the cold the small business
investment corporation which was
passed
through the auspices of the late
senator kid and then also later
on the roof of the fixes to be
acted on when of the ten
governor Dennis was some first
in her chair of those of both
entities such as this type of
the idea is to create an entity
that is a public not a private
we formed ought not for profit
corporation and a public
corporation that is controlled
by the government controlled by
the government in the directions
that are given regard to how the
board members are from.
Created so that's why it's your
first question the second
question is also a challenge
that with thinking for first I
would recommend highly to
everyone here if you haven't
seen it already the work that
Jeremy Farris did on the
interconnection closed about six
or eight months ago for all
committee with oversight
Committee of the New Mexico
finance authority and he has
written a memo that I think did
a really good job on at that
meeting held himself out to you
the legislators to say come to
visit with me on the second part
questions it's no better than
gentleman up what he writes is
reflective would by
understanding is
so first here we have it be
appropriation that goes to the
DFA at least the last bill that
I so The appropriation goes to
the effect would general
instructions to DFA as to how to
use that program and courts to
to be administered not specific
I regard to be anti donation
clause there are probably two
ways of looking at it
and I can cite to the ways that
those have been used in the past
on the one hand it is certainly
the possible that the DFA could
then contract for services with
this entity the entity having
been created as a.
Government controlled of
corporate entity as opposed to
just people going out informing
a government controlled which
statutory directions but but but
but if it is run by government
officials but never the less
contract with that entity that
we when there's a contract
your available nation cause
problem because there's
consideration services that run
up in different ways the second
is that the some other kind of
ability to get the money from
the DFA to the entity up would
be covered by those the case for
provisions of that talk about
inter governmental transfers
being allowed to be done and
then of course how that entity
would use money in regard to its
lending and such all in regards
to whatever government money it
has not federal money the the
been there may be an identical
questions there in regard to the
federal money we have a case
called hotels of distinction
that says federal money not
covered by the origination
clause in regard to state issues
we have other issues that we
want to look at
if we look at the Dawn contract
and donation of you know that
the the inner government entity
we have some good case for we'll
have some very strange old
language in the and I've been as
close about a public corporation
I don't know if anybody knows
what those words mean but I
think they meant at the time of
cooperation that was widely held
and not privately held because
it says public or private but if
Jeremy very a need somebody had
concerns about that language and
I'm not familiar with any case
for that describe that language
I think the responses enter into
a contract DFA needs this wrong
they need to run because that's
the legislature the let me
access run it they contract with
the entity the state to the
entity you do these things you
pay money to us we pay money to
you for you to do these things
and then you have to if you
don't do these things we have
remedies in return there is a
model for that too this an
entity called the enchantment
lancer.
Defied development company and
that is a company that was not
formed on the state law but was
formed separately by banks to
run a program that brought Lente
to people under certain just
just be a program and because
time sure let me let me if I can
interrupt you I'm try I'm sorry
yes when I try to keep things a
little sure sure sure sure you
and I will spend hours I guess
request probably enjoy it very
much but with the committee has
demands so just real quick
because here here's the issue
that I was raised in nothing but
a closer of that one is with
okay thank you so you know if
you go to page three of the bill
says the center is not a state
agency for any purpose
and then it says the state shall
not be liable for any
obligations of the center so
again I'm I'm trying to figure
out this entity Mr buckles and
and we we've talked in the
conversation quite a bit this is
coming up more and more in what
we're doing in the Senate of
last session it was involving a
hospital over in Rio Rancho I
think and usually was whether
the employees were public
employees subject to the
requirements of of state law and
the hospitals argue they were
not in the employees in the
union wherever they were that
becomes an issue done in Los
crucis in in Albuquerque UNM and
NMSU what is the foundation is
University foundation as a
public entity or not the
foundations will say they're not
and they're not subject to open
meetings and inspection of
public records but then they'll
say when it comes on the
liabilities immunities they are
and so you know we're getting
into this whole half pregnant
the state areas of law and
government and and I'm just kind
of puzzle little bit by this one
too so I'll talk to you about it
would you agree that when we
would say this is going to be a
public corporation that there's
no such entity as a public
corporation in our corporation
laws in of of New Mexico's
boards or something there for
for what is a public corporation
I believe that job.
This is an entity that is
important to directly by the
government and it is not covered
by the not the the privately
used not for profit corporation
Act with the privately used for
profit corporation in is there
anything on our law right now
which defines what is a public
corporation.
Other than that we have done
this in the past over the top of
my head I don't think I can cite
you anything but I will go and
try to find out for you I don't
think there is yeah I think we
should figure that out because
we're saying that's what this is
is a public corporation and we
don't know what public
corporation is and then we say
over here it's not liable for
the state's not liable for this
at all and that is not a state
agency for any purpose that's
why we're here so you're gonna
say like well we're outside the
touch of the government we're
not gonna have to comply with it
bro and we're not gonna have to
have sunshine in transparency
and we're gonna be able to do
private contracts and negotiate
deals and by the way we're going
to fund it with twenty million
dollars and take maybe other
requests that federal money that
should cause us a little pause
in and because it becomes a
really.
Water
accusing anybody of in advance
but it's a very easy way to do
that pretty creative way to take
public money and put it into
private hands
I I hate to think that anybody
would do that but things like
that so it was pretty good way
to do it you you raise the you
said we've done this before in
terms of employees of the mutual
fund in workers comp but we
don't fund that is a state at
all do we we don't put any
funding into that that's
entirely funded by employer of
contributions or order charges
to that fund is with with with
everything it's a little
complicated what was originally
created there was an investment
made from the severance tax
permanent fund into that fund
and the same thing with the
state with the on small with the
small business investment
corporation up both of them had
relationships with the severance
tax permanent fund for
investments to keep get them go
now we still doing that are so
funny the way we can I'm I'm not
that sure about the mutual fund
I think that there are still
range means between small
business investment corporation
and the and the severance tax
permanent fund so what when when
we have Saddam I'd really like
to explore that with you right
now Senator this should be no
trouble talking we can top of
line as you'd like to I don't
want to not have to be done in
public but I'm happy to do right
and again so if you and you have
a great familiarity with the
with the function of the
permanent fund's of severance
tax funds and so without those
funds are I'd be curious whether
those funds are being used to
fund the small business
investment yeah I I can cite it
to a third one which is the
pandemic relief that you created
to the finance part with it was
a very significant investment
from the severance tax permanent
fund into the program that's run
by the finance authority for
pandemic relief yeah stand in
again that's probably worth of
spending a lot of time exploring
the legislature what happened
there too right we took a lot of
money from those permanent funds
and put him into pandemic relief
and let's face it we saw that
even at the national level with
the PPP program you know multi
billion dollar corporations and
for.
No football teams and religious
organizations all took advantage
of that I as a business owner
take advantage of that I measure
you did too I don't know anybody
who's in business who was paying
attention who didn't take
advantage of any of those funds
was that a good idea for use of
our state funds we should really
ask ourselves that question too
so just because we do this I
guess is what I'm trying to say
isn't and doesn't mean that's
necessarily a good idea I agree
the policy questions are
important but we tried to do hit
the was to try to look at the
models that have been used to
starkly and be able to come in
as best as we could and say look
this is not brand new we have
needs that the federal people
described as this is because
some of the things you have to
do regarding the ability to
access most federal funds my job
was to say well how do we do
that on the model that we
created in New Mexico law so
that the things come back to get
a but it's you know sausage
making to some extent then we
tried to the best we can in in
the managers the the point that
I I hope that I'm making is well
we all support climate
investment in research and and
efforts to try and address what
to me is clear crisis in terms
of our environment and climate
change we all agree on those
things and the whole room was
also in support and there's
nobody in opposition to this and
that doesn't mean we shouldn't
still ask ourselves you know how
we doing this and and I was
working in is is to have a
potential for unintended
consequences or abuses and I
hope that we will always
continue to ask those questions
even when everybody's singing
come by on the concept is
Rickett I bring this up really
in the context of the last bill
to what we all may supporting an
idea of its the implementation
and the start of the I's across
cities it's really part of our
job here madam chair so thank.
Thank you senator survive this
Senator smitteez the manager in
center of is is it all possible.
for when the you know the sun is
shining now but if the if it's
raining
is it possible for the state to
come in and sweep this fund
later.
Madam chair Senator we have had
that precedent set in many
different funds.
Last year's right but I and and
where I'm going with this madam
chair and center is is sweeping
the fund what would that do with
the federal funds for that give
us a violation of the agreement
with how these funds are set up
with the federal so madam chair
I would leave that response to
probably attorneys but I think
that the funds would be
segregated the sweeping would be
segregated to the state funds
okay well interesting Madam
center I and I went in the
details of that I just I I find
interesting if it and I I keep
thinking about the tobacco
settlement fund that I I feel
should be constitution protected
and this new legacy conservation
fund the same thing and so I I
just wonder how that works I
don't think it I don't want to
get into the weeds there just to
the concern of mine but as long
as there is some sort of relief
for some process for that I
think it's fine I I would just
because of COVID I you know the
the the the term inflation
reduction is in here but I I
look at these industries that
have a lot of third party
payment you know we we have a
fairly fixed highly regulated
fund and system it's this is not
really just an open free for all
market rate we have these
regulations and when third party
payment comes in and when we in
ject more cash into a system.
That that does not reduce
inflation two good examples are
health care industry that is
riddled with third party
payment.
What are the prices doing
college.
Riddled with third party
payment.
Prices are just skyrocketing so
that is one of my little drums I
beats from time to time that I
I'd I'd I don't believe this is
inflation direction because
we're just injecting this third
party into a kind of a fixed
fairly fix system and that's I
think that's all all that I have
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator committees I
just have a couple of questions
And I think this is the this is
related absolutely related to
Two would Senators advances said
is I on page three of money for
the where it would stay the
Senators not the center is not
the state agency for any purpose
the station not be liable for
any obligation incurred by
Senator is that to avoid some of
the problems we've had with some
of these other.
Funding agency I mean not
agencies because of these other
things that we've created like
the state investment
A group you know group some of
the foundation's you foundations
we've we've had the the
ambiguities that Senators
advantis mentioned where
sometimes they they seem to want
to not comply with the open
meetings act but then they want
to have some benefits of being a
state agency is is that with
that let lines for so madam
chair I was we'll let our expert
Mr Beckel since that.
The best account up first I was
not involved in the latest one
draft of the bill I believe the
language may have come out of
the of the bills that I decided
to with these entities were
created of my own reaction would
be that the for example in the
for the finance authority bill
you have simple language they're
not covered by P. already
they're not covered by certain
issues.
My own policy view would be that
if the changes were suggested by
the legislature and they were
not offensive to the ability to
access some of federal funds
I think you could add language
that says you know the COVID to
act that covered by X. Y. NZ
approach open meetings act
or otherwise copyright or
otherwise are the language that
could be in there it may need
more support because it's a good
question but my sense is of the
language probably isn't unique
probably was covered by other
entities and probably could be
adjusted to the extent that it
doesn't violate the sense of
with setting this up to interact
with federal programs to be able
would react on sept federal
programs I'm not an expert on
federal for the federal so madam
chair
To answer your question of
further if this bill goes
further and we could put the
amendment into this committee
sub we do have a read retired.
Madam drafter who's going to do
the next Committee sub for
finance.
Thank you all of that I would
encourage you I'm not going to
insist of all but I would
encourage you to think about
open meetings and transparency
in this with these kinds of
funds and so that that provision
kind of concerns me it but I
understand you have to these
these hybrid things you have to
figure out what you want what
what satisfies the federal
requirements and also what
satisfies our policy issues with
regard to transparency and and
making sure everybody
understands what's going on so I
just throw that out there and
then the next thing and I'll
just I know we're out of time is
just a little tiny thing and
it's a grammar thing for me on
page five the **** on page
fourteen shouldn't that be an on
line fourteen on page I should
that be in order and not an end.
Because it shall be
representative on the board that
have expertise in one or more of
the following areas so to match
that it should be in for.
I just grammar I think you're
correct so do you want to make a
motion so I I make a motion on
page five line fourteen to
change the end to work.
Thank thank you this is accepted
of is that thank you is the
motion is that anybody opposes
motion.
Okay with that the motion is
passes and do I hear motion or
anymore questions comments.
Where motion Madam moved to
pass.
Your second on the amended a
second on the.
The on the on the some of the
steps to make again mended.
So the motion was to pass a
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
sixty nine has amended.
What thank you would call the
roll.
Research about this yes Senator
that goes excuse Center have
with yes Senate Bill yes Senator
both yes from States.
Senator also yes there's a
little bit yes.
Alright yes.
With with a vote to seven to one
you have a do pass thank you
madam chair and I in open all
changes since we expect another
iteration of before I.
Thank you very much thank you to
my experts.
Okay with that this committee is
adjourned.
Go with.
