And as I mentioned of to Senator
Campos on the floor this is his
morning.
To knock out quite a few bills I
hope so Senator Campos why don't
you proceed and I understand you
have an amendment but why don't
you go head start.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the the subcommittee
and eventually the full
committee before you have a
Senate bill one seventy six and
this immense the a second
community ditch infrastructure
fund it adds disaster response
recovery and hazard mitigation
to the purpose of the fund as
well as language providing for
the use of the fund for state
and federal matching cost share
requirements it also provides
that use of the fund shall not
require a local cost share and
it increases the recurring
appropriation from the
irrigation works construction
fund from two point five million
to five million dollars if I may
madam chair members of the the
subcommittee as we move forward
I have to do we have enough to
the committee five people.
I thank you so you're on the
full committee that we are
unable I appreciate that very
much of Madam chair so that's
that's good to hear in terms of
the amendment at this point I'm
not prepared to go ahead and
present that I would like to at
least start the discussion and
then if it looks like the
amendment itself would be
something that will be necessary
then of course we can we can
make that that that proposal if
I if I may please so also with
us is a co sponsor and this is
center how to me who will be
joining me now along with the
following Garcia who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico Seki Association and if I
may madam chair allow center how
to be able to make a court
statement that like and senator
would you please use the
microphone to the people on the
webcast can here madam chair I
got a wide you by using this
microphone I sometimes start
thinking.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee when we started
thinking about the fire and what
happened in northern New Mexico.
People like Paula Garcia to my
immediate right reference to the
mail in and the executive as
family as someone they grew up
with their entire life I thank
you as and about and that was
their generations before they
came who their family looked at
and when the executives were
devastated by the fire and the
debris that came down.
It was a devastation to north
any US who know that water is V.
that not just the other day but
with with the gentleman Mr
something wrong from what I
County who talked about needing
to take care of a secular is and
what it means to definitely know
the landscape of northern New
Mexico if you dig too deep the
water seepage that will happen
if you dig too wide the water
that will be lost this disaster
fund will ensure that New
Mexicans who understand the
effective community who
understand the landscape and
what it means to keep it will
ensure that money comes in to
help people fix the effective
they have been devastated
because we need to insure that
water continues to flow into our
valley and continue to provide
for we have life thank you madam
chair thank you and miss Garcia.
Thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
my name is Paula Garcia and I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico sic Association and I
live I live in mode off I was
one of the people one of the
families that was impacted by
the hermit's peak calf canyon
fire and the impact on our
communities has been
devastating.
It threatens the survival and
the future of us I guess and
these are the kids that have
been in our family for
generations and because of the
fire and the subsequent flights
these are sick as are
inoperable.
They are full of silt of Madam
ash debris and the they will not
float this spring and and that's
endangering a whole way of life
it's been in our valley for
hundreds of years.
What we're attempting to do with
this legislation is to have a
disaster response system that's
more available and accessible to
as a guest because there is an
existing frontier at the
Interstate Stream Commission
that has been supporting us that
gets for decades and there are
other disaster programs but this
fund is uniquely tailor twelve
seconds there's people who work
at the Interstate Stream
Commission with specific
expertise and experience in
working with the second so this
is just an attempt to insure
that when there is a disaster
that there is a source of
funding that's available
relatively quickly for debris
removal and also for a long term
rebuilding and rehabilitation
there's it also just supports a
sec is generally with
infrastructure there's a a
growing interest in our
communities in terms of
revitalizing and rehabilitating
are sick yes there's been an
increase in the demand for
infrastructure dollars as
evidenced by the number of us
sick is asking for capital
outlay for this program actually
provides for not just
infrastructure dollars but
planning design and construction
and and getting back to the
disaster
Recovery urgency.
the Interstate Stream Commission
played a very productive and and
collaborative and positive role
in this recent disaster in that
they were able to mobilize
experts quickly to do damage
assessments and that was
critical to a sick kids who were
using those cost estimates to
apply for for for resources and
so that work has has been under
way this bill just seeks to
formalize that in the purpose of
the fund and to increase the
amount of funding that's
available to a second through
the frontier it also seeks to
clarify that there's no local
cost share required for a second
and madam chair and members of
the committee thanks for
questions and madam chair if I
may just very quickly with the
seven hundred plus a second is
in in our state as we move
forward to things that always
come to mind number one in terms
of the cost here but many of
these organizations do not have
the resources available in order
to go ahead and find that so
that's one of the reasons why
we're hoping to move forward
with the very straight forward
appropriation request the second
issue that we're still
continuing to contemplate deals
with should these resources go
to the Interstate Stream
Commission or directly to the
office of the state engineer and
so within that I hope that the
the communication as we move
forward will help us to clarify
some of that the other issue as
we work on the oversight water
crisis subcommittee and Senate
finance we've had excellent
meetings and bringing people
together so I anticipate that if
this bill was to make its way
out of this committee it would
be one of the points if you will
for us to have those just
discussions in order for us to
better utilize and to effectuate
if you will positive change in
terms of how we're going to deal
with the results of the wild
fires and the floods and insect.
Lee how we move forward we start
talking about are more most
precious resource water when we
talk about the canal is in the
second set and those type of
things as we move forward so
that madam chair of were
available for questions.
Thank you at this point of we
are on Senate bill one seventy
six for the audience and Senator
Gallegos that that's too much of
front of you was that over
and.
We're I'm now turning this
meeting over to Senator Sedillo
Lopez to run in the event that I
get called for my other bills so
Senator.
All right so maybe we see how
many supporters there are in the
room.
Are there any opponents.
Okay and on you Senator says
supporters or opponents above
these are all supporters if you
let me know how many you want to
call okay.
We have such a big schedule in
such a short time do you mind if
we only have three supporters
and one on soon madam chair
it's your prerogative in with
that we're available and ready
to go and work with you on your
schedule if you would select the
supporters who are in the room
thank you madam chair and.
Okay thank you.
Thanks for.
And the cops.
And it's supported need to come
in the middle of the room and
they need to use the Mike so
that the people on soon can hear
that.
madam chair Jonathan Martinez is
here for their seats in
commission and we have Joe
enjoys from the rocky mountain
farmers union and so we from
conservation voters perfect.
For the but schools.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jonathan Martinez I am the
second program manager with the
New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission.
and generally we're here to
support the bill with a couple
of cav yachts we do have a
couple of concerns first being
The zero cost share for the
local entities our only concern
with that is for one of our
concerns is we feel that by
having some local cost share
with the local communities that
that we tend to see that they're
more engaged in the overall
project in the process of of
having a project completed for
them we are not oppose though to
having a zero local cost share
requirement for any of the
disaster response and recovery
efforts we know that in times
when when we have wildfires like
we just experienced what this
last year there's there's tons
of hardship and so therefore you
know we're not opposed to it
there but on the construction
side we are somewhat opposed we
do have just for your
information as well as a low
interest loan program where we
can help the acequia spread that
burden out over time it's
typically up ten year period at
a two and a half percent annual
interest where they make an
annual payment back to the
agency so that can help with
that culture Byrd and again we
we we recognize the need for
some share and and we're not
opposed to even having a lesser
cost sure but there should be
something at least our opinion
and the other concern that we
have is just the hit on the
irrigation works construction
fund this dot does increase the
amount of money provided to a
secular as it doubles it from
two and a half million to five
million and we're just a little
concerned with the
sustainability of that fund with
that increased
Hit on it and other than that
there is one
just for all your all your
information is there is one
Appropriation in the executive
recommendation of our pool funds
for five million dollars to the
irrigation are to be a second
committee did its infrastructure
fund as well so with that I
stand for any other questions
just to clarify that our
profession that has already been
appropriated or is it available
for appropriations.
Up Madam chair of that's just in
the in the governor's
Representative executive
recommendation for in this
year's budget recommendations
for appropriation think that is
correct thank you.
The.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Gillian
Joyce I am the government
relations relations
representative for rocky
mountain farmers union we stand
in support of this bill
our a sec yes Representative the
only opportunity for the
continuation of agriculture in
areas of our state where there
are few agricultural wells or
wells off of which agricultural
products can be sold those areas
are not going to get any other
form of irrigation other than
these executives and many of
these executives that are being
impacted by the disasters we've
seen they look like they haven't
been dug out in fifty years they
have so much sediment in them
our second as are struggling so
much from so many angles to
maintain these traditional ways
of life at this eight ecosystem
services they provide and the
economic benefit they provide to
our rural communities we must
prioritize ensuring that we have
these your addition waters
available to our producers who
are often hanging on by a thread
for generations to come thank
you so much for this opportunity
to speak thank you Mr with.
Madam chair members of.
Committee Arthur Romero on from
home and.
I'm here to represent a couple
of seconds for sure but
certainly all ones up in our
area
I think the bullets are pretty
well stated in this this
synopsis and the handout I'd
like to speak briefly about we
have no money in our sector
funds our current our our
secular secular schooling us has
twelve hundred dollars in from
fees that we collect from
members we really need help on
cleaning these things out
getting as much as we can done
with the recovery of the
flooding is what our biggest
issue is because of the fires
everything's down hill we all
understand that
Hopefully you guys are in a
position to can assist people
that are in this situation I
will only echo the need and.
The explanation has been given
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Romero and let's go
to the today's them and let's
ask Mr Jose Lopez to speak.
Yes this is closely on Google
Lopez I represent the estate
Justice of the Sunday of the
bill.
Are you.
I have the support of this bill
and in reference to what Mr
Jonathan Martinez from all
your fifteen commission this
can.
Maybe for us that
Or in the construction phase not
due to disaster.
Maybe in that case of have a
sliding scale since we have to
provide the latest bank
statement.
Or will we submitted application
I think that one might the.
That my work with us on a
sliding scale but I do support
this bill it is thank you need
to thank you.
Thank you Mr Lopez I just want
to make sure there's no
opponents either online or in
the room.
Okay with that I'll turn it over
to the committee and I have
Mister guy of Senator Gallegos.
And chair sure appreciate this
is a are both centers
Going back in time I had a
second Colorado headwaters came
from New Mexico and I'm trying
to understand because I
understand
measure of metal from home and
were born actually there for one
day but we would pay dues into
the second to do repairs I
understood
during the fires that the
federal come out I've got a
cousin was affected and three
differentials that was getting
hundreds of thousands of dollars
for repairs are the feds not
have insurance center
come forward at the money or
these matching funds to get
their side.
So if I may madam chair and of
course Senator Gallegos a couple
of things before we move into
more the explanation number one
with the Committee substitute or
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
yesterday in H. FC as we heard
the bill part of what we're
dealing with directly are issues
as an example with FEMA and
along with that with the state
of these resources were to be
made available how do we ensure
that those individuals that are
going to be applying for the
resources if you will would be
validated so on on that front
yes there could be resources
available but at the same time
as we move forward what we're
also dealing with and that's the
reason for if you will the quick
application for resources is
that in southern Colorado as we
continue to go and see the snow
caps we're preparing if you will
for a majority of the snow
capped of melt and then from
there of course the water that's
going to be hitting areas
specific as an example to Holman
where they had roads washed out
where they had other issues that
that occurred so within that the
quick answer would be yes there
could be additional resources
available but again we're trying
to make all the resources
available for the long term
because it's gonna take more
than the resources that we have
available in order to go ahead
and clean out our sick as and if
I may Center Madam chair Senator
Gallegos is defer again to
Pollock or see a for further
explanation please.
Thank you madam chair and
senator guy it goes that's an
excellent question there are
when there's a federal disaster
FEMA does come in and a second
are eligible for the
public assistance program they
can submit a request for public
assistance and that they can
receive assistance for debris
removal which is category a or
for permanent work which is kind
of greasy
where there's not a federal
disaster.
There's no payment and so I'll
give you a couple of examples of
what this looks like there's a
list of.
With the kids from the current
Pico canyon fire and another
list from the black fire and in
the black fire there's no
federal FEMA no federal
assistance so that's a gap in
disaster response
so it's it's really important
for there to be a robust state
based response and disasters you
also have department of homeland
security emergency management
and in in a disaster they they
you can ask for disaster
assistance through their because
the governor will doing
executive order that makes
available seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars per county
Our estimate of the damages and
and grant and a dongle County
alone is almost three million
dollars so that the executive
order way of going through DHS
CM will not suffice also that
program has a seventy five
twenty five culture in most
federal disasters where FEMA
does come in except for H. P. C.
C. permits because canyon
because it was started by the
federal government and the
taking responsibility that the
federal government's covering a
hundred percent but it is
typical federal disaster it's
seventy five twenty five so
there's a need for a state cost
share and and this program is
well positioned to provide that
culture to those existing
disaster programs the other
thing is that yes yes because of
the limited capacity third not
able to mobilize quickly to get
those cost estimates needed to
apply for disaster assistance
one of the good things that that
there's a Stream Commission did
recently through Jonathan
Martinez is that they use their
their funds that they had
allocated to the agency to get
a consulting firm that could go
into assessments in the field
and get cut cost estimates and
those cost estimates are with
those the sickest are doing now
to do there what it called to a
request for disaster assistance
RDA through DHS him and in fact
next week we're doing a whole
workshop down in Memphis to help
those a second spill out that
paperwork so it's a it's a it's
a puzzle that's a kiss and in
need of different types of
resources because this is an
existing frontier and their cell
phones we're we're Mr Martinez
has some discretion to respond
quickly then you know is able to
deploy those resources to get
into the community and do damage
assessments the other thing is
that the Interstate Stream
Commission recently
approved another pot of money
from I. S. C. to
to.
Help with the debris removal one
of the challenges with using
FEMA or even DHS CM if it's
federal or state disaster is
that the entity has to pay up
front this is what SB six
addresses but in absence of SB
six and any other type of
disaster we anticipate funding
get reimbursed if if I see has
flexibility they're able to use
the resources to get in and do
that through the work up front
so what we're looking for is is
responsiveness to the unique
needs of a second as well as
flexibility for the agency to be
able to
work and in a way that's most
most a beneficial to this I
guess in the time frame that
that's that's needed for the
emergency and madam chair thank
you very much madam chair
Senator Gallegos and full
disclosure we had three
emergency declarations that were
approved by the governor for the
the amount of up to two million
two hundred fifty thousand and
within that that was to help us
with our water purification
system there in in the Las Vegas
area so as we continue to seek
resources again there are other
resources available but at the
same time so many of these sick
as do not have the initial
resources in order if you will
to to match the second part of
that is we need the resources
available at all levels given
the nature of emergencies and
other issues that we deal with
when they were starting to have
the water issues that continue
to approach us thank you very
much chair.
You madam chair and senator
Paula and I appreciate that of
no going backward we paid our
dues just to have the more loan
to clean up not not the room
right off the run off heard our
head Cajun and plugged up the
whole system and thank you
bridge the the banks and you
have a whole lot of other issues
I was gonna ask madam chair in
center and all of so deacon the
lord for more more is causing
his daughter's has moved to Las
Vegas she's turning point on it
and she's litigating and I'm
wondering just thinking home
peak of.
Our our things and I I
understand that you have have
the up front money to get some
of the stuff started are things
that bad yet you to talk about
not just a second the homes of
been there for centuries there
there's a lot of infrastructure
this con you think about the
fences that were all cedar post
on the.
Because you live this on the
federal side are they doing
anything in a rapid response or
is everything waiting on this
bill to be able to find the
money to get started.
And madam chair Senator Gallegos
if I can defer to a miss Garcia
please madam chair and senator
guy goes yeah that's that's a
very good question and
So.
You know this bill will help
address the disasters that are
that have happened in twenty
twenty two.
But it's also contemplating
future disasters because
well you know our side of the
mountain burned tragically other
mountains are going to burn to
in other villages other
communities even Santa fe's very
much at risk of of catastrophic
wildfire and so it sort of
taking the the current short
term you and the long view but
to respond to a question about
the claims process
that's very specific to the
hermits because canyon again and
it's related to the federal
responsibility and
individuals are injured persons
it could be an individual local
government business or you know
and the second creating as a
local government
can file a claim and of that
claims process is under way
It would take
it would take what we're being
told according to the the
interim rule which we haven't
seen the final really at is that
once a claim is accepted by the
claims office it would take a
hundred and eighty days to pay
it out
a lot of a second are going
through the FEMA process about
forty to have submitted
Rick our PA's
the interim will had some
interesting language that said
if if if if the if the entity
it's been my eligible for public
assistance that they wouldn't be
able to make the same claim for
the permits pick have caning
claims office and we took issue
with that we try to
urged the claims office not to
go that route because we what we
agree that they shouldn't be
paid twice for the same work but
they should be eligible for both
but the the the they can there's
really two things there's a
urgency of short term
disapproval and then there's
long term permanent work and the
debris removal is is what's
really critical and it's what
has to happen within a matter of
weeks or months to get the water
flowing again if the water
doesn't flow
that means people are in a
position where that solar cattle
they're not growing Hey and so
there is the the debris removal
time frame is much shorter so
you know FEMA public assistance
And the HPCC claims process are
not well suited to that timeline
needed for the debris removal
however there is one effort
right now with them DOT I just
sees engagement with the HSE M.
to get deal T. to come in and
help of the debris removal and
then D. O. T. will get
reimbursed by FEMA so they're
taking on that difficult role
for the a second so there's some
creative things happening
but what I understand from
talking to our I think it's in
the Grant County area that the
three agencies DHS CM D. O. T.
in icy are working together to
cover the cost of their to
remove all.
Madam chair center and Polish up
I know I keep track Colorado's
snowpack and were above the five
year average so this first run
all is going to determine what
this second look like for the
next twenty years morning madam
chair in center could be
appropriate for the conservation
committee to send a letter to
our of federal delegation asking
them to
work with payment to get it as
soon as possible because Ron's
not gonna wait scissors weather
changes it's going to come in
then as all that depreciates
ahead again they'll take out a
full head Kate there's nothing
to stop him because it's not
permanent there there into the
director of metal there but if
you get enough to bring enough
water force behind it it'll take
about what I've seen that in in
Colorado where we had our
advocate Mexico it again but so
I'm just wondering if it would
be good as a conservation
committee for us to be able to
send target allegations okay we
need to help not later we need
it now and fill it just on those
things I think you're gonna get
to the point after the first run
off if we're not prepared it can
take years to route respond over
personal Senator why don't you
work with the chair on on that
letter and then we'll move on
and address this bill would on
the potential of that letter and
the she decides madam chair I
think that senator we could work
on a letter together but until
that one bill passes we can't
put anything on our letterhead.
Okay.
Madam chair of yield and thank
you.
Senator centers all over the
past years second by second.
Secretary will cover please.
Yes Centers want this is.
Senator Gallegos.
Center happen give Centerville
yes pope yes Senator committee
is centers also yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes session
funding yes.
Okay on a vote of eight to zero
you have a do pass where does it
go from here.
Okay.
Thank you nine thank you very
much madam chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you very much center how to me
for your your support is with.
Okay Senator Campos you're
staying there with the water
protection permanent fund just
B. one ninety five thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee
in essence Senate bill one
ninety five
would add a new section creating
two new funds in the state
treasury the water protection
permanent fund and water
protection fund to be
administered by the Interstate
Stream Commission and disbursed
by the department of finance and
administration in essence madam
chair and members of the
committee what you have before
you and as we continue to hear
the
conversations occurring in terms
of all of the buckets of
resources available for us to
address the major issues across
the state in essence what this
would do is it would appropriate
hundred fifty million from the
general fund to the water
protection permanent fund to be
invested by the state investment
officer and of course there the
dates and and other information
that's available to be invested
if you will
at a four point seven five
percent right over five year
average and from that of the at
at that time the resources that
become available then would be
available for us to start to
address if you will issues like
dam repair our water
infrastructure improvement
process and more importantly as
we do move forward if everything
works out in the agreement is
agreed to with the lower Rio
Grande water project that within
that these resources and would
be applied over a long period of
time to address the dire need
that we have when I bring up
just a couple of points as we
move forward when we talk about
dams irrigation infrastructure
what we have done is neglected
our water system overall in the
state.
And in that that's very hard
statement to make but in dealing
directly with that particularly
is ideal with our dams and the
work that is necessary there we
have literally dozens of dams
that are at high risk and what
does that do it presents life
safety issues to the people of
the state of New Mexico it
insurers if you will that we
reap as we try to replenish if
you will aquifer's that we're
not able to do that in in the
best way possible but with these
resources over a period of time.
It creates and purpose of
perpetuates if you will
resources that would be
available to address this issue
instead of as we deal with some
of these projects possibly
indicate this year we're gonna
appropriate ten million dollars
but yet overall we have eight to
ten billion dollars worth of
needs that have to address this
this is minuscule it's not the
right way to go and I repeat as
we move forward with this fund
would do was would be providing
us additional resources in order
for us to alleviate and address
the dire need that we have when
it comes to water preservation
water effective use and most
importantly of what the future
water is going to be for New
Mexico so that madam chair
members of the committee
available for questions.
Senator I have to amendments
here would you do you want to
introduce imminent want somebody
to introduce with that I I I I
don't have any amendments are
they are they prepared for my
signature scent yes they are
they're both facing each of okay
so then within that and I really
apologize because I don't I
don't have copies of those
amendments.
Thank you.
Well the well the Senator is
looking at the amendments how
many supporters we have never.
Do we have any opponents.
Online to have the support.
Could you pass.
Would you like to introduce
amendments a way to.
Nine I'm prepared then madam
chair members of the committee
in essence on
let's say for example amendment
which would consider amendment
one it would be to number point
two two five zero zero eight
point one in essence so what
this does is it also answer it's
including for eligible projects
located on lands of an Indian
nation tribe or pueblo so that
in essence is what this
particular amendment would do it
and I consider that to going to
be a friendly amendment okay so
I move the amendment what one
ninety five for discussion do we
have any discussion.
Okay do we have any opposition
to the amendment.
With that the amendment is
Is accepted.
and then the second amendment
Senator so thank you very much
madam chair members of the of
the full committee in essence
what this does it basically
clarifies land grant permanent
funds meaning the permanent
school funded status article
twelve of the constitution other
permanent funds derived from
land grants or confirmed to the
state by the act of Congress but
anyway this is an act to enable
the people to New Mexico to form
a constitution state government
to be admitted into the union
the point with this particular
amendment what this does is it
includes the water protection
permanent fund in the permanent
funds invested by the state
investment council and along
with that that's to ensure that
there are additional resources
that would be invested and
generated for this particular
project or if you will this
initiative was someone up to
someone wish to a committee
member wish to remove the
amendment.
K. senator Neville do we have a
discussion on the amendment.
It doesn't Senator.
The phone is.
Madam chair Senator Hemphill
you're correct.
Do we have any opposition to the
amendment.
Okay with that both of your
members are accepted
Let's let's move on to the
supporters of the bill there
were well.
Mr engineer would you like to
speak and then wells were
supported that would like to
speak.
Okay with that will Mr engineer.
This.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Mike Hammond New
Mexico state engineer and I rise
and full support of this bill.
Of our dam safety bureau in the
senator's office has identified
over seventy.
Dams throughout the state that
are owned by public entities
that have some degree of
deficiency in the two hundred
plus million dollar range many
of them I would say the top
fifteen or so on that list are
in serious condition needing
spill replacements and a number
of other issues that we really
need to address over you know
the next decade or so the other
living problem is a number of
these NRCS flood control dams
have been constructed throughout
the state that are in the
district where our field of
sentiment and we're originally
designed to protect agricultural
lands but due to a steady growth
in the counties that and and and
I would call it minimalism ink
consideration for the location
of subdivisions these dams are
now expected to protect homes
and property and life and
they're not designed for that so
we need to address those as well
I I know some of them are being
looked at in the lower Grande
area right now as a means to
capture and re charge storm
water for re use and and route
and recharging the aquifer in
that area as part of the overall
plan to address water issues and
and the lower ground as well so
it's got a lot of benefits to
move forward and and manage
these facilities and a proactive
and and very of well designed
manner so on that madam chair I
I fully support this thank you
thank you engineer haven't with
no opponents all go ahead and
turn it over to committee and I
have Senator souls.
Thank you madam chair and just a
very quick question this has
seven million dollars very
easily eight million eight
million is that enough to do all
of this work it's expensive
replacing spill ways and Ms all
across the state this seems too
small.
Madam chair and Senator sos
you're you're correct in your
spot on this is definitely not
enough.
As we deal with the failing
infrastructure that we have
across the state of New Mexico
the intent of this fund is to go
ahead and create resources that
will help us in a very stable
way to continue to put those
resources so we can better plan
and address the failing
infrastructure that we have
across the state again just
madam chair Senator souls you're
correct it's gonna take hundreds
of millions of dollars if not it
billions in order for us to
rectify correct and if you will
improve our entire water system
in the state so with that madam
chair I'm ready for additional
questions
just just a clarification on on
page three.
Line eight hundred fifty.
Will be confused by the
question.
All right below that is madam
chair is eight million so so it
is to the eight million under
fifty years the hundred fifty
inside of the million the the
hundred fifty incorporates the
eight million.
So just to be clear to the
probation for hundred fifty
million the The appropriation is
four hundred fifty million but
within that that is to go and go
into the fund to start to
generate if you will the
investment in the interest in
order for us to have resources
then for the long term in order
to go ahead and spend on our
infrastructure.
So that's the non reverting and
then the eight million is
reverting funds just to clarify
thank you.
Okay thank you Mr.
Any other questions for the
committee.
Yes.
Dr second okay the question.
Yes Senator about this Senator
you know we've already seen.
We've already seen the that's
built like this the session
everybody's coming in creating
funds I'm hoping that at some
point and madam chair we can
maybe get a charter table of all
the funds that we're creating
this committees approved and all
the financing we're putting into
all of its in center Wirth had a
number of these as well to work
on all kinds of different things
were put in different names on
all of them and I'm just kind of
curious with the big picture
looks like we put all the pieces
of the puzzle together and and
how that they don't have
overlapping or conflicting
purposes so Senator because some
so madam chair Senator about
this I really appreciate the
question so with the Senate
finance subcommittee on the
water crisis issues as we deal
and go forward what we have been
doing is meeting directly with
many of the stakeholders the
agencies that deal directly with
this including the office of the
state engineer Department of
Environment EMNRD and others and
with that what we have already
done is come together with the
matrix in order for us to
identify those bills that are in
other committees that have been
heard and then from there we
want to ensure that we're
eliminating any duplication in
those efforts I would be more
than happy to go ahead and bring
of the entire context of what
we're dealing with with that
oversight committee to this full
committee at some point so we
can share with you in terms of
what we're dealing with when it
comes to water infrastructure
and if you will the ongoing work
that has been taking place a
with the fifty year water master
plan along with the task force
that is continue to deal with
the water efforts and then from
there if you will all of the
bills that have come forward
from regionalization all the way
if you will to dealing directly
with the entities so within that
that would be the offer that I
would make to at this point
again madam chair Senators serve
on this point well made what we
want to do is to ensure we don't
duplicate and that we have a
full come.
Context in terms of the water
issues and the severity of what
the issues are that we're
dealing with thank you madam
chair thank you Senator Campos
we have a motion for two passed
by senator bill two years
second.
Katie a second by Senator called
Hamblen.
Madam secretary will call the
roll Senator spot this yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator happened yes Senate
Bill.
Senator pope.
Yes.
The committee excuse Senator so
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
font yes.
It.
Eight.
The okay on a on a vote of eight
to zero you have a do pass on
your amended bill thank you very
much madam chair and again I'm
extending that
issue if you will as we move
forward if you ever have time
and you would like to go ahead
and see the full context of what
we're dealing with with the
water crisis subcommittee I'd be
more than happy to come bring
the experts with us so that
you'll be able to take a look at
is what centers of on this is us
for what the issues are out
there and how we're dealing
directly with them thank you
madam chair.
Thank you that that is a great
idea and I know Madam will take
it very seriously look to see
whether we have the time so
Senator Campos now we're on your
bill Senate bill two thirty
nine.
So thank you very much madam
chair members of the
conservation committee as we
move forward Senate bill two
thirty nine proposes amending
sections of seventy two dash
fourteen NMSA nineteen seventy
eight Interstate Stream
Commission protection of
interstate streams to create a
new a sector bureau within the
Interstate Stream Commission and
in essence madam chair members
of the committee that's what
this bill does with me is all
the Garcia who is the CEO or if
you will the executive director
of the second so ciation for New
Mexico if I may madam chair
allow her to make a brief
comment in terms of what this
bill does Senator we all we have
an amendment I don't know if you
care to.
In the bill first Madam chair in
again I I at this point would
indicate that not to consider
the amendment I would like to go
and wait and see what the
discussion brings and then from
there if it doesn't if this bill
is allowed to continue we'll
have that discussion again what
we're trying to do is to bring
together all the pieces but it
deals with water and for funds
would go how the agencies work
together so in that these are
all pieces for discussion as we
move forward if it's allowed to
continue thank.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
thank you for the opportunity to
make some remarks Senate bill
two thirty nine is would create
a second bureau within the
Interstate Stream Commission is
built upon a longstanding
programs at the Interstate
Stream Commission that's been
there for decades it would
simply formalizes so that when
we advocate for additional
funding for staff to to build
capacity in the agency that
there's a clear place for that
funding to go mainly for to
ensure that there's dedicated
staffing for the program so it's
it's a it's a simple purpose
and it also appropriates three
hundred thousand dollars to
speak to serve the purpose of of
the bureau and all stand for
questions madam chair.
Do we have any supporters of the
bill yet in the audience.
Do we have any opponents.
So what if we can have a couple
of supporters and then see if we
have couple people online as
well and again in the interest
of time just a couple of support
please.
Thank you
madam chairwoman members of the
committee thank you for yet
another opportunity to address
you again Julie enjoys Rocky
Mount farmers you
long before I had heard any
rumor of this bill being run I
had heard from various members
of a second commissions in
northern New Mexico that
accessing funding out of this
particular fund was a particular
burden for our acequia
communities our secular so
interesting and that they are
political subdivisions of the
state that are wrong primarily
by volunteers there's very
little capacity at the level of
the second
to chase around funds and the
challenge we have here is that
there is both lack of capacity
at the level of our secular and
lack of capacity at the level of
the Interstate Stream Commission
and so are just sick yet
commissioners and leadership who
often have full time jobs
outside of their work for their
second as and often have full
time jobs in industries that
would not lead them to be
particularly good at chasing
around state funding are
burdened with chasing around
this funding and so developing
this bureau will
take a dramatic burden off of
our US ikea's and allow this
fund to work far more
efficiently than it currently
does thank you for this
opportunity thank you Mr Joyce
engineer Hamit.
Madam chair members the
committee Mike Hammond New
Mexico state engineer.
we up we support the intent to
support the building of of a of
a team within the Interstate
Stream Commission that has the
full capacity to address the the
needs of the LESC is with all
that we've heard so far this
morning that we're dealing with
in terms of the horrible of
you know catastrophic damages
that are occurring and and the
of north central part of the
state down as well as in the
southwest part of the state as a
result of the of the fires all
of these things need a lot of
attention we have three staff
persons of with the lead by Mr
Jonathan Martinez of the acequia
work team within the Interstate
Stream Commission we are in the
process of advertising for two
more positions there so what
constitutes a bureau I would I
would propose that and also I
would say that
and you know and an
organizational approaches we did
we generally bring programs
forward to the legislature for
re organizational purposes
within an agency however it's a
it's a notch down below which
would be within the purview of
the of the agency to to develop
of the the Burke bureau itself
so the the idea of being we we
we we like the idea of the
bureau I just I just of of
neutral on whether it needs
legislation to create the bureau
because we we can do it
ourselves what I'm more
interested in is the support for
building the capacity within the
US secular a team that we
already have and are starting to
slowly build but the work is
immense so we have a hundred
seventy five different contracts
it under Jonathan's preview
right now and it's just growing
over time so with that madam
chair us stand for any questions
the the committee may have.
And there have been is three
hundred would you consider three
hundred thousand dollars a
bureau or it's sufficient
funding to help you build up.
Madam chair of the the the
number again I miss that the
number of the appropriation of
this bill three hundred thousand
dollars.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee I I think three
hundred thousand would would
that significant additions in
addition to the two staff that
we're building that's roughly
about maybe three three
positions
Depending on what you use those
funds for and the and the
position type but we certainly
think that's a.
Rogue you know moving in the
right direction I I think
ultimately that that bureau
could need probably ten to
twelve positions to really to
really be supportive of the
communities but it but also
continue to make the pitch that.
City developments in the local
areas to be more self sufficient
would be also helpful when you
look at things into tally so
let.
Thank you engineer Hammond
Let's go ahead of Senator let's
go ahead and take one personal
money.
The let's go with the Amy
Gonzalez.
Which is available ms Gonzalez.
Yes my name is Amy Gonzales I'm
madam madam chair and Committee
I am secretary of the acequia
Debehogne level not Intel's
County and I am in support of
this bill I am we are trying to
of funding a the two hundred
thousand dollar project here to
replace a critical pipeline and
you know we it's going through
the process
it's very complicated and I'm a
very over educated farmer
who is struggling with all of
the funding mechanisms and ways
to best
apply for these funds and the
Interstate Stream Commission in
New Mexico the acequia
association have been incredibly
helpful but they need help on if
they need help to help us to be
able to move the process forward
it's taking us at least two
years to get this funding and
I'm afraid we won't be you know
when there's a timing
restriction because you can only
do the construction
when we're not using the water
so it's a very delicate balance
and
Again I really feel as though
Jonathan and his crew needs and
support us so I'm not chasing
them around as as has been said
before.
Thank you Mr zealous
So we Steinborn and again I just
want to confirm no opposition.
With that will move it to the
committee committee members.
Every time one of them washes up
expressions of the side of the
hill or whatever it's always a
big obstacle to try to figure
out how to get some more some
money to fix it capital outlay
is one they always come to us
and we don't have an efforts not
gonna be timely so I think this
would be a great thing to first
put in place to to help those
community ditches to resolve
some.
Very serious issues that
happened very quickly thank you
senator Senator bill.
Thank you madam chair I of
mine's more of just a comment I
think that and I appreciate the
the sponsor for bringing this
bill and just all of all of the
work that you're doing to help
our sick is around the the the
state
you know it's.
We have to continue doing this
and I appreciate your diligence
and I appreciate all the work
that the acequia association and
all of the folks who are really
trying to manage our crops and
our water and so with that if
there are no other comments
madam chair I would like to move
a do pass.
All right madam secretary will
you call the roll I I just
actually just have one comment
and that is whether or not this
bill ultimately makes it to the
end I hope that the state
engineers office and the
Interstate Stream Stream
Commission make this happen
madam secretary Center savant
this yes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senneville
yes Senator total yes thanks
committee excuse Centers souls
yes center city office yes
Representative box is excuse.
Okay was seven to zero you have
to pass.
Thank you very much madam madam
chair members of the committee
just a an insurance this is for
the entire state so as we deal
whether it be the north to the
south this is going to be that
we're going to be able to
provide this everywhere that
that that we can in New Mexico
thank you very much madam chair
Senator Campos this is Senator
Campos date conservation
so now a with as B. two fifty
four.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Campos is on a roll out a just
let him keep at it but
this is these are the kind of
bills are very popular but this
is a bill that in very simple
terms raises the fees that are
charged for all the various
licenses for hunting fishing and
so forth and stayed out of state
I don't know there's a there's a
in the analysis that tells with
the averages are and so forth
but the bottom line is is that
the gamefish Department does not
operate on the general fund like
the from most agencies do they
operate their enterprise agency
they operate based on their game
and fish licenses and we still
demand that they raise their
salaries whenever we raise all
the other state employee
salaries with we they have to
pay for the insurance when that
goes up all of those things pick
up trucks used to cost thirty
thousand other fifty or sixty
thousand all those costs go up
and unfortunately we to allow
them to continue to operate
these dollars go and what's
their operating budget name of
that off and we have director
Sloan with this and first I'll
defer to my co sponsor Senator
Campos for any comments and
we'll let the directors but
thank you madam chair we really
appreciate that members of the
committee and of course Center
develop as we do move forward
the last time that we had fee
increases about seventeen years
ago in two thousand six the
issue that I bring forward and
that I brought forward at that
time as we were pursuing this is
that in order for us to continue
to deal directly with the
conservation issues in New
Mexico with game and fish and
although if you will the
increasing complexities of
climate change in the way things
have have evolved it's incumbent
upon all of us that we continue
to expand not only our efforts
but to ensure that you Mexico
continues to be as pristine as
possible because people do come
to New Mexico the land of
enchantment for if you will
hunting and fishing but more
importantly for the
enjoyment if you will of our
natural landscapes and so with
that madam chair members of the
committee would like to do is to
defer to our expert Mike Sloan
who is the director of the New
Mexico game and fish department.
Director slow madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for here are bill today I'd
like to begin by thanking the
sponsors Senator renewable and
Campos for recognizing the
critical need.
For hunting and fishing license
fee increase to ensure the
continued support of New
Mexico's wildlife
as the senator said we haven't
had a fee increase since two
thousand six R. the game
protection fund we've made
prudent financial decisions flat
budgets deferring maintenance
State staging
capital projects to extend the
life of the fund but we're now
at that point where we really
needed an increase to be able to
continue to do the good work
that we're doing.
In short the the the bill raises
resident fees an average of
seven point eight one dollars.
It leaves eleven of the twenty
seven license types for
residents unchanged and a
maximum increase of about twenty
five dollars for nonresidents
there's an average increase of
eighty dollars and forty five
cents.
Six of the twenty licenses
remain unchanged and there's a
maximum increase for non
residents of two hundred twenty
five dollars also importantly it
adds a provision that
individuals on snap for that
receive snap benefits can
receive a twenty five percent
discount on their license type.
The proposed increases would
align New Mexico's fees with the
average cost of licenses in the
west so we're not a detriment to
people applying to who would
just aligned with the rest of
the west.
We anticipate that the that the
increase would allow us to
continue another ten years
without the need to request an
additional fee increase.
A couple of important things to
note is that it does not change
any of the military discounts
other discounts that are in
statute elsewhere.
it's also important to
understand it and you may hear
some to the contrary today
that this is really the only
funding source for all wildlife
in New Mexico as we talked about
last week yes the department
works on deer and elk in bass
and trout but we also work on
Amos mountain salamanders
long billed curlew Rio Grande
job and a wide diversity of of
wildlife and this Senator Campos
pointed out it's we're not just
hunting and fishing organization
we do do wildlife conservation
across the state for the poll.
Suite of species and our fourth
most of our state without it
stand for any questions.
Thank you do we have any
supporters of in in the room of
this bill.
Thank you do we have any
opponents.
we do have one opponent
Online so if we could take up to
supporters if in the room.
I don't know if you missed a
Senators if you would like to
see or if they just want to do
first come first served.
Matt madam chair and again we're
gonna go ahead and first come
first serve those individuals
that are there let them decide
who would that two individuals
will be.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chair
Members of the committee my name
is Brandon when I'm from
Albuquerque I'm here just as a
citizen New Mexico I'm not a
lobbyist or anything like that
I'd have been paid to advocate
for
but wildlife and conservation
issues in New Mexico and how
they affect New Mexicans so this
bill is it's critical this bill
has to pass in some form
it's been seventeen years since
we've increase the the licensees
in New Mexico and so I I I
apologize that I'm coming late
to the game but we never saw
this bill was introduced into
the legislature so we had had a
chance to really have an input
so here I am
so how to get the punch line
first what I like to see this
bill to correct what I think are
some deficiencies is an increase
of the non resident game hunting
license fee from eighty five
dollars this proposed two
hundred thirty dollars that
would generate from not
residents so out of state money
that flows in the state which is
an economic planners dream
right.
maybe ten million dollars with
the federal match every year
that's a hundred million dollars
over a ten year life of this
bill which is the expectation.
So.
the the reason I'd like to see
that is because of that big
deficiency in this bill is that
the non resident license fees
most of them barely cover
inflation so it's a discount to
the last time we raised the
seventeen years ago we're gonna
run that out for another ten
years.
And you know they say there's no
free lunch but there is free
money.
And that comes not as it headers
the demand from nonresidential
is very elastic and that's
evidenced by the willing to pay
five to twenty thousand dollars
to hunt elk in New Mexico right
so that's a private revenue and
that's great you know it's good
to the committee but why
wouldn't the state capture some
of this free money and put it to
the Department of gin and fish
for the next ten years I think
it's really a critical thing
that should be done and I
apologize to Sanchez for
bringing this up at a later date
I hope I justified why did it so
late I didn't didn't get chance
before thank you I really
appreciate it thank you Mr when.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Kerry Romero
executive director and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico council about fighters
and guides we do stand in
support of this bill I also have
permission to stand in support
for the Audubon society The New
Mexico wildlife federation and
trout unlimited
The department budget has not
had a fee increase in over
seventeen years and it's it's
clear that they have a
legitimate need for additional
revenue we also appreciate the
department taking the time to
reach out to us during the
drafting process to negotiate
the increase to non resident
hunters and anglers and the the
non resident license fee
increases in this bill remain
within the average of license
costs to all of our surrounding
states and across the west and
so we are content with the
license fee increase and we urge
your support thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr Romero do we have
any opponents in the room.
Can we have two opponents online
it will ask them to speak
briefly since the that's all we
have the first is Mr Kevin
Bixby.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kevin Bixby and executive
director of wildlife for all in
Los crucis and we oppose this
bill we understand that there's
a need to raise license fees and
and I am an occasional hunter I
get that but the reason why we
oppose this bill is because we
have been trying for a number of
years now to modernize wildlife
management in New Mexico and our
frankly our game and fish
department is stuck in a time
warp a hundred years in the
making it could suspend ninety
percent ninety nine percent of
its revenues and resources on of
managing and and eight eight of
of a subset of animals in New
Mexico for the benefit of
funding and hunters and anglers
and and there's a lot of species
that are being neglected New
Mexico is one of the most bio
diverse states in the country
and yet the one state agency
that we have those responsible
for protecting that that that
heritage is not doing its job
it's it's in part because the
legislature has not given the
department the authority to
manage all species in New Mexico
or the the mandate to do so so
we oppose this bill without also
attaching it to modernization to
expand the mission and the
authority of the game department
to manage all species as a
public trust on behalf of all
New Mexicans.
Thank you Mr Miss Mister Smith.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Chris Smith I'm here on
behalf of WildEarth guardians
and are thousands of supporters
and members across the state I'm
also an avid angler since I
first got on to the rate because
as a kid we oppose this bill as
well we support well funded
agencies and in fact wish that
the department was funded
through the general fund and we
do recognize that license fees
lag behind inflation however we
don't want more money going to
an agency that has largely been
unresponsive to the broad Mexico
Public who cares about all
wildlife species reports to a
commission that suffers
dysfunction and hasn't had a
full roster for several years
suffered a fairly skating
performance evaluation from the
legislative finance committee in
twenty twenty and consistently
opposes any legislative efforts
to modernize their focus scope
and structure if the
department's showed an openness
to fixing some of these problems
are to be pretty different is
the agency supported some of the
widely popular and common sense
reforms proposed the legislation
by all means we would want you
to take care of them but year
after year that just doesn't
happen and more money is likely
going to make this agency less
accountable to the legislature
and the people of New Mexico
hired to do not pass and I urge
you to bring this concept back
with broader reforms it will be
well supported thank you thank
you Mr Smith with that let's
turn to the committee.
Senator souls.
Thank you madam think of.
Did I reading here that this
would raise approximately ten
million dollars of additional
revenue a year is that correct
chair of the that's right.
I'll defer to the experts.
And madam chair and and the
directors loan what with that
extra money be used for why is
it needed.
Madam chair Senator as the
senators noted we're barely
keeping up with inflation and
the cost of vehicles and that
sort of stuff so there's clearly
ongoing operational needs but as
well as continuing to do those
larger capital projects thinning
forests improving watersheds
stream habitat enhancements
introduction of species
Native species
As we've continued to do over
time to manage a species keep
prevent listing of species under
the Endangered Species Act those
sorts of things.
Madam chair and and director.
I understand why a hundred
percent or I should say a
hundred percent the majority of
your funding comes from license
fees and stuff from hunters and
users with some federal is that
correct.
Madam chair Senator that's
correct we we will operate under
user pays everyone benefits
scenario.
So madam chair none of the money
comes out of the state general
fund is that accurate.
Madam chair Senator that's
correct.
The madam chair but the mission
from what I understand do do do
some things that are outside of
funding for just game and fish
the general habitat for species
that are non game fish it right
the budget the public in
general.
Madam chair Senator that's
correct under the wildlife
conservation act we have
authority for wildlife that is
deemed imperilled either
threatened or endangered and to
study and work to enhance those
populations as well as even a
deer or an elk for us trout
habitat project budget all
wildlife and when we design
those projects we keep all of
those whether it's opinion J. or
Rio Grande job in mind as we're
trying to design a project to
benefit all of us.
The madam chair and and director
the six to ten million dollars
is it just spent on game and
fish species but more wildly
wildly widely for for all for
many species if not all species
and habitat.
That accurate.
Madam chair Senator that's
absolutely correct that thank
you madam chair.
Senator Gallegos.
Madam chair centering US
as consecutive
just my real broad question is
as you receive these monies and
changes how does that affect
salaries for your individuals in
Lee County we only have one and
I don't know how broad is areas
in Mexico City County but young
man works himself to death and
I'm just wondering you know we
gave raises to teachers last
year and I just don't know where
you're department is can pay
scale wise and would this
benefit them try to help and
catch up Madam chair Senators
Madam chair Senator we were
fortunate last year that the
legislature gave significant
raises on top of that we had
built raises into our budget
which again the legislature put
through
In addition to all of that peace
officers in particular they did
a study and were moved into a
separate classification that
also increase their pay so our
officers fortunately at this
point are quite competitive with
surrounding states this money
will help us continue that and
as senator Neville pointed out
if we get another four percent
or so this year in the
legislative increase that goes
to our employees as well.
Madam chair Senators I like the
idea of what you've done to not
had an increase in so many years
but being able to keep the.
The operation in and check in to
do with what you can with what
you have so I appreciate that
because I know that a rural New
Mexico you guys really wants
there to protect our our our
animals the end it doesn't
matter if it's water power L.
produce here we don't have
helped in our area but it's just
one of those things some guys
are out there patrolling twenty
four seven so without all of you
thank you okay Senator is about
this thank you the of.
The yes what a bit ago was with
the building increases you're
expecting an additional ten
million dollars in revenue but
then you're adding the
additional language.
That would I write a column two
of twenty five percent on all do
what res all license fees for
residents and family members of
residents involve a
participating in snap so there's
gonna be a corresponding
reduction in revenue for all
fees that's why this read so
what's the reduction and all
fees going to be based on your
projections of the participating
so that residents madam chair
senator we estimate that to be
about a million dollars but I
believe that ten million dollars
is assumes that one million is
already come off the top.
And I'm I'm a little.
Kind of just curious how that
language came into this and I
was what's the idea behind that
and I'll just tell you the the
definition of who's going to
qualify residents and family
members of residents to
participate in the snap program
so
It's a little bit having trouble
understand with that how that
works with that means services
residents who participate snap
would be eligible for twenty
five per column family members
of residents who participate in
snap so like it might.
Cousin is in snap do I get a
twenty five percent discount on
my fees.
Madam chair Senator that's a
good question
in our discussions with HSD what
we learned is that every
individual
that's in a family say it in a
household is listed in their
database and so our system would
check that database for the
individual so if there is a a
mother a father and a child each
of them would be listed in that
would hit against that database
if they're not in that database
they would not be eligible for
the the.
Discount.
What what I appreciate that
explanation that's not when the
bill you those are just as
residents and family members of
residents so I don't I don't
know how you guys provide me and
know where your bill due to
provide was a family member
residents so again back to my
example of my cousin is
participating in the snap
program I'm a family member of
that so that participants would
I get a twenty five percent
discount and how did you how do
you factor in the scope of that
disco.
Madam chair Senator I I believe
it also says as qualified by the
rules of the commission I have
to look exactly what the
languages I think we could
clarify that there
alternatively
you could just read resident
individuals and that might
clarify the language if that was
something that senators are
interested in yeah because you
could be a family member of a
resident participates in snap
and not even be a resident New
Mexico right so you that it's
edges it's very ambiguous there
you do have language and there's
as after qualifying with the
department but then say with the
department's going to do to make
that determination qualification
that that that language with the
goal there is a pretty ambiguous
from my perspective so thank you
madam chair.
Senator do you have a suggested
fix.
Madam chair
Two two points I guess I would
suggest is is one is that the
database that HSD has that we
would head against only contains
residents so there's there's not
a possibility for non resident
family member to be included and
then second a defer to the the
senator Sanchez whether that
removing the and family members
would be something they would
find acceptable the manager.
I think we go to finance from
here is that right.
Let's talk afterwards if we
could Senator madam chair and if
you have some we can think some
language you might consider
amendment just for clarifying
with finance if that would be
acceptable we can get the brains
of stirs to if we need to
madam chair that assumes you're
gonna getting out of the
committee for starters number
one and number two of the the
other thing too is again here he
repeatedly said well we're going
to rely on another agencies
database to determine who would
qualify here and there's nothing
in this language that draws that
tie which you know how you how
you're going to do that so those
those just be my concerns along
the way madam chair but anyway
I've I've covered my questions
with thank you thank you centers
about this I I would think that
removing and family members of
residents would clarify I don't
know if you want to do that here
or or wait to see if you get out
of committee into it
for those were.
the simple amendment.
Because my understanding if
they're in the snap database and
our residents they would qualify
and you would have that
indicated.
Okay
I'm I move an amendment to the
bill online fifteen.
Page four removed and family
members of residents.
To where discussion on the
amendment.
Do I hear opposition to the
amendment.
Okay you've you've got an
amendment any further discussion
on the bill Senator Gallegos for
certain and then chair and just
trying find out madam chair
Senators in the F. R. talks
about the
The conflicts duplication with
companion bills so it's HB one
nine seven Senate bill nine and
Senate bill seventy two if you
guys assess those and see how it
works with three against your
bill Madam.
I have not chair I don't know if
the department has or not.
Madam chair senator I believe H.
B. one ninety seven is free
fishing days which we have
looked at and don't believe
would have a significant impact
Senate bill nine is the legacy
fund which would generate in its
current form two point seven
million dollars annually for
five years so it's not a long
term funding source so we
obviously need a long term
funding source and what was the
other bill Senate bill seventy
two.
Because of the transportation
DOT right and so that's that's
specific for wildlife corridors
and wildlife passage over roads
would be a benefit to wildlife
and New Mexicans and wouldn't
help us with our operations okay
I just want clarification on
that so madam chair I yield.
Okay Senator are madam chair
coming in late
Just one question looking at the
nonresident licenses and I see
you're raising them up how do we
look as far as parity with kind
of our surrounding states I
guess and and how did you come
up with that amount.
you madam chair Senator
If you get your FIR there's some
analysis in their.
the director can speak up the
top of his head rather than me
reading it the team I can tell
you what to percentages were and
in line roughly with our
surrounding states is it is a
simple answer if you're more
specific dollars all of the
directors address that.
Madam chair etcetera that that's
exactly right we looked at the
average of the western states
looking at Arizona Colorado Utah
Montana Wyoming Idaho Nevada to
try and make it so that we were
comparable to the states and
what we did in fact do that I
can run through some license
types but on on that we took the
west the average of the west and
tried to get approximately close
that you know some are a little
bit higher summer a little bit
lower but but on average it's
read about the western half.
Thank you madam chair thank
thank you Center pope with no
more discussion madam secretary
will you call the roll.
I believe
we haven't gotten a motion okay
over the past month sorry
do I hear second OK a motion for
do passed by Senator pope a
second by Senator souls.
As amended thank you now would
you call the roll.
Center spot this no.
Santo Domingo's.
Senator Hamblen explained a
vote.
Senate Bill yes.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator street is is excuse
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes and
Senators devices also excuse.
Okay and the.
Senator Hamblen to explain her
vote thank you madam chair and
thank you Sanchez for bringing
this I do agree that fees need
to increase and that the
department needs to be supported
however I also do see that there
needs to be some support for
this department to modernize
Census started to ask addressing
the needs that some of the
opponents have brought forward
so I do commend you on the
passing of that that was just my
concern.
Thank you with a vote of five to
to to get you received do pass
thank you very much chair
members of the Senate
conservation committee we really
appreciate your intelligence
this morning thank you.
Okay with that we have forestry
division procurement exemption
Senate bill two oh six the
template and cream.
Madam chair and committee thank
you very much Senate bill two oh
six provides an exemption from
the procurement code for
contracts entered into by the
forestry division of the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department I'll just continue to
refer to it as EMNRD from this
point on otherwise we'll be
going way into twelve o'clock
this is to allow them to
distribute federal grants to non
governmental entities and
individuals selected by the
federal government for programs
relating to forestry.
Madam chair and committee this
bill helps remove some of the
restrictions because of the
procurement co that are
hindering the efficacy of EMNRD
of the many areas that entered
overseas this bill would allow
them to spend monies on
contracts for maintenance of
grounds and facilities at
highway rest stops purchase of
books periodicals and training
materials for access to the
public purchase of livestock at
auction contracts with
businesses public school
transportation services and much
more but more importantly what
this bill will do is allow EMNRD
to distribute federal grants to
non governmental entities and
individuals selected through an
application process for programs
for wildfire prevention or
protection urban forestry forest
and watershed restoration and
protection reforestation or
economic development projects to
advance the use of trees and
wood biomass for hazardous fuel
reduction very much madam chair
and committee there are groups
there are nonprofit groups that
are available throughout the
state that can do some of the
work that this division cannot
do at the moment because the
capacity and so this basically
removes the handcuffs that are
on EMNRD right now to work with
other groups and agencies that
have the capacity to do the work
that EMNRD cannot do right now
my experts are Laura McCarthy
who is the force division
director of EMNRD and we also
have Dylan the from I've been
tell me don't you if you if you
to thank you one make sure I get
your name right names are
important whose general counsel
from EMNRD and I look forward to
the discussion madam chair.
Thank you are you gonna have
your experts speak yes if you
want the money sent a few words
for madam chair and senator.
I'm going to do two things in
really refer marks explain why
this is needed and to give you
an example of the problem this
will solve.
Under the procurement code the
forestry division is the fiscal
agency for a suite of federal
grant programs authorized at US
department of agriculture and
department of interior many of
them are farm bill programs that
name non governmental
organizations as eligible
applicants at the previous
funding levels it didn't really
matter that New Mexico non
governmental organizations we're
missing out on small six figure
grants but that changed with the
twenty twenty two wildfire
season and with the bipartisan
infrastructure law and inflation
reduction act because now there
is one billion dollars in
community wildfire Defense
grants available across the
country and four hundred and
fifty million in landscape scale
restoration projects for
underserved landowners these are
big dollars that could come to
New Mexico for wildfire risk
reduction and NGO capacity is
needed to fully capture the
opportunities the simple all
given the is the community
wildfire Defense grant program
the notice of the funding
opportunity came out in July
twenty twenty two when everyone
was busy after the wildfires and
dealing with the post fire
flooding these were grants of up
to ten million dollars each and
despite that busyness there were
twenty two applications from New
Mexico totaling forty one
million dollars six of the
applicants were non governmental
organizations in late fall the
Feds ran their competitive
process they have yet to
announce their awards but it's
coming soon if Senate bill two
oh six does not pass and the NGO
proposals are selected through
the federal competition.
We will then have to conduct a
state procurement to pass them
the funds even though we know we
will know who the feds have
already selected it's a
duplicate of process and itself
could be a violation of the code
because we will already know who
the funds need to go to in
conclusion madam chair and
members Senate bill two oh six
is a reasonable exception
applying only when there is a
federal competitive process that
can be a substitute for the
state competitive procurement.
That's true.
Thank you how do we have
supporters in the audience.
Do we have any opponents.
We have supporters or opponents.
So we have to support is online
I just have a clarifying
question before we begin and
that is when I read both the FIR
and in our committee analysis
about the AG's analysis
it's saying that it may not be
necessary because federal law
would would apply in these
circumstances I always ask
myself what is the purpose of
the bill would be trying to
accomplish and I want to
understand why it's necessary.
If
if federal law already applies
to these competitions so I I
would like clarification before
we take public comment madam
chair committee there have been
conversations with the state
AG's office that this McCarthy's
been able to have and I would
like to leverage us that up
madam chair and senators the
attorney general's the staff who
reviewed the FIR has withdrawn
her concerns after.
The general counsel and I
briefed her on the intent she
realized that she made an error
in a raising that because and if
you want at an expo a detailed
explanation we can get that from
the general counsel as to why
she withdrew her concerns.
Okay if you explained it was a
two step process the federal and
then the state correct okay I
think that satisfies me
think that so let's go ahead and
get to supporters please.
Yes.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm Camilla I am in
the director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club and
we stand in support of this
legislation and thank the
sponsors and the agency I think
as they've well said but all
repeat this would be only for
contract where NGOs were
selected and funded by the USDA
and deal why through their
processes for certain programs
that actually specify that
nonprofits or NGOs are eligible
participants so this would
include things like rural fire
defense community wildfire
prevention and protection urban
and community forestry forest
and watershed restoration and
protection and perhaps most
importantly right now
reforestation thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr chairman one more.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts we stand
in strong support of
legislation.
Thank you and I apologize to the
people online but in the
interest of time since we have
no opponents I think I'll just
move it to the committee.
Senator.
Just to clarify.
We had a constitutional
amendment and I'll call on our
attorney for and on the other
side of their if you could fill
in that that addressed something
along this line that passes
understand we're we could make
some kind of direct payments to.
Non government entities can
somebody refresh my memory on
how that works with that applies
here.
The survey which I think and
think what you're talking about
the senator was the
constitutional amendment was
passed in the last election
cycle which expanded the
exemptions to the.
At a donation Clause right
that's it that's it because
that's what I see this as being
in conflict with.
Madam chair I don't see the
conflict after that but but did
I do see where you see there's a
relationship they do have some
some parallel that's just trying
to clarify and understand how
this fits with the.
Noncompete clause and so forth
right madam chair and senator
dilution go ahead from EMNRD to
address that question so this
targeted amendment madam chair
that's Senator deals with a
unique situation where we are
tasked with building the fiscal
agent so we have to pass the
money out the door we have to
administer compliance with the
grants and other things like
that under the procurement code
unless there's an exemption the
state has to follow the
procurement code for any
distribution of funds
obviously for distributing
federal funds we can follow the
traps of federal law the unique
posture we find ourselves in
here is the feds have already
done the selection it's not
here's a pool of grant money you
decide how it's administered and
then you need to pass it out as
the fiscal agent and so that's
why the constitutional amendment
which broadens how state money
can be spent those are first
obviously restrictions on state
money don't apply to federal
funds broadens it out and.
but does not affect this unique
situation where we are being
asked to distribute money to
specific people
in a specific way under a
specific program and this
precludes us from having to
either pre procure those groups
or run a sort of and one is a
farce of a procurement but just
sort of we're gonna run a
procurement process where
someone's there because this is
also not a situation where a
sole source contract is
appropriate so we find ourselves
trying ourselves and not and
that's why we wanted this
targeted amendment if that makes
sense and I understand that our
object what you're trying to do
I'm just trying to understand
how with this all fits in law
and I thought we had addresses
maybe on some other.
Situation years passed I don't
know if
Or maybe is proposed we didn't
do it under active recall.
we this this specific situation
had not addressed it because
again we're not in the anti
donation clause phase this is
really about how the state
agencies are required to
distribute money in the process
and traps they're supposed to
follow through so this is really
sort of a complimentary I would
describe as a complementary
change to both take advantage of
federal funds that are coming
smooth the operations over that
I think will work well side by
side with expanded scope of work
that can be done with the anti
donation clause exemption so in
EMNRD's mind this is just one
piece in the what one piece in a
broader puzzle to move these yes
I guess I was thinking we had
are some out what this trio once
before in some form or fashion
and my memory is not good for
you.
Had
Allowed agencies to.
Track the federal procurement
process.
So madam chair in public policy
from Alaska specifically to the
terrace Senator yes we can
follow stricter federal
requirements to the extent they
are inconsistent with the
procurement code if we're
distributing the money and for
the forestry division it EMNRD
already does this and other
grant programs where we are
given just a pot of money and
saying here's how you
distributed in here the general
rules of the program that has
been addressed and when the
attorney general's office looked
at it they were thinking about
it in that perspective what we
clarified with the reviewer is
the added wrinkle here is the
feds aren't giving us a pot they
are telling us you need to give
this money to Senator Gallegos
not conscious Senator but just
as an example you need to give
it to him for this project and
that's where this is a departure
under what we've done in the
procurement code in the past you
are correct the legislature did
correct that initial issue of
agencies can defer to stricter
federal requirements when doing
a procurement this is not that
situation this is it's already
been selected okay my advanced
age please forgive me for that
I'm trying to understand how
this fits together thank you
madam chair thank you and that
actually helps explain even
further that comes confusion of
the AG's office any other
comments or questions.
By the committee okay do I hear
motion.
I move it to pass chair do I
hear second.
LESC.
Thank you with with a motion by
Senator pope in the second by
Senator Neville madam secretary
will call the roll yes I yes
yes.
It goes.
Senator happen yes Centerville
yes.
Senator pope yes thanks
committee excuse Senators souls
yes Senate bill okay yes yes a
phonics test.
Senator Griggs would you like to
explain your vote madam chair
and senator up in I've done a
lot of procurement of for
construction and my fear was
This Is sidestep I wish the AG's
office not that I don't believe
bill which here to stand
explained there
Mr chairman I my personal belief
is Mr chair Senators they should
have been able to clarify that
for me in their present so
that's the only reason I hope
this goes forward that they will
stand up and change the F. I. R.
and clear up some details
because I think it up being that
it is the AG's office I think
they owe to you and us to be
able to explain that so madam
chair you thank you absolutely
madam chair and senator of what
we are in the process of making
sure that there's a no official
statement from them but there
have been a lot of conversations
on that and on behalf of my co
sponsor Senator Woods thank you
very much for for your
consideration in the
conversations today thank you
got a seven to one to pass.
Okay the next one is the plastic
waste reduction act Senate bill
two forty three.
On.
the quite definition how what do
you think it's quick bill.
Okay.
I apologize senator Steinborn
that's actually next on the
agenda.
Thank you very much.
Center and.
If you could do it quickly I
will do we will we will go as
quickly as possible chair.
Madam chair and committee thank
you very much for this
opportunity to speak here what
we're doing with this bill is to
make it easier for rescues our
rescues to have first right of
refusal for animals that have
been secured for forces it's
defining equine a little bit
more clearly this is for
domesticated of US forces or
equine want to make that clear
and this is an opportunity for
rescues which we have in Los
crucis and throughout the state
to be able to have access to
these animals before they go
back into the auction system and
perhaps back to the unfortunate
conditions in which they were
rescued or removed from and I do
have Jessica Johnson from animal
protection voters and also and
I'm sorry I I my script is
somewhere else and so that Sean
Davis Sean Davis thank you very
much here and to answer any
questions and so I open it up
for discussion okay do we have
any supporters in the audience.
Do we have any opponents.
Do we have anybody online.
Okay if you don't mind if we do
that just a very quick minute of
support please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Susan have early I'm the
executive director of the our
shelter and I'm also the chair
of co chair of the New Mexico
equine rescue alliance we are in
support of this bill the
definitions do need updating but
most importantly.
To I have no idea that.
Sorry most importantly really it
is the disposition of animals
that have been seized or found
we feel strongly as rescues that
they are best served going into
a licensed rescue in New Mexico
that has the know how the
expertise we have veterinarians
on call we can safely re feet
these horses when they're
severely emaciated it can take
up to six months to really get
the sources back in shape we
train them and then they are
made available to the public for
adoption at a nominal fee so we
really hope you will support
this bill to help support these
horses going to good homes
instead of potentially down the
path
that is not as.
Beneficial to them thank you
Emily
with no opposition will take it
to the committee.
Senator Gallegos and chair just
a question the lady those yes
provide brought up the care the
six months is that
charge back to the original
owner I hate hello questions
been on all my life Senator
Senator there's a large cost in
six months of being care it's a
huge cost to someone and I'm
just wondering if it were my
animal and you had to pick it up
would that not be my
responsibility back to the
organization madam chair
committee and so had left when
my experts either one I think of
both qualified to answer that
question.
Madam chair of the Senator
gaggles thank you that's a great
question so The New Mexico
livestock board deals with two
two types of forces ones are
ones that are abandoned that we
never really provide an owner
for and the others are the seas
the court order seizures those
costs for that six month
rehabilitation our our after the
owners have the the court for
our process has determined that
the owners are no longer the
owner so the rescues bear that
cost there themselves and that's
one of the reasons you've hit on
here apply this bill needs to
needs to be passed because that
cost belongs to those shelters
those rehabilitation facilities
and they bear that and so they
don't need the extra added cost
that would come with having to
purchase the animal on the onset
and so it's really good really
good Dr thank you Sir thank you
for that madam chair center of
this long time ago I lived in
Denver and I had a newspaper out
on horseback
because I value our we have
ranch Colorado we bring then and
now but I just pre should
because it's one those things
I've seen given horses tied that
it died in the back years ago
they're trying to get rid of
because of cost to feed they
take about middle of nowhere
just time to the post so I
appreciate what you have to and
that only thank you.
Thank you.
Any other comments.
Centers of on this so I'm trying
to read the notice provision so
I'm looking at section seven on
page eleven of the.
The.
By the
And equine is
is taken into custody that the
there's a notice that's given
and and I'm trying to find out
where where the bill does it
talk about how that notices to
be done.
Madam chairman and Senator want
this I move ahead Liz shunted to
the question.
Madam chair Senators about this
again it it's not clearly noted
in the bill as you pointed out
but we do have a process we we
post the astray notices or
impound notices of anything that
we've put our hands on it to
Mexico last act board on our
website you can go to that
website right now and see the
animals that we have impounded
or are there those for that
we've strayed and those notices
run for thirty days on our
website
we also post those notices with
the New Mexico stop an magazine
through an agreement with them.
Yeah here's the trick so then if
you look at all the new language
you're adding on page thirteen.
Of.
There there's time limitations
right and you've got throughout
this bill five days after five
days then you all are in a
position to do a number of
things which is to
Purchase essentially acquire
ownership of the of the equine
right within five days but if
you look at
if you look at page thirteen
line sixteen it says that that
right.
Right FINS five days after the
last publication of notice but
then if you look on page twelve
line seven business a within
five days of the last
publication notices five days
after publication of the notice
so when you just said you know
you're publishing your notice by
a website publication so I think
this is gonna be penned down
pretty carefully because it's
that I date
that really triggers the
transfer of ownership really
right now it's a the owner of
the of the horse I'm excuse
workforce.
Never gonna feel composite
equine to me it's just of course
but as an example if the if the.
Department takes the position of
our and puts it on its website
you said it publishes it for
thirty days but according this
language the rate of the owner
to that animal is transferred
after five days ago is the
language on page twelve read
that right says administrative
is and that is an equine the
notice shall give a description
and shell state when we're is
invalid and should give notice
it unless it's claimed by the
legal owner within five days of
publication the rescue or
treatment or retirement facility
shall be given the right to
first refusal to purchase so you
know again that that triggering
becomes pretty important at five
days and and I'm confused why
one Y. one place the new
language would be five days
after publication of the other
language says five days after
the last publication that
suggests to me that would be
multiple different publications
that is a is that the clear what
I'm what I'm confused by that
miss madam chair members of the
committee of Senator thank you
for pointing that out that is a
discrepancy at that think that
we might have missed and and I
think that does need to be fixed
of the the process has always
been and it still is in in our
dealing with these animals it's
five days after the after we
posted so we pick up our roaming
the streets of somewhere or if
they were in the country and as
soon as we pick up that our we
take pictures of it we posted on
that day at the end of the five
day period that animal is deemed
a straight and that is win the
bid process is closed and the
rescue has first right to
refusal after that so I think
you have noted something that
probably we've missed thank you
I'm would you like to to roll it
over and fix it would you like
to fix it on the way we can be
sure madam chair and and
etcetera we can go ahead and fix
that before it hits the next
committee if that's its schedule
the judiciary.
It is our the state so.
Never mind madam chair will take
care with their okay.
All right of.
We thought madam secretary will
you call the roll with their
motion we haven't had a motion
thank you keep doing that
Do we hear a motion to hear
motion.
I'm of a pass rusher Senator
pope of with a do pass Senator
souls with the second.
Now madam secretary we call the
roll Senator Montez just center
K. goes this point Senator have
one yes Centerville yes Senator
pope.
Yes yes yes yes Senator souls
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
font yes.
So we're gonna go ahead and
start with that sort of thing
eight two zero you get to pass
thank you.
I want that as the two forty
three.
Requested by reduction act.
Committee members you do.
Take a morning madam chair madam
chairs and great to be with you
this morning on a issue that
deal that plagues plagues our
environment and that is what to
do about plastic waste this is a
bill to take a first step in
that by dealing with the lowest
hanging fruit which is single
use plastic backs and this is a
bill that would do as several
cities in New Mexico forty done
nine other states have already
done and that is to eliminate
the use of single use plastic
bags from retail outlets.
We could still acquire them on
their own and instead require
paperbacks.
which biodegrade very soon and
plastic we know never really
about it gracefully and ends up
in our environment and never
really gets recycled into
building littered on highways
and I could go on and on of the
bill would save about five
hundred million tax a year from
going into New Mexico's
environment and roadways so it's
it's a lot of bang for the Buck
and with that happy to stand for
any questions I'm I'm joined by
Sarah Pierpont is executive
director of the New Mexico so I
can pollution I would just say
colleagues I just looked at all
the other state laws I could
find this buff Bill synthesizes
them also look at the existing
municipal ordinances in New
Mexico it kind of has the best
of all of them but it's there's
no it's it's not onerous is not
penalty happy it's really about
this creating the shaft and
doing it in the simplest way
possible so that happy to stand
for questions.
We have the support of the
number.
We have any opponents.
For the supporters.
By Juli ana and Laurie.
For.
It is the other.
What's going.
Real brief madam chair this is
on okay.
Thank you appreciate madam chair
and members of the committee
thank you for your service and
my name is Juliana Santa I'm the
program director every unity
resources where Santa Fe based
organization focused on closed
loop value based way solutions
we've been collecting food waste
from schools and restaurants
since twenty fourteen for
composting and we presently
divert almost two million pounds
of food waste from our landfill
annually notably since we've
been doing this since twenty
fourteen before the City of
Santa fe's plastic bag ban I can
attest that we've seen a
dramatic improvement in the
cleanliness of our waste stream
of food waste as well as the
cleanliness of our facility in
terms of plastic litter blowing
in the wind etcetera so this is
had a dramatic positive impact
on our on our facility and
business and I stand in strong
support of the plastic waste
reduction act both in my
professional role and as a
citizen and mother thank you.
Just keep pressing the button.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Laurie
center I'm from Albuquerque New
Mexico and I am the co founder
of the plastic.
Reduction team of New Mexico and
I am also chair of the zero
waste team of the Rio Grande
Sierra Club central group and as
member of the zero waste team I
lead tours to different
facilities I recently led a tour
to the bar co recycling center
in Albuquerque
with our nine other people it
was of quite an eye opener
on the conveyor belt sick go buy
it one hundred twenty five feet
per minute that's two feet per
second I and others in the tour
saw several plastic bags go by
every second
even though they are not
supposed supposedly allowed in
the blue bins so but they're
still tossed into the blue bins
this means that the workers have
to pick them out by hand is
slows down their operation it
clogs up the machinery they have
to stop it in order to unclog it
so it causes of you know a lot
of expense for the recycling
facility those are just the ones
that they.
Collect.
And you know that the only five
percent of the bags are
collected the rest of them are
blowing in the wind getting
caught and fences are clogging
up our streams and the state
kia's and the cost seeing as
they break down into
microplastics and Anil plastics
a lot of health concerns for
people they these bags have
toxic chemicals in them
endocrine disruptors that can
cause a number of health issues
including obesity diabetes some
cancers
and besides that they also
contain
some of the ended of such as P.
I just.
Which are bio accumulate in
organisms and people.
Including us you know that so we
really have to get rid of these
plastic bags this is so easy to
do to use reusable bags or.
Paperbacks thank you thank you.
It that's one more.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today I'm
Tammy people Carmen Albuquerque
city councilor and I'm here
speaking in favor of this bill
on behalf of the vast majority
of my constituents that support
a prohibition on single use
plastics we had just a
prohibition in Albuquerque for
short time and I can tell you in
addition to all the benefits
that other folks have talked
about the two that really struck
me was within just a few weeks
of the implementation of that
prohibition when I took my dog
for my afternoon walks there
were fewer plastic bags.
Blowing across the street hung
up in trees in our parks you'd
see less storm water intakes
that were that were completely
stopped up by plastic bags and
then if you walked over to the
Rio Grande you would see that
the water was flowing and much
more smoothly because there was
not dramatic amounts of plastic
bags holding that up the other
benefit I saw from that process
in Albuquerque was the
involvement of young people in
the political process young
people understand that single
use plastics are not needed they
understand that this is an easy
step to take to get us to where
we have to be in terms of of
plastic use in our society and
one of the most heartbreaking
things I've ever had happen to
me as an elected official was
when a young person came up to
me after said the City of
Albuquerque roll that back and
said but I thought that
government was supposed to do
good and I want to and I know
that they can not here today
because there of course and
school but I want them to know
that government can do good this
bill is that opportunity for
government to do good thank you
and happy support the bill thank
you counselor
We now have somebody online in
opposition to the bill the
person's name is Cheryl Cheryl
would you introduce yourself and
state your opposition to the
bill.
I'm sorry this is Cheryl are you
calling on me I would have my
hand up to comment on Senate
bill two seven one I'm in
opposition to Senate bill two
seven one yes yes what is your
name and state your opposition
to Senate vote okay yeah I mean
you don't.
Madam chair I'm sorry that is
the wrong bill you didn't to
allow public comment.
Okay so we did not hear
opposition to this bill so with
that I'll turn it over the
committee.
Chair of the past okay doing
your second Senator Gallegos
session.
Madam chairman and senator
I'm I guess I'm trying to
understand a lot of this so
regional purpose for the bags
going plastic was save the
forest do you guys have any
facts to show what your bill
would do to
the more efficient to our our
natural resources.
If I may
madam chair members of the
committee senator guy goes thank
you for that question
that the banks that would be
required in this
In this bill are forty percent
recycled content paper bags what
that means is it's creating a
market for all the paper
recycling so well and it's not
necessarily having to grow more
trees but it also supports local
business in our state in Pruitt
New Mexico we have McKinley
paper by a pal which is our only
and market for recyclables they
can take all that cardboard and
paper that we recycle turn it
back into a new cardboard box
for a paper bag within just a
few months employing hundreds of
residents in the grants New
Mexico area so paper bags are
definitely a more sustainable
solution for our state and also
the forestry industry is working
very very closely with Energy in
their water usage they've
reduced their water consumption
by nine percent compared to two
thousand five levels they reduce
their energy consumption by
twenty percent compared to two
thousand five levels so these
paper bags they come from trees
which were planted and are good
for our environment and then are
also very renewable and
reusable.
Madam chair and senator I guess
that was the ops a discussion on
the plastics came out so just
couple of the questions actually
on page four of the commanders
of the so
line seventeen item do of.
Just in reading this
I guess there's a little bit of
fear for myself that it's it's
For instance the twenty five
dollars on
line twenty twenty one sorry is
that a limit or will we be
increasing the violation cost.
Every year every five years I
just wonder if there's a
discussion about that and chair
Senator know it if you look at
line fifteen it says in an
amount not to exceed twenty five
dollars and that's the lowest
penalty you'll find anywhere and
any them you and any back bands
that exist so it's a that is set
in statute so there's no
escalator on that and they don't
have the ability to go beyond
that thank you for that
madam chair center in the same
area in DC do we have any kind
of
for administration to come up
with that.
procedure for the assessment how
are these counties and
municipalities going to be able
to do that or is that something
that will do here for they have
let Mr chair Senator we the the
local governments this is not
preempt local governments from
passing their own ordinances and
what this bill says is that well
and see on line eleven the
county Minnesota mate ordinance
I ordinance prescribe a penalty
for violation of the section
provided that if they do not the
department of the environment
may I may assess a penalty not
to exceed twenty five dollars.
Madam chair and senator I guess
that's my fear because I think
what we have it is going on the
NDP line twenty three the
department of environment shall
promulgate rules for
implementation provisions of
plastic waste reduction the way
I read this in the city or
county has something then the
department could change the
implementation just by rule is
that Mr chair madam chair and
senator is that correct well
madam chair center if you're
saying change implementation of
a county ordinance I'd is that
what you're asking because of
the same speed a county
ordinance I would say the pre
exemption of the ordinance if
the city or county has won a and
then the department could in
fact go in and change and I just
there's a fear that I have that
that might happen more often
than we realize.
No and in fact
madam chair center not only is
there not preemption of local
ordinance but there's deference
to local ordinance when it says
that online thirteen provided
that if they do not only then
shall the department have the
authority to to act.
So it's there's really deference
and it's up to local
jurisdiction if they want to get
involved in this issue or not
and if they don't it was
important that there be a state
entity who will ultimately
could.
Deal with that but on the
smallest penalty level it's
really not and that's they may
issue it they'll probably issue
a warning to probably give a
phone call so it's it's really
not about enforcement heavy it's
it's just about creating that
shift in purchasing.
Madam chair and senator I guess
my last comment.
In Lee County for I live usually
the badger right around the
Walmart area but on our highways
we have more problem with trash
bags are rolled out of the truck
with all intent of trash in
entirety of the wrapping
materials and tarps this bill
has nothing to do with that and
that would be my cleanup issue
in Lee County but I just wonder
if you have a.
A supplemental bill coming.
Well Mr chair Senator that's
what we call it the plastic
waste reduction act so that next
year you and I can build on top
of the plastic waste reduction
act the deal with other forms of
nuisance plastics you know other
states and they're looking at
all kinds of things plastic
straws containers this is the
first step for us.
Madam chair Sir just bit because
you brought that up I know
there's discussion in the ocean
and all that now
Just just thinking through that
how real is it since we don't
have a body of water
how big of a.
An issue do we have in New
Mexico being that it's just wind
compared to water I understand
like turtles will pull up in the
high multiple trials and stuff
like that I'm just wondering how
big this is looked happy on
Santa Fe in Albuquerque have you
guys had discussions from rural
New Mexico in terms of them
chair yes so I mean we have
fragile ecosystems here in New
Mexico and we have diverse eco
systems that include bodies of
water rivers some of the most
biodiverse rich areas in the
state and the healer on the boot
hill and other places and even
in the desert you know where I
live so I think science is just
starting to understand the
impacts in the fallacy of
plastics being able to truly
ever go away and they're finding
it when they do samples and
Representative ecosystems and
wildlife so I think it's it's
analyst probably where these
materials on land up and as we
heard a couple affect human
health it'll affect wildlife
ecology health so it's it's vast
impacts.
Thank you for that matter all
you.
Thank you madam chair money just
a very quick comment because one
of the things that I think you
know and and and this is not to
make light of the aroma bill but
I think you know when we are
looking at our state kite as a
plastic bag that's a problem you
know that because that is a
potential because we see this
all the time especially in March
in southern New Mexico you know
there are communities that have
attempted to put plastic bag
bans and and use and an
understanding that the
restaurant industry has concerns
about that as well and
appreciate the the efforts that
you've done I think ultimately
it's that we need to make it a
little bit easier for businesses
to go ahead and a common rate
this because they want to do
this it's just what can we do to
help remove the the costs that
they're experiencing so I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill I appreciate the
efforts to try and and address
these issues and I'm in full
support of this bill and
encourage you to pass it there's
no other conversation madam
chair.
Senator like the second on the
past.
Okay so motion and a second with
no more discussion will have the
secretary to call the roll
Senator Pontus.
Senator Gallegos one.
Senator have a yes.
Senate Bill yes Senator yes
Senator status excuse etcetera
so yes.
There is a deal okay yes Senator
fox yes.
Systems that.
Madam chair thank you Sir I
guess my whole thing is I I
don't like this feels like to me
a statewide mandate and I like
your currently Santa Fe Las
crucis Silvercity have their own
bands and I think that's the way
to go but I appreciate the
dialogue and discussion you got
and chair six two what.
Thank you Alex the discussion.
That.
That.
That.
