I would let's go to the webcast
cover.
We can make a.
Okay would you please take the
role.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Neville your Senator
poker president Senator
smitteez.
Senator so you're.
Senator Sedillo Lopez good
morning yes here canister
CENIC's yes.
We have a quorum thank you very
much good morning everyone we
are starting of today's meeting
with house bill forty one and
Representative Miguel Garcia is
with us it's to establish
certain land grants were said
this so Representative Garcia
please proceed.
Thank you madam chair and
we went on the as the leading us
to all of you on this fine
morning and madam chair
I do have some experts and I see
them on the screen the phone
number one the last four numbers
are seven three five
that is a Joseph idea he's one
of our leaders are partition
land grants I also see run or
thank god he's another of my
experts and then are correct to
that that was also an expert or
just for technical questions
Madam chair so we're all on
board and I'll go into the
presentation
the reason that these two
gentleman leaders of partition
land grants are on the phone
this because they live out in
kind of frontier communities
where the internet is very
spotty madam chair
Madam chair of the house bill
forty one.
includes new language and
chapter forty nine which our our
land grants statutes at eighteen
the final criteria of a
partitions and this thank grant
madam chair and house bill forty
one also adds qualifying
criteria and what constitutes a
partition land grants.
Madam chair these two elements
need to be objective of house
bill forty one which is
establishing partition land
grants as bonafide units of
government slash political
subdivisions of the state.
Madam chair in doing these in
doing this these partition land
grants joining.
twenty six centuries old sister
land grants in that undertaking
madam chair.
And this legislation Madam
applies only to six partition
land grants in our state.
These being.
Madam elkaar met which is south
of motor.
Lower dining us which is west of
Montezuma castle near hermit
speak.
No speaking less which is
between storytelling and Los
Vegas.
Senator Christine which is south
of Las Vegas some get only more
which is south of Las Vegas
Arroyo Hondo Reba north the
town's.
In the beautiful valley in route
to the Taos ski valley.
A ski resort.
And madam chair
I would now like to yield to
Joseph Padilla.
For a brief two minute
presentation on this and that
because of this legislation
go wrong or data after that and
then I'd like to come back and
make some concluding remarks on
our our presentation madam
chair.
Please.
Does the best one you can sell
madam chair.
There you go.
Request permission to speak yes
please.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Joseph by the.
I had to have been lost in this
for seventy three years I have
been a member of the Los this
partition grant for fifty three
years I have served on the Los
is partitioned grant board I am
currently on the loss making
this sector commission.
The community of Las this was
settled around eighteen thirty
five the settlers were farmers
ranchers wood cutters and
skilled laborers the surrounding
area included small farms and
common lands.
Farms were adjacent to the game
is revert common lands were west
of the village in the mountains
and the forest.
Addition grant is the common
lands west of the village.
Forested area around most
speaking this was used as common
lands for the community of Las
Vegas and it was organized with
the governing structure some of
the uses of the common lands
included grazing timber wood
hunting dry farming and some
irrigation in the commune than
that one area.
Some individuals actually built
cabins and settled within the
partition grant move forward to
nineteen fifty one the Las Vegas
land grant wanted to sell the
common lands west of Los ****
was similar to the mess somebody
actually purchased a hundred
acres each within the partition
grant a group of individuals
from the city less went to the
district judge guided the need
for the common lands.
This need was for three thousand
acres and became the partition
grant of loss making this.
The Las Vegas land grant also
David do for the common lands to
the community a little
stickiness this occurred around
nineteen fifty one similar deeds
were given to lower came as some
on the more than others.
The partition grant of nineteen
fifty one has been governed by
an elected board of trustees to
partition grant has been self
governed and has defended itself
in court we have been a
standalone entity.
Regular meetings are held in
compliance with the open
meetings act there is a set of
by laws and regular elections
are held.
The original instigation for
becoming a unit of government
occurred because of the
challenges law city this
experienced in receiving
watershed restoration and fire
prevention funding from the
state.
The state forestry had approved
funds to reduce the risk of fire
to the watershed above Las Vegas
but the uncertain status of loss
making this delayed moving the
funds into action.
Additionally let's do this
successfully do sick defended
itself in court against another
state landowner who blocked
access on the road to the
themean area the state is
prevailed in district and
appellate courts and create
sacrifice to its members we
receive no support or help Las
Vegas land grant.
In summary madam chair we
support house bill forty one to
become a unit of government this
would enable us to apply for for
spending requests sending
improves wildlife habitat
reduces risk of forest fires
makes firewood available to the
public for standing is greatly
needed some areas have four
hundred trees per acre or forty
to fifty is the norm.
This is a tributary to the
game's river which is the
drinking water to city of Las
Vegas in the second water for
farming.
Becoming a unit of government
means compliance with the open
meetings act fiscal oversight by
the state and promote
transparency from public
officials.
We want accountability it is
important to us house bill forty
one is pass committees in both
houses but pocket B. two by two
governors.
Most read in this is been
behaving as an organized entity
with a self governing structure
since eighteen thirty five we
strongly support house bill
forty one and welcomed committee
unit of government thank you
ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you.
Representative who is your next
expert chair I yield to.
No thank god.
Thank you Mr take up.
Run on mute yourself.
There you go.
Yes good morning madam chairman
members of the committee this is
wrong or take a and I am the
president the lord a guy in this
land grant which is a
neighboring land grant to the
low speed this land grant.
In the interest of time after
listening in two of president
how DO.
He did an excellent excellent
job the explained in the
situation that the lower grain
this land grant is in the fact
that we are neighboring land
grants together we of then it's
a little over six thousand acres
just neighbor to neighbor so in
the interest of time I'm not
going to repeat the history Mr
Prodi up thank you you did an
awesome job committee members
are asked that what Mr Pavia has
stated with the the history the
situation we're dealing with is
so similar I'm gonna let that
stand specifically in to the
point.
The lower gayness Land Grant is
fully support and request that
the committee support house bill
forty one for the reasons that
have been stated specifically we
find our common lands are of in
danger to adverse possession
lawsuits by people who claim it
of white was the less we've had
to defend our land boundaries
with no help from the Las Vegas
land grant of we find that we
have a history of managing our
land grant through proper
channels of organized meeting
structures and organized the
governing body and we hear of
definitely lived up to what the
expectations the Land Grant ours
to serve the community and its
members we find today that we
are in a position that with the
new farm bill the two thousand
eighteen farm bill there are
funds available to help us
continue managing our timber of
water land resources that we
could not access now because of
our status.
And
State funds the same so in
summary of we ask that the
committee listen of accept our
request respectfully wrist the
sector request that house bill
forty one is important to us
very very important and that it
be passed and moved on and
hopefully once and for all it
will pass.
Madam chairman I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much.
Garcia who else.
And that's it on our experts I
do want to make some closing
comments on our presentation
madam chair okay could you wait
till we hear from the opponents
and the proponents and then I'll
give you that chance.
Fine madam chair thank you so
are there any opponents I have
one here on this bill.
Mr king town are you here for to
oppose this bill.
Madam chair yes I am present.
Are you here to oppose this
bill.
Yes madam chair please go ahead
and speak.
All.
Permission to speak madam chair
to to you and the sectors thank
you thank you one of the the US
good morning in the the lord
watch over you my name is
Gilbert to Donna and rather than
going to a dialogue about what
we presented over the last four
to five years because many of
you have gotten the date the
date of the legal opposition to
it and so forth but let me tell
you a little bit about me
because I think sometimes they
see the opposition even our own
people as opponents to land
ground movements we have
supported many many bills that
have come through the that grant
interim committee over the years
we are definitely in opposition
to this bill my name as I
mentioned before still working
Donna I am a graduate from the
university of Colorado with the
BA and a master's degree from
the university of Denver I did
get my screen in there I was
born in a four hundred year old
hold here in water four hundred
years our ancestors were
indigenous people first and then
they intermarried with the
Mexican people but this bill
agent in this hold I'm talking
about my great great grandmother
was born in it my grandmother
was boarded up my mollis boarded
it I was born in that I was born
in the same role as my mother in
opposite corners.
We used to have a little
disagreement from day to day but
that's just opposition for more
burgers
Mr compound I need to hear what
your post because we usually
only give the proponents and
opponents of mentor to to speak
so
number ICS yeah well that's why
I want I want you to know that
we're normal people to we want
inclusion as well we don't want
to be excluded in any decision
making processes and that's what
we felt over the last four years
you below we've spots
excessively to defeat this bill.
You have a date of their I just
want to give you a history of
some of the members here and
what kind of public people we
are that way you get a grant but
you're dealing with people that
don't want to be included I
don't believe that systemic
racism I don't believe in it and
gentrification I don't believe
in things that are going to harm
this land grants and I think
that's important that's our
opposition is that we fought for
on those basic fundamental
principles over the last four
years to to deal with this bill
now we want to be included we
want to be heard and in the in
the legislature we have not in
the executive we have and would
you hope that the legislature
would once again include us in
that conscious knowledge of of.
These issues I mean because
today we have a new Santa Fe
rings and it's a little more
color than it was in the past
and we want to make sure that we
are not excluded because in the
past these are all people
against us to defeat us and
taking our lands away are the
reason this lab right is so
critical is that would be less
and less land grants madam chair
and fellow senators we're Landis
land grants we've been fighting
to get that back from various
entities in the federal and
state government for all for a
while web so we need to support.
Not not of a fight against us
it's very important that we be
included in that in this
decision because in this
land Adam this land grant the
one of the that grants as
mentioned for partition it how
could you partition a land grant
that has a I I I would gather a
deep nineteen thirty some.
Out of the land this land grant
you can create a new land
grants.
Our.
Brown thirty seconds please okay
what is what is it you know I
hope you've heard what I've had
to state please include our our
our thoughts and our prayers for
we can continue in this struggle
and go forward madam chair.
Thank you so much for being with
us this morning Mr katana okay.
Are there any other opponents to
this bill.
Okay are there any proponents to
this bill.
Are you planning to speak on
this Mr.
Okay representative Garcia
wanted to go to your closing and
then we'll go to the committee.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I just wanted to
kind of highlight the
significance of the advantages
of creating these partition land
grants as a unit of government.
Of which they are not currently
in that status.
And then just madam chair are
that they're entitled to capital
outlay just like their sister
twenty six land grants.
They're entitled to federal
grants as a stated.
They are exempted from adverse
possession lawsuits these are
squatter lawsuits madam chair
and then imposed on land grants
historically and where land
grants spend more much other
expenditures fighting off the
squatter settlements chair under
a.
Local subdivision status they're
exempt from adverse possession
lawsuits they also are able to
determine there's only to
protect the comments which is
crucial in terms of the eight
rigs that are community Spanish
coming land grants have also to
elect because we bringing our
land grants under a political
subdivisions that is their
subject to an election code that
basically yes free of some of
corruption in terms of elections
of the board of trustees also
they're entitled to free legal
services which we created
through the community governance
Attorney act as as noted the
fall under the open meetings act
where we have to give notices to
their the general meetings also
madam chair they're entitled to
right of first refusal on any
state owned property that goes
up for sale.
And that right of first refusal
is applicables to any state on
property within the original
boundaries of their
I StarClan requests and madam
chair with that though we stand
for questions.
Thank you very much.
I have a Senators souls please
thank you madam chair I move it
to pass.
Okay is there a second.
I thank you madam chair okay
because you had your hand up.
Madam chair pollution
Russian chairman Garcia I do
have a question on and I've I've
been part of the land grant
interim committee meetings for
ever but I was wondering how Mr
Constantine palace
issues being dealt with I I
understand they don't have any
the land but being that they had
had pre notification on the
boundaries is there anything
that we can do for his group.
Mr chair and representative.
Chair in the.
And then the Senator Gallegos.
You've been with us over in the
house for a long time so
congratulations.
You know senator we've taken
into consideration some other
kind.
Throughout the years and
applying them to language in the
bill before us especially when
it comes to that what we're
doing here is we're opening up
the floodgates to more partition
requests that's not the case and
that was a concern that the
opposition had so what we've
done under the definition we
basically stated that a
partition land grant is a of a
community that existed prior to
two thousand and four when we
passed the milestone
land grant reform measure that
created bank that says political
subdivisions of the state and
and as far as your other.
point in terms of our state
assisting these this particular
individual and the land grant in
motor they wanted to not
participate in the Land Grant
process established by the the
the reform measure two thousand
and four and established by the
priorities of the Land Grant
interim committee Madam chair
Senator.
Yes thank you for that Madam
chairman and representative of I
just want to make sure that we
were still trying to allow them
to be part I just recently sold
my property in Colorado and
after having and family since
eighteen thirty three
I just I know how hard it is for
the land grants were part of the
connections Land Grant report
regionally in the canals land
grants no longer a land grant
even though it's in Colorado my
state my south pasture state
boundary but I I just know how
hard it is to be the only one
out there fighting and try to
get something done I just want
to make sure they're still at
least in communications and see
that we're trying to include so
with that I yield second the
I'll wait for someone else
inside debated some thank you
madam chair center
Representative thank you so much
thank you Senator Schmedes are
you have a question.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say hi to my good friend
from the house stays
Representative Garcia really
good to see you again and I want
to remind you
what my middle name is in case
you forgot Greg yes it is it is
so good to see my friend.
Thank you very much senator
Senator I think you're gonna say
a grant.
Thank you Bob.
Thank you.
We're moving on.
I thank the members we're losing
some members soon so please call
the roll.
Senator surrounded yes Senator
thank god.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope yes
Senator committee.
Yes Senator salt yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes into next yes
you know a unanimous do pass and
Representative Garcia the reason
I'm rushing is because we're
gonna lose two members soon and
we want to hear our agenda this
morning thank you madam chair
god bless you on this fine day
thank you so much for being with
us we really appreciate it okay
members we are going on to house
bill two forty five yes
Representative Georgene Louis
welcome to the committee.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
committee members.
May began yes please great thank
you so house bill two forty five
is a correction in a drafting
error to the grid modification
mall it's missing an important
comment in a section that
applies to utilities so just for
refreshing everyone's memory the
grant modification law
encourages energy companies
local governments state
universities public schools and
tribal communities to use
technology to improve and
modernize the efficiency
reliability resilience and
security of the electric grid
power
so the definition should have
originally matched what is
Currently and applicable
sections of the Energy minerals
and natural resources
departments Gregg wrote Rod
excuse me read more roadmap but
unfortunately that Thomas agency
and we changed it around this
time because whenever drill
bills are drafted
a punctuation isn't included so
the bill would have
Representative this same because
the comma wouldn't have been
answered it so that's the reason
for the change and I am
available now to stand for
questions thank you madam chair
and committee members.
Thank you is there anyone here
in opposition to this bill.
Is there anyone here that is a
proponent.
For this bill.
Senator souls.
Thank you madam chair I move it
to pass.
And second.
There is a motion and a second
is that are there any questions
or comments from the committee
members.
Ranoco would you please call the
roll.
Senator sirventes yes Senator
Gallegos distract Senator
Hamblen just.
Pope.
Yes I'm sorry senator Neville
yes Senator Smith yes.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes and
chairman of annex yes.
Your unanimous do pass thank you
Representative Lewis for coming
thank you madam chair and
committee members thank you
members are next bill is house
bill two sixty.
Harket passes for vets and gold
star families Representative
Hernandez and lord.
And I see Representative Lujan
Hernandez welcome to the
committee good morning miss
madam chair good morning.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee House Bill to
sixty require the energy
minerals and natural resources
department by New Mexico
residents who are veterans or
members of gold star families
with day use passes for
unlimited entry to state parks
and other recreation areas
operated by the state parks
division of EMNRD the free
access to New Mexico state parks
is a small way to thank
America's veterans and gold star
families for their sacrifice to
our country and to encourage
them to explore recreational
opportunities on their public
lands and waters.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much I believe
there are some proponents and
opponents
is
and let's first hear from the
opponents.
One comment that we did receive
what was the cost related to
this okay and also that in the
past year the efforts have been
to make it equitable with other
populations that are having free
passes like once a month or once
a quarter it federal now let's
go to the proponents.
And I had.
Gary Williams.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Gary Williams on the US Air
Force veteran and member of A.
R. P. New Mexico staff thank you
madam chair and committee
members for the opportunity to
talk this morning about support
that the R. P. is providing for
health so two sixty we feel this
is a very good bill madam chair
and committee members here are
P. does in fact stand very
strongly for veterans military
informed members of those
military personnel we encourage
you madam chair and committee
members this morning.
The passage of house bill two
sixty thank you for the
opportunity madam chair
community members to talk this
morning.
Thank you for being with us.
Any other proponents or.
proponents Senator pope and then
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Hernandez
bringing this bill forward.
One of the questions I have is
just how this will be
administered these passes I and
I was a veteran it's like you
bring in your DD two fourteen
I'm just wondering what the
process would be to identify
these individuals for this
budget.
So currently currently we offer
veterans that are fifty percent
disabled or more free access so
this bill would be for everyone
so
What we had talked about was
doing just just bringing a
are a form of identification
stating that you are a veteran
to any of the state parks to be
let in for free it does make it
a lot easier instead of having
to fill out the forms online and
submit everything to get your
placard and everything so we
were trying to the the part of
this bill is to make that a lot
easier for the veterans to gain
access.
thank you madam chair and
Representative Hernandez so but
but I guess my concern is your
director if you're retired or
your fifty percent disabled or
you have benefits from the VA
you have that card but we do
have some veterans that do not
have any type of federal ID be
or anything to identify them as
a veteran besides our DD two
fourteen I'm also wondering
about the eagles are families
and once again I support this
bill I just want to make sure
what that process would be yes
no actually I did I'll be a
hundred percent undecided not
realize that date that that if
you were not fifty percent
disabled or retired that you
would not have some sort of
identification so maybe that's
something you and I can work on
as it goes to finance to get an
amendment to click more clearly
define what that is I would I
would absolutely love to work
with you as you are obviously
gonna have a lot more
information on that that I do
yeah because they do have their
DD two fourteen and for example
on the fifty percent or
discounts on your on your
property taxes you would send
that to Department Veterans
Services they would acknowledge
that in a letter and use that so
so once again I want to support
this I just want to make sure
there's a process in place to
take care of these folks
especially the gold star
families because we also want to
make sure that it's not all a
way that they have to go through
a process to
That causes even more hurt you
know what what they've been
through as well right to to to
relate these these issues so I I
want to you know make sure what
that process is and then and
then also there were some fiscal
concerns on what the passes
would be
I'm okay with this but you know
just with what's happening and I
want to take too much from the
budget from you know these
departments so we might want to
look at making it a monthly pass
quarterly or whatever to make
that more equitable because I
don't think it's gonna be folks
going every day to where you
need that once again I support
the bill but I think it out to
be willing to just have those
discussions and and once again
thank you for bringing to go for
thank you thank you senator.
I have a center renewable center
date goes on a starry Senator
graders first then Senator
Neville then Senator Sedillo
Lopez so Senator Gaydos.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate this I'll have to
record questions in one of
Sharapova jumped in on but the
first one is I'm trying to
figure out how you in
Representative Lord did not
find one of us to be a co
sponsor on this I like the bill
we've done this for other
reasons but my my main question
going along with Center pope is
on the gold star families
I'm just I'm just trying to work
through the process also because
not always with the mother of
the the the other parent levels
are County be with the kids and
I'm trying to think through you
know if if our past and my
daughters were the ones were
able to go I'm not Montoya so I
want to correct that but I just
think through my family how they
would be.
Knowledge is a one man with the
understanding now that not
everyone has a federal ID
especially if the pair just
passed on then have we talked to
the Department of Health state
parks would look at them as
individuals coming in.
Representative Senator.
Madam chair I I have not
specifically as I told Center
find I did not realize that
there was not identification for
these different groups so it
sounds like I need to go figure
out what the identification
requirements are going to be
to be able to get in and I I
need to touch base with the
state parks department to see
what they can or both figure out
what the identification as a and
what they what they will accept
or what we can get them to
accept so that sounds like
something that I need to work on
with this bill before it goes
forward.
Just a thought madam chair and
and Representative is if we
built a goals are registry so
all the departments that have a
folder there with you know the
the Golzar names so that way if
they walk in the child walks in
says you know my name's David
guy egos my dad's culture are
member part of his family they
would have a list there to go by
I don't know how cumbersome that
would be put to me that would be
something that I think would be
the but the book over the guy
goes call it down pine my
daughter my son's name at odds
but not just of the A. B. at
checkout point.
Is something easy so everybody
could be counted in I do like
your bill and I I understand the
Madam chair representative the
FIR shows five hundred ten
thousand dollars a year I think
we owe this to our veterans and
their families so I wouldn't
have a problem with an increase
small increase in the park fees
so that the rest of us can rate
on on these member so with that
are you I just want to thank you
for your bill I think it's
really good way to show them
that we care so Senator are you
thank you thank you so much
Senator as senator Neville.
Try to be quick chair of
Representative just no this is
all veterans is that right I
just want to clarify I'm able to
work out of my office so I don't
have all my stuff.
madam chair and senator this
would be veterans that are
currently residing in the state
of New Mexico so you couldn't
come from Texas or Arizona and
be granted free access you you
do have to be a resident of our
state but it would be all
veterans and gold star families
which is the surviving parent
spouse child of a service member
just the parents is that when we
go on the gold star size to just
the parents or is it more
extended family a little bit
further on the it's sort of the
surviving parents spouse child
or sibling of a service member
killed in armed conflict when
you include all veterans of they
said five hundred thousand
dollars to charge my card when
you go into a light Navajo lake
you I education so if production
to driving than that but you
would get the whole family and
four of the five but without
paying five Bucks correct.
I I'm I'm not sure what that
where they got seven thousand
there's a lot of veterans in New
Mexico because we have a lot of
military patients I'm I'm not
against your misunderstandings
concern that we need to have the
dollar amounts right March
that's basically their revenue
string right there that's a
whole bunch what they get rely
on to function so.
Let's make sure those numbers
are right that's all madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you so much Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair
I support the bill I want to
make that clear to but we in in
this other context we've had
discussions about who is a
veteran like whether whether
National Guard members of
veteran
What is the intent to I I know
we intended to include all
residents but is it.
Army National Guard Air National
Guard.
So if you intend to be as broad
as possible is.
Madam chair and senator yet yes
it was to
Let me back up so on the on the
house side I was questioned by
several of the veterans on that
side to make sure that National
Guard and
so the main the main branches as
well as the National Guard were.
Were included in this to not
I guess to not to recognize
everyone service is the best way
I can but that you know how I
guess there thought was how are
we going to do the main branches
and not do the National Guard
when they're both serving our
country excellent so I wanted to
make sure they were all covered
excellent and that's my question
is that are they all cover
that's that's excellent and then
my my second question is
Is there a goal service registry
the the FIR says it is not clear
if there's a registry of gold
star families in New Mexico I
know I participated in drives to
help gold star families and so I
assume there was a registry away
I figuring it out.
Madam chair and senator not one
that I have easily been able to
find it sounds like I need to
along with the identification
this would be part of that and
see if there's something that
that the state can access
for it just to find out the gold
star families and make sure and
verify that they you know who
they are for this program so I
need to do a little bit more
research on that one.
Maybe the Federal Register
because I like I said I've
participated in drives to help
them and so are it surprises me
that that if there's not a
registry and then my last point
is I really support you in
working with senator Paul
on some of the details that you
mentioned he has a lot of
knowledge about this and I think
you can make make the bill
stronger so thank you thank you
for bringing the bill I think
it's important to read recognize
all who serve our country thank
you very much chair.
Thank you.
My only comment Representative
Hernandez is that
we might not stop you here but
Senate finance will be asking
all of these hard questions and
really not moving on unless it's
resolved so committee what is
the pleasure of the committee.
Could you pass.
Thank you madam chair.
Your motion and a second.
For a do pass.
Could you please call the vote.
And wanted yes Senator Gallegos
yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator no
yes.
Senator pope yes Senator Smitty
yes Senator so yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Chairman Stefanics yes.
You know you have a unanimous do
pass congratulations
Representative Hernandez thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee thank you okay
committee members I just want to
publicly announce on Saturday E.
we are having a Senate memorial
we will be having Senate
memorial twelve that during
rural effect on groundwater
resources we will be having
Senate bill four nineteen Meryl
landowner animal takings
Jennings law and if it if.
Senate Bill endorsed thirty one
gets through Indian Affairs this
morning on the youth
conservation corps then we will
be hearing that as well on
Saturday so right now
for the public and for
yourselves it looks like we
might have to bills and one
memorial all Senate on Saturday
morning from nine to twelve or
when every time we go into the
floor onto the floor and sanity
thank you very much we are
recessed cricket day.
