Okay and.
Representative.
Senate Bill there pop.
Senator souls.
Committee.
I don't see him Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Senator Stefanics yes
we do have a quorum thank you
very much Radica and we will get
started for members of the
public
One it that we're going to hear
Senate bill one fifty five and
then instead of going right to
one forty nine we're going to
give the Sanchez who's the same
person on both a little break to
hit the restroom.
So we will move to Senator
Hickey is two forty three in
between the first and the second
so we going one fifty five to
forty three one forty nine.
And with that
I see no comments or hand so
we're going to go to the first
presentation Senate bill one
fifty five and that is the
energy transition act changes
Senator common to begin.
And for the for for this
presentation will do fifteen to
twenty minutes Max for the two
Sanchez in their experience and
then we'll go to the opponents
and the proponents.
A good morning everyone
Madam chair and co sponsor of
this legislation and
conservation committee Senator
thank you for this opportunity
to present Senate bill one fifty
five this bill amends the.
Energy transition act also known
as the J. together we supported
the ATA because it would re
transition our production of
electricity from reliance on
climate altering coal plants to
removals.
I had to vote again on the ETA.
I would require if you surgical
amendments which is why I'm here
today I invite you to join me
today and making a few
significant changes to the TA in
order to protect New Mexico
consumers and make it the model
right dress right just
transition.
It really was intended to be.
Three changes in the law that we
are proposing are as follows
number one we're making changes
to remove the automatic
guarantee for a hundred percent
recovery The bill affords our
electric utilities.
Current version of the ETA
utilities receive a hundred
percent costs from ratepayers
when they closed a plant.
Were abandoned I portion of
ownership of a plant the first
amendment removes the automatic
guarantee of course utilities
can ask for a higher percent
could compensation.
It's just that are amendment
will eliminate the guarantee of
a hundred percent cost recovery
the second amendment restores.
The PRC's oversight for utility
plant closures so they are once
again authorized to do three
things.
One apply the legal standards of
prudence number to evaluate the
proposals to determine if they
are fair and just and number
three the balance the interest
or both.
Shareholders and ratepayers.
Number three which I believe
everyone will have no objection
to reinstates the conforming
legal deadlines consistent with
New Mexico court rules
artificial ten day deadlines are
changed to.
Thirty days for a notice of
appeal this is a standard in New
Mexico and throughout the United
States the dust principal
accomplishment was a closure of
PNM is coal fired San Juan
generating station and updating
the renewable energy act and the
air quality control act to make
needed progress on climate there
was a debate about whether the
law provided sufficient support
to impacted communities and one
of the cost president percent
wants closure in terms of rate
impact were fair.
But I think the overall sense
was that both this body and
Administration were supportive
of the opportunity to expedite
the closure of coal increase
renewable standards and provide
a ****.
Funding mechanism for workers
and communities that would be
impacted.
My vote I understood that there
were some trade offs.
I voted for the two thousand
nineteen ETA stated publicly
that I thought it was a
sweetheart deal for PNM.
What I did not realize and I
believe
If you probably did not realize
that in the law we passed in two
thousand nineteen language is
tucked into the eighty two page
bill that effectively removed
PRC authority to oversee the
amount of compensation the
amendment would receive.
From closing its coal plants.
This the regulation provision
applied not only to its coal
plants but to do with gas and
nuclear plants as well according
to the article four section
eighteen of the New Mexico state
constitution the title of the
ETA should have provided notice
of the inclusion of nuclear and
gas facilities our constitution
requires that the subject every
built very clearly expressed in
its title ETA's titles almost
two pages long and referred to
coal fired this is and referred
to coal fired facility six times
but neither it's titled March
text made any mention of nuclear
or gas.
The bill is language that
categorically for this the PRC
from disallowing PNM from
recovering what it claims are
any costs that was a PNM is
right base prior to two thousand
fifteen.
We are only beginning to now
understand the full implications
of the law that we passed to my
two thousand nineteen we see now
that the utilities.
PM where I live.
And I'll pass electric we're.
Senator at Hammond souls live.
Are using the law to claim
automatic hundred percent
recovery of any plant they are
beyond that and now they have a
decided
decided to move up there
decision to sell their portion
of four corners to take
advantage of the ETA bill before
it is amended.
Impacted and a recent PRC
hearing ETA's language of Christ
and requiring gas as well as the
coal this was news to us and it
is extremely alarming news.
Awesome posed and repairs for
all plants will be substantial
but the costs associated with
the Palo Verde nuclear
generating station could be
astronomical nuclear has become
very expensive when compared
with the renewables therefore
hello Verde's closure.
May very well be eminent.
The.
All of the commissioning
sometimes known as cleanup
costs.
And the value it loses has been
shifted to the rate payers and
that's amount cannot be modified
this puts PNM in charge of
setting its own rates without
PRC is a bit.
This puts PNM in charge of
setting its own rates without
PRC bility to just those charges
even if they are not fair and
just the PRC sister plant
closures one of striking a
balance between the utilities
desires and interests the rate
ratepayers with ETA PNM and help
Selectric skate this balancing
process get a sweetheart deal
hello very close is this good
easily result in unfair multi
billion dollar impact on
ratepayers.
PTA did a good job of protecting
the environment what a poor job
of protecting the consumer.
Sierra Club conservation voters
are not in the business of
protecting the environment.
Focused I think are in the
business.
Taking part but they are not
focused and concerned with the
consumer.
I received a hundred percent
rating from.
Survation voters but I am also
interested and focused on
protecting.
the consumer I'm a big advocate
and you supporter of consumer
protection laws in the current
legislative session I am
sponsoring to other consumer
protection bills Senate bill one
fifty two and Senate bill fifty
seven.
The heart of this bill
protecting the consumer.
The PTA is the only.
Secularization bill in the
country The for budget
regulatory oversight this is of
critical importance why should
we grant electricians.
We that exist free from
competition the right to be
excused from regulatory
oversight we shouldn't.
The heart of this bill consumer
protection.
As afforded.
And administered by the PRC PRC
has a history and expertise to
examine the value utility
investments and whether
outstanding cost should be
absorbed by the shareholders are
paid by the rate payers move
removing PRC supervision to
protect the public was not in
the title and we do not
understand we did not understand
so we voted for the we are do
you to pay.
So.
I'm almost done the madam chair
might two officers and I do
believe that the proper
authority should be returned to
see and that is what our bill
does.
Please.
Madam are you I make three
assurances and I have four
questions all of which are
troubling the three insurance is
our number one the economic tool
of secularization is maintained
and the financing of the closing
of San Juan in a minute ago
critics claim otherwise.
But.
We can assure you that it does
maintain secularization number
two other critics claim the four
million dollar economic
development job training for San
Juan county is in jeopardy not
true let me repeat that that is
not true and number three Madam
chair of the.
The mobile portfolio standards
absolutely are maintained.
And not and not affected by the
amendments that that we are
proposing.
And finally.
Madam chair for questions all of
which are troubling why is ETA
the only secularization on the
country The for budget records
or oversight number two why did
the title ETA bill not provide
inclusion of nuclear and gas
facilities number three why
we're concessions and or budget
provided provided to the public
in a bill that was extensively
about renewable portfolio
standards thirty states that
enacted renewable portfolio
standards summer simply
promulgated by the governor
through a five six seven eight
page executive order why do we
need an eighty two page bill a
number for madam chair why did
this.
Sierra Club and that
conservation voters calibrate
with PNM to draft a bill that
harms great players all the most
of the other environmental
groups support our bill to amend
the eight.
thank you madam chair this
concludes my remarks.
We will now hear from Michael
Sanchez Senator.
And that's the real Lopez and
their after I would reduce.
Not reduce introduce two expert
witnesses thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you senator Clemente
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
I don't I'm gonna try not to be
repetitive because I think that
the lead sponsor was very
comprehensive but I'm I want to
start by saying that the energy
transition act is a
transformative built act that is
put is on the path to address
climate change and for that I'm
very grateful but I will tell
you when I was a brand new
Senator and this was introduced
it was an eighty two page bill
that I struggled to understand I
talked to a lot of people on all
sides about what this bill meant
and how it accomplished its
goals and I still was toward and
what troubled me the most was
removing a constitutional agency
from the decision making about
plant closure and abandonment
that was troubling to me because
it's constitutional duty is to
balance the interests of the
rate payers and the shareholders
and so that that bothered me.
And what happened was when I was
still struggling with it.
Representative Nathan small I
asked him a question about well
is this in the nature of a
settlement with PNM so that they
will agree to the standards and
and I was wondering why this PNM
have to agree to standards it
was just but he said to me
Senator the whole world what is
the most important thing about
this bill is not the cost it's
the time we don't have time to
wait on this and that persuaded
me to vote for the bill because
she is absolutely right we don't
have time however.
I did not understand that this
bill and I will I also believe
that most legislators did not
understand that it would be
possible for PNM to sell its
interest in a four corners plant
in the four corners plant and
then come back and say that they
were entitled to one hundred
percent of their abandonment
costs and there
stranded assets costs stranded
assets when they work
necessarily leaving those assets
to the tune of of three over
three hundred million dollars.
And the coal would continue to
burn in four corners.
This is not a transition the
call will continue to burn yes
PNM is going to get a hundred
percent of its cost with the
possibility of no review by the
PRC.
That.
Troubles me greatly and I do not
believe that our colleagues
thought that this would be a
result my my cosponsored the
lead sponsor senator Thom
Abraham talks about consumer
protection we are of our state
Madam chair of very poor state
and the idea that the
shareholders would get off Scot
free from the the cost of
closing that or that we're not
even closing the plant get off
Scot free for its decision to
buy into that plant in the first
place is is shocking to me.
At this moment many of our
fellow New Mexicans are not able
to pay their bills.
PNM reported that forty one five
hundred and twenty four
households are behind in their
utility payments.
And would have been subjected to
electricity termination but the
PRC ordered that there no be no
utility shut offs of any crime
not only for electricity bills
for gas and water to as long as
a governor's COVID nineteen
emergency order is active many
of our state already struggle to
pay their bills before the
pandemic pandemic it.
Madam chair.
We need to get the PRC back into
its proper constitutional role
and that is why I agreed to sign
on to these amendments they do
not affect the good parts of
this bill the excellent parts of
this bill the securitization for
the renewable portfolio
standards for the the costs that
will be given to the community
to to ensure a just transition
none of that is affected I buy
are tiny bill that brings the
PRC back and also does not
permit under present cost
recovery should the Pierre P.
Garcia require closure of the
plant for the environment thank
you madam chair and I in my
cosponsored well I I yield back
to the lead sponsor of the bill
senator Clemente.
Senator common you have some
expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chair yes might
have to and I'm sure the first
one is the PRC chairman Steve.
Fishman former state senator.
Mr Fishman is a businesses has
been a lot was it has been in
the up the **** and member of
the PRC for the past two years.
Mr isn't state we now hear from
Steve Fleishman is he online
with us yes Chairman go ahead.
Can you hear me now yes we can
Representative.
First of all let me say
I am testifying for myself and
that is because the commission
the commissioners we've all
decided that unless there's
unanimous support for a
particular position
that no one can be testifying on
behalf of the commission in
support of or in opposition to a
bill.
I will say that our professional
staff very much
Agrees with the position that
we've been putting for the that
I'm gonna put forward here
today.
I want to begin by saying as
you've heard before that yes the
one fifty five preserves a
hundred percent of the
environmental and economic
support provisions of the Energy
tread is transition act.
It does not modify or impede any
of those requirements in anyway.
The ETA has been a fantastic
success of the PRC did not have
a reputation as being a forward
looking in agency in terms of
climate change requirement but
protection but the PRC has
faithfully enforce the ETA and
we've applied of Gresley and it
has led to a substantial
increase in renewable generation
going forward.
and I'm
Very pleased with the way the
ETA and a little bit surprised
at how well the T. is turned out
on the environmental front and I
think it will continue to have
tremendously positive impacts in
that regard.
But there's still a tendency for
people to believe that we need
to somehow make concessions or a
sacrifice ratepayers interests
in order to entice utilities to
embrace renewables.
That used to be true but now
renewable is often out compete
fossil fuels in terms of
providing energy to the market.
And there's no need to sacrifice
ratepayer protections to achieve
our energy transition goals.
In fact New Mexico's
decarbonization policies
significantly increase profit
opportunities for our our
investor owned utilities and I'm
gonna repeat that.
New Mexico's decarbonization
policies increase electric
utility profit opportunities
with out the need for any
concessions by rate payers.
They encourage investment in
capital intensive new
technologies that utilities can
recover profitably in rates and
they promise massive increases
in electric consumption through
transportation and building
electrification.
Recent PRC proceedings of found
that one New Mexico utility has
made significant improvement
investments.
At the expense of rate payers.
And it is reasonable the leap to
believe that more such cases
might be found.
It is not reasonable to remove
customer protections from
imprudent investments even as
electric utilities look forward
to a financial and economic
group.
I want to address that argument
you'll likely hear from some
opponents of this bill they said
the ETA does not guarantee full
cost recovery on gas and nuclear
plants.
That is a hotly debated points
among a turns the PRC attorneys
believe that the current
statutes can easily be
interpreted to guarantee
utilities a hundred percent.
The first our guests.
I can guarantee this.
Well statute is not amid.
However the PRC decide.
These cases.
Also that late it'll go to the
Supreme Court the Supreme Court
will decide this.
There's a good chance they will
agree that the law bars the PRC.
Burdens on.
We have that section thirty one
C. of the ETA by removing the
phrase.
That reads quote.
Provided that no order of the
commission show this allow
recovery of any depreciated
costs and decommissioning costs.
Eliminate that one phrase and
we've got to fix.
Your approve this amendment the
legislature will decide the
issue once and for all.
Whether the PRC in do
this regulatory authority.
This.
About that.
Needless future litigation will
be averted for all stakeholders
so I just want to repeat that
this will go to court unless the
legislature takes action.
Let's avoid needless future
litigation.
Part of this bill who claim the
current law does not guarantee a
hundred percent cost recovery
for utilities will have
sacrificed nothing if you pass
this law.
All you will have done is
clarify statutory language to
ensure.
That their claim is true.
So no one has anything to lose.
This is just clean up in
clarification.
If your intent is a legislator.
All right who voted for the ETA
was to avoid saddling consumers
with improving costs you want to
vote yes on SB one fifty five.
This will ensure regulatory
protections are in place that
enable the ETA in the R. EA to
achieve all of their intended
environmental benefits and at
the same time ensure fair cost
sharing between shareholders and
ratepayers for the energy
transition and that.
And that concludes my comments
thank you.
Thank you Sierra you have
another expert.
Yes madam chair on my second
last.
Next witness is a attorney.
Mario that the Nancy.
To the former criminal and civil
rights attorney turned utility
expert she is one basis in New
Mexico Supreme Court that the
PRC and executive director of
the new energy economy Act and
her advocacy on behalf of rate
payers and save that repairs
more than five hundred million
dollars.
A half a billion dollars sounds
more impressive.
Go ahead.
Maria on okay good.
Good morning madam chair and
Senators thank you my name is
merry L. Masih I am the
executive director and attorney
for new energy economy I've been
practicing at the New Mexico
public regulation commission for
a Levin years as you have heard
we are asking you to consider
amending the eight ETA for three
reasons to remove utilities
hundred percent guaranteed
compensation within when it
abandons the plan.
To restore regulatory oversight
to determine on a case by case
basis based on the facts before
them what the utility is
entitled to take from captive
customers and to reinstate
filing deadlines that conform
with New Mexico law.
The need for these eighty eight
amendments are not theoretical
let's review the real life
example of San Juan PNM sought
the abandonment of the San Juan
generating station and the
securitization of costs in and
and and three hundred and sixty
one million dollars forty
lawyers including the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water utility it's already the
county of Bernalillo.
Western resource advocates you
energy economy and at least half
a dozen other
other entities argued for
dis allowances of all kinds we
presented claims and defenses
back up our positions over two
week hearing what did the
hearing examiner's and
ultimately the PRC approved.
One hundred percent of what PNM
at four three hundred sixty one
million dollars exactly why.
Under the ETA.
Quote lacks authority to reduce
the demanded amount P. in
position in the San Juan
earlier abandonment case that it
was title to a hundred percent
of its cost but it agreed to
take.
Only fifty percent in that case
and that was fair just and
reasonable and balance the
interests between shareholders
and ratepayers.
What I want to tell you is that
the hearing examiner's fat.
Recommended decision that they
understood and were sympathetic
to the claims that we raised but
stated and I quote the
commission discretion is limited
to calculation adjustment if
they can eighteen a
mathematical or transcription
error that's it the entire
authority of the PRC that's why
we stand here before to you
today there will be many many
abandonments both from PNM and
ETA I'm sorry PNM an EP el Paso
electric in the next in the next
short period of time these
abandonment costs.
If on changed by you will at
least for PNM the current
outstanding number is one point
three billion dollars plus
interest amortized over twenty
five years this will be more
than a two billion dollar price
tag on to some of the poorest
New Mexicans
A lot of money is at stake do we
want the utilities setting
unilateral oral rates or do we
want regulatory oversight I hope
you will join me and the two
dozen groups and tens of
thousands of members across New
Mexico to ensure that repairs
will benefit from enormous cost
savings that regulatory
oversight is bound to bring.
If you fail to act repairs will
be left bare and naked without
anyone to shield them from the
utilities if you do share duty
to make as much money as
absolutely possible please vote
yes to restore regulatory
authority to usher in an
environmental and economic win
thank you.
Thank you Senator Thomas at the
end of your presentation.
Madam chair this is the end of
our presentation thank you thank
you we're now going to go to
opponents and then proponents we
have several people signed up on
each side so we're gonna take
ten.
People from each side for one
and a half minutes.
And Trevor are you still
operator will be calling on
people when that occurs please
do
I'm mute and everyone.
For this zone you cannot be on
the webcast.
You can only be on the zoom when
you're on the webcast and assume
you create a delay and it
bounced back in the computer
Townsend so if you're on the
webcast please get off of it
just be on the zoom and Trevor
let's start with the opponents
ten people at one and a half
minutes please.
First we have Sherman McCorkle.
You madam chair and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak this
morning my name is Carmen
McCorkle I'm justifying on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
in opposition to Senate bill one
fifty five the historic passage
of the twenty nineteen energy
transition act ushered in a new
era for our state and its role
as a national energy leader
unfortunately Senate bill one
fifty five creates chaos and
uncertainty in our growing green
energy sector and unfairly.
Impact.
We began this process years ago
and shifting course Val only
lead to more cost delays and
further destabilization of our
growing energy economy.
This bill undermines are
determined work to ensure that
this transition does not harm
small business and communities
well we responsible only shipped
and quickly take climate action.
Right just transition requires
that this responsible climate
movement is thoughtful and
cohesive.
Senate bill one fifty five
undercuts the progress that has
carefully and thoughtfully been
made over the past several
years.
It doesn't complement the
original Act and it did not use
the full mechanisms for
businesses to recover cost.
The twenty nineteen eighty eight
was years in the making.
The years of collaboration.
Asked whether brought patients
far reaching communities
support.
The greater Albuquerque chamber
is twelve hundred members
intensive thousands of employees
ask you to vote no on Senate
bill one fifty five thank you
very much.
Thank you next.
And you're keeping the time
cover right yes okay minute just
a reminder for the opponents and
the proponents one and a half
minutes thank you the driver go
ahead.
C. Bowman.
Yes hi I'm Camilla I will then
director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
as a New Mexican born and raised
and as a mom I count call to act
on climate but I will not leave
communities and workers who have
powered my life behind as we
transition we propose amendments
to the ETA on both SP one fifty
five and one fifty six the ETA
is a parade that works together
to save our climb Climent save
ratepayers money and generate
recovery funds for frontline
communities and workers
customers have and will save
money through the ETA here's how
the utility leaves coal they
refinance the PRC approved
investments in this cold and low
interest bonds they replace the
coal with lowcost one hundred
percent renewable and batteries
which the PRC approved for San
Juan using the expanded powers
to decide replacement per folios
that the ETA provided them this
according to the PRC hearing
examiner saves customers money
even while generating forty
million dollars and community
transition funds and workers
severance pay and re training
which is especially important
for mine workers who aren't PNM
employees some utilities
take what some folks want
utilities to take a loss on
their books for leaving coal
that just makes utility credit
ratings go down and makes future
investments more expensive for
customers later we preferred
that they lose all their
previously approved profits
which.
Thank you very much next Trevor
next James two zero people of
the.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee.
my name is James Pokemon and I'm
the policy director for the
center for civic policy I wanted
thank the sponsors for your
willingness to meet with many of
us to discuss our concerns about
this legislation unfortunately
we cannot and do not support
this amendment in two thousand
nineteen center for civic policy
in many of our L. and community.
And members are in communities
around the state that are
disproportionately impacted by
climate and energy issues
supported the ETA we became
involved in advocacy in crafting
of the G. A. out of a massive
concern that communities of
color rural communities tribal
communities would be left behind
in efforts toward energy
transition and at the end of the
day we were comfortable and
proud of the work that we did so
we oppose this legislation this
amendment because it makes it
less likely and then it in that
it damages the likelihood that
and in particular will utilize
securitization and therefore it
puts the community investment in
workforce funds negotiated at
risk PTA as it is implemented is
beginning to have great success
yes yes it is bold in large
piece of policy funds if we
start chipping away at it then I
believe the policy will begin
and to become less and less
effective thank you madam chair
and committee members for the
opportunity to speak on this
bill and I urge you to vote now.
Thank you very much nextra
we're.
Joseph Hernandez.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Joseph Hernandez and I am
that the net energy organizer
for neighbor education project.
I live in Shiprock New Mexico.
And I want to.
thank thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for pro
for allowing me to provide
public comment.
I I propose.
Senate bill one fifty five.
I'm I'm also a member of the
Energy transitioned Act
community advisory committee and
I have heard from many Navajo
community members and
institutions regarding the way
that the community fund can help
us began planning.
For our new economic.
This community fund will help us
prepare for the adverse economic
impact that we will be faced
with when San Juan Jordan
station closes.
To pass this bill means that the
ETA bond funding will be delayed
in because uncertainty.
Which is not a just transition
for our people now you're just
committee to please vote no.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
However.
There is concern.
One.
She is on.
You madam chairman.
And I am
Junior high school.
And I support renewable energy
for myself and my friends and
family.
I am not I am worried about.
FY.
If this bill passes I will get
money in things that the
community needs I want to see
more renewable energy projects.
In our schools and.
And promote clean land water and
air for my community.
Thank you thank you so much for
being with us today okay next.
Next we have Richard the guy.
Mr began are you on.
Big gale on.
Yeah he called in on a phone on
a cell phone.
Yes.
Thank you please go ahead.
Unmute thank you can speak.
Let's go on and if Richard can
on mute in a few minutes we'll
come back to him.
Michael and so.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Mike I sent
out I live in Farmington and
work for San Juan citizens
alliance San Juan citizens
alliance has approximately two
thousand members in the four
corners region with members in
northwest New Mexico we are
opposed to SB one fifty five
eighty eight changes we believe
that these amendments are
unnecessary DJs being applied in
San Juan County to transition
from coal to renewables with the
ETA applying to San Juan
generating station we are the
recipients of nearly one billion
dollars investment in solar in
our community this is
transformative innovative and
reduces pollution and our
citizens have been exposed to
for too long this bill could
threaten transition funding for
impacted communities that aren't
repairs.
In fiscal report on energy
minerals natural resources
department stated they believe
that these amendments are
necessary and detrimental to the
efforts behind ETA ETA has a
very brief time since it was
signed into law been working is
designed to utilities real pro
up certain vesting clean energy
generation status providing
important economic relief to
communities impacted by current
or future coal plant closures
and consumers are saving money
on utility bills and I would
just offer to that their service
current
in a lot of these committees
there is a fallacy that
renewables are more expensive
than fossil fuels we want to be
part of a just transition and we
need a coat close our coal
plants and move on to innovative
renewable energy thank you.
Thank you so much let's go back
is Richard Begay.
Available to talk.
Two on mute on the phone is that
star six.
Richard go ahead.
Okay can you hear me now yes we
can okay good morning madam
chair and Senators okay my name
is Richard keen K. I survive
just introduce myself that I
serve on twenty two nomination
Council.
Representative ensure proximity
hi all also a former.
And not the president of non
profit Norton New Mexico
indigenous farmers I
Representative I chapters
community alone is San Juan
river.
That are on the next to San Juan
generating station and four
corners power plant the majority
of the work force or Navajo
which.
Committee members have been
Rep Georgene Louis is having
Dorn dedicate
of the environmental destructor.
And
Twenty nineteen our governor
signed into all.
The energy transmission act.
To help us to begin a new path
that will also yield a damage
that we're done.
Care not or must not be delayed
any longer madam chair I
respectfully ask this committee
to vote no on SB one fifty five.
Thank you very much Mr Begay
okay next Traver that's a
Chavez.
J. R. to Chavis inicia go with
the hope of finding out the
woman said the good morning
madam chair and committee
members my name is off to Chavis
did that born for Kewa Pueblo
pueblo here in opposition to SB
one fifty five our committees
need funding now to deal with
the closure of the San Juan
generating station the more we
have to wait on new amendments
and court cases are communities
fall into deeper uncertainty as
a former financial adviser I
know that these proposed changes
will make securitization
unfavorable to utilities they'll
simply opt not to use
securitization and our
transition funds will be gone
the PRC reviews prudence and
they can and should on open
cases no measurements are needed
for them to do that currently
again these proposed amendments
to the ETA puts the just
transition funding that some of
these folks have mentioned
before that is meant to up lift
the citizens in San Juan County
in many Navajos living there in
jeopardy if PNM doesn't use
securitization for four corners
no community investment and
workforces will be generated
again these amendments
jeopardize funds for frontline
communities and our coal workers
we want a just transition and
that includes the funding met
for my community our indigenous
families who have spent their
lives working are being impacted
by these extractive industries
in addition these amendments do
you zero for the clients they
focus only on rates and for the
San Juan K. we save an average
customer about seven dollars and
forty five cents per month is
that too much to save for the
forty million that
securitization generate for.
Thank you Mr Chavis your time
was up.
Thank you Mr.
Okay Sir Trevor we have two more
slots for opponents.
Next okay Davis.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the Senate
conservation committee my name's
Carol Davis and I am Navajo I am
asking the citizens against
running our environment also
known as the chair thank you for
your time today chair is all
Navajo based nonprofit that has
advocated for environmental and
social equity for medical
communities since nineteen
eighty eight I wish to speak in
opposition Senate bill one fifty
five because we are seeing
positive outcomes for indigenous
communities that are directly
impacted by energy development
we have been working with our
Navajo communities to help
contribute to on going
discussions aimed to achieve
economic stability that is only
possible for these communities
from just transition funding
made possible through the EPA
proposed amendments through
Senate bill one fifty I will
only jeopardize these funds to
impacted communities these
communities have in their
decades of the cycle economy in
the shadows of an energy boom
that benefited the rest of New
Mexico we feel the ETA as it
stands is our best opportunity
to entertain equity and
development for communities that
made it possible for me to make
Mexico Mexicans to sustain a
better quality of life over the
past several decades we strongly
support leaving the ETA as it
currently stands we were so
respectfully ask you to oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you so much for being here
today however for the last
speaker on the opponents.
Yes we have Matthew hundred
meal.
Thank you senator madam chair
members of the committee senator
Tom and and senator Steele Lopez
Matthew how did you hear what
the public service company in
New Mexico and as you all know
the energy transition that was
developed over the course of two
legislative sessions through
hundreds of hours of negotiation
longer more metal community
advocates legislators businesses
and governor Michelle the
operation and just Senator
Sedillo Lopez a commissioner
Fishman mention it is a landmark
piece of legislation that sets
the foundation for New Mexicans
to start transition to renewable
energy and it is working already
the transition act is making a
Mexico national clean energy
leader and is being used as a
model and how other states can
make the assistant will
transition to more clean energy
Furthermore PNM is planning to
use the money recovered from
closing down the coal plant and
make historic investments and
developments in new clean energy
technologies and as many of said
removing these funds transfer
and a bility to make this clean
energy investment and as others
have said this amendment would
also strip four corners
community of desperately needed
financial support especially
during this time of will
pandemic that's really causing
serious hardship for all of New
Mexicans if we're going to fight
climate change and build a
Mexico's economic prosperity we
need to move forward not
backwards this amendment undoes
policy with broad based
collaborative consensus and
significantly significantly
threatens Mexico's ability to
move forward with our historic
transition to clean energy the
energy transition that does work
let's not mess up the good work
that we've all been together by
fixing something that isn't.
Thank you everybody.
Thank you very much ma'am okay
we are now going to the
proponents will hear from ten
people one and a half minutes.
will identify them and keep
time.
First we have Tom manning.
Madam chair Senators I'm Tom
manning.
Director of citizens for fair
rates in the environment we're
in association of residential
rate payers public service
company of new Mexico's based in
Silver City.
In announced it intended to
close the San Juan generating
station a year and a half before
passage of the ETA the reason
that the plant closed and the
customers will save money is
because we're transitioning out
of expensive coal power in into
renewable sources of
electricity.
Testimony in the abandonment
case demonstrated that
ratepayers will pay
significantly more because of
the ETA well look well
communities will receive forty
million and eight ratepayers
will likely pay between a
hundred and sixty eight and two
hundred thirty nine million
dollars more over the twenty
five years because the PRC was
required to apply the ETA even
though the plant was going to
close anyway.
The money further demonstrated
that under the ETA the PRC is
powerless to protect rate payers
even as costs rise to a half a
billion dollars more than
closure would cost without the
ETA.
We all know ratepayers were
harmed that is why the writers
talk provisions into the law
that removes PRC ability to
ensure there is fairness please
support you want fifty five to
reinstate basic regulatory
authority thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Next we have our TV so Romero.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is our
mission Romero we cover I'm here
speaking as a spokesperson for
yucca youth United for climate
crisis action the TA is a law
about how we're going to do the
work of closing down dirty coal
nuclear and gas plants it's
about who pays for transition
costs we've learned to the
recent application of law that
apparently the current answer
that question is US ratepayers
Wirth New Mexicans many of us
struggling to pay our bills
especially now.
With this law stands we pay for
everything we pay whether the
company should have invested in
the study energy plants are not
we pay with the costly to fair
and just reasonable rates we pay
for cleanup of the CEO not the
shareholders who have been
profiting US four hundred
percent no matter what we need
renewables we need just
transition funds we believe that
there should actually be a lot
more transition funds and
greater payments for communities
of color we're glad these
amendments to not jeopardize any
of the game to heard about in
the San Juan K. but as an
organization representing
communities of color and the
youth we demand both economic
and environmental justice we
believe we truly and equitable
and accountable process includes
corporate accountability and
regulation.
That is why we support SB one
one five thank you for your
time.
Thank you very much next Richard
Moore.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members my name is
Richard Moore and I'm on this
well today representing Los are
Dennis institute the gardens
Institute and I'm national co
coordinator the environment
justice health alliance.
I'm in changes we know is
happening affects future
generations.
Missions are needed and can be
achieved but not at the expense
of the people we need
corporations to be held
accountable for their abuse and
this is what we call
environment on economic justice
PNM has been reliant on dirty
fuels for over fifty years and
has contributed to many negative
health related effects that this
disproportionately affect people
of color and other community.
much of what we've seen is
cancers heart disease premature
death Senator at one time the
riches in ministration cited PNM
for sixty thousand air quality
violations so now PNM wants the
same people who have been hurt
by corporate choices the
compensate them in full they
want us to pay them to close the
climate because including plant
the DA makes us pay all no
matter the facts no matter the
abuse the G. eight prohibits a
reduction on cost from us to
their corporate shareholders
they can't be this can't be what
you want to and this is not what
we want this cannot we cannot
believe that this is okay we
support democratic rights and
ETA eliminates those due process
rights P. and includes us and
sent the bill and we are sent
the bill increased rates for
their corporate mismanagement is
a direct assault on frontline
communities.
Thank you so much our next
driver John Boyd.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee can you hear me
yes we can.
The ETA should be amended
because the regulated what PNM
can take for rate payers as
compensation when it closes the
plant this is the only state in
the nation that per that kind of
de regulation into the consider
this in two thousand sixteen PNM
obligations at four corners coal
plant in.
The PNM renew them anyway
without any financial analysis.
Federation of less costly
alternatives to all to the
detriment of ratepayers the PRC
found PNM is conduct had been
improvement and that ratepayers
should be held harmless from
that from that PNM persuaded the
PRC to defer penalizing it until
the general rate case keep up
future then PNM decided it
wanted to sell the plant but PNM
had a problem it would have to
get rid of four corners which
then it would have to file an
abandonment proceeding and it
was facing taking zero for the
cost for its stranded costs so
what it did was to come to the
legislature it wanted its three
did wanted three hundred million
dollars.
S. retirement costs for that
plan and to take that from rate
payers so what it did to avoid
the penalty that it was
certainly going to face before
the PRC it came to the
legislature with the ETA which
had many good aspects but buried
in and and I believe very few
legislators.
Thank you our next please.
The holding.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
hearing today in two thousand
nineteen at a standing room only
totally packed room no comments
were allowed.
Two and then this bill that is
why we are here to date.
this amendment does not adjust
any landmark renewable energy
standards we will not harm
native peoples and their
community.
This bill does restore authority
to the P. Garcia but most of all
this bill limits additional
corporate socialism on the
future closing of utilities I
urge you to pass this bill and
make a good bill stronger also I
want you know I would former
member of Sierra Club NCV and am
neither of which have any
expertise in renewable energy or
utilities they do not represent
the bulk of the environmental
community thank you very much.
Thank you I'm we're gonna trying
not to attack people or
organizations here I I we've
been respectful so let's keep it
to the bill please okay next
cover.
How.
Hi are you on.
Can you hear me now yes we can
thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee I am the reverent
Ollie Beaumont organizing
director of interfaith worker
justice New Mexico a statewide
network of people of faith and
people of conscience that
advocate for economic justice
and workers rights and we urge
you to support SB one fifty five
SB one fifty five seeks to
preserve and protect all that is
good in the energy transition
act by correcting provisions
that remove accountability and
responsibility for utility
companies while we were told
that the law would lead to
savings for ratepayers while
transitioning the energy sector
the ETA actually significantly
increases costs to ratepayers by
shielding one utility company
from regulatory oversight there
can be no economic justice for
New Mexico's working families
without the public regulation
committees authority to ensure
that rates are just and
reasonable madam chair and
members of the committee we
cannot truly have a just
transition without ensuring
justice for rate payers as well
we urge you to support SB one
fifty five and we thank you for
your service to all the peoples
of New Mexico.
Thank you very much next please.
Paul Gibson.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and bill sponsors for
introducing this important
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred member statewide
revision of the energy
transition act is one of our
very highest priorities for the
session you have heard from the
bill Sanchez and expert
witnesses who carefully laid out
the problems with the ETA as
past and how it can easily be
fixed without impacting any of
the many benefits of the GA I
don't need to pull the the labor
those details you've heard the
we take has sent you all a
detailed analysis of the
problems with the ETA and how to
be fixed I strongly recommend
you review the document why you
to liberate and before you folks
once the G. A. was introduced I
was among the dozen advocates
from the environmental community
and from the grassroots
indigenous advocates who met
with ETA Bill Sanchez we
outlined much of what you've
heard from today about the
problems with the ETA and bet or
amendments to be incorporated we
were what they would consider
and integrate our concerns if we
could get them to the language
over that we can merry on the
**** did so from those
recommendations were not heeded
and so here we are today I want
to cut to the chase those
environmental organizations who
supported the ETA in the first
place and who refused amendments
were either in league with PNM
craft in crafting the language
for they were hoodwinked in
either case there are willing to
acknowledge their mistakes I
don't understand why they won't
admit those mistakes but you
have a chance to correct them
retake our democracy strongly
encourages you to vote yes on SB
one fifty five thank you very
much for your service.
Thank you and I I want to remind
people about the some respect
for other organizations I know
we have a lot of feelings about
dar constitution our policies
thank you next where we have
three more we can go.
No.
Thank you Baker.
Just a moment M. I. and needed
yes yes thank you I'm is this
opportunity thank you madam
chairman and the Senate
representatives to the
consultation committee I
Representative Rio Arriba
concerned citizens which is a
grassroots proponent of.
I'm elected justice and green
energy development.
I I think that
Senator Tomlinson and to deal
Lopez have
made the point that perhaps some
of the people who were approving
the ETA and twenty nineteen
we're not entirely aware of some
of the limitations and I believe
those limitations have been well
delineated that the ETA as it
stands it's I think greatest
liability is that it has removed
the possibility for PRC
oversight for the proposed
actions that PNM decides we
started unilaterally to take
I admit that they are moving
towards green energy
possibilities and I I'm grateful
to securitization
abilities of this bill but I
think that
it's dangerous to have any
public utility basically that
has a monopoly into the future
to be relieved of any oversight
any further analysis of.
Thank you very much thank you
very much miss Baker and next
Trevor.
Grant.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Cameron Graham I'm a
volunteer legislative advocate
for a a RP New Mexico and is two
hundred fifty thousand members
in the state A. R. P. stands in
strong support of Senate bill
one fifty five.
The amendments to the ETA on
this bill address the concerns
that led A. R. Pete to oppose
the original adoption of the ETA
because we saw that it did not
protect rate payers because of
the absence of meaningful
regulatory oversight over the
amount sought to be recovered
under appreciated investments or
decommissioning costs those
costs you have heard can be
hundreds of millions of dollars
and they would be paid out over
decades of time.
A. R. P.'s nation wide policy on
sustainable energy policies is
that they should be cost
effective it has a policy on
securitisation that should be
used only when it results
overall lower costs for
consumers those goals cannot be
met if you have no regulatory
oversight.
This bill addresses that concern
by removing the absolute
prohibition on any disallowance
of such costs by the public
Regulatory Commission.
It also addresses another
concern about the issuance of a
financing or.
Currently they mandates the
issuance of a financing order
regardless of quantifiable
benefits this amendment corrects
that by allowing the PRC issue
of financing or if tangible and
quantifiable benefits to
ratepayers are cheeks.
Thank you for the opportunity of
addressing this important piece
of legislation that we think the
sponsors for bring it forward.
Thank you I'm next this is our
last proponent.
Daniel Pritchard.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Daniel
Pritchard on the executive board
of renewable tells we think it's
great the HSD is working to
support cheap solar wind and
battery energy and economic
development in northwestern New
Mexico.
However the right paying
consumers once again pitted
against the profit taking of
large investor owned utilities
no one has quantified the
alleged risks noted earlier I
support this bill which is about
protecting the consumer the
right pair it is deeply
troubling that the original ETA
did not address PNM stake in
future decommissioning of the
multi billion dollar Palo Verde
nuclear plant the small
adjustments proposed are
supported by the chair of the
PRC and in fact is unanimous
unanimously unanimously
supported by the **** PRC's five
sitting commissioners as
reported in editorials in many
state publications I believe
they know what they're talking
about additionally the FIR for
this bill states that I
paraphrase if this bill is not
enacted the commission will
remain constrained from
exercising is traditional rate
making authority to act in the
public interest.
Thank you for your consideration
of this bill and I urge you to
vote in favor of New Mexico
consumers thank you.
Thank you very much we are now
going to the committee senator
Tom and is there you want to
take a minute for anything.
Before we go to questions and
discussion.
Thank you madam chair and hello
I you can now proceed to the.
Members of the committee thank
you thank you very much okay
members of the committee
questions comments discussion I
first have Senator renewable.
Thank you madam chairman
mixed feelings here I coated
against the TA for different
reasons and what to wear coming
up now but to
had some concerns I I don't have
any objection to let the
oversight but PRC per se but it
was we we we did a lot of
discussion and committees and
over and over again when we pass
this bill and it is the law of
the land current time.
One of the things that.
Have to object to is people talk
about how on why is it was to
have been invested in the power
plants the coal plants and so
forth they should have done it
and and in nineteen seventy or
one of this plant started off
everybody basically economically
demanded that Cole was it was
cheapest thing out there is
easiest way to keep the for the
our everybody was it was all in
favor of that them and this long
as the Albuquerque was never due
to brief the coal fired air of
and that they didn't care about
that price was cheaper than
that's what everybody wants so
we got our plans because
economically speaking that's
what the public wanted we got
him and now we want to convert
away from I am not an opponent
to winter so I think it's a good
thing but you got to pay for and
the it's a it's kind of like
we're we're looking at a minimum
wage bill we're not necessarily
by the Congress level they're
talking about going to fifteen
dollar minimum wage we wouldn't
expect that McDonald's would not
raise the price of a big mac if
you raise the minimum wage you
get paid court and the there's
no regulation like that on on
that Donald's or any private
business but this is a different
situation we got sensually
monopolies that operate and the
PRC regulates those monopolies
they allow them and money and a
half percent return on our
investment.
And if you want to have wind and
solar you have to pay the tax
and that's my opinion is that if
we want to convert to renewables
it's going to cost money and PRC
has a history of only allowing
maybe fifty percent or even zero
percent recovery so there would
be no that's why the bill was
put together the way it was.
Under the elected version we got
a new version of PRC coming up
in the near future it may be
different politics is going to
be greatly reduced maybe totally
different but when you have
great players to the lectern the
PRC obviously they're going to
look to their constituents to to
pass rules that affect a
monopoly so I'm a little
concerned about that I think if
we're gonna do this conversion
the the regulated entities need
to have the ability to recover
the dollars they spend much of
that they have invested and it
was invested wisely in the past
and you can argue that if you
want we didn't know that at the
nineteen seventy we didn't have
never heard about climate change
or to any significant degree of
probably if you professor types
are out there talking about it
the public certainly wasn't
aware.
I have a fairly good portfolio
stocks in one thing that never
happens I have invested in some
oil wells and you know when an
oil will need more money they
call me and say we need more
money you don't give it to me
out so but if I buy a stock on
the stock exchange one thing
that doesn't happen is that
General Motors doesn't call me
and say Hey it's running a
little low on cash this week
could you send me another check
I didn't happen much stock goes
down the value goes down but
that doesn't happen in doesn't
have that prerogative to go to
the rate payers and save we want
more money they can only say we
want whatever the PRC a lapse on
the rates.
And yet PRC has historically
come along and so we're only
going to allow you to fifty
percent or even zero percent of
that cost because we don't think
it's a whatever it's not prudent
personalizes the interest rate
there's there is only one source
of funds here Madam chairman and
that is the right there you can
say well the stockholder on it
stockholders don't pay extra
they of their stock value goes
up and down but they don't pay
for it the but my cellar stocked
company may go bankrupt but
there is only one source of
money we have to make sure that
we provide for that and if we're
gonna make the conversion we're
talking about drastic changes in
our environment our in our
energy sources wind solar
battery technology is not there
we've got lots of costs that are
going to come up in the near
future that we're gonna do it
we've got to be able to do that
and by rocking the boat and
changing the this particular law
I think would do irreparable
harm possibly to the to the
state to the prospect of us
getting over the hump and
getting to the goal that are set
out an ETA with other righteous
or not Senator Cervantes will
tell you they are aspirational
if not in statute they're not
mandated there's no penalties
and that's true so I'm not sure
that we were we're gonna get
there anyway but if we're going
to be able to pay for we have to
maintain some stability and
that's what the whole idea of
the J. was about was to try to
put some stability and reason
and logic into the process
that's my comments on any
particular questions madam chair
would certainly listen any
rebuttal that the sponsor has
but
that's my thought thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so much US senator
Clemente he's offering you the
chance to say a few words if you
want.
Thank you madam chair on I'll
defer to mice sponsor a to the
oath Lopez.
Did you want to respond in any
way yes thank you I think it's
really important to understand
that PNM is not like a private
company it is a monopoly a
regulated industry and what that
means is because it's the only
one that has the the license to
do what it does is very
important to have a check on it
so that it does not take
advantage of the rate payers and
so that is why the constitution
in New Mexico constitution
article eleven section to
establish is the duty of the PRC
to regulate monopoly utilities
and that's it monopolies I mean
every company has an interest in
generating profits and
maximizing
payouts to shareholders and
maximizing that the value of the
stock that's inherent in a for
profit company and because it's
got this monopoly we need the
PRC to regulate it The New
Mexico constitution requires
that the US Supreme the Supreme
Court has spoken about it and
our New Mexico Supreme Court has
spoken about how important it is
to have the PRC and so that's
what we're trying to do with
this bill is restore that role.
Sure Senator I don't I don't
disagree with you in in terms of
of monitoring and assuring that
they didn't borrow four hundred
million dollars and three
hundred million was up but I I
don't have any problem with that
concept but getting a hundred
percent is important and
historically the PRC has not
always done that and if you're
going to achieve the laudable
goals in the Energy trans Act
transmission at ETA you have to.
Be able to allow the utilities
to pay the tab and that means
they have to recover their
entire investment of any old
technology that it's going to be
obsolete and that's that's my
concern Messin around a single
the law as it is written in
jeopardize that and that's all
that's my comments thank you
thank you.
Well Senator solves this next.
You're on mute Senator is Center
souls you're on mute and then
after all at the center so the
Senator Gallegos I thought I
thank you myself off of you
thank you madam chair
couple of questions does Senate
bill one fifty I stripped the
just transition funding.
Senator are common or center
city Lopez.
The answer is no.
I don't know if Michael Sanchez
on mute.
Thank you madam chair and and
center city a Lopez or tell me
whichever one does it touch the
renewable energy targets of the
ETA.
No it does not know.
I'm Madam chair in senators who
in New Mexico is responsible for
regulating utilities in New
Mexico.
The PRC.
Madam chair does the ETA as it's
written does it script that
responsibility from the PRC are
you this one and do the that's
it you're proposing of re
established party of the PRC.
Go ahead.
Yes that's absolutely correct
Senator souls.
Madam chair in center city Lopez
center to open up.
The R. C. typically the term
repo improvement costs would
regulate the utilities.
Yes I'm sorry I did.
Yes the PRC normally Rick has
the authority to review those
costs.
Madam chair and senator does the
ETA as it currently does it
remove that oversight.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Senators souls yes
it removes that oversight with
regard to plant abandonment and
and recovery of stranded assets
when the management costs and
recovery of stranded assets so
with that limited area it does
remove that oversight yes.
Madam chair and senator help
address the Dissidia Lopez and
yeah.
We don't have to trip over who
which one I'm addressing to.
Either one of the managers
Center Sedillo Lopez in the ETA
is it's currently written is it
written just to deal with the
San Juan generating station and
other PNM utilities orders that
were probably written in that
restricts the oversight.
Madam chair Senators souls the
the attorney's a.
it it turns out an agreement on
that point one and that.
Share Madam chair Senators
schools there is disagreement
about that
unfortunately I believe that it
is of drafted and that's one of
the things we want so it's so
drafted that's one of the things
we think is important to clarify
that it is ABS it's limited to
coal now there is a section
that's that's that's that you
can again one of the things
we're trying to avoid is
litigation about this so there
is a section that you could
argue limits it to coal but I
think it's important to clarify
that for future when we do close
the glass gas plants I mean when
they when PNM closes the gas
plants and when PNM closes the
nuclear plant we need to agree
to start at this foundation that
we're trying to amend right now
we need to start with ensuring
that the PRC has regulatory
authority to determine whether
it's investments were prudent
and whether those costs are just
and and that's why it's
important to make that amendment
whether it however you answer
that question it's still
important to make those
amendments.
Thank you madam chair in center
city Lopez does this bill one
fifty five does it restore the
oversight of the PRC.
Madam chair Senators those yes
it does.
Thank you madam chair at center
city Lopez are there any other
states or other instances in the
country where securitization has
been years that removes the PRC
or the public utility commission
some recipe you see in other
places where we moves their
involvement and oversight any
other situations of
securitization.
Madam chair Senators souls has
has a lead sponsor senator
Clemente said in his opening
statement no.
So madam chair and I believe
securitization in the country is
been used somewhere close
between twenty and thirty times
and this is the only instance in
New Mexico we're securitization
has been used that remove the
over the.
Oversight commission from any
involvement and they're
essentially just told to accept
whatever is presented by the
utility is that correct.
Madam chair Senators souls yes
that is that precisely why we
have this amendment that why we
for this man thank you madam
chair and and senator under the
current ETA with the PRC be able
to disallow future
decommissioning costs.
This amendment fix that.
For these amendments.
Madam chair Senators all that is
exactly what we're trying to do.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator do legislators in your
opinion have the expertise to
determine but stranded asset
costs should be through
legislation just improving
expenditures of the amount that
is just transition costs to
legislators typically have the
expertise to make those
determinations in specific
dollar amounts.
Madam chair Senators souls no
they do not that is why that
responsibility is allocated to
the PRC under our constitutional
framework.
Madam chair people often talk
about the PRC as being just five
commissioners is the PRC staffed
with lawyers and experts and
others on all things dealing
with utilities.
Madam chair Senators sold yes
that's absolutely correct.
Thank you and I think that's a
really important point these are
not just I elected people that
extensive staff were able to do
large
research studies on what other
states have done whatever reason
will approve it because these
are not justified people that
sit down and decide we're going
to take everything from PNM that
they've invested they have
expertise in that staff with
expertise on what are reasonable
and prudent class I think
they're been numerous instances
where utilities across the
country have made and I think
the term is typically used
gilded costs they go out to buy
the most expensive retrofits and
upgrades and other kinds of
things because the profit is
based on that underappreciated
asset ended you can buy the most
expensive asset then you make
the biggest money profit back
for your shareholders I'm.
And I think we already
established this does this bill
does restore the PRC authority
as one of the main components of
the amendments that you're
proposing is that accurate.
Madam chair Senators souls yes
it is and that is why I just I I
disagree with senator Neville
that that they should get one
hundred percent cost every time
because as you pointed out
gilded costs are excessive costs
imprudent investments should not
under our current state of the
law should not be paid for by
rate payers those are those
decisions because they were not
good decisions should be paid
for by PNM.
In other words its shareholders.
Thank you madam chair and I wish
I'd got in in time that I could
provided it for the entire
committee but just yesterday I
got a report yeah and it's
fairly lengthy it's about twenty
five pages but it's put out by
energy innovation
How we're at energy innovation
dot org but it is a paper
comparing the two thousand
nineteen securitisation
legislation in Colorado Montana
and New Mexico by Rod Stewart
Michael Boyle
talked about the three states in
compares their legislation now
this is an industry regulator
oversight paper report
if I might you madam chair read
a couple of sections where it's
comparing the.
One of them it says yeah these
are just short paragraph so just
take a minute Colorado's new law
to both the most attention to
public interest and consumer
protection from among those
three Montana's law follows
Colorado's approach but does not
go into as much detail and then
contains many provisions about
these outcomes New Mexico's law
has the least attention to these
issues the legislation preempts
do you see in New Mexico called
PRC oversight of consumer cost
by defining recoverable dollar
amounts and limiting time for
implementation since utilities
other financial advisors have a
fiduciary duties to their
shareholders legislation should
support the commission's produce
very duties to consumers and the
public interest so the correct
balance to be struck between
consumers the public interest
utilities and financial firms do
share your duties
recommendation.
By this group is legislators
should include public interest
in consumer protection
provisions in securitizations
provide the maximum consumer
societal benefits another
section as they're going through
and I have the whole lot of
sections but madam chair if I
might and this is talking
specifically about New Mexico's
ETA the.
Mr chair up sorry Senators told
will you find that report to
everybody on the committee.
I will I'm I think I can email
it but I'm not in the office so
I will.
I understand that the the emails
of everybody.
I think our tips but that would
be relevant for the next bill
that we're going to hear around
this topic as well.
Yes and I'm gonna be you some
other sections that is as I'm
talking about that which is more
broadly securitization okay
thank you.
One last session that I want to
read out of this page talked
about and this is the ETA so
talking specifically about the
New Mexico Law yes it's out
going through and I'm on page
fourteen I think I provided you
late yesterday afternoon that
Madam chairman is the EPA
definition specify amounts
subject to securitization for
the abandonment of the San Juan
generating station removing
these amounts from the public
regulator regulation Commission
the PRC's discretion this usual
provision differs from
securitization statutes in other
states most states specify what
securitization bonds can be used
for but we determination of
amounts to the discretion of the
regular Tory Commission The New
Mexico amounts are hard wired
into the legislation so the
utility has complete certainty
as remaining as to investment
amounts.
You can recover these provisions
likely included to gain utility
support limit the ETA's
applicability be adequate.
At
to this single example and limit
the application to future plant
retirements or other potential
uses of this refinancing
technique such as storm damage
or pollution reduction or other
areas I'm this report which is
not done to support your club
PNM PRC anything of that sort.
Indicates how unusual the
provisions in the New Mexico you
need a work by removing the PRC
authority which has never been
done in any other state these
particular amendments restore
that authority which matches
with how others used
securitization when we have to
abandon
Power plants because of
environmental concerns because
of cost or the need to move more
renewable so with that madam
chair I will I'll yield to
others who might have questions.
Thank you so much Senator
Gallegos your next.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Cormann Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
I want to start off by telling
you that the actual work for me
say appreciate Sir souls
discussion of how the
legislature's hat lack
experience in now will get will
get sorry in the utilities area
I work for PNM for thirty years
and I'm actually in opposition
to this bill not because I work
for PNM they actually when they
sold the New Mexico gas company
has a hundred eight hours short
of thirty years now lost half my
retirement so I not gonna say
there's not small of lost there
but in all reality Madam chair
Senators I guess my concern is
more on the FIR page three and I
wondered if you guys have
discussed the difference in your
view and energy minerals natural
resources department in in their
explanation there and what we're
I go with that is Center sold to
talk about you know this bill
having attorneys of the children
PRC I would anticipate that when
we did the original Energy
transaction Act and I was not
part of that bill and I voted no
on it but I would've of believe
that we had the same group same
discussions same attorneys of in
that discussion I want to verify
that and then get an idea of
what you think of the
concerns with the amendment R.
D. R. E. M. E. N. RT Sir Thomas.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator for your question I'm
gonna defer to the agency NSE.
To answer that thank you.
Madam chair and senator guy a
goes thank you there's that
there's a number of issues that
the and that the N. T. M. N. R.
D. raises so I'm not exactly
sure which one years
specifically hoping
Mr not say he is referring to
page three of the fiscal impact
report and if the discussion to
the question.
Yes there's a number of issues
thank you madam chair and
senator guy a ghosts is a number
of issues that that are brought
up one they said that there is a
clean energy replacement and
economic relief these are
unchanged in the amendments
being brought before you the big
change is that.
there will be PRC oversight as
we said before and as senator
schools just articulated this is
the only securitization bill in
the country that removes
regulatory oversight over I'm
depreciated investments and
decommissioning costs this bill
will change that it doesn't
change anything else in the bill
except for removing PNM is an EP
is one hundred percent guarantee
and it only in inserts
regulatory oversight over those
costs so so the just transition
funds will be protected they
renewable portfolio standard
will be protected all the all
the good parts of the ETA will
remain all this does is is allow
regulatory oversight.
Thank you madam chairman and
senator an expert witness I
guess my next question is being
that this is such a new act the
we've put in place.
Why was this not dealt with with
the attorneys and PRC and all
the other people at the table
when the original Act was
enacted what was lost in the
discussion to bring us to today.
Does the chair of the PRC want
to comment or not on that.
Yes I actually I do
Are we we did have some
engagement with the bill Sanchez
and actually we were.
versification pointing out this.
Regular issue.
And
A clearly folks didn't really
want to pay attention to us
we could have been more clear
about what the issue was but the
language did not change.
Yes madam chair Senators and
Mr chairman I appreciate that
answer I I guess my thing is
going back Senators souls that
we don't have the expertise I
would have expected at that time
that with all the people at the
table we would have had a better
outcome but.
All all in with this and and
Madam chair Senators I know that
so when the cold
Industry was supposed taken out
in rat tone it devastated their
their community and I look at
this as an opportunity for us to
help communities where they're
at now you know I know Senator
Sedillo Lopez brought up the
were poor state and I think we
do a lot of unintended
consequences with quite a few
bills we have this year
so I guess the my thing is I
know that I don't want to hurt
our constituents in our state in
on this bill I had only thirty
four and fifty one in opposition
but none of more for my area of
the state of but I just
understand that you know as we
go forward if we change from all
gas natural gas and coal that
there are are going to be
consequences and cost associated
to that with that are you thank
you madam chair.
Thank you so much we have
Senator Cervantes next.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair we're all familiar with
the quote that goes those who
don't know history are condemned
to repeat it.
Madam chair I was in the on
amill will chair the you now
hold back in two thousand
eighteen two thousand nineteen I
think cell history is useful for
everyone on this on this
conference today.
Now when I chair the committee
back in two thousand eighteen
this bill ETA first came before
us.
Senator souls and I have a
number of issues with it at the
time Senator was I think at one
or more alternate versions of
the ETA I work pretty hard in
two thousand eighteen to keep
that bill from passing in my in
my role as the chair of the
committee will remember those
year round with maybe not very
fond memories spending hours as
I try to go through the eighty
two page bill to identify what I
thought were issues at the time.
As a result of that hearing the
bill was held up in two thousand
nineteen I was a very popular
because the bill had a lot of
support from the environmental
special interests and have a lot
of support from the executive
branch of a lot of support from
PNM.
and then it also has some
opposition but but we held the
bill up in two thousand
eighteen.
So it could take a full year for
additional scrutiny and
consideration by people with
expertise and and that's what
happened we came back in two
thousand nineteen.
In two thousand nineteen once
again we were about ourselves in
the middle of session with a
great deal of disagreement about
what the bill did what it didn't
do.
and help and didn't help but let
me disabuse anyone who has
memories different than have
been expressed your today we
knew damn well that we were
taking the PRC out of the
process that he suggests that we
didn't know what we're doing we
knew it we debated that we
discussed at great length.
Anybody who believes that they
have that we didn't know that
the costs are going to be borne
by the rate payers
has have short memories because
we knew that issue we discussed
in the right that a greatly.
And I will get out back to
center schools are sold out a
number of amendments and and and
I joined him in trying to amend
the bill back in two thousand
nineteen we just quite simply
didn't have the votes.
But all the issues were known
all of the issues that are being
discussed here today were known.
They were discussed at great
length but the votes were there.
Now when I set out we're
condemned to repeat history we
don't learn from it I think what
what we find ourselves with
today is an important issue that
I want to highlight in my
comments.
Which is this was an
extraordinary difficult and
complicated piece of
legislation.
In a highly complicated area of
of regulation the utilities that
very frankly the legislature was
not equipped to handle.
We don't have the staff we don't
have the resources we don't have
the skill set to understand
these issues are far beyond this
and I bring this up and I want
emphasize what because I find
ourselves doing this now today
all the time.
Including legislation we passed
this session and legislation
that I expect we're going to
pass this session.
We're dabbling our toes in areas
where we really frankly don't
know what we're doing.
And that's not to be little
ourselves we all work hard we
give a lot of time and energy
and effort we have very bright
people that I serve alongside
with and yet the areas we're
dealing with are far beyond our
capacity.
Now back in two thousand
nineteen when I realize the
issues were beyond my capacity
frankly I looked to the PRC.
The PRC is our state agency
charged with the expertise the
knowledge the staff countless
hours every week there are full
time paid position I thought we
would get helping guide FOR the
PRC.
My memory may submit my my
memory may deliver that some of
the restaurants that I've heard
here today my recollection the
PRC is the prosperity didn't
take a position on the ETA or
when they did take a position I
went back and forth sometimes a
commissioner would say they
supported it sometimes they
didn't even in the middle of the
session even as we got close to
vote I found PRC commissioners
I'm committed to supporting or
not supporting the legislation
made a hard for me as a
legislator because I was looking
to the PRC for some of that
guidance and very frankly we
didn't get it we can get to my
satisfaction the doctor I don't
recall the PRC taking up a
position with the other.
Kind of interesting because this
last election in November the
public essentially has disbanded
the PRC and I think you would on
that legislation I don't think
the PRC took a position strongly
one way or the other Intel maybe
shortly before the vote but even
at the legislative level the PRC
then take a position whether the
essentially abandon itself.
And so what that told me is that
the the complication of this
legislation ETA was even beyond
the capacity of the PRC itself.
I'm.
Want to go beyond the bill here
so alter the bill and shared a
moment with my specifics in my
concerns and issues with this
bill but I really do think it's
important for us to recognize
that when we on this committee
and as a ledger legislature
began to try and regulate.
Thanks is complicated as
community solar or fracking or
produced water.
Or requiring the.
Solar energy on all new home
construction we've got to have
the information in the data to
make these decisions
intelligently.
I'm too often times I find that
that we're we're making these
decisions really with a lot of
information on now and I I hope
all of this will give us some
pause is this my colleagues to
sit here and think you gonna
change the way we do our job.
We've we've got to modernize our
legislature we've got to
modernize our resources our
staff we've got a more
modernized the with the
resources we give ourselves do
our job well and I I hope this
bill will illustrate that
because clearly we find
ourselves here today with some
regret some very very deep
regret.
And let's not kid ourselves that
are so that you bring up your
name you tried mightily to bring
all these issues of your tried
mightily to put amendments on
this bill I try to help you to
do it and let's face it we
couldn't do it.
but let's not let's not kid
ourselves we it's not that we
didn't we didn't understand of
what the bill that we we knew
very well what the bill did we
knew that we were taking the PRC
out of the process.
Madam chair let me turn to the
let me turn to the.
Shortcomings of the bill today
because of problems with the
bill today are really much of
the same problems that the the
earlier bill had for me we turn
to page four of the bill with me
and I'll go through pages four
and five.
This committee but maybe not
everybody does call is used to
me saying this now this
committee is to be made a bunch
of lawyers it's not anymore but
it but it does include a couple
of us and and lawyers should
appreciate something that in the
law lawyers use the word called
ambiguous.
Ambiguous is a word we use a
great deal of the law to
describe a word or term that is
capable and susceptible of
different reasonable
interpretations and meanings.
And when something is ambiguous
then we begin to create problems
we create litigation for
ourselves my my original
problems with the ETA aware that
it had a great deal of ambiguous
language that I predicted at the
time would lead to litigation
and of course two years later
this led to a great deal of
litigation still ongoing and
expect this bill it was to pass
with only compound that
litigation I'll give you my
examples on pages four and five.
Recovery of energy transition
costs are allowed by the thank
PRC through the issuance of
bonds legislative in on page
five it says provided they
provide tangible and
quantifiable benefits taxpayers
want to what what is tangible
and quantifiable benefits to
taxpayers and highly ambiguous
early subjected would only be
litigated.
These and and the that is the
criteria by which bonds could be
approved by the PRC is if the
bonds provide tangible and
quantifiable benefits ratepayers
that are greater than would be
achieved absent the issuance of
the bonds that language is
meaningless to me as a lawyer.
Really meaningless just as the
PRC is going to try to I was
tangible what is quantifiable
benefit to ratepayers and what
would be greater than than the
bonds with or without the
language then the proposed bill
would be New Mexico was on to
say.
That the PRC issues the bonds in
the assets and the investment
investments were prudently
incurred.
Cruelly it encouraging who who
really encouraged to the PRC or
to PNM PRC won't exist much
longer.
Our words like whether assets
were prudently incurred is
meaningless ambiguous.
The program because the language
was I to say the bonds would be
issued if the energy costs are
fairly balance the interests of
the taxpayers and consumers what
is fairly balanced I don't know.
Resilience would leave that
issue to the PRC what is the
parent what is to fairly balance
the interests of investors and
consumers.
Language likewise goes on with
greater ambiguity approval of
the application would result
rates that are fair.
Very just a reasonable.
Rates that are fair just
reasonable is going to be in the
eye of the beholder.
Once again that's not a
meaningful standard it's not it
doesn't really belong in the law
where there is no objective
standard by which were given the
PRC any direction.
And then ultimately the last
language that one sentence of
the bar should be approved if
the application is in the public
interest.
the public interested to
Throughout the history of this
too two years of this bill what
is in the public interest
depends on which special
interest group is speaking at
any given time we have
environmental and conservation
groups at polar opposites of
them a position on on the ETA.
Groups that profess to be
existence with the idea of the
environment conservation coming
up with completely different
conclusions about whether the
ETA is the public interest or
not.
So how are we as lawyers
provided so doctors etcetera
with that the bonds are approved
or something's in the public
interest.
I go on madam chair I won't
continue with the proposed new
language but but I I can't
support the bill simply because
I hope that I'm always
consistent is legislature we're
passing laws laws or something
that lawyers and judges are
bound to interpret and apply in
understand and enforce when we
used language that's ambiguous
right Sam simply in casually we
can't so all we do release we
credit regular work for
ourselves as lawyers and that's
not my goal here to do so.
So madam chair all and by
repeating I hope that will take
the caution and the experience
of the learning and the history
of the ETA as a caution to
ourselves with all the other
bills that this committee this
legislature are considering of
that would change regulatory
environment.
and environmental law.
and and the the way that we find
New Mexicans with the the type
of state that we all hope to to
leave them on so madam chair
what with that said I I cannot
support the bill we don't get
mulligans all the time in life
and and here it seems as though
we're asking for a mall again
but the ship has sailed I wasn't
happy with the ETA no surprise
anybody have been critical of
the ETA's of this passage.
I think it's free **** agency
representatives misrepresented
some politicians we can applaud
ourselves for our great
standards leading the nation on
renewable standards which are
not standards at all.
They are aspirational as senator
no well I think when other ETA
gives goals and targets and
things we hope to accomplish but
there's no consequence we
failure to do we fail to do so
that's not a law that's
memorial.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
are there before I go to people
of the already asked one
question are there any people
any senators who wish to speak
for the first time.
Okay etcetera so here next and
then Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to move it to pass.
We do have a motion for a due
pass is there a second.
One second.
There it.
Still.
Yes okay just a moment we'll
come back you Senator again
guiding us Sierra you cannot
second Senator Sedillo Lopez
you'll second okay is now
Senator Gallegos you have a
comment or question.
Madam chair and thank you I
really enjoyed Senator want this
history I was in the.
The lower chamber and did not
hear the details last time so on
this bill but I and I hope you
didn't **** I lost my zoom at a
while to get back on but I'm
wondering madam chair and Sir
Tom and if you to allow a peer
street commissioner of.
To
explain me what his position is
on the E. T. A. as it is now.
You will ask the question.
Yes
From a legal standpoint Senators
of our case.
Races are very reasonable
concerns.
but I will say.
That is.
I can't speak to any specific
targets because of safely the
judge
art and decided those dockets
but I can't say that in general
dockets that have come before us
that involve the ETA the
commission has very faithfully
tried to implement the intent of
the ETA.
And I think you have the results
of those decisions.
Are this in terms of.
where we go on in terms of
renewables since the ETA was
passed.
And I personally doubt that we
would have made nearly as much
progress on renewables as we
have without the ETA are pushing
us along.
so in practice whatever the
theoretical problems with the
ETA in practice it has I think
really achieved its its purpose.
I do believe in disbelief at the
time the legislation was passed
that the limitations on PRC
authority were ill advised again
exactly for the reasons that the
Senators invitees pointed out is
there simply a lack of expertise
and you know what I'll tell you
that Senator frontage was
correct we could use a little
more expertise even at the PRC.
But one of the great advantages
of the PRC process is that
intervenors could come in any
case and bring experts into the
debate.
And even when the PRC might be
short on internal expertise
those interpreters often bring
in very very.
Carpeted experts whose testimony
we can evaluate and that is one
of the extremely valuable prices
processes that we go through in
our decision making at the PRC
and to me it is a terrific
checked to be sure that we don't
make big mistakes.
And
So anyway overall it just having
said that.
With all of that with all of its
legal faults and all of its
complications and problems I
think the ETA is so far work at
to be terrific.
with the exception of the
stripping away of some of these
consumer protections that
Senator souls pointed out exist
everywhere else in the country.
And as Senator Sedillo Lopez
pointed out.
When you have a monopoly.
And you have an entity that is a
monopoly whose first legal
responsibilities to shareholders
you need that regulation.
You need it anyone of us put in
that same position of a monopoly
might be likely to abuse that
privilege it's just human nature
so it's not to call anyone.
That are evil or anything else
is just the natural check and
balance that protects the
public.
I hope that answers your
question.
Madam chair and commissioner yes
it it does I was just trying to
figure out here overall view and
with that all you'll madam chair
thank you.
Thank you I have Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question I'm not sure
who can actually answer it but
I'm wondering what the San Juan
hearing examiners be able to
predict customer savings what
what is the outcome of that.
Thank you
I am happy to to answer that I
don't know for our expert would
like to add but yes.
Excuse me Senator Sedillo Lopez
etcetera so if you made the
motion could you put your hand
down Senator Hamblen can you put
your hand down so I can remove
our other committee members up.
Thank you.
The hearing examiner's role is
just to respond to the K. to the
case before that is PNM is
requests and then all the
intervenors who have the
arguments that they make about
about the reasonableness or not
PNM is requests and then the
hearing officer makes a
recommendation to PRC that's
supposed to make the ultimate
determination and so what our
bill does is it lists the issues
from the public utility act and
the New Mexico Supreme Court and
while I understand very well
that Senators advances things
it's vague that is the law has
it currently exists
and what we did was try to
ensure that the PRC would have a
role in deciding the issues that
it should decide in the absence
of the removal of the PRC
authority under the ETA so it
just brings in Supreme Court and
public utilities law and is very
specific about what the PRC's
role should be with regard to
plant abandonment and
decommissioning costs.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you very much Madam thank
you we do have a due pass motion
and a second.
Madam chair I'd like to move the
table
thank you senator and tabling
motion is not debatable for
Annika could you please call the
vote on tabling motion.
Yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am Senator Hamblen.
Yes I'd like to explain.
Senator Neville.
Well yes.
Senator.
No.
Senator so no.
Senator Smith yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
Thanks.
No.
So there's I yes and no and for
nose to table speech okay so
Senator Hamlin to explain her
vote.
You madam chair I've I've been
the impacted a great deal by the
conversations and and comments
from people who are living in
these communities and.
You know my concern always
whenever we as legislators when
we draft legislation with good
intentions but that it could
have potential negative impacts
and and many of you know I've
always pushed for cleaner air
land and water but also feel
that when we continue to push
for renewable energy that we
must also thoughtfully provide
opportunities for those workers
in the coal industry which is
what the ETA is addressing so
that they can learn new skills
and work in an industry where
they can either make equal or
more than what they did in the
coal industry there are families
that have to support their their
their household put food on
their table pay their bills if
we don't allow for more
renewable energy projects to be
developed we're not creating an
industry for those displaced
workers to find new careers and
this is concerning to me I do
think the all or nothing
approach to amending the ETA is
not allowing the ETA to work I
am concerned for the frontline
communities and for the worker
transition programs I feel that
the energy transition act
designed to really help those
most impacted but I worry about
the funding being put in
jeopardy and I'm trusting the
concerns from those who've
talked today who live in the
community how the EPA has
impacted them and what they see
as best long term and
sustainable solutions that will
help their communities benefit I
do appreciate Senator serve on
this looking at the ways we
legislate and wave that we craft
language and policies and how it
could potentially stall if it's
being stuck in the courts and
still not benefiting those
communities or the causes that
were intended and that is why I
voted to table thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much this bill
has been tabled Senate bill one
fifty five I I thank everyone
who participated today and we're
moving on and I had announced
earlier that in between one
fifty five and one forty nine
we're going to hear Senate bill
two forty three remove some
solar energy G. R. T. deductions
from Senator Hickey and I'm
going to ask our vice chair to
take over why stepped away for a
minute Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you madam chair
Senator Hickey are you ready
presenter bill.
Senator Hickey.
You're on mute I know
see we all do it all the time.
Thank you very much madam chair
for the opportunity to present
this bill this is my maiden
voyages Senator and presenting
so please bear with me I don't
think this is a very complicated
bill especially what we just
went through our in any of that
are this bill
does several things it the.
expands the G. R. T. exemption
for installing a solar energy
system to include systems are
property to prevent G. R. T.
Karia meeting it calls for a ten
year sunset and requires an
annual report and I have an
expert with me today to
Well the president the the
details on the bill I am
interested in it as many of you
know I am very very interested
in developing renewable energy
and learning ways that that can
help produce revenue for the
state so that we can address the
very difficult social economic
issues and poverty that we have
and so I'm very pleased to be
able to be a sponsor this bill
and I would like to introduce my
expert witness Ryan center wall
who will go into detail thank
you madam chair and I now would
like Mr center wall to describe
the bill in the thank you Mr
center well.
Right good morning madam chair
and committee members it's an
honor to be before you today my
name's Ryan center on the CEO of
affordable solar we are a
Albuquerque headquartered and
operated solar company have been
here for twenty three years and
work in New Mexico in the
western U. S. and this bill is
relatively straightforward its
primary search function is to
remove the few words to
specifically the words to the
property on which it is
installed as a requirement for
G. R. T. deduction for solar
energy system.
additionally it adds a sunset to
the G. R. T. deduction and also
adds a reporting requirement the
the purpose of the sons that
reporting requirement are fairly
straight forward of the removal
of the words to the property on
which it is installed allows for
G. R. T. deduction on the
construction of offsite solar
projects as of right now the the
G. R. T. deduction is available
specifically for a of a system
that is installed on someone's
roof for business and service
that property this this bill
intends to clarify to taxation
and revenue
that is any solar project would.
Would qualify for G. R. T.
deduction there's a few reasons
that.
This is an important bill the
the primary one is that it
removes appear emitting aspect
of G. R. T. and that a solar
system is taxed as gross
receipts tax both of the
construction phase and also at
the retail energy sales so it
removes that period omitting it
also allows us to leverage our
strength as renewable energy
provider and put us on
parity with some of the
surrounding states and create
economic development
opportunities for for the state
by attracting by lowering our
cost renewable energy and
attracting.
Businesses that are that are
interested in that renewable
energy and then additionally at
the the reporting requirement
allows us to more so think we
understand the impact of the
deduction.
Thank you Mr center well and
that is my only expert witness
and so are you the four back to
you madam chair vice chair.
Thank you Senator Hickey do we
have any opponents of this bill.
Please raise your hand.
I am not seeing any opponents do
we have any proponents of this
bill you can speak for one
minute.
Mr Fleischer.
You're on mute.
Mr Fletcher you're on mute.
Sorry.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee I'm Marc
Fleisher magician lobbyists for
affordable solar and I'm
speaking in favor of this
legislation for couple reasons
one it makes as much more
competitive to attract data
centers and other large
consumers it also makes sense
for places like UNM New Mexico
State University that would like
to have solar energy but it
doesn't make sense to put
rooftop one fifty different
little buildings really good
haven't offsite so it makes it
much more efficient to do it
that way if they put it on the
rooftop it's there's no gross
receipts tax if they put it off
the rooftop of property there is
a gross receipts tax that
discourages these places doing
were there for ten favor this
bill and we'll give it due
consideration sure.
Thank you Mr Fletcher is there
anyone else in support of this
bill.
Okay I'll turn it over to the
committee and also to madam
chair who is back.
Okay thank you very much Center
renewable.
Thank you madam chair just a
quick question for the sponsor
or one of these experts
One of the concerns I have a
discussion last no mention
somewhere along the way that
wind and solar are more
efficient more cost effective
and so forth one of the reasons
for that is all of the various
incentives that we provide tax
credits and so forth
does this have a sense that in
and just a forever deal out
Mistretta ProBility I'm having
computer issues here but all up
and are the FIR and the did you
give me some background what
this does as far as that goes.
Senator.
Yes thank you madam chair and
senator Neville yes this has a
ten year sunset.
Very good.
Ten years a long time at some
point we're going to have to
start seeing what the real costs
are and the.
without tax credits without
incentives and rebates Malik and
stuff because we need to know
what real costs are.
The stuff I'm not gonna vote
against bill but I just want to
find a little more about the.
What what are the census an
issue I think kids will too long
from the the.
Of.
That that's one of my long term
concerned about wind solar all
of those things have only
subsidized they don't
necessarily reflect the true
cost that's all chair thank you.
Thank you before we go on to the
next speaker what other
committee to Cisco to Senator
Hickey.
I believe it goes.
and that Brian apps you can
correct me if I'm wrong here I
think it goes to finance is that
right my your.
It's going to I'm looking at my
list now I think it's going to
tax that's right chair of the so
I'm sorry okay so that it be
going to my committee thank you
thank you the only reason I ask
is you might want to reconsider
at ten years
I have next Senators souls and
Senator Gallegos.
Every time the real thank you
for I'm just one thing it's a
little bit more funds to center
renewable every year last
Representative comes out with
their levelized cost of energy
at current with the as we and I
believe is the lowest cost
followed by solar has levelized
cost that's in all the cost of
that's the you know after any
subsidies any other types of
things on the entire cost the
energy and wind and solar are
the lowest cost areas in all
ways followed by I believe it's
wind with battery storage so but
every year Lazarus levelized
cost of energy is the thing to
look up the to show those just a
little information thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so much now we have
center guy a ghosts and Senator
Hamblen.
Madam chair and senator I
appreciate the discussion I just
have a couple questions real
briefly center if you look at
how much Americans spend spend
on just energy costs nationwide.
Specifically in US senator madam
chair for myself now I have not
I have I would defer to by
expert witness if he had any
insight into that.
Madam chair senator Greg as a do
not.
Well you madam chair and senator
I've heard it's as low as four
percent of our earnings for our
income I'm just wondering with
that being such a low number why
would we need this tax
deduction.
Thank you I again will refer to
my.
Expert witness on the Senator
Gallegos.
Madam chair senator guy it goes
my my opinion is that this
deduction those two primary
things it makes it more
competitive with surrounding
states that that have a
deduction or more competitive
gross receipts tax structure for
those that are considering
operating their their business
or data center in New Mexico
versus surrounding state and
secondly.
It's a it's also my opinion that
the attacks on the retail energy
sales that is the output of the
of the solar plant is is it in
addition to the tangible
personal property tax that's an
on going through the life of the
asset is sufficient taxation in
itself.
Madam chair senator I appreciate
it actually I've been talking
about this for a long time love
for wind and solar to be able to
contribute thirty percent of our
economy as oil and gas does and
if we did that we'd have a sure
plus throughout the state but
the with that all you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you for bringing
this forward Ivan more money is
more of just as a COVID and
maybe to also address Senator
diagnosis concerns as somebody
who owns who is fortunate enough
to have a solar system on my
house I appreciate the savings
that I have from having to pay
my investor owned utility
company money for energy that
I'm being generated from the
free use of the sun I do feel
that this is an opportunity for
us to address some of the issues
that were talked about in
previous legislation of being
able to support renewable energy
projects so that we can continue
to train people who are going to
be displaced as we move toward
more renewable energy I do also
echo chairs to fund exes
concerned about the ten years I
do think that that's a long time
and we would probably want to
look at it is a little shorter
period of time so that we can
evaluate the the efficacy of
that and see if we want to go
ahead and and and bring it in
again and see how those
communities are impacted I feel
that ten years might lock us
into something that if it's not
working then we're kind of stuck
with so I do appreciate Senator
Hickey for you bringing this
forward I do appreciate the
opportunities that we have for
the solar industry and as always
I encourage the opportunities
for locally owned businesses and
also solar plant Jenna solar
panel generation for us to be
able to do that and make it come
from the state of New Mexico I'm
always going to support thank
you Senator Hickey thank you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair yes and
then the Senator Hamblen.
And also the ten year.
the.
What this bill does is really
encourage people to invest here
in New Mexico verses the the
surrounding states for the get
this deduction and our we have
the double incentive of having
more sun that the other states
another great that but they're
not nearly as good as New Mexico
so this is a telling of the soil
maybe one of the seats it gets
put in the soil so that
eventually we have fields of
solar and become a leader also
we have the opportunity to do we
a freshman from the legislative
finance council they did a
session yesterday very very
enlightening on the
opportunities for the revenue
development in the state are
that may not be dollar for
dollar the same as oil but the
gigantic opportunities we have
to have significant revenue
coming into the state through
public private partnerships as
as well owners and and sharing
in the margin as well as
taxation and since we can
produce a cheaper than others we
can put a a more tax on that of
and it said that Mexico has the
potential just was solar energy
to supply a third of the
nation's electronic.
Needs and that when you add that
went down on top of that I I do
think that we have opportunities
to get that thirty percent plus.
Back secondly I will before this
those before the taxation of
business committee talk with our
expert witness and proponent and
whether or not we can adjust
that years number and also
understand why.
The committee would like to look
at that but I think we're very
flexible on that so thank you
Senator Hamblen thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Senator Hickey center
about.
Thank you madam chair a I I will
be supporting the bill and
thanks for thanks for bringing
this for forward Senator Hickey
I do have concerns on when the
sun sets I think that needs to
be a little shorter and then
maybe we need to have the
discussion that maybe we bring
this back in and maybe is Mr but
we find ways to actually invest
this money here in New Mexico
and talked about how we invest
in companies here with companies
that are going to sustain the
systems companies I can possibly
manufacture some of the
components here and like you
said to where we can actually
start supplying this energy
around the country and then
that's how we actually diversify
the economy and bring some of
that revenue back to the state
so thank you.
Thank you senator pope.
Share comment Senator Hickey
were going on Senator souls.
I'm sorry madam chair I forgot
to take my hand them okay so
we're at the end of discussion
it looks like is there a motion
from the committee I wanted.
I'm of the past there is a
motion for a new path is there a
second.
Madam chair.
Okay running that we had a joint
second from Senator help open
center Kerry Hamlin so you pick
one.
We are now at the boat on Senate
bill two forty three.
Running would you take the vote
please Senator serve on test yes
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am I'd like to explain my
vote Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville.
Yes in like to explain my vote.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator so.
Yes thank you Senator Smith.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes in
chairman CENIC's.
Yes.
Eight eight yes and one no past.
Senator Schmedes from.
I never heard anything.
The seven one.
Then there's nine members in our
committee.
Senator Schmedes you didn't hear
from.
Oh that's right sorry yes.
Okay.
So he's excused.
There's seven yes one no yes and
one excused okay thank you Now
Senator guide it goes to explain
his vote and then center
renewable.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity I my biggest problem
is being from the lower house
last year in our committees we
would've tried to amend the bill
to add in the eight years or
whatever the sunset would have
been and I'm just afraid that is
goes to tax that we would not
have the input on that I think
this bill
for me we're just need to be
resolved here in this committee
thank you madam chair I yield.
Thank you senator renewable.
Thank you madam chair I voted in
favor of it because I'm not
opposed concept but like what
senator guy goes to said I think
we need to look at amendment ten
years I may not be able to vote
for them support with that
number in there are like to be
more like I secure somewhere in
there I think we've got to start
looking at these types of
enterprises economic and as long
as we're subsidizing them we're
not going to see that and the
market ultimately will drive the
success of wind and solar and it
ultimately has to happen that's
all thank you madam chair.
Thank you so much thank you
Senator Hickey you have a do
pass on to your next committee.
Committee members we're going to
start Senate bill one forty nine
see how far we can get.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm when I joined the
legislature in in two thousand
nineteen I haven't enlighten
abroad environmental agenda with
me.
And I was really disturbed that
the oil and gas acted not been
amended since nine we're not
once since nineteen thirty five
even though the oil extraction
technology had dramatically
changed.
I read a lot of material and I
went out to see what industry
was doing and I was I look
through through infrared glasses
to see the method that was being
spouted into our air I saw the
spills of water that god knows
what was in the spills of water
and I saw the disturbance of
scenic and cultural rights.
I also since I was working in
the industry every day it was
best for our agencies to make
recommendations about how this
this this of.
New technology should be
regulated so what this bill does
is it defines hydraulic
fracturing it would be using a
standard industry
Definition of hydraulic
fracturing
it asks the agencies or the The
OCD to to parse issuing permits
future permits not pass permits
and nothing is to affect the
existing existing wells that are
operating of course and it's too
because those for four years to
give us to long sessions into
short sessions to hear from are
regulating agencies about what
is the impact of this technology
on our air land and water and
also to make recommendations for
what should happen this would
give the agency's breathing time
particularly the environmental
Division and up but you know CD
from having to deal with
everything going on because what
I learned is there were only
eight eight inspectors for at
that time about fifty two
thousand wells and so I I
introduce this bill I looked for
co sponsors in the house and I
nobody wanted to co sponsor this
bill with me except I was
grateful that Patricia Roybal
Caballero when I ran into her
after speaking to people up and
down in the house she jumped in
and said that she would and so
she is a co sponsor on this
bill.
I would now like to introduce my
experts my expertise doctors
Dr Sandra Stein rubber who is an
author of the compendium on
fracking in the in the in in
internationally she is the
author and editor of it she is a
biologist and I'm also very
grateful to common ground Rising
and centers for paying the costs
of her testimony and she is a
very sought after speaker being
one of the foremost experts on
fracking in the United States so
with that I will turn it over to
Dr Senators time Stein grabber
okay so before we go to her
Representative the Christian
Roybal Caballero did you want to
say a word.
Madam madam chair and senator I
will refrain until after expert
witness thank you okay thank
you.
Dr Steinberg please.
Thank you thank you senator a
city a Lopez and good morning
members of the legislature my
name is Sanderson Graber of my
pronouns are she heard I'm a PhD
biologist and distinguished
scholar in residence at Ithaca
college in the finger lakes
region of upstate New York and
I'm here to testify in support
of Senate bill one forty nine
and I'm speaking to you today
from my little roughly strip of
land between the two longest and
deepest of the of these finger
lakes Seneca and Cayuga that's
where my one hundred and twenty
year old houses located outside
my window there's a foot of snow
on the ground with more in the
forecast and the last time I
checked the temperature out
there was nine degrees and I'm
pleased to report that I'm
actually warm and toasty inside
my home office although I have
no furnace in my basement I'm
completely disconnected from
fossil fuels including our
village gas line having swapped
out my gas fired boiler for air
source heat pumps and those heat
pumps are pulling heat from the
frigid air outside and
transferring it inside my home
they're designed to do this
efficiently down to negative
thirteen degrees and they run on
electricity which here in New
York can be powered with solar.
This is a new heating system our
system for me this is the first
winter with it and the outgoing
ongoing cold snap here feels
like a heat stress so I'm
pleased to report that actually
works great war over my monthly
utility bills are going down now
and without gas coming into my
house for heating or cooking my
indoor air quality is also
greatly improved whether indoors
or outdoors natural gas
combustion creates invisible
nitric nitrogen oxides which in
turns create creates ground
level ozone and smog which is
linked to asthma heart attack
and stroke risk home use of
natural gas also releases the
carcinogen benzene into our
homes benzene is linked to
looking at risk and so my sleek
new age fax system is also
healthier for me and my family.
I offer the fact of my warm
fossel free house as a frame for
our conversation today about the
risks of harm for for for pup of
fracking for public health and
our climate and for the need to
push the pause button on on
drilling because risks and harms
of different if we know that
they are avoidable and they're
more expensive in the long run
then an innovative solution.
No I'm not the only scientist
making this argument earlier
this week for dozens of the
world's top climate scientists
led by Marc Jacobson at Stanford
University released a public
declaration and announcing that
breakthroughs in energy
innovation especially in battery
storage which now have reached
grid parity in are usurping the
role of gas in the power system
means the world based on one one
hundred percent renewables.
Electrification is not only
possible but we now have the
technology to transform the
global energy system fast enough
to avoid catastrophic climate
change which is to say we can
and carbon dioxide and methane
emissions by twenty thirty four
all electric power generation
and by twenty thirty five for
all other sectors with studies
showing that one hundred percent
renewables will stimulate
investment create more jobs than
will be lost in the fossil fuel
industry and reduce electricity
bills that will save money for
citizens and businesses alike
and that's just based on the
technology available to us now
and that is such good news to
have this declaration from our
top scientists in fact that
transformation is already
underway in the European Union
is rethinking commitments to
move forward on natural gas
projects including imports from
the US Ireland is now not only
banned fracking but is canceling
plans for an LNG terminal and
Shannon that would have imported
fracked gas from Pennsylvania
the French of pulled the plug on
a plan to import liquefied
natural gas from the Texas
Permian basin Germany is
likewise reconsidering the
construction of its own LNG
facility.
Last fall Deloitte announced
that the return of invested
capital of oil and gas company's
was likely on par with top
renewable energy companies and
of course we all saw oil majors
like Exxon drop off the Dow
Jones industrial average this
year so big picture as a
backdrop I'd like to explore
with you what we know and don't
yet know about the public health
and Climent harms of fracking.
Here now I'm speaking as a
public health biologist and also
as a co founder of concerned
health professionals of New York
we are a group of scientists and
physicians that came together
ten years ago when New York
found itself in the exact same
political moment that New Mexico
is facing should we push the
button to push the pause button
on fracking and use the time to
investigate its wrist harms or
not so I decided yes and then
we'll fracking was pause with
the moratorium he convened a
panel of experts working within
our state health department to
conduct a review of the evidence
meanwhile on the outside a group
of us independent scientists
decided to use that time that
the pause provided to do the
same and that's how concerned
health professionals New York
came to be so fast forward now
to the year twenty fourteen
within two weeks of each other
coincidentally the governor's
top experts and my little shop
concerned health professionals
released our respective reports
and we came to almost identical
conclusions looking at the same
body of evidence here is how we
express our conclusions quote
our examination uncovered no
evidence that fracking can be
practiced in a manner that does
not threaten human health
directly and without imperiling
climate stability upon which
public health depends and here
is how our state health
department expressed their
conclusions quote it is clear
from the existing literature the
hydraulic fracturing has
resulted in environmental
impacts that are potentially
adverse to public health instill
the science provide sufficient
information to determine the
right level of risk to public
health from fracking and whether
the risks can be adequately
mitigated high volume hydraulic
fracturing should not proceed in
New York.
It was on that basis that to our
Frank surprise our governor
Cuomo simply decided to ban
fracking for good in New York
and aim swiftly to move our
state two hundred percent
renewables now when that just
isn't decision was made in
December twenty fourteen there
were about four hundred studies
on the wrist and harms of
fracking in the peer reviewed
scientific literature now six
years later as New Mexico
deliberates about a possible
pause on new drilling operations
in your own state that body of
evidence as well to more than
two thousand studies so in other
words New Mexico has the
advantage of five times as much
data to guide your own decision
making as we did in New York
when we were having a similar
conversation six years ago.
Concerned health professionals
New York has kept our shop open
and has continued to re issue
updates on our compilation
research entitled the compendium
of scientific medical and media
findings demonstrating the risks
and harms of fracking it's now
in its seventh edition which we
just released last December it's
a fully referenced peer reviewed
compilation of relevant research
on the health and climate
effects of fracking that we make
available as an open source
document on our website so let
me now share a few of our
relevant findings and then
answer your questions and I'm
going to cast my net widely here
and stand Representative ready
to provide more details on any
topic that touches your interest
I want to begin with water which
I know is such a precious
resource in New Mexico
especially as the climate crisis
has exacerbated a longstanding
drought in your state so serious
that it's now starting to
interfere with your states food
production fracking uses
prodigious amounts of fresh
water as a club to smash part
the shale bedrock that's a mile
or more below your feet and this
is where the bubbles of oil or
gas or trapped and of course
down in the Permian basin you're
mostly fracking for oil up in
the San Juan basin natural gas
is the main quarry both oil and
gas Representative the
fossilized corpses of four
hundred year old marine
organisms that fell to the
bottom of an ancient sea floor
they just have different
molecular weights so when water
is used to liberate these
petroleum bubbles from this
ancient stone cemetery one of
two things happens to that water
some fraction of that water is
for ever in tune in the shale
shards that it blew apart and as
such that water has completely
disappeared from the water cycle
in other words fracking makes
water disappear nothing else we
humans do can do that irrigation
of course uses water golf
courses use water we might brush
our teeth with the tap running
but those water uses don't make
water exit the hydrologic cycle
we.
Might transfer water from
underground aquifers to
urination ditches and increase
its evaporation rates but
eventually the water we use
might evaporate Informa cloud
but it would come back down as
rain or snow to the earth but
not so with fracking right so
one question you might wish to
answer if you choose to hit the
pause button and research this
further exactly how much water
is New Mexico actually making
disappear via fracking
operations what percent of your
state's water is lost and what
are the future projections for
water loss.
Okay so not all the water used
for fracking is tracked down
deep underground for ever
another fraction of it comes
flying out of the borehole after
the shale shattered and the
pressure is released and not
waste product is now called
produced water flow back fluid
and it not only contains all the
chemicals that were added up to
the surface to turn fresh water
into fracking fluids but has
also picked up on its journey
down the dark heart of the
planet and back a lot of toxic
elements there naturally found
in deep geological stratum these
include things like boron
arsenic mercury Strawn CM lead
and of course a radioactive ones
which for which New Mexico's
famous namely uranium also
polonium and radon gas which
are.
decay products of a radioactive
elements the Permian basin in
particular produces far more
fracking liquid fracking waste
than actual oil or gas so for
every
barrel of oil that you pull out
of the Permian basin you will be
producing forty seven barrels of
liquid fracking waste that will
require disposal and because
there are very often other
hydrocarbons done in the shale
this flow back fluid contains
toxic materials such as benzene
formaldehyde and tiring and
finally it's very salty having
mixed with our brainy Agency
water that's still down there so
this salty wastewater is very
corrosive to pipes and contains
a lot of taxable tears that
can't be filtered out and it's
often radioactive so the
question is what do you do with
this waste water in twenty
fourteen when we were discussing
this in New York we couldn't
solve the problem we could not
find any safe message a method
for disposal maybe you can do it
but perhaps you would like to
hit the pause button on new
drilling to see if you can solve
that problem here's the
conundrum though you can't
indefinitely use and your reuse
and recycle fracking waste
because it becomes increasingly
corrosive and increasingly
radioactive with every Phrack
job it eventually will destroy
well casings and expose workers
to radio activity is currently
no technology that I know of
that can cheaply turn toxic
fracking waste back into safe
drinkable water again
essentially fracking turns fresh
water into poison and that's a
one way conversion.
Now if you leave fracking out in
open pits it contributes to
toxic air pollution threatens
groundwater as when it spills
and leaks and if you injected
back into the earth the slippery
chemicals that were added to
reduce friction during the
fracking process to lubricate
naturally occurring faults and
fissures in the bedrock and
contribute to earthquakes we
have absolute proof of the link
between disposal of fracking
waste and earthquakes further
uncapped abandoned wells from
years ago locations no may
service but pathways to allow
that disposed fracking waste to
spurt back up and contaminate
overlying drinking waters
increasingly then in western
states the unsolvable problem of
where to put fracking wastewater
has increased political pressure
regulations that would allow its
use to your great crops and
water livestock so you might ask
what do we know about the
science of the harms of
irrigating and and are offering
that water to livestock and I
actually don't have an answer
for you concerned health
professionals is taking a close
look at the possible public
health harms from consuming food
that was produced with fracking
waste but we have basic
questions that remain unanswered
for example we do not know how
toxic materials can be taken out
by plant roots of major crops we
just don't the science just
hasn't been done how can it find
its way into meat and milk do we
know that we don't know the
answers to that these are remain
unanswered questions you may
wish to use the time provided
you buy a fracking pas to figure
this out what I can tell you is
that emerging studies show
increased birth defects among
livestock livestock and horses
watered with fracking waste and
we do summarized those studies
in our compendium but right now
they're not very many of them so
look briefly not air we find
that smog and toxic air
pollution follows fracking
wherever it goes in there again
is no real good way to mitigate
this because the air pollution
begins as soon as the drill bit
goes into the ground methane
benzene formaldehyde.
I'd all come out of the hole
before I remember takes many
weeks to drill a well so that
whole time that the vapors
trapped in the bedrock now have
a pathway up to the atmosphere
so it of fracking well is like a
giant cigarette in the earth
that it continues to simply
poor smoke into our communities
and their new findings now
coming out of Harvard University
showing that actually
radioactive particles come
straight out of the well head
and we didn't know that until
this year we thought the radio
activity was mainly a threat
from the fracking waste but now
we understand that the radio
activity comes right out of the
well heads and as radioactive
particles attach themselves to
Dustin can be carried as far as
thirty miles down wind on this
is part are posing a particular
exposure problem to the citizens
in the Dallas fort worth area
who live downwind from quite a
lot of fracking activities so
that's a new finding we only
have one study but again it's
something that needs to be
studied more.
I wanted to talk about health
effects very briefly again
depending on your interest I'm
happy to take your question so
far the public health problems
associated join fracking include
poor birth outcomes among babies
born to pregnant women living
near fracking sites respiratory
impacts cancer heart disease and
more recently we understand
mental health problems those
cities who are pretty consistent
especially those that look at
pregnancy outcomes.
Studies of mothers living near
oil and gas extraction
operations consistently find
impairments to infant health
including higher risk for
preterm birth lower birth weight
and birth defects in Colorado we
find higher rates of leukemia
among children and young adults
in areas with oil and gas wells.
either consistently documented
adverse health indicators are as
much increased rates of
hospitalization increased ER
visits rashes trauma drug abuse
headaches and this new finding
of heart failure so we have our
emerging data showing that all
of these things increase when
fracking moves into a community
now importantly we found that
these health burdens are not
usually shared our findings
clearly show that fracking is an
environmental justice issue with
black indigenous Hispanic rural
and impoverished white
communities bearing the brunt of
exposure to toxic fracking waste
because well pads and associated
infrastructure including flare
stacks pipelines and compressor
stations are disproportionately
cited in non white indigenous
and low income communities this
is a pattern that we saw when we
look at data across the nation
now ask for jobs we look closely
at employment because
unemployment is a social
predictor for public health and
we found that jobs creation is
been greatly exaggerated by the
industry most of these jobs are
short lived in our increasingly
being lost to automation even
before the ongoing pandemic
crushed oil and gas demand along
with prices and triggered a
massive layoffs yes jobs are
also extremely dangerous data on
fatalities for the oil and gas
workers are limited in their
disaggregated among multiple
federal agencies so it's hard to
help was hard for us to do this
research but the available data
we found shows that I work take
place fatality rate four to
seven times the national average
workplace pipeline construction
workers are story point six
times more likely to die on the
jobs and workers in other
industries and won their when
workers in this industry are
injured but not killed the their
entries are very tend to be very
severe and disabling including
burns explosions head trauma
amputations and crushing
injuries workers are at high
risk for toxic exposures we know
that benzene has been detected
in the urine of well pad workers
at levels high enough to cause
leukemia we also.
So look at the social cost of
fracking because these also have
public health consequences
studies show that fracking
brings a twenty eight to forty
six percent increase rate of
crime to the communities where
fracking is practiced these
include things like auto theft
and drunk driving but also
violent crime especially target
women in fact aggravated and
sexual assaults with the crimes
primarily driving the increase
in crime when fracking comes to
town with indigenous women as a
special target this extends to
rape domestic violence stalking
and sex trafficking.
No I understand the New Mexico
funds its public schools with a
big assist from the oil and gas
industry in this will be a tough
ethical conundrum from you as
you go forward the fossil fuel
industry helping prepare
children for the future that the
fossil fuel industry at the same
time actively destroying by a
climate change and harming
children's health in the process
so possums really maybe give you
time to unwind this relationship
and find ways to finance early
education that's not so
dependent on the oil and gas
industry the research that we've
come on compiled that may be of
interest to you shows that in
children areas school districts
offer lower test scores lower
attendance higher teacher
turnover and exacerbated
educational inequities.
And then to close with a few
words about climate change.
As you know early promoters of
fracking argue that natural gas
could serve as a bridge fuel on
the way to renewables scientific
evidence now disproves those
earlier claims with data showing
that natural gas is as damaging
to the climate as coal methane
is a powerful greenhouse gas it
escapes from all parts of the
extraction distribution system
at levels that we now know are
sixty percent higher than
earlier EPA estimates most of
those emissions are not
accidental leaks from fixable
plumbing problems but rather
their inherent to the design of
the engineering of fracking
itself or they're a necessary
part of the operations including
routine maintenance venting of
methane is also used to prevent
blowouts and prevent accidents
if it prevents things from
blowing up finally fracking does
not end when the oil or gas is
depleted depleted wells go on
leaking methane threatening
health employment we have some
pretty good evidence you're from
Pennsylvania abandoned wells
actually leave more than our
climate damaging methane David
wells currently in production
our best gas is up to three
million depleted oil and gas
wells are not in production
anymore across the the United
States and are in need of
remediation most abandoned wells
are not adequately funded
leaving the full cost of
plugging them to tax payers
especially as operators declare
bankruptcy and of course
cumulative impacts are the
operative word here the more
wells in your state drills the
more the higher the cumulative
team decommissioning costs when
they come to the end of their
productive lives so this is a
train coming right out New
Mexico and I would recommend
maybe using a pas period on new
drilling to figure out a fair
solution to the inadequate
bonding of all drilling so
speaking finally now as a mother
my my message to you as well as
my own children is to clean up
your own mess and figure out how
to pay for it before making any
new math classes I think our
Senator Sedillo Lopez is words
of this bill gives you breathing
time is our.
An important one and literally
it allows you to brief I'm also
impressed by Senator Cervantes
words that we need good
information to do our jobs as
both citizens and as legislators
we don't want to make decisions
that we come to later regret
thank you very much I I'm
interested in your questions.
Madam chair you're you're muted.
Madam chair your muted.
I'm.
Well I would just ask my my co
sponsor to speak briefly and
madam chair you are muted.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator and I just want to
briefly just say that my support
for sponsoring Senate bill one
forty nine is because I truly
honestly believe that it's
critical in meeting our
obligation.
in protecting the public's
health and welfare first and
foremost and I also just want to
call your attention to the F. I.
R. on page six where the Indian
Affairs Department particularly
offers the importance of
protecting our public health and
welfare.
Right to the historically
disenfranchised but yet the
spirit
Tribal lands that have been
affected and the impact that it
has to the water and environment
as stated in the FIR and health
impacts and I'm and more
importantly the impacts to the
cultural resources and think we
sacred lands and sites that has
to be taken into principle of
consideration and that's one of
the reasons why one of the main
reasons why I entered and
finally on madam chair and
senator I am as a member of the
house economic in rural
development on multiple times
visited fracking sites and work
in the many explanations of the
science and I was never
convinced that there would it
would be safe.
In offering clean air clean
water and clean lands and so for
that reason thank you for
inviting me to help co sponsor
this bill thank you very much
thank you for being here today
Representative Roybal Caballero
and now we go to the opponents
and then the proponents we have
quite a few.
On each side so let's see if we
can do.
Ten at one minute.
And I know one minute means you
have to be very thoughtful and
concise but I appreciate your
attention to the matter.
So sure go ahead.
Winchester.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico we do stand in opposition
to this bill we do disagree with
many of the conclusions that
have been stated here today the
EPA has repeatedly indicated
that fracking has had no
documented cases of contaminated
drinking water.
Cynically report that came out
in the Obama administration that
confirm that fracking did not
cause impacts on drinking water
resources
we also see that fracking has
enormous benefits to our state
particularly it reduces energy
prices it is brought clean air
in reducing US greenhouse gas
emissions to twenty five year
low so for these reasons and
many others we do oppose this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next a meet parity.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee hydraulic
fracturing has been the
engineering process used to
extract oil for more than fifty
years in New Mexico in more than
fifty years fracking has been
and safely and as Mister
Winchester said without a single
instance of groundwater
contamination and while greatly
reducing the surface footprint
of our operations fracking and
all the oil and gas activities
are the most regulated
industries with strict
requirements and enforcement at
the federal state and local
levels because of this
technology the United States has
achieved its energy independence
the cost of this legislation is
explained well in the bills FIR
the lost revenue over the four
years would be more than eleven
billion dollars to New Mexico's
budget New Mexico's oil and gas
employees have tirelessly worked
throughout this pandemic because
they are truly essential to our
state in FY twenty the oil and
gas industry funded thirty four
percent or two point eight
billion dollars to the general
fund in closing a moratorium on
fracking would leave more than
one hundred thousand New
Mexicans without jobs an annual
do.
Thank you very much next Lexus
Johnson.
When I would just ask yes yeah
eight the number SO X. emissions
and good luck in Santa Fe I'm
here to provide constituent
feedback as an everyday New
Mexicans small business that my
husband just came home from
being gone for a week in the oil
and gas industry the Permian and
Delaware basins sure our US
energy is flowing New Mexicans
are employed and that our
children and other children can
be educated on this revenue our
small businesses taken someone
from northern New Mexico on
government assistance to a man
who makes more than eighty
thousand dollars a year we have
broken the chains of poverty and
chemical dependence I care
deeply for the environment and
the future of my children I mean
pharmacology here the state is
not receiving royalties from
solar and wind we actually pay
for subsidies that as you heard
the previous bill businesses in
New Mexico will move to Texas do
you know that the refrigeration
of color vaccine is run on gas
that the N. ninety five
respirators and gallons are
supplied by petrochemical
products all of you want to
better New Mexico a better
environment and a healthy
environment.
Thank you very much next.
This the carrier.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify today my
name is Missy Currier and I'm I
am a registered lobbyist for
strategies three sixty speaking
on behalf of our client
Occidental petroleum
respectfully we stand in strong
opposition to Senate bill one
forty nine the bill ignore
strongly established in already
well research science proving
good actors in the oil and gas
industry like Occidental lead
the world in innovation and
stringent environmental
protection the proposed
legislation also ignores the
economic hardships that this
moratorium would needlessly
create for all New Mexicans
including and especially school
children and the socio
economically disadvantaged the
moratorium would grossly drive
up energy costs decimate support
for health care education and
roads and increase our
dependence on energy from those
that do not have as high of
environmental standards and
protections SB one forty nine a
nor science and innovation and
increases hardships and I'm
already economically devastated
New Mexico thank you.
Next.
James Walter sh sh.
Okay in my own on James Walter
shut yes you are on okay I'm
against this bill I live in
Carlsbad New Mexico and we're
almost in the verge of having to
all wells fracked here and so
what so we be a direct recipient
of you know a role to use and
what not of that but anyway a
act in this I just think this is
comma when those bills that are.
You know the my brother law
calls of nuclear bill may well
I'm in opposition to this bill.
Thank you very much.
Next.
Patrick Killen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Patrick Killen
registered lobbyists for chevron
I'm also a fellow New Mexican
respectfully but strongly
opposes this bill they're
productive ways to transition
New Mexico to a lower carbon
future this is not the right
approach legislature's own
fiscal impact report shows this
bill will decimate our state's
budget funding a Levin point six
billion dollars in revenue over
the next four years one point
six five billion dollars in the
first year alone this revenue
loss of the proposed possible
inflict immediate harm drastic
cuts to public education our
state's response to COVID
nineteen can be devastated
funding for first responders in
state courts to be slashed
programs the protector States
most vulnerable will be in
jeopardy if this bill passes
where will the legislature finds
nearly twelve billion dollars in
replacement revenue to maintain
essential services please vote
no thank you.
Thank you very much next Jerry
fanning.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak today my name is
Jerry planning on the public and
government affairs director for
Eddy County the oil and gas
businesses a lot of southeast
New Mexico in the county.
Senate bill one forty nine sets
out the literally the only only
gas business of New Mexico and
Eddy County a recent independent
study conducted by amendment
issues Ariel hits their head
center it was shown that between
the years two thousand twelve
thousand eighteen Eddy County
alone contributed approximately
six point four billion dollars
to the coffers of the state and
local governments is Senate bill
one forty nine is an act as a
large part of that money will be
we go away and for what allow
for years valuate the possible
impacts of fracking where is the
justification for such drastic
measures that will severely
impact all of New Mexico
get a study be conducted without
stopping oil and gas we don't I
believe it's in we believe that
Senate bill one forty north lot
about conducting a study but
about shutting down oil and gas
industry and hurting the
citizens of New Mexico the
budget so great the dollars that
this industry contributes
Senate bill one forty nine will
kill thousands of high paying
jobs.
Thank you very much Mr fanning
thank you next please Carol
leech.
I work for C. O. G. operating
LLC is a subsidiary of Konica
Phillips I lived in New Mexico
for forty years in the states
very important may I frankly was
done by some of the things that
were said that the expert in
this case I had honestly thought
that this bill was about not
issue any more permits and I was
going to point out some of the
problems in the bill that word
create some confusion and and
may in fact stop fracking
altogether and now understand
that that's really the intent of
the bill and I oppose it for
that reason thank you.
Thank you next.
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we strongly oppose
this bill understanding the
growing climate crisis and the
inevitable move towards
alternative energy New Mexico
has a very limited number of
years we can leverage our oil
and gas tax base to support the
regulatory changes and
investments needed to diversify
our economy for the future but
instead of using the urgency of
the moment to build more
resilient economy we are
doubling down on you costly
regulatory and business
requirements things are shifting
and we are not ready and we're
making it worse according to the
fiscal impact reports the state
investment council notes that
given the growing demands that
policymakers are seeking to
utilize dollars from the
permanent funds to meet the
needs of today the proposed
curtailment of fracking creates
an especially high risk to the
funds and the significant
benefits they can deliver to
future generations legislation
of this nature would be likely
to damage state budget reserves
and New Mexico's bond rating
driving up the cost of capital
the state we need to make up for
the potential budgetary
shortfalls as of yet I have not
heard of an adequate source of
revenue.
Thank you very much Mister
Wagner and that this is our last
opponent next not treat.
Yes good afternoon thank you
madam chair members committee
Bernalillo treat government
affairs for Xcel energy.
Madam chair I just wanted to
comment that.
Senate bill one forty nine and
other bills targeted at the oil
and gas industry whether they
Rested the legislative process
is is up to you all but in the
end it's even the message.
These kinds of bill sand and
they have a they will have a
negative impact Justin messaging
to those involved to in
employees of these companies
property values.
Even to the state budget
ultimately.
And I just would like to close
it as a as a reminder with Xcel
energy we've last few years have
brought on.
many new renewable resources and
you have a week like this that
we've had in the southeast with
the weather we've had those
renewable resources have
provided very little energy to
the the homes and industries
here in southeastern New Mexico
due to the weather so just a
reminder
of what are a.
Baseline resources are needed
thank you.
Thank you we now that the
proponents.
Lanes you know.
Hello madam chair and committee
our residents groups and thirty
seven organizations are
supporting sesi one forty nine
we work six years in stopping
the following Sandridge
application of that would
fracked the Albuquerque basin
and destroyed our drinking water
we stopped at that oil and gas
industry that would exempt our
residents from protesting
fracking applications we stopped
discharge permits on prime wells
that would be used for fracking
operations throughout of
Sandoval County we found that
that on those prying wells that
a toxic fluids were spread in
reconstruction of the that pods
and wrote for dust control okay
well heads were turned I am
eighteen JPMorgan chase down two
hundred and eighty eight tons of
radioactive teen or insults into
the Rio Rancho landfill its half
life is sixteen hundred years
and this will contaminate our
water our air in our soil Mr
chair said that he sold those
fifty five thousand acres of and
Representative leases privately
we're sold to Asian markets we
came from.
Thank you very much next what's
worth.
Madam chair and members of the
committee what's worse the
senior organizer for food and
water watch New Mexico and I'm
Representative.
We stand and support Senate bill
one forty nine Mexico's beryl
had with fracking without
knowing or acknowledging the
long term affects ranking is not
always been great for our
economy and bust cycles meant
the New Mexicans lose jobs and
lose the state loses revenue at
the whim of the global market
meanwhile nationwide more people
are currently employed in
renewable energy and energy
efficiency than the fossil fuel
industry we say that we would
like to support education with
profits from fracking but is it
right to fund the education of
one New Mexicans student with
oil and gas profits at the cost
of the health and well being of
another New Mexicans student
from a frontline community.
And hundreds or even more than a
thousand fracking licences
currently exist committing to
more means locking us into
decades of fracking and drilling
before we understand the long
term consequences and this may
impede our progress moving
toward sustainable energy and
economic development please vote
in support of Senate bill one
forty nine thank you.
Thank you next.
Well.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rebecca
so on the senior climate and
energy campaigner for WildEarth
guardians we stand in support of
SB one forty nine it allows for
a democratic legislative process
in the interest of citizens and
free from the pressures of
industrial lobbies as doctors
diagram were thoroughly
demonstrated we need a common
sense pause for protections
because the truth that is we've
been exploited oil and gas's
fracking too fast for our
regulators to regulate and oil
and gas we're going to make us
rich we would be rich by now New
Mexico is now the leading oil
and gas producing state in the
country but we have still have
the worst public education and
the highest rates of child
poverty and hunger this is the
state within a families living
only three hundred feet from
fracking wells can have no
access to electricity our
governors committed us to stand
in a court with the one point
five degree world but we cannot
make science based efforts to
address climate change without
full knowledge of the impacts of
this industry and our collective
health wealth and wellness SB
one forty nine one able access
to that information and provide
decision makers with the tools
that they need to protect their
constituents well being thank
you to the sponsors for the
introducing necessary effort and
we urge you to move this bill
forward with the urgency that it
deserves.
Thank you next nor Bravo.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Eleanor Bravo I'm
chairman of the board of new
energy economy and we stand in
support of Senate bill one forty
nine if we are serious about
implementing our legislative
mandate for a just transition
from fossil fuels to renewables
by twenty forty five we are
looking at a minimum of twenty
more years of extreme energy
extraction namely fracking what
will be the purpose of
transition to renewables if we
leave a legacy of polluted water
dirty air and sub standard
infrastructure where where our
children and our grandchildren
be if we do not gain some
reliable and comprehensive data
on what is actually happening on
the oil field and be on the
continuous viewing of toxic
chemicals the regular spills of
fracking flowback in the
relentless pounding of heavy
traffic on our highways
compounds the challenge for just
transition we lose nothing by
stopping to investigate with
integrity the real damage being
done to our environment the
health and welfare of our
communities and we need to
create an alternative revenue
streams according to new studies
decades long fracking boom in
many other.
Thank you very much miss row
next Yang to leader.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is into you know I'm speaking as
a spokesperson for you thing
that I'm crisis action I'm a
spokesperson and representative
of my indigenous people in the
four corners region where land
sector by the coal oil and gas
uranium protect our lands have
been systematically targeted
investigative profit before I
was born connect to my home run
was designated and energy
sacrifice under the Nixon
administration in nineteen
seventy three and since then my
community experienced health and
environment thanks to your
hundreds of uranium mines for
coal coal power plants and
hundreds of fracking wells this
was your proj of extraction and
consumption powers are cities
allows us to have the luxury of
back home on my reservation or
lands in New living besides oil
and gas barrels of fracking
wells we do not have the same
luxuries many of you enjoyed but
we may have plenty of as my long
line disease and cancer some
people say that we should not
bite the hand that feeds us but
that is a colonial oppressively
thank you the situation and in
fact the idea was extractive
industries a budget this is a
lie as we do not have an
adequate food shelter water
medicine we need to make a
Representative transition to
justice that takes into account
of experiences for frontline
community.
Thank you very much Mr Lee
next my a keen flattery flattery
T..
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee I
might can fire T. with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state this
legislation gives nine state
agencies the time to thoroughly
analyze and report on the
impacts of the drought
fracturing we know that the what
we know that oil and gas
drilling amidst the global
warming gas methane volatile
organic compounds we know
exposure to VOCs correlates with
health impacts like asthma
headaches nose bleeds
interpretation other respiratory
diseases and many more we know
we can't rely on a bullet hell
industry to fund our public
schools and services but there
are many more unidentified
impacts SB one forty nine allows
our state to learn about the
true impacts of fracking and how
to responsibly manage it to
protect our communities water
and the environment we support
SB one forty nine and thank the
sponsors for the spell.
Thank you very much next.
Gail Evans.
Good afternoon my name is Gail
at I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
The New Mexico environmental law
center strongly supports this
bill if we are going to continue
to be a state that is and
Norma's producer of oil and gas
we also have to take on the
enormous responsibility of
regulating that industry so that
our environment and our public
health is protected according to
Adrian Santa at the oil
conservation division there are
over fifty thousand wells in the
state and only fifteen
inspectors when she compared
that to North Dakota where there
are twenty five thousand well so
half as many wells but forty
three inspectors so three times
the amount of inspectors and
half the wells we have a lot of
work to do to develop our
regulatory capacity in the state
so that we can ensure that our
oil and gas production is safe
and not harming our environment
and our public health and are
fresh for sure resources.
Thank you very much next.
Yes C. Pena.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is we have to still see pending
and I'm here representing table
imitated as an organization that
is deeply committed to
protecting and restoring lands
ecologies and living waters to
be you and our community of
supporters urges New Mexico
legislators to support SB one
forty nine which would allow for
critical studies to be conducted
on the hazards harms and
consequences of fracking in our
state our indigenous a land
based peoples are
disproportionately situated by
for disabilities insights and
are experiencing devastating
impacts we know that
environmental violence
excessively affects women
whether it's from toxic releases
the violation of drilling on our
earth or the formation of
Manhattan's ultimately needs to
harm upon native women girls and
families our public health plans
waters and sacred homelands are
suffering for the health of
current and future generations
it is imperative that we
prohibiting fracking licenses it
is beyond time to grant some
reprieve on impacted communities
in an active pas on fracking to
document these multiple and
cumulative impacts in depth as
members of this committee you
can protect our people and claim
it and be a contributor to
renewable energy development and
economic reform by pausing only
fracking permits within the
state.
Thank you very much next Matt
Thompson.
We're opposed to Senate bill one
forty nine I don't think you
meant to call me.
Two more
However.
that's that showed up there's
two two or three people who
didn't show up to the meeting
today.
Yeah on.
I thought he was I didn't see in
okay and then Chilton.
he needs to take him off the
list for today.
And penny Akan.
I don't see her okay and it's
Michael Eisen fell for or
against.
I am for this bill I I live in
Farmington and within my all of
my houses to the oil and gas
wells and I just wanted to say
that we're extraordinarily
fortunate to have on the theme
to drive stand grabber.
giving us some information about
the reality check on what it's
great to be exposed to oil and
gas infrastructure and so thank
you so much for the opportunity
to comment.
Thank you okay I heard from nine
proponents is there anyone
lacking out there before we go
to the committee.
Senator is the one that set it
say anything before I go to
committee questions and
discussion.
You need to take yourself off
mute thank you thank you I'm I
want to respond about all of the
references to the FIR the FIR
does not measure the cost to our
public health to our children it
doesn't even mention the direct
cost across the road we have to
build for them and the
subsidiary the subsidies that
we've provided to them the
understaffing that we have in
our agencies that don't have the
resources to regulate them.
I believe that it and and the
other thing that I've learned it
from the agencies is there about
a thousand or over thousand
permits of already been pulled
so the impact that the FIR is
written his if all new permits
would would end immediately and
in fact there are thousand
pending permits so that the
impact would not even be
immediate the reason for the
pause is to bring everybody to
the table and to put urgency on
the need to regulate
I always say New Mexico should
be open for business not for not
open for exploitation and
unfortunately with regard to the
this industry we've been we've
been exploited I'm I am ready
for questions and so is my
expert.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
center guided us.
Chair and center city Lopez I
just want to thank you for the
opportunity to clarify a few
things
first one thanks.
Dr Stennis Senate grabber for
explain the crime and efforts
route fracking I know
Albuquerque is the highest crime
rate in the state I just did not
understand that they had
fracking in the Albuquerque area
also living in Lee County I live
forty five foot from well raise
two daughters Sir and
granddaughter and actually live
in the environment of fracking
madam chair and senator I did
have a really quick question on
page one of the bill line
eighteen you have the definition
of hydraulic fracturing
fracturing and I'm wondering why
you didn't go with the OCD's
definition of hydraulic factory
input the Roadrunner Alison the
difference.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you senator guy was for
that question this is a standard
scientific definition of of
fracking and we wanted to have a
definition that would rely on
defeating agency interpretations
but a standard definition
understandable to the in the
middle of this in their concerns
madam chair and get rectus went
somebody needs to their mute on.
we have some background I'm
sorry to interrupt Senator
Gallegos.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and senator I guess
my my question or concern was
because OCD governs our
hydraulic fracturing I thought
it would be that they would have
the knowledge to be able to
address it in the difference
that I see is in there to talk
about the completion of well
that's already been grilled a
case and seem manage which shows
that there's a lot of
significant cost and and safety
measures already put put in and
then the.
The fracking material is mostly
water and sand actually ninety
nine point five percent of the
total volume with all plan point
I of chemicals and I just
wondered because I think that of
in reading your bill when I read
it it didn't break it down in a
point that I could understand
the science of the volume of
water that's in there so.
Would you I guess my question is
I guess my concern is that it
wasn't clear enough in the
description of hydraulic
fracturing wondered if that's
something you've heard from
anyone else still.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos no
I have not heard that complaint
from anyone else.
Okay well madam chair and and
senator to go on and just to
tell you I've I've
Had a level votes yes and three
six hundred thirty seven what
knows but
My next concern and and to just
tell you and and one of the
gentleman that did not was not
able to to speak in opposition
he talked about
the personally come on
devastation for the state and
that he would hope that we would
be state women instatement in
the roundhouse to be able find
compromise on this issue and
I just wondered madam chair and
senator if you had any the
industry reach out to you for
any kind of compromise a
discussion on the bill.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos no
not on this bill.
Okay well madam chair and in
center and and I guess all go
into the the reasons why I
appreciate you staying the chair
for business in New Mexico and
I don't know if you understand
totally how much of New Mexico
depends on fracking in in the
oil and gas industry no we
talked about the amending nother
bill that you have to be able at
in other polluters namely wind
and solar because it's so I
think we need to treat all
industries the same and not just
segment of oil and gas out of
being that they do so much for
our our communities our schools
and our children I just wanted
to reach you a portion so since
I live in Eunice I just want you
to understand that it does not
just
our tax base what what all
gassed us from the rest of us
are this is with the passage of
your bill one forty nine it's
going to inflict physical damage
to the state no take critical
money from local school
districts and hospital
district's many hospital
district in southeast New Mexico
are supported by property taxes
which are self imposed we do
that for from our own community
to supplement their operations
one is normally special hospital
district which has a large
portion of Lee County in a great
job on testing for COVID and is
now working really diligently to
be able to get the vaccine out
of the Artesia special hospital
district which is more right
around artesian New Mexico of
the General Hospital a special
hospital district and also the
Eunice Betul hospital district
in in unison Division which can
compose encompasses the Eunice
full district we've imposed a
two mill levy to help support
our clinic that provides much
needed health care to our
community in in FY two.
The tax collected from oil and
gas production was two million
forty seven thousand one hundred
twelve dollars and eighty four
cents without the support of the
clinic we could not exist in the
past to this bill will have
significant impact on the
delivery of healthcare in
already medically answer
underserved area Furthermore the
school districts are allowed to
impose a two mill levy by
referendum to support local
projects in those districts the
absence of the oil and gas
production in these districts
will have the same impact on
schools as it does health care
delivery and madam chair and and
senator and I'm sure you've
heard of two times being on I'm
I've been on school board.
Upwards of eighteen to twenty
years can do the math anymore
but what we're gonna do to our
students is gonna be critical I
I keep going back to the point I
wish that the
wind and solar would be taxed to
a point that it could afford to
give us thirty percent
On on our G. R. T. so that way
when old gas does go away it be
a boon for us right now well one
hi you guys do affect all gas
and it does go away that we
actually have the needed monies
for our schools and education
I just want to make sure that
You knew the implications what
it hasn't southeast Mexico I
know you don't live there you
don't go to school your family
doesn't nor do you need to drive
from there but I think we've
been pushing legislation that is
is going to be really hard for
our constituents to handle in
long term but
Madam chair representative with
that all yield thank you.
Thank you.
Other questions comments from
committee members.
Senator renewable.
And then Senator Montes.
Thank you madam chair
I only have a couple of comments
the the experts cited statistic
after statistic after statistic.
Many many of those are beautiful
and the in particular help
affects the the I live within
the next three gas wells within.
Almost in my younger days I
can't now but in my younger days
I could pro baseball and get all
critical
The help number statistics on as
much cancer and all that are not
in the worst affected many cases
are better in our county than
they are Bernalillo.
Of.
The primary for example are
better in our communities so on
and on and on I just want to
refute that the many of those
statistics are just not not
ballots within city limits to
army from their six hundred
guests wells.
Time is not an issue of
significance of health is not an
issue of significance
and certainly the schools and
colleges hospitals Senator
Gallegos talking about all of
those benefit greatly by that
but I just want to make it with
and we've been fracking wells in
San Juan County there's somebody
give statistical numbers wealth
state or something like thirty
thousand wells in San Juan.
Most of our existing they've
been there a long time but
they've all been practice most
part.
The it's just.
It's just not what is being
portrayed by the experts and
sponsor and I just want to make
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you bill Senator Mondays.
Thank you madam chair chair
committee members Senator
Sedillo Lopez I know this
committee this bill it was
passed it would go to Judiciary
Committee and Senate finance so
with route three Committee
referrals up we see we see where
you're headed here because of
that already but let me let me
just ask a few questions I hope
we see the numbers I think it's
important for us to.
Emphasize some of the numbers
from the fiscal impact report in
the bill was to be passed
according to the state agencies
I guess the first question I
have for you is and has the
governor committed to sign this
bill if you were to pass.
Mr chair Senators of this no.
and then
from the from the analysis we've
been given beginning with our
our budget that begins July one
of this year the impact for the
year that begins from July one
of this year to June of next
year would be one point six five
billion dollars would as part of
the impact the general fund what
is with the total general fund
budget what was once two point
two five billion Representative
of the total you know the total
budget is.
All madam chair Senator the
problem with the FIR is it
assumes that no permits would
that no wells with start up at
all and there are a thousand
pending wells so I disagree with
the premise of FY are in the
first place and my understanding
is this would be that the camp
of the FIR impact would be about
a fourth of the budget which is
about I think it's a little bit
less or maybe the same has the
impact that we had over the last
year when because of the market
of oil and gas actually when I
went to a negative and the
impact on our budget was about a
about a fourth and unfortunately
COVID also had an impact I was
asked about whether I thought
the impact of of COVID and the
market was about the same has
the fracking bill and I said no
I don't think so because my bill
would not require the industry
to shut down wells which was
happening so to answer your
question I understand that the
impact would be anywhere from
four to a third of our budget
which is unfortunate because I
don't think we should have so
many of our eggs in one basket
basket particularly with regard
to education I think it's very
important that we diversify the
sources of revenue for the
state.
I'm gonna believe that everybody
on this committee agrees with
that the unaccounted in the way
we disagree with that.
You're saying that if we were to
pass this bill we would have to
cut our budget by four wheel
you're saying no so I
misunderstand we thought I
thought you said that the that
the equivalent impact at least
forty eight where the analysis
the fiscal impact report
that's been done by state
agencies.
including the agencies of this
administration the governor was
very committed I know to
renewable energy into good good
clean environment so forth but
you'll be able to even her own
agencies reject the well you
disagree with their projection
is that this may cost about one
point six five billion dollars
again back to my question what
was that Representative as a
percentage of our total state
budget has has I said it would
be about a quarter to a third of
the state budget if the FIR were
correct but as I mentioned it
assumes that there would be no
but no new wells and there are
about a thousand permits that
are out so that the impact would
not be immediate if my bill were
passed I assumed that they would
get you engage in a more
sophisticated analysis of what
in fact the industry plan to do
with their one thousand wells.
I mean.
second discussion here bill
passes committee knows the
Senate Judiciary I would hope
Senator between now and it got
here any hearing Senate
judiciary thank you would
correct the secretary of energy
and all the cabinet secretaries
and help them realize that their
analysis and their numbers are
incorrect and that they have it
and we don't know what they're
doing but I would I would you
know we wouldn't have an answer
that of your you were taught me
that they don't know what
they're doing and they're their
assumptions numbers are
incorrect and we're talking
about cutting our state budget
by a fourth to a third of our
budget that that has some pretty
serious implications of I'm sure
we all agree with that let me
just ask Miss if we assume that
the ministration was with
knowing I I really disagree with
this information what they're
doing
we have cut our budget by a
third or fourth well we're would
you be proposing or do you have
a bill or does anybody have a
bill proposing to supplant that
that amount of money in in the
works that would become
effective July one when we begin
to see this decline is our
billing place to generate that
additional say thirty percent or
forty percent of revenue in the
state.
Madam chair senator they're
actually quite a few bills that
that seek to there's diversify
our tax there would there was a
proposal to reverse the the tax
cuts that were during the the
Richardson and the Martinez
administration's there are
proposals in quite a few
proposals and perhaps my co
sponsor who is actually in the
house they're quite a few house
proposals none of which passed
last time but several of which
are coming back to help us
diversify Representative revenue
there are quite and I understand
that there is in our business
and tax Committee several bills
that are I haven't studied each
and everyone of them I look
forward to it but I know that
there is a huge push to
diversify our revenues and to
prepare for the day that that we
don't have oil and gas to rely
on
so yes I I can't of I'm not
gonna go one by one and perhaps
make cosponsored would have some
suggestions about some of the
bills that she's reviewed I
haven't personally review them
in any committee that I said on
because I'm not on finance and I
am not on business and tax.
Well I'm just opening it up let
me just because I I agree with
you I I want to diversify
revenue I think we should have a
great many more sources and they
should be more reliable and
predictable and you're right
there are a number of bills to
increase thank you compacts is I
don't know there's any bills
increase gross receipts taxes
but but just just inside of a
bill forcing us all to go
through all the tax increases
that are being proposed in the
house which is the biggest one
which which which one of the Act
bills it's out there right now
would be the largest tax
increase and how much would it
generate of that one point six
five million dollars.
Madam chair actually I'm not I'm
not positive I haven't seen that
for on all of them so that I I
prefer to to wait until action
to the answer but I do not know
the answer to that I don't know
if my culture to.
Any Michael Sanchez.
If I may madam chair.
Very briefly Representative I
don't think I don't think that
any of us have the answer to the
specific question as to how many
how how great the impact is on
will be on tax bills that are on
the table right now and how they
equate to the exact amount that
the senator is asking I think
they're all being made in an
effort to look at alternative
diversification in renewable
energies in particular so that
we can begin the pathway to
become less dependent one of one
or two sources of revenue in our
state thank you.
Thank you madam chair I gather
from your point madam chair the
want to move this bill long and
you've got a lot more to do so I
won't belabor the issue I just
always feel like it's our
responsibility this committee
going back to when I shared it
that we not make the the dirty
work done by the next committees
so and that's the next
committees that Judiciary
Committee you know I think it's
a responsible for us to to make
the Judiciary Committee do the
hard and have you for dirty work
and then of course ultimately
for the last several years we
always end up making the Senate
finance committee do all the
dirty work so we all get to say
that we support the banning
fracking and we do we support
getting with more gas and we
support diversification all the
speakers everybody's that we all
the things that we all share
those goals but ultimately we're
the adults in the room and we've
got to be responsible I'd love
to sit by the pool and I'm not
have to work but I've got a I've
got are living and so I do so
because I got to balance the
budget I gotta pay the bills I
think you're the legislature my
job is to pay the bills so Madam
chair of the thank you I guess
if we get through here what will
set Judiciary just want to have
an idea of the questions I would
want to be able to ask their
thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm not seeing any
sign more hands I would like to
ask or make a couple comments
and ask a question.
while I would like to see our
energy.
Transition.
when the president came out with
a pause.
On fracking are US senators.
Did not oppose the president but
indicated.
That in order to because.
Oil and gas and fracking there
needed to be a plan.
So that our state in particular
and they make comments about our
state would not be hurt
financially.
With the resources that we are
capturing.
And I had a conversation with
Senator lu Han's office and
while they did not put out a
formal press release they did
give an interview to one of the
national newspapers about this.
And I think that that reflects.
Some of my concerns Senator
Sedillo Lopez and I'm wondering
if you would be willing.
To amend this bill and I know
you've tried this before whether
you would be willing to amend
this bill to become a reporting
bill.
versus eight because on
fracking.
In order to gain.
Factual information from all of
the departments.
madam chair that that is
That is an idea because I think
the the planning part is very
important the problem is I was
told that several legislators
over the years have put forth
memorials like this and
unfortunately nothing happened
and has Senator said bond this
is fond of saying is when you
don't have any TV and you just
have a memorial there really is
not much to not much that that
would happen
I.
I wasn't suggesting memorial
okay I'm suggesting amending
this bill.
Now with deleting it section
keeping the reporting and adding
an appropriation.
You were going to finance
anyway.
Madam chair I will commit to you
that I will definitely consider
that in finance if if we get
past this committee and get to
judiciary and finance Senator us
of this is actually an excellent
person into it in terms of
trying to make bills specific
and clear and and finance
committee is an excellent
Committee to.
Really understand and and
evaluate the costs and I will
commit to you that I will
consider those as we proceed I
would like to have the bill
moves and why I am concerned
that we don't have enough time
to consider the impact of such
an amendment at this moment but
I would definitely consider that
as it moves forward.
I'm going to make another point
about the idea because each of
us has been provided some funds.
To put it into existing
departments for purposes and of.
There would be an opportunity at
this time if people were
serious.
About the collection of data and
reporting.
To commit to that so that's my
only comment I'll finish with
that what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair moved to table.
A motion to table is non
debatable.
So granica.
Would you please call the vote
on a tabling motion.
Senator so wanted yes.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes ma'am I'd like to explain my
vote Senator Hamblen no.
Senator Novell.
Yes.
Senator poke.
No.
Senator souls no.
Senator Smitty.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no.
In the context.
So there is for yes to table and
I know.
We're back on the bill.
Madam chair I make a motion to
for the past.
Is there a second.
Thank you madam chair.
There is a motion and a second
for a due pass run echo would
you please call the vote.
Wait excuse me excuse me Senator
Gallegos you wanted to explain
you wrote.
Madam chair it'll be the same on
this next votes all you'll to
that point okay thank you.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos.
No ma'am eight to elect to
provide my both.
But.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
No.
Senator Paypen.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Now.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes and senator semantics.
Yes explain my boat so Senator
Gallegos first.
Thank you the on both the votes
I would have preferred to be
able to have your very
insightful amendment put on in
this committee I both going
forward will be the next time I
see it is on the Senate floor
and I just want to be able to
vote in the affirmative if it
were good for my constituents
and my part of the state thank
you madam chair are you.
Thank you my only comment is
while IT support.
Moving on to various energy
sources I also am very concerned
about affecting the finances of
our state.
And encourage you to think
about.
How this bill could progress
with more support.
with that I we are finished with
this bill I would thank you and
your expert witness for in your
co sponsor for being here today.
Okay so
members it is twelve forty one
we could do one more easy bill
or we.
Which is Senator.
Woods.
Are we can recess what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair center would have
been waiting for quite awhile
I'd be amenable to try to get
his bill through strongly okay
this will be the last bill for
the day Senate bill one ET
reforestation center act Senator
Woods and the reason I think it
might be easy is there were no
opponents only proponents.
So Senator Woods.
Thank you madam chairman a
I actually am and home and I
decided you guys will go get
them and I took my time out so
please excuse my address for the
day I want to explain what bill
real quickly.
Yes.
Madam chairman what this is is
an act to create a.
The New Mexico reforestation
center.
It will require a joint fires
agreement department of forestry
human who are New Mexico at
highland university the
agriculture experiment station
the New Mexico State University
in the department of biology at
the university of New Mexico to
address the impacts of climate
change or the state's forced and
the state report stations meets
are and created the that
medicated account for one.
The New Mexico reforestation
Center Charlotte dresses
impaction say climate change and
state forces to meet the current
state.
Future reforestation needs the
establishment of this sit back
program under strict program and
a planning program and show the
develop and operate a seed
collection say processing stage
towards state.
Orchard seed production six
storage seating Commission
planning and monitoring climate
change monitoring and data base
management and research and
outreach education training to
support the State Bank very
different funding program.
Thank also really just the the
requirements of each
of our academic or state agency
and
I'm I want to leave just a
little better time I know that
that you're awfully busy and
it's late in the day.
I will do stand.
You get the general concept but
what I'm trying to do and I want
to stand for questions madam
chairman there is an
appropriation of four million
six hundred and eight thousand
one hundred dollars with that I
would I have got some expert
witnesses I don't know where
they're still on the line
I did give.
Listed just.
Thank you Senator Woods it I
think it's important to hear
from our witnesses because it
indicates the collaboration of
the different universities so go
ahead I have is expert witnesses
loan and Bernie and Laura
McCarthy.
Are they still on.
Yes on this is a very please go
ahead.
Madam chair Senators my name's
underneath I'm an associate
professor at New Mexico State
University and director of the
John Deere engine course
research center so I would like
to thank the sponsor for the
hard work in organizing a
collaboration of stakeholders to
present this important piece of
legislation to the committee
Senator Woods gave a really good
excellent overview of this
proposed bill highlighting the
importance of reforestation to
the state of New Mexico so thank
you madam chair and centers we
will stand for any questions at
this time.
Thank you is Lorna currently on.
Senator would be our state
forester shares our state
Forster madam chair she is a one
of the main pushes on this.
And some of your of.
Well well the not FIR but some
the agency deals I will read
what she has to say it says
wildfires have created hundred
thousand acres of bird lands in
New Mexico in some of the
wildfires have created well when
and some of the burns were so
severe that there are no
remaining natural seed sources
without this nurse requested New
Mexico will continue to struggle
with reforestation of burn lands
in addition the climate smart
reforestation will reduce the
state's carbon emissions and
that will not be possible
without seed collection and
nursery capacities.
Thank you so.
Sloan or Max Baca here.
To speak for highlands
with your madam chair.
Go ahead please Joshua thank you
very much Madam chair in
senators first I I'd like to
thank on behalf of highland
university Senator Woods for
sponsoring this very important
bill which is critical to the
future of New Mexico's forests
and critical to the provision of
clean water clean air and all
the other resources provided by
those forests for all of your
districts
I don't have anything in
particular to add that either
Senator Woods or doctor Bernie
haven't presented but I am
present to field questions if if
anybody would have any from
Ireland side so.
Thank you very much for your
time and and I appreciate your
consideration.
Thank you if there is anybody on
this matter madam chair Matt
Baca with the university of also
like to speak just quit quickly
and quickly Max's you heard from
highlands and so I just wanted
to let the committee know that
the state has asked us to
collaborate so this particular
initiative checks all those
boxes and I think it's a it's a
where the mission I think the
sponsor that's it thank you
madam chair.
Thank you now could I see the
hands of the opponents to this
bill.
Are there any opponent.
Could I see the hands of the
proponents.
You go down to your reaction box
at the bottom of the page.
And put your hand up okay I see
proponents thank you very much
for joining us today since there
is no opponents we're gonna go
to committee members so that we
can
wrap up.
Are there is there any questions
or discussion.
I have a new batch okay there is
a motion if you would hold that
amount there is a question I
have Senator souls did you have
a question Madam jobs just got
moved to pass all second the
past thank you senator Hammond
you have a question.
Madam chair no it's actually
just a COVID I just love what
Senator was talking about and
when it comes down to supporting
New Mexico State University and
and our our other educational
institutions right on thank you
senator thank you.
Thank you my question Senator
Woods it is are the other
educational institutions
involved.
I'm I've got three universities
involved madam chairman I've got
New Mexico stated that New
Mexico highlands and I've got
the University of New Mexico the
great thing about this bill it
it requires him to do a joint
powers agreement to agree to
work together.
And I hate to say this in front
of of all the people here but a
lot of times that's not easily
done.
And that's one thing this bill
requires is for them to get
together determined what their
part in this.
Deal yes and and agreed to have
a financial agent one.
And put this money together and
put it to work madam chair.
Thank you so much okay so we
have a motion for you passed
from Senator Novell and the
second from Senator souls.
Anything further from the
committee.
Reineke a could you please call
the vote.
Senator serve on yes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen just.
Senator.
Yes.
Pope.
Yes Senator souls yes.
Senator Schmedes.
Senator.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes thank
you Mr CENIC's yes.
Yes and one excuse.
Thank you so much Senator would
you have a passed unanimously
and you.
Thank you members of the public
Senator Sedillo Lopez you had
your
first of all Center souls your
hand still up right yes no eight
Senator so's your hand still up
okay center city this yes I need
to make a motion to take a bill
off the table it was senator
Stein boards bill and I believe
it was number eighty two.
Okay there is a motion is our
second to that motion I would
like to second.
Okay so there's a motion and a
second what this means is we
will put it on the very next the
top of the very next agenda we
will take a vote on the motion
to reconsider and then we will
take a vote on the bill.
So Senate bill eighty two has
been requested to be put at the
top of the next agenda we will
vote on the motion to reconsider
then we will vote on the bill so
members of thank you so much for
joining us today before we
recess I just want to let you
know that we did complete one
half of our agenda today so we
are moving forward it's great
thank you very much have a good
rest of the weekend and happy
