And I'm carrying this
legislation on a half of the
NMFA a legislative oversight
committee, which voted unanimous
unanimously to endorse the bill.
The bill appropriates 13.25
million.
Uh, from the PPRS and uh to 3
identified funds, the 6.25
million for drinking water state
revolving 2 million for local
government planning fund and 5
million to the cultural affairs
facilities, uh, I, my expert
witness here is uh Marquita
Russell from the New Mexico
Finance Authority, and she can
make a brief statement if she
likes. If you don't want to,
that's fine. OK, so excuse me
one second. I understand that
you're also gonna carry
House Bill 206.
That's correct. I'm sure if if
it is it's your pleasure. I
would love to do them back just
a minute.
So, for the audience for the
committee after this bill, House
Bill 41, we will be hearing
House Bill 206, which is the
funding bill.
So, please proceed, Marquita. Do
you want to say anything about
House Bill 41. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I would note that this
doesn't impact the general fund.
These are monies that are moved
from the public project
revolving fund, which the
finance authority um
administers, um, and the 6.25
I'll just, um, that 6.25 million
to the drinking water state
revolving fund serves as the 20%
state match for capitalization
grants that come down from the
EPA and so those monies are
important for us to be able to
secure federal dollars.
for clean drinking water
projects, and with that, I'm
happy to stand for questions.
Thank you very much. How many
people in the audience are here
to support this bill.
OK. Anybody here in the audience
to oppose this bill.
Anybody online?
Either side.
OK, so with some of the
supporters like to come and
speak.
And tell us why you're
supporting it.
Madam Chair, my name is Michelle
Gallagher Roberts. I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary for the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
This fund is vital to uh the
agencies um maintenance of the
facilities that we oversee
across the state. Um, we use it
for, uh, maintenance
infrastructure, repairs, um, and
this is supplemental to the
capital that we also receive um
graciously from the legislature.
Thank you.
Thank you. And who else is gonna
to speak?
OK, so we will now go to
questions, comments from
committees. Senator Scott, you
look like you have some.
Please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
is
An expert what is cultural
affairs.
Spending the $5 million on.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. Thank
you, Senator. Sorry, it's like
at home week here, um, and so,
uh, the cultural Affairs funding
is for water projects for uh
septic sewage, drinking water
and and and and in areas within
the cultural affairs department.
Oh, OK.
A chair and.
description, these are
plumbing projects.
Or
Buildings
Related to cultural affairs.
Is is that uh I think we should
have the cultural affairs
director come up and uh speak,
please.
And if you might uh restate, you
heard the question, right? OK,
thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you for the question. So the
cultural Affairs Infrastructure
Fund, um, is not necessarily
tied to water projects, but the
DCA does, um, we own and operate
over 240 buildings, 3 drinking
water systems and a wastewater
system. I know it's very unusual
for people to think that about
uh DCA, but um we do have a
variety of infrastructure
projects at our sites across the
state.
Um
Madam Cha expert.
None of this
qualifies as capital
expenditures.
Or
this, this.
I guess what I'm asking is
these capital projects or
maintenance.
Madame Chair, Senator, thank
you, um, both, um, primarily,
um, these this fun.
Depo is primarily used um while
DCA is eligible to receive these
funds. I'm looking at Marquita,
um, because we receive GGRT um
funds, and that is where these
funds are um coming from, so
that is why DCA is eligible to
receive these funds and were
allocated a part of the GGRT
PBRF funds. So, um, primarily we
use these for maintenance, um,
some of these projects are um
supplement.
mental to capital.
And Madam Chair, how did you
arrive at the $5 million number
was that uh
Are there list of projects that
were
Talking about with.
With a budget to prepared.
So, uh, Madam Chair, Senator,
the, the fund that this has
moved from, there's a, there's a
part of the statute says up to
35% of the annual governmental
gross receipts tax received by
the Finance Authority can be
dedicated to one of 7 projects
or programs. And so we are
operating within the constraint
of 13.25 million. We know how
much we need for the drinking
water state revolving loan fund
capital grant, which is the
6.25, we need about
million to keep up with the
annual flow of applications to
the local government planning
fund and that left us with the
$5 million to the uh the
cultural affairs infrastructure
fund. So what I understand, what
they presented to the finance
authority oversight in the
interim, and I'm sure that uh
Director Gallagher could um uh
expound on this, but there is a,
they have an annual ICIP I mean
they have a capital improvements
plan. They are um taking care.
maintenance in the in the places
in which maintenance will stave
off additional need for capital
expenses, so that's what we've
heard and, and $5 million is
what we
Sure their need is greater than
what our fund is able to
allocate.
Madam Chair, that was my very
next question was.
Is that $5 million greater than
or less than what those guys
actually need.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you.
Um, we have identified um on our
ICIP we have identified, I think
$46.5 million worth of need in
fiscal year 26, um, so.
Yeah
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all for now. Thank you. Next, I
have Senator Siia Lopez and
Senator Isa.
Thank you. um, and you always do
such a good job of uh Madam
Chair, of explaining this um
every year. But now to me, we
have kind of a new twist, and
that is the availability of
these federal funds, they notice
that their EPA funds, um,
Are they at risk and if they
were to go away, what does that
mean for New Mexico?
So Madam Chair, thank you for
that question. We've been
receiving the EPA capitalization
grants since the late 90s, um
and the public project revolving
fund has served as the state
match since that time. Uh, we
don't expect any changes to the
capital to the drinking water
state revolving fund
capitalization grants coming
down. We do expect that they
will change a couple of ways in
which the monies can be used,
but not in fact the dollars
coming down, so, for instance,
uh, during the last
administration,
There were elements of required
environmental justice, which has
now been walked back, um, but
the kinds of projects that we
can fund are the same, so we
don't have to do additional
priority for environmental
justice, um, but the
capitalization grants, the
underlying use is the same. So
we're not expecting a major
change to the fact that this is
primarily used for clean
drinking water projects. We have
some additional supplemental
grants that we also received,
uh, from the last administration
that have more.
targeted uses, but those don't
seem to be um in play right now.
That's good to hear, although.
In a month, the sea, the CFR,
the Confederate, the
congressional Federal
regulations have been changed in
the and
They already walked back the
environmental justice stuff.
Madam Chair, um, Senator, the
CFR wasn't changed to add in
environmental justice, those are
strings that they attach to the
annual capitalization grants, so
there are conditions that they
send down that aren't
necessarily baked in CFR, for
instance, there's a requirement
that we provide a certain amount
of these dollars as quote
grant-like funds. There's
another bill that you're
probably going to see next week
that asks us to change our state
law to comply with that
provision, but they are, but
that comes down just as.
Those requirements of the
capitalization grant.
Thank you, cause I, um,
There is a CFR on environmental
justice. And so that does not
apply to the granting process.
Madam Chair, the relative to the
CFR and environmental justice,
we're required to review every
project to look at its
underlying impacts, so we do
look at environmental
documentation and issue our own
determination and environmental
justice is included in one of
those major crosscutters, um, so
we have to do some consultation
with um federal government,
federal agencies and local state
agencies and governments on.
Potential impacts that doesn't
change, but the targeted use of
the funds to ensure that a
percentage of the dollars were
used for environmental justice
got shaved back. Be chair, that
is very helpful to understand.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Representative.
Um
Going back to cultural affairs.
I guess I want more information
that I'm still kind of confused
at where all this money is going
because you have already asked
for, let's see, for the past 5
years.
Uh, you've received similar
Appropriations over the past 5
years. Now we're
Back at it again, so I guess I
want clarification on what the
money is being spent.
So Miss Russell, why don't you
start? And then if you need to
pass over, you can.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So prior
to about 5 years ago, we were
underutilizing that maximum 35%
that's able to be appropriated
out of the public project
revolving fund. We weren't fully
utilizing it for the match for
the capitalization grants, they
were much smaller than the need
on the pub on the local
government planning fund wasn't
as great, so we weren't fully
utilizing the max 35%. When the
law changed in 2019 to add this
new project, roughly about $5
million has been made available.
has, has been available um for
those uses. Um, so, you know,
that I think the 2019 law was
just fully take advantage of
that 35% uh ability to, to
appropriate.
OK, but still didn't answer my
question, Madam Chair, Miss
Russell.
Yes, I would because, uh, I
mean, they're asking for $5
million here in the past 5
years, so we're looking at
$30 million that y'all are
wanting, and I, I want to know
what it's being spent on.
Um, Madam Chair, a senator,
thank you. Um, so as I said, we
do have 240 facilities across
the state, um, and many of them,
um, over 100 of them are on
historic site, uh, historic
registries. They're very
expensive to keep up, um, the 3
drinking water systems we have
used, um.
OK, I'm gonna interrupt you
right there because you're,
you're going on and on. He said
that there's 240 sites you have
3 drinking waters. Tell me where
those are located, madam Chair.
Madam Chair, the 3 drinking
water sites are in uh Fort
Selden in Radium Springs, Donna
Anna, we have a drinking water
and a wastewater system at Fort
Stanton in Lincoln County, and
we have a drinking water system
in Los Luceros in Al Calde.
OK, then go on with, with the
rest of what you're saying.
Um, Madam Chair, senator, so the
funds are used, um, across, as I
said, across the state in
various maintenance and um
replacing of sewer projects, um,
we have a variety. I'm happy to
provide you with a list of
projects that um were submitted
to um the NMFA um oversight
committee, um, for that we used
in the last for fiscal year 25.
Well, Madam Chair and
Representative Miss Russell.
Oh
Maybe that list should have been
presented to us too, because I
do have concerns about it.
Who has oversight on this money
over this $30 million.
Madam Chair, um, Senator, the
money goes through the standard
state procurement process.
OK, Madam Chair, those as
There are these funds that you
are receiving for the cultural
affairs facilities
infrastructure fund as there an
audit done on this money, Madam
Chair, Senator, it does go
through our standard audit
process.
OK, so
What should we be looking for
whenever you're talking these
are going to.
Uh emphasis
OK
I
or
Jeez,
thank you, Madam Chair. I want
to know, uh, Madam Chair.
I'd like to know
More in depth of what cultural
affairs is using all this money
for.
Because when they were talking
about the New Mexico.
Drinking water state revolving
foam, that's 6.25 million, and
that's capitalization from the
EPA.
We've got the local government,
government planning fund.
And can I'd like a little more
information on that, Ms.
Russell, if you don't mind.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
local government planning fund
is primarily used to author um
preliminary engineering reports
for water and wastewater
projects. The preliminary
engineering reports are needed
to access the federal dollars
and things like the drinking
water state revolving fund and
the Water Project fund. So they
are critical. We can also fund
now Affordable Housing Act
plans, uh, LEDA Act plans, um,
Uh
Anything needed basically to
access federal or state dollars
go through this, this fund.
OK, Madam Chair and Miss Russell
whenever we're talking about
this, uh,
Local government planning fund,
I'm also assuming that you are
working with, I don't know,
mutual domestics on getting
their water projects going and
everything else, and that is
starting from.
The get go following through, is
that correct? Madam Chair, yes,
the primary, uh, users of the
local government planning fund
for water and wastewater
projects are mutual domestics.
OK, and that brings me to a
question that I will ask on the
next bill because I was very
concerned when I was reading it,
a lot of the projects that I had
requested, uh, they're not
there, so, but we're gonna help.
Uh
Never mind.
Cultural affairs get all their
stuff.
To the tune of
Big money, Madam Chair.
Whenever I'm looking at the FIR
on this, uh.
It's
We know that there's gonna be
some big changes coming down
from Washington DC.
So let's say if HB 41 is not
enacted in the Mexico could lose
roughly $28.7 million in federal
grants.
Uh
We're also seeing that the
federal funding also supports 55
full-time employees.
In at enemy deed that's that
works on the safe water, all
this type of stuff, safe,
reliable drinking water.
What will happen if that money
is cut? What will happen to
those people that were employed
by the NMED.
Who will make sure that
There is safe water out there.
Madam Chair, um, about 27% of
the annual capitalization grants
can be used by the Environment
Department to provide direct
technical assistance, uh, local
assistants, there are some
capacity development, some of
those dollars are used to staff,
um, and some of them are used to
pay contractors, so I can't
really tell you um exactly what
would happen if that money
doesn't flow through to the
environment department, but we
know that they have supported
both contract dollars and uh
staff support.
Thank you for that riff of
information right there.
I guess I want clarification.
Why was
Can you tell me the impetus
originally what this book was
supposed to be for.
Um, if I could get a little
clarification, which one? The
public project revolving.
Thank you, Madam revolving foot
Um, if I could get a little
clarification, which one? The
public project revolving.
Thank you, Madam revolving
footland Laun.
So the public project revolving
fund was created to to fund
capital projects for local
governments uh throughout the
state, um, and that project,
that program was started in
1994, so it's now about 30 years
old, um, we've made almost $5
billion worth of loans from that
program over that time period.
Um, the drinking water state
revolving loan fund is, uh, was
created in the late 90s to take
advantage of the capitalization
program that EPA was offering,
and those are only for
Clean drinking water projects.
And Madam Chair and Miss
Russell.
Can you give me the balance of
what is in the public project
revolving phone to date an
approximate I'm not asking a
hard and fast but I just want to
know approximately what's in
that. Absolutely, Madam Chair,
so, um, it's, it gets a little
complicated because monies that
flow in monthly, daily, um, sit
in a reserve account that until
bonds are paid, we cannot touch.
Once bonds are paid, money flows
through into what we call the
actual loan fund, and we make
loans from those dollars.
That we have in that fund as
those monies get drawn down and
sometimes we're at below 0 then
we
Because we're waiting to issue a
bond, um, we'll actually go out
and issue a reimbursement bond
uh to replenish the fund. So
those dollars go up and down
weekly, frankly, because we
close loans weekly. We are about
to, or we just closed on um $100
million.
A bond, so that those dollars
are relatively high right now,
but we're already planning our
next bond because we expect
those dollars to be drawn down
in the next 2 months. So, Madam
Chair, I, I can't tell you this
week's balance, but I can tell
you that it fluctuates weekly.
OK. Well, Madam Chair, I guess
my concern is I know that ED is.
A very worried about their
ability to match approximately
$28 million in expected grant
funds.
Um
But that can be used for their
full-time employees and if there
is something that happens, but
it's
I, I don't know if Miss Russell,
if you have read the analysis
from
I can find it, I think it's in
here at the ED the uh.
That they have expressed some
concern over if that money is
not coming in for those grants.
And
Let's see.
Uh, I'll, I'll just read this
real fast, Madam Chairman, with
respect to estimated additional
operating budget impact enemy D.
Existing proposed budget already
seems that the above
appropriation revenue will be
received and there is no
additional operating budget
impact that is not already
captured in the existing
operating budget provided are
you?
Concerned with what I just read.
Madame Chenoso, since the
inception of the program we have
taken full advantage of the 27%
that's allowed to go over to the
Environment department under
what they call technical set
asides. So our expectation is as
those dollars are made available
that 27% of it will flow
directly to the environment
department for its authorized
uses, um, and again, it's
expected because in fact we have
to secure our capitalization
grant dollars. We have to secure
the match before we can apply.
So these dollars.
will apply in July for the
capitalization grants will have
to apply by August, but it'll be
a July application. These
dollars need to be in place for
us to apply for those dollars.
So we don't know exactly how
much um EPA will keep the
administration and how much
they'll send down to the states,
but that is our best guess at
this time.
Thank you for that information.
Madam Cheer brings me to, I'm
just pondering on something
prior bill that we had in this
committee and it did pass out of
here.
The Environment Department was
going to have to hire 300
additional full-time employees.
Now we are saying, you know.
But the additional operating
budget will be impacted because
what's going on here?
I'm just kind of concerned if
We might not be reaching
boundaries that cannot be met by
our budget request.
So, Madam Chair.
I do appreciate the comments
here. I'm just very concerned
about
Oh
Where all the money's been going
and how it's been.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Cedillo Oaks. Senator Charlie?
Thank you, Madam Chair, just
really quickly, um, thank you,
representative and Deputy
Director Gallagher for being
here. I'm
Sure that the money has been
allocated for the
Mm
The request for the
infrastructure projects that are
Be earmarked
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm not
sure I understand the question.
Can you clarify?
Um, Madam Chair, the $5 million
that's going to cultural affairs
facilities for infrastructure
are projects already identified
for what's gonna happen.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for that clarification. Yes, and
it is off of our ICIP. OK, um,
Madam Chair, Representative, and
Deputy Gallagher.
I
Just, I want to bring this up
because it is something that I
try to work through, but I would
really appreciate if the
cultural affairs department
would work on the portal project
to get heaters and air
conditioning on the portal,
Native American elders are
required to sell on the floor,
and I understand that is a um uh
a rule through with rulemaking
process, um,
But it
When it comes to to what drives
tourism and really what drives
cultural affairs, so much of
that is Native American culture,
and the people who come to Santa
Fe, want an experience and that
experience is at the expense of
Our humanity often, and the fact
that our native elders have to
sit on the ground, fell off the
ground.
Really gets under my skin, but I
would like to see, especially
during the summer that they have
adequate cooling, and then
during the winter that they have
adequate heating, because they
are out there.
Literally on the ground.
Um, and I'd like to see that
become a priority, chair, um,
representative.
And
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Sadila Lopez. I move it to pass.
I'll.
Is there any further comment?
The secretary please call the
vote.
Cervantes excused.
Senator
Charlie, yeah, Senator.
And, no, Senator Hamblin.
Hamlin, yes, Sen Pope,
Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
And it's got, yeah, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, tends to Lopez.
Yes, uh, Lopez, yes, San
Stefanissophonics, yes.
Thank you. Um, House Bill 41 is
has a due pass with a 7 in the
affirmative one in the negative,
and 1 excuse. Congratulations.
Now let's present uh house Bill
206.
And then we'll go back to the
regular agenda.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members. I would like
to have my expert, uh, witness,
uh, present a House Bill 206.
I'm here with, uh, in place of
my colleague Representative
Ferrera, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, uh,
House Bill 206 is our annual
authorization bill that allows
the New Mexico finance Authority
to make loans and grants from
the water project fund. Those
projects are recommended to the
legislature by the Water Trust
Board, and then once they're
authorized, um, then they make a
final recommendation to the
finance authority for us to
execute loans and grants, um,
every project that was qualified
that applied this year is on
this list. There is about $160
million.
it's being made available for
from severance tax bonds, and
they are going to a significant
list. There's 84 projects listed
on this bill, um, and they are
all been vetted by a technical
agency team, and they'll go
through one more vetting to make
sure they're all ready to secure
the funding, um, but with that,
Madam Chair, I'm happy to answer
questions.
Thank you. Uh, is there anyone
in the audience to support?
this bill.
Anyone opposed to this bill.
Anybody online?
OK, we're to the committee for
questions and comments.
Madam chair and move a do pass.
There is a motion and a second,
but we will go to questions.
Um
The motionless from under.
Hope and then Senator Charlie's
Senators out for discussion.
Thank you, madam chair.
Um
I would like to ask.
Miss Russell
I'm having a problem here
whenever I'm looking at my
analysis and how many projects
there were.
Which
I have underlined each one of
them the counties they came from
and there's quite a few counties
missing, so I know some of those
counties did have
X
But I'm assuming this is for the
2026 cycle. Is that correct,
Madam Chair, this is for the
2025 that we expect severance
tax bonds to be available in
June, um, and the finance
authority will have a uh
approved those projects before
that. So they were um projects
from 25 counties, um, and as I
said,
84 applications were submitted
and there are 84 um projects on
this authorization bill.
OK, I guess my problem is, madam
here and Miss Russell.
That's the the state engineer's
offices.
They're saying that there's a
number of projects there, the
number of projects they are
seeing is 66, which is different
from the '84.
That is
Discussed here on the FIR and
used.
Give me any heads up of why
there's a difference.
Not sure, no, there are 84
applications listed. There are
some applicants that have more
than one project type, so you
will see the authorization,
we'll say, you know, with an S
on it for a certain kind of
project or for more than one
project, but there are 84
projects on the authorization
bill. They total about $238
million.
But I think the question she,
the senator is asking, is it
more, is it more than state
engineer is like NMED or other
departments.
That are over some of these
projects.
Madam Chair, no, all of the
projects that are listed come
through the Water Trust board
which the finance authority, um,
administers were staffed to the
Water Trust board, and we are
administers of the uh loan and
grant fund, the water project
fund.
OK, uh, madam chair, Miss
Russell, you said there was 84
projects or yeah 84 projects.
And the total on those 84
projects Madam Chair, $238
million.
3
OK, because on the FIR under for
the state engineer's office.
It's on the very back page the
physical implication.
I don't know if you've had a
chance to look at that.
Madam Chair, I have not looked
at the state engineer's FIR. OK.
Kind of curious there.
Um
But I guess my next question,
Madam Chair.
Miss Russell previously we've
heard a bill from Senator Munoz,
Senate Bill 29.
Which is the funding mechanism
for these projects.
Um
Are any of these projects
currently in the House Bill 2?
Madam Chair, the, the water
project fund is already slated
to receive about $160 million
from Severance tax bonds. The
Senate Bill 29 authorizes
additional funding to the Water
Project fund as we understand
it, uh, what they're expecting
to put in House Bill 2 will be
for projects authorized in 25,
which is this list, and in 26,
which is the list you would see
next year. So my understanding
of the way that that
appropriation is being proposed
is that it would be.
To potentially for two years.
OK.
Madam Chair, I guess that brings
me back to the prior bill we
just heard.
House Bill 41.
Those projects would come into
play again for the next site. Is
that correct?
Public project revolving pan
drinking water state revolving
loan fund, local government
planning fund and the cultural
Affairs facilities, Madam Chair,
that is an, yeah, that's an
annual authorization bill. We uh
regularly ask for approval or uh
of appropriation from PPRF over
to those programs.
Madam chair, I guess I'm kind of
And bio, yes.
Madam chair
I have gone through the bill,
House Bill 206, and I have.
Like I said, underlined.
Each entity in each county and
that there's several counties
that are not reflected in this
bill.
For those counties I might be
referencing, did they not make
application for any sort of help
this year, Madam Chaley did not
make application. I'll note that
this year and the prior 4 years,
we have asked for authorization
for every application that was
qualified that that came in. So
if they met the, if they met the
program guidelines, we have
asked for authorization of those
projects for the last 4 years.
Madam Chair, and Miss Russell, I
guess my concern here is if
there is an entity out there.
Uh, that does need help. Would
they be, where would they go
locally to start the process?
Madam Chair, frequently they'll
start with the local government
planning fund, which which is a
callback to the last bill, um,
because they'll need to get a
local where's uh that I need to
know where that is located,
Madam Chair, that's what the New
Mexico Finance Authority, that's
the fund that's gonna be
receiving $2 million from House
Bill 41. We use those dollars to
make grants primarily to mutual
domestics for water and
wastewater projects. That
preliminary and geneering report
is necessary to apply for
funding.
From the Water Trust board and
Madame Tier, I understand that
perfectly, but on a local level,
can they go anyplace locally to
start the ball rolling where
they can make this application.
Madam Chair frequently
communities work through their
councils of government?
To help get that shepherded
through.
OK.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. I have
Senator Cedilla Lopez and
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
interested in the flood, um, the
flood prevention project in
Berlio County on on page 2.
Um
It
Is is that those bump outs, um,
That, um
I forgot what they're called.
Uh, do you know what I'm
referring to there, the
stormwater bumpouts.
Madam Chair, I can tell you that
the uh the scope of their
application is to design and
construct the John Saint, uh,
John Street, uh, pump station
and Gravity Pond diversion of
the William Street 72 inch storm
drain and Broadway Boulevard 66
inch, um,
And upsizing the burstitched to
30-inch pipe. Excellent,
excellent. Thank you. Um, those
are great projects. Um, my
grandparents used to live on
William Street and used to flood
all the time when, when I was
growing up.
Um
So, I also noticed and maybe it
happened last year, Belen had
severele, New Mexico had severe
flooding a couple of years ago,
um, and I noticed they're not
here. I maybe it was last year
or
I'm sure I will have to check
into whether they were funded
last year, um, typically they'll
have to get a planning project
together and then submit because
it's an annual process that
starts in July, sometimes they
look other places for funding
for more emergency like
projects. Thank you. I'll um
I'll give him a call and see
what happened. Thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, when you're ready
for a vote, I mean, ready for a
motion, I'm happy to make it.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, um.
Good morning.
Representative
Can you explain where the
general terms of these.
Madam Chair, the finance
authority, um, will structure
the loans for certain of these
projects if they've got a rate
paying constituency, then they
are asked to take on a 10%, a
minimum 10% loan, um, and
they'll go up to a maximum of
40% loan based on the underlying
community's capacity to repay
the debt. So if they are um a, a
wealthier community or the water
system generates a lot of excess
um revenue, we'll ask them to
take on a larger.
percentage of loan when we go
through an annual analysis on
that, um, but it's between 10%
and 40% on average our projects
are about 85% grant and 15%
loan.
Um
Madam Chair
The
The ability
It seems like
It seems like there's
An issue of fairness.
And
whether a
Oh
Municipality.
I mean if they've done a good
job in managing their rate
structure.
And their maintenance and, you
know, their manpower.
There is
I
I make an argument that if you
do all those things, you're
penalized, you have to pay more
back, and if you don't do a good
job,
You don't have to pay as much
back. Do you understand? I mean,
there ought to be.
There ought to be some fairness
to to the process. I mean, I'm,
I'm all about this process. I
mean, I don't think it is
advertised enough.
And there's probably many mutual
domestics out there that just
Don't know about it and and
don't play.
So
I would like to, I guess my
question is, the fairness issue
number 1 and 2, what do you do
to advertise to the
Those people that are
That might be
Applicable to this.
So that they could join in and
upgrade their systems.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
question. Uh, relative to the
first question, I think the
water transport has struggled
with that. Um, asking everyone
to repay the same amount of loan
is also uh some smaller systems
really can't afford the same
things that larger systems
can't. So there's some
efficiencies that come with
being a larger system, often a
municipality, um, so they've
struggled. The water transport
has struggled with whether to do
a blanket loan amount, which is
where they started or to do it
over time uh to to look at.
Uh, an entity's capacity to
repay debt. So I don't think
there's a good answer to the
question that you've raised and,
and this is where they've,
they've settled.
Well
Madam Chair, um,
I, I think.
I would encourage the the trust
board to relook at that, and to
to look at because
If just because.
You've managed your
Business, right?
I don't think that those
Municipal user should be.
harmed or penalized because they
have good men.
I think that
I mean, I've argued so.
Argued this same point with
But
Secretary Kenny on the
environment side.
But a big company be fined more
because.
I have the ability to pay more.
And, I mean, made the.
Argument in rules committee
should a younger man have a
longer prison sentence than an
older man just because he has
more to give.
And that, and there's a, there's
an argument there that I think
in fairness that we all look at,
but I support your
That's for your bill.
Um
I do think it needs to be
advertised more because there's
many municipalities out there
that are struggling and don't
don't have knowledge of it, and
many of them, quite frankly,
are.
pretty basic, and I mean, they
don't have time to come to I.
I just don't know, you know,
they just, they just try to keep
the leaks from occurring and
keep the, keep the water on, so
I, I would encourage you to do
that, and I would encourage you
to look at them.
The fairness of all those
loans are structured. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, on the list I
have for the first time, I have
Senator Scott. Anybody else for
the first time.
OK, and then I'll have send a
result for the 2nd time, Senator
Scott.
Thank you, madam chair, Miss
Russell.
What is the audit process.
For these folks requesting this
money, make sure that it's
going.
Where it was intended and not
wasted.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So the,
uh, one of the requirements of
getting the funding is that they
haven't, that they've complied
with the state audit Act, so
this, these dollars because
their severance tax bonds are
subject to that executive order
from 2013, so they have to be
able to at least um pass the
audit tests that the auditor
puts out as part of its rules.
Um, and then we actually
reimburse for project expenses.
So as project costs come in.
We oversee those dollars. We
look to see if they're within
the contract scope, we look to
see if the documentation is
correct that the engineer or the
construction manager has signed
off, but we have a two-step
process which includes an
outside engineering firm to look
at those costs. So we have um a
very uh rigorous review of those
applications and those pay
requests as they come in.
They're only done on a
reimbursement basis.
And Madam Chair and Miss Rossi
either have in house or
contract.
the technical expertise to
oversee these.
Project expenditures to make
sure that
Those monies are going with it.
Madam Chair, yes, both with the
Environment Department and with
a um an engineering firm. We
have two different technical uh
teams that work on this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I did forget to ask two
questions.
Our colonia.
Uh, areas allowed to request my
or do you help colonius?
Madam Chair, um, there is no
prohibition against an entity
that also qualifies for colonial
money to apply to the Water
Trust board. So there are
frequently um projects that will
apply to one fund one year and
another fund another year, um.
So, yes, I think that's your
answer. OK, so, Madam Chair,
Miss Russell, what I'm hearing.
What you've said 10% grants, 15%
loans. I'm assuming that they
would receive probably a more
than likely.
Madam Chair, if they are
supported by a rate-paying
constituency, they are required
to take out a 10% loan.
But that's not always the case.
OK.
Madam chair and Miss Russell.
What about, talk to me about
emergency funding, as you well
know, there was some areas down
where I live that were hit
drastically. I see all the ones
that are in here for the rid us
a Lake County area.
What about Travis County and
Ross?
Has there been any application
made for assistance with any of
their projects or even the town
of Dexter.
Madam Chair, um, and let me look
at the projects here in a
second, but generally speaking,
this is not a fund that's used
to fund emergencies immediately.
It may be something that happens
2 or 3 years later, reseeding or
something to do with flood
prevention, but because there's
an annual process that starts in
July, these aren't dollars that
are going to be made available
until probably the following
September. So it's not really
set up well for um uh emergence
to, to
To respond to emergencies.
OK, well, the reason I was
asking that is I'm seeing 12.
See, I think there are 3
different projects in here.
Maybe just to 3, there's 3
projects here for Lincoln
County. I didn't know if these
were for projects that were
ongoing since 2024.
I don't know what those were or
not, but I was just kind of
curious because I know that some
of the funding that we have been
asked for is to help with
Oh
Tanks for holding water for a
certain city.
And the cost of those tanks is
in excess of $1.5 million that
wanted it out of capital outlay
because it was desperately
needed.
That's not really doable. So
anyway, I didn't know. I thought
earlier I thought you said
something about emergency
funding, but it all goes back to
the structure there.
Is that what you're talking
about?
Me too, that's correct. So this
is not typically a source for
emergencies. OK.
All right, that's all madam
chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Sadil Lopez. I'm move a Duas.
A second I think we already did
one, OK.
Oh, I'm sorry. Did we already
have that? We had Senator.
Hope and Senator Charlie, I
apologize.
Uh, with the secretary, please
call the vote.
Senator Cervantes is excused
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Zel.
Saintel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Yes. And our Pope, yes,
and her sky.
Scott, yes, Senator Townsend.
And 100, yes, Senator Dia Lopez,
yes, Lopez, yes, send us to
Ponics. Yes, centers to phonics,
yes.
Thank you very much. You have a
unanimous due pass on this bill.
Thank you.
So we'll go next to House Bill
11.
And Representative Matthews.
111.
Maybe it's 1,111.
Welcome to the committee.
Ma.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
Let me first, uh, introduce the
people who were with me, and
then I'll talk very briefly
about what
Happened and our bill and then
send for questions, um, with me
are Brie Pritchard, who works
with service animals in New
Mexico.
And to my left is Rose Romero.
Um, who is the lady who was the
Owner, uh, and
I think now I can just get into
the story of what what happened.
So on July 28th of last year,
there was a water main explosion
on a street next to the home of
Rose Romero in Albuquerque.
Rose is blind and for 11 years
she was helped by her faithful
seeing eye dog Ivy.
After the explosion, Rose was
desperately trying to locate
Ivy.
Calling the first responders
that came that her service dog
was missing.
It took 11 days for Rose to
learn that Ivy had died in the
garage of her home in the
explosion.
The reason she didn't know
earlier was because emergency
responders failed to adequately
search for Ivy.
HB 111 amends the service Animal
Act.
To say that if a first responder
at an emergency is made aware.
that the owner has a qualified
service animal.
The first responders shall.
To the extent practicable and
while prioritizing human safety.
Make a reasonable effort to
search for the qualified service
animal.
Um, and with that we stand for
question.
Thank you very much. Uh, would
your experts like to say
anything before I go to the
audience?
I, I think we can just proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How many
are in the audience to support
this bill.
Is there, thanks. And is there
anybody in the audience to
oppose this bill?
Anybody online for either?
Reporting.
Anybody opposing?
OK, so there's about 7 people
online supporting as well.
So is there anybody in the
audience that would like to
stand up and make a statement?
Please come to the middle.
There's a couple of people.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition. I do healthcare and
disability work, so I never
expected to find myself in the
conservation commission
committee, but it's a pleasure
to be here. Um, the disability
coalition represents the
interests of people with
disabilities of all types, and
we stand in support of this
bill. This bill has to do with
service animals and under both
federal and state law, a service
animal is either a dog.
Or a miniature horse, no other
type of animal that is
specifically trained to assist a
person with a disability or
multiple disabilities with
performing tasks that are
related to that disability. It
does not include pets. Service
animals are not pets. It does
not include emotional support or
comfort animals. These are
animals that are essential to
the functioning of people with
disabilities, um, and we think
that this, this bill strikes an
appropriate balance in putting a
duty on first responders in
regard to service animals while
limiting it, the bill
specifically refers as the
sponsor said.
to efforts to the extent
practicable and that are
reasonable. So we think that the
bill does strike an appropriate
balance, uh, in terms of
recognizing the importance of
service animals and requiring a
response by the first responder,
while not um imposing an undue
burden on them, so we urge your
support. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members and sponsor of
this bill. My name is Grace.
Yeah
We support House Bill 111 with
more than 7 years of experience
in the animal welfare industry,
I understand the deep pain
people endure when they lose an
animal they rely on for comfort
and companion.
The pain is even greater and in
some instances, life altering
when the loss is out of a
qualified service animal. House
111 is a commonsense bill that
would help to protect animals
provided.
Service to their humans, I
believe it is in our state's
best interest to ensure that
reasonable efforts are made to
search for qualified surface
animals during emergencies,
updating the law to add this
provision will help protect some
of the most vulnerable members
of our communities when we make
animals safer, we make their
humans and their communities
safer as well. Passing this bill
would help to ensure humans and
their qualified service animals
are given the best chance in
having all life saved in times
of crisis. Thank you for your
time and consideration.
Thank you. We have several
people online, so let's take um
Nadine and then Jim Jackson.
Madam Chair,
committee sponsors and audience.
I am speaking to House Bill 111
today. I have been a service
animal handler for 39 years and
then currently placed with my
5th service dog, a service dog
generally spends 2 years in
training, then works until it
reaches between the age of 8 to
10 years, at which point it is
retired unless it is retired
early for health, performance or
behavioral reasons. Once a
service dog is retired,
technically, it becomes a pet, a
qualified service animal.
must be able to pass an annual
PAT, which is a public access
test demonstrating its ability
to cope with significant stimuli
and rapid environmental shifts,
including emergencies,
legitimate training entities
such as Guide Dogs for the Blind
and other Assistance Dog
International accredited
entities require handlers to
maintain an emergency plan. This
includes two other persons as
emergency contacts, maintaining
microchip registration, wearing
of a collar with identifying
tags, maintained veterinary
care, have an emergency.
ation can't hold any local
animal control licenses as may
be required. These standards
exist for good reason, and I
hope that this bill is not too
far of an overreach, given that,
however heartbreaking it is to
lose any important being from
their life. It is also a
collaborative responsibility. It
is a 2 to 5 year wait for a
successor service dog, and the
planning and costs are
significant, which often leads
to misrepresentation of pets a
service animals. I hold enormous
empathy for how difficult the
process is, as I have gone
through it myself. Thank
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
So was that Natine and that was
that AI or was that typing or
what was that? Computer
generated.
Speech
Text to speech for difficulty
speaking today. Thank you,
thank you, Nat, for being with
us. We appreciate it.
Jim Jackson.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
Jim Jackson here for disability
rights New Mexico. I don't want
to repeat what other uh people
have already said. I think that
makes it clear that service
animals play a vital role in the
life of people with
disabilities, so it's really
important to try to get them
reunited in the case of an
emergency. I would just want to
add one other piece that was uh
kinda alluded to that there is
already a provision in state law
that makes it a crime to claim
that your dog
is a service animal. If it's
not, um, we do believe that this
bill is a common sense proposal,
and we encourage your support.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. We're now
going to go to questions and
comments from committee members.
Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good to see you, representative.
Um
Has this been through judiciary.
Senate Judiciary is the next
referral from us.
Did it go through it now?
Excuse me, did it go through a
House Judiciary, Madam Chair,
uh,
Senator, it did not.
OK.
I
I'm gonna ask you a few
questions.
Probably tapping up for
judiciary, but they're coming,
um.
Then there's no doubt about it.
Um
And it's not in.
Opposing
legislation once you.
But
I think uh
I think you're gonna have some
momentum.
Reasonable effort is it?
term.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, I, I'm sorry, I
started to say representative
senator that's fine.
So, um, it is not a defined
term, it would be specific to
the particular circumstances
that were occurring.
Madam Chair and um.
Representative
Have you thought about?
how you prevent any liability to
that home.
First responder.
to the
to the government entity that
They may work for.
Because men reasonable, madam.
Chair is not defined.
Then
In today's litigious society,
you're gonna have somebody.
Uh.
Start messing with you and, and
you need to prepare yourself for
that.
chair, Senator, uh, thank you
for the question because that
kind of issue has come up
before, um, first of all, we
already have a service animal
act and all we're doing is
amending.
Adding a provision to that.
And what we attempted to do.
This was not designed for
lawsuits. This was designed to
be sure that first responders
had the notice and the
understanding that
These animals.
If they, if they know that such
an animal is present.
Um, that, um.
After protecting human life,
their 2nd guideline is to do
what they can to to you know to
save the service animal, and so
we
Purposely used terms.
Reasonable effort.
Uh, practicable and so forth as
opposed to trying, we're not
trying to impose an absolute
duty. I mean, these
circumstances are fraught, quite
frankly, but we simply wanted to
provide some guidelines to first
responders, and if you come upon
a scene, you know that there's a
uh a service animal, um, have to
being sure human life is
protected. Please look for that
service animal.
And I completely agree, and I,
and I want you to understand
that I'm sure my, my point is
not.
I'm trying, I'd like to try to
help you get this bill through
and be thinking and be ready for
some of those questions.
Um
First responder.
Um
Is it a defined term?
Madam chair, uh,
it is
in in the uh.
It's in
On page 2 of the bill, um,
Subsection B.
Yeah, we added a definition.
That's, that's a good, um,
Definition in many rural parts
of
Of New Mexico we have.
Volunteer firefighter.
Yeah
will respond and then you have
nurses all across.
New Mexico that have a um
Yeah.
both
To
respond. So you have to be
careful that you don't, uh,
Get them in in a pinch.
Um
I, I, I think, um, I think your
effort is, is uh
well-intentioned and, and, uh,
is something that
Most every
First responder would do.
You, you're gonna have the issue
of competing calls and
What's reasonable and
I mean in this society today, I
can see a lawyer looking at this
and saying, uh oh.
I'm, I'm on a
I'm gonna do something.
So be prepared. Uh, thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you. I have Senator
Hamblin, Senator Sadilla Lopez,
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
mine's more of just a comment.
Thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this because I, um,
is working with an organization
that
Trained uh animals to be service
animals for veterans, especially
veterans who are suffering from
PTSD.
And, you know, seeing the
training that they go through,
it's significantly, um, you
know, just very detailed and in
terms of uh getting medication
off of countertops and pulling a
blankets over in case there's a
mental health crisis and cut in
and uh being able to be
comforted and opening the
refrigerator and helping get
water and, and
You know, it's, it's not only
are these, and ma'am, I'm, I'm
so sorry because I can't even
imagine the heartbreak you must
have felt, uh, knowing that
you're not only your assistant
and your your aid, but also your
companion, possibly your family,
you know, an animal that you
felt as your child who was there
for you.
And so my deepest condolences to
you. So I, I appreciate though.
Your advocacy for this because
then hopefully what will happen
is, is a result of this
legislative session, other
people will not have to
experience, uh, and there are
service animals will will be
able to be found.
So I, I want to commend you, um,
and commend the sponsor, and so
thank you for being here. That's
all, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Di Lopez,
then Senator Scott. Bedd and
chair of Mrs. Ms. Romero, I'm so
sorry for your loss. I just
It's just devastating to think
of what you've gone through. Um,
my question has to do with
reasonable efforts, you can
imagine, wouldn't reasonable,
reasonable efforts be something
that is developed in training
for the first responders as we
as they um take this bill and
develop training.
Man chair, uh.
Senator, um, I'm gonna have 3
talk about the training.
Issue.
Madam Chair and Senator, yes, it
is something that should be
developed during the training
for the first responders, um,
reasonable effort could mean a
num a number of things based on
the different situations and um
that's why the language is as it
is in this book. Absolutely, it
absolutely makes sense cause
every situation is gonna be
different, and I'm sure that the
training is it could be
different training for fires,
different for training for
floods, training for explosions.
So, um, I really like this bill
and I thank you for bringing it
forward.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Matthews
This
Could be
Interpreted as an unfunded
mandate, particularly.
With respect to the training
requirements for
Sometimes volunteer first
responders.
And I too share.
Senator Townsend's reservations
because on.
On page 4, line 6.
You've got the word shall and.
Make a reasonable effort.
The search for the.
Search for that service.
And I can see in the heat of an
emergence.
Well,
sometimes.
Prioritizing trying to say with
you.
Yeah
Those reasonable efforts, right?
Very reasonably take.
The back seat to the.
That the primary objective.
So
I wish there was a word should.
that could go into that.
Into that shell space.
I don't think we use that.
It's either may or shall.
Uh, but I, I do see.
Some liability issues.
Certainly as a possibility.
If someone loses a service
animal and the search was not
considered to be.
Again
Substantially in the mind of the
beholder.
To be reasonable
For these, Madam Chair.
Matthews, these were primarily
be
Uh
Dogs, I presume.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, senator
under.
Under the statute under the act
itself.
existing law.
Um, qualified.
There's only two categories of
qualified service animals, and
it's on page 2.
Subsection C.
Um, it's only qualified service
dogs or qualified service
miniature horses.
And those are the only two
recognized in the state of New
Mexico currently and we didn't
make any changes to that.
OK. Well, madam chair.
Matthews uh
I recognize it.
Magnitude of the tragedy.
I'm just not quite sure that.
Because of service responders
already have.
The ability to look for
If they are made aware, there's
a service animal involved.
They already have the ability to
look for that.
Service animal if circumstances
permit.
But that word shall.
It's problematic.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Hamley,
you had a motion. Yes, I have a
motion you pass.
I
There is a motion for a due pass
in a second any further
comments.
Could the secretary please call
the vote.
The Cervantes excused Senator
Charlie.
Charlie, yes, and a.
Excuse me.
As Senator Hamlin.
Center happened. Yes, Senator
Pope,
Pope, yes, and her Scott.
Senator Scott? No, Senator
Townsend.
The Townsend no, Saneria Lopez.
Yes, Senator Di Lopez, yes.
Then her, then her, no,
Santeonics, yes, honics, yes.
Townsend to explain his vote.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you,
Representative, I'm glad your
bill got out of here with a due
pass.
think it needs to work.
Into it, and I look forward to
supporting it.
done. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Senator Uzel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Representative, I do
appreciate this bill and I've
read it.
I do.
Some friends that do have
service animal.
But
As was stated before, line page
46, the shell, I think really
needs to change.
Really do, I think that would.
The liability, the hidden
liability for first responders
is also very true.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. So by a vote of 5 to
3, uh, your bill has a due pass.
Congratulations and thank you
all for coming here today.
We're moving on to House Bill
128 as amended, and there is a
handout that's being sent out to
everybody.
Senator Pope, please proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Committee members, House Bill
128 amended at the local solar
access fund is a
community-generatedd proposal to
empower New Mexico's community
with the resources they need to
build small scale.
Beneficial local solar and
energy storage projects that
will save money, increase
resilience and public safety and
reduce carbon emissions. This
legislation is the product of
extensive community outreach and
engagement.
I'm proud to be a sponsor of
this bill, which has a wide and
diverse range of community
enthusiasm and support behind
it.
Across our state municipalities,
counties, tribal governments,
land grants, and school
districts want to invest in
solar energy and storage to
power community centers,
schools, fire stations, water
treatment plants, and other
critical infrastructure.
But many need accessible capital
and technical expertise to get
these projects off the ground.
With federal funding cuts now
happening across the board, the
need for accessible state
funding to fill in the gaps and
build our community's capacity
for these projects is more
important than ever.
This bill establishes the local
solar access fund at the New
Mexico Finance Authority with a
non-recurring, non-reverting
appropriation of 20 million to
provide planning and
implementation grants for these
projects.
Planning includes hiring
technical expertise to plan
projects as well as secure other
sources of funding and
financing.
Implementation funds
shovel-ready projects.
The fund prioritizes rural,
low-income and underserved
communities that would otherwise
be unable to pursue solar and
storage solutions.
Why now?
The urgency is clear. Energy
costs are rising, greater
reliability is uncertain and
climate-related disasters such
as fires, floods, and extreme
heat are becoming more frequent.
By investing in our community's
capacity to access solar and
storage today, we will
strengthen local economies,
protect critical infrastructure
and ensure energy security for
decades to come.
This bill is not just about
clean energy. It's about public
safety, economic opportunity,
resilience. With this fund, we
can help turn community centers
into emergency shelters.
keep fire stations and water
treatment facilities running
during disasters and lower
energy costs for local
governments, freeing up funds
for other vital services.
New Mexico is the has the 2nd
best solar resource in the
country, yet we have lagged
behind other states in
deployment, for example, uh,
Texas is ahead of us right now.
This fund will change that,
helping communities take control
of their energy future.
This is a one-time investment
that will benefit our
communities for decades to come.
Thank you again for your
consideration on this bill and
letting us present present it. I
hope you will join me in
supporting the local so local
solar access fund, a smart,
cost-effective and
forward-looking investment into
our communities, our economy,
and our future.
Uh, Madam Chair, I have 2
experts with me. I have Alicia
Shaw from Public Power New
Mexico, and Thomas Gray from
Positive Energy Solar, um, if I
could give them both a minute
just to introduce them.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, I think.
much else to say except we're
really excited to um be here,
you know, we worked on the
community engaged process that
Senator Pope referred to and
we're very excited at the
possibility of establishing this
fund because it will have great
benefit for our communities in
New Mexico.
with that madam Chair, we are
ready for public comment. Any
questions from the committee.
I
Thank you very much. Is there
anyone in the audience
supporting this bill? Can we see
your hands? Anybody opposing.
This bill.
Online
One. OK. And that was Dick
Mason, OK. So let's have people
line up. Let's take 5 comments
uh from the supporters.
Remember, only 5.
You're not in the 5, you're not
in. Sorry.
Oh
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, JD
Bullington, and I'm gonna speak
on behalf of 4 organizations to
be efficient.
Uh, I am speaking on behalf of
these four entities that
strongly support this
legislation, that's the Pueblo
of Laguna. It's the city of
Santa Fe. It's the American
Institute of Architects, the New
Mexico chapter, and it's also
the Gallup McKinley County
School District. I have been a
registered lobbyist for public
power in New Mexico the last
couple of sessions. I have been
able to see behind the scenes
how hard the bill sponsor has
worked on this bill, how hard
the members of public power in
New Mexico have worked on this
bill. It's a great.
of legislation that's primarily
going to help rural communities
and rural governments.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee, uh share a
grown horse with PNM. We thank
the sponsor for introducing HB
128 as it may help support local
and educational entities cover
costs for their solar systems.
Over the past few years, PNM has
worked with education and local
governments as well as tribal
governments, such as the
You know, entities such as the
city of Albuquerque, Grant
County, Demming schools, Santa
Fe County, the Hickory Apache
Nation on clean energy systems
and know this effort may help
support similar entities in
their efforts going forward into
the future. Thank you.
Thank
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jim De
Chardin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We have over 60 members
and moved around since 2004. Our
mission is to support, promote,
and advance the transition to
renewable energy in New Mexico.
This bill creates a state fund
to help finance solar on public
buildings and land and tribal
governments to help them
participate in the transition to
100% renewable energy economy.
It will also help to drive
the local solar industry by
providing jobs, economic
development throughout the
state. As we realize windfalls
and oil gas revenue we need to
invest this money to help us
move to adjust and orderly
transition to renewable energy
and I strongly supports and
urges the committee to vote it
to pass.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Melissa Bernard and here on
behalf of the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter or 35,000 members
and supporters. We support this
bill, the 20 million that is
included in HB2 is contingent
upon HB 128 passing. This bill
sets up the framework for the
fund, how NMFA and MNnerd will
operate it and how to evaluate
projects, funding for planning
and implementation to the
entities as previously
mentioned, will fund solar and
storage to power public.
Buildings like community
centers, libraries, schools, and
fire stations as well as
infrastructure like water,
wastewater, and street lighting.
This fund will help communities
overcome obstacles to build the
solar they need and want,
investing in their future for
decades to come. We are here
today for climate crisis Day
wearing black as we grieve the
crime at the climate crisis, and
this is a hopeful bill, so we
urge you to pass it. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Andrea Padilla. I am
president of El Concerjo de las
Mercedes and president of the
town of Tomer Land Grant, and we
stand in full support of this
bill because many of our land
grant communities have community
centers or will be getting
community centers and we want to
go to solar. I've been asking
about that for a couple of years
now and this is just wonderful
to hear that you guys are doing
this. I ask you that you please
pass it. Thank you.
Thank you, and we'll go to our
uh person online uh Dick Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is uh Dick
Mason. I'm a board member of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of HB 128.
The league supports transition
to a predominant reliance on
renewable energy resources to
address climate change.
It is essential for community
buildings to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by shifting to
polar, solar and other uh
non-fossil fuel energy sources.
So the league wants to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
legislation forward and urges
the committee to give it a due
pass. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now we're
going to questions.
Comments from committee members,
Senator Hamlin to start. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and it's nice
to see some familiar faces, um,
here, and I want to thank the
sponsor for this. Uh, mine is
really just a comment. I'm
grate, I'm grateful for this
bill, cause I think about
Especially in rural parts of New
Mexico.
And the community centers that
are the heartbeat of those,
those areas. I think of La Mesa
and I think of San Miguel and
how it would be much more
efficient to be able to have
those on solar, but more so what
is important for me is then our
rural communities, a lot of
those uh residents are looking
for street lights because of
safety. They don't want their
kids walking on streets with the
with the fear of them getting
hit by a vehicle because they
can't be seen. And so working
with solar street lighting would
be
solution that also would not
Have the electric fee go back to
those residents who are busy
trying to put food on their
tables and support their
families.
So I'm really grateful for this,
and I think this is an
incredible project that is going
to help not only my district,
but I think it's going to help
communities throughout the
state. And so, um, I am very
happy to be supporter of this
and bringing this.
Thank you, man.
Thank you. I have uh Senator
Scott, then Senator Sio Lopez.
Scott.
Thank you,
ma'am sure.
Mhm
How many? I presume.
These are going to be.
Relatively small.
Maybe even rooftop type systems
with battery storage associated
with them in some cases.
And your senator, that's
correct.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, how
many?
Megawatts of power will $20
million by.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, that
would be about 6 to 7 megawatts.
Of so
Oh,
Wow.
OK.
Right now we have about 9000
megawatts statewide on the grid.
For $20 million we get 7
megawatts.
Madam Chair, Senator, that is
correct.
Madam Chair
Uh, uh,
um.
That one, that number took my
breath away.
As
credibly expensive.
And
I'd like to let somebody else
talk for a minute.
While I go through the math.
To make some comparisons with
other.
methodologies for generating
power.
But
This is
This is incredibly.
Expense.
So if I could, Madam Chair defer
for a few minutes while I
I do some calculations.
That's all for
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I, I
would also add that.
Um, we're talking about, you
know,
250 to 300 smaller projects and
while that doesn't seem like a
lot.
The aspect of the battery
storage, the aspect of the
resiliency.
is also coming into play with
these projects.
And if I could let my expertisha
show.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, in the
handout, there's about a little
over a dozen examples of some of
these kinds of projects because
we get a lot of questions about
the pricing, the sizes, the cost
savings, um, for instance, one
project in Dixon's, uh, Ririba
County Dixon's Volunteer Fire
Station is just 7.5 kilowatts,
but it has battery storage and
it enables this to become an
emergency resource. So the, you
know, the, the, the, the
megawattage.
It would actually allow for a
couple 100 or more small
projects or a few utility scale
projects, but most of these
projects are very small, uh, the
price of solar keeps coming
down, and some of these actually
show the kinds of savings that
we have, which is actually a
huge investment that lasts for
generations, and I'm not sure if
um our solar expert would add
anything to that as well. I
think that the point about the,
the cost of solar in terms of
megawatts is not appropriate
because the
intent of this bill is to fund
small projects across the state
between, you know, government
buildings, federal, uh, not
federal but um land act and
really facilities that are not
going to be in the megawatts,
but smaller sizes. For example,
today, PNM announced that they
may turn off the power to Santa
Fe, Las Vegas, and other areas
tonight due to wildfire. So if
there was a small um
Fire station in the neighborhood
that had battery storage that
was, you know, fed by solar.
That area, that particular
facility would be safe and be a
place that we'd be able to
operate in that particular
thing. This is the sort of the
idea of these projects.
So I think that the calculation
is, is maybe a little bit off.
We're not looking to fund
community solar projects.
OK, Madam Chair, that's all for
now.
Thank you, Senator Sidi Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, I noticed that on,
on the
One of the FIRs and maybe this
has already been taken care of.
It says that there's a companion
bill Senate Bill 49, that has
some overlap um with this, with
this potential fund is, is it,
is that been taken care of, care
of or is there no overlap or?
Madam Charlotte my experience.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, so
they are they are compatible
bills, the $20 million that is
in HB 2 for this came from a fun
fund transfer from the large
quantity of funds that were
allocated to the community
benefit fund and they're not
really duplicative, but they are
complimentary. Um, they both
have, you know, arisen out of
different kinds of community
input and the desire to meet our
state's needs for these kinds of
projects and resource them.
Excellent. I, um, I was also
interested in this Los Lunas
project that is um a tower.
Um, is that
Commercially available or was
that a
Tell us a little bit more than
than was here, it says it was um
got a battery backup system.
And it actually uh creates more
than is consumed.
Madam Charsonnero that my
experts answered that.
Madam Chair, Senator, I do not
know much more about this
project than was in that
article, but I thought it was an
interesting example of
innovative solar technology that
takes up minimal space and has
community benefit, as you can
see in the packet, there are
many different types of, uh,
uses for these kinds of arrays.
What I will say, what I will say
I'm sure Senator, actually know
someone who I think owns the
company that's doing that
development and told me that he
has it down there, so I, I know
they've done some research and
he's trying to, I think, get
Some more startup funding to
expand that, but um I know he's
established it down there.
Um, Madam Chair, I really like
this because it, it adds
resiliency to our grid, um, and
I think many, we're gonna just
as, as time goes on, we're just
gonna need many, many things
like this, and I look forward to
uh just like we did now, looking
at the variety for the earlier
bills, looking at the variety of
projects, um, the innovation
that that this uh hopefully
we'll, we'll, uh
will support, um, so I, I'm
looking forward to voting for
this bill.
Thank you. Other questions, um,
Let's see, we have had Senator
Scott, so we're going to Senator
Townsend. We'll put you on the
list, Senator Scott, for the 2nd
time after everybody else.
Well
Don't be.
But
Madam Chair.
Senator
I, I
Appreciate the opportunity you
have to bring this bill forward.
Um
This bill is about.
To me it's more about
Ending taxpayer money wisely.
If $20 million and I'm gonna let
Senator Scott go through that.
power cost
per kilowatt hour.
Of what you told us while go is
astonishing.
And I hope people in the
committee run the math.
But
If what you told us is correct.
You're talking about
power source that is a multiple
of 100 times over a foot.
car is available today.
It just doesn't make any sense.
So, although, yeah, have a right
to bring a bill forward and, and
I understand that. I'm not for
sure your numbers are right, so
I would just tell you to go
back.
Because
But those numbers.
trying to spend $20 million for
7 megawatts of power.
I
I um
I would say is probably
would meet
Fiscal impact report.
Responsible. It's
Horribly expensive.
Thank you, I'm sure.
Thank you. Anyone else for the
first time, Senator yourself.
And then we'll keep going to the
2nd.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Senator, I was, I too was
astonished.
I know a little bit about
electricity and that was just
overwhelming.
I do have a question. If there
is a solar bill, madam Chair,
and Senator.
Oh, there's a couple of big ones
down in my area.
Are you working in conjunction
with the state land Office at
all to see if they might be.
Up to the fact that some of
these
To be put on stately.
Madam Chair Senator, I will let
my experts respond to that as
well, but for the most part,
we're dealing with communities
that might have state land, but
once again, we're talking about
rooftop rooftop solar on public
buildings, community centers,
fire stations, and then, you
know, them setting up the store,
so in some cases that could be
the case, um, but that's not the
intent to put these projects on
on state land.
Madame Chair, Senator, um, the
state land Office has supported
this legislation in the past and
currently does as well. Um, and,
and I know that they are open to
working with communities at that
opportunity does arise. I think
um as the senator said, you
know, we are talking about small
resilient projects. I do want to
make a brief comment on the, the
cost piece here. We're talking
about several 100 small scale
projects, many of which cost
less than
$100,000. They cost more if they
have battery storage, which
makes them resilient, which
makes them resources during
times of disasters, and there's
many examples of um, you know,
solar powered communities and
and resources retaining um
their, their um power in the
events of emergency, um, public
comment was limited today, but
we have someone from the
municipal League here and they
support this legislation because
it reduces risk, because it
reduces risk for
fires and floods, you know,
things like critical resources
like wastewater treatment
plants, losing those resources.
So I just wanna say that in
terms of the power, the number
is hundreds of small scale
projects and the elimination of
most of those utility costs
going into the future for
decades to come, and the
establishment of resilient
resources. So I just wanted to
put that in perspective.
OK, uh, Madam Chair, I
appreciate that answer I think.
Uh, you said that somebody was
here from the municipal.
Uh, Alice, Madam Chair, Senator
Allison was here previously. She
got up to speak, but she wasn't
able to.
Thank you for that.
I'm also reading under in the
FIRO the significant
issues uh.
program is likely to increase
the number of cellular
installations serving low-income
and rural communities.
I know that they're
People down in my area because
of our abundance of sunshine
they have been inundated with
requests if they owned any
sizable piece of land, would
they be interested in
participating in solar panels
going up.
And one of the things that
County commissioners have had to
deal with is if these people
decide to
They do have to contact me.
If there are protests there and
they are valid protests, those
projects will be stopped.
So there is a concern there that
needs to be taken into
consideration.
And Madam Chair and senator.
That question I was going to
ask. Oh.
Has any community opted out.
Of the solar panel
I already know the answer to
that, OK, so you really don't
have to.
Here we are again because many,
many years ago whenever Senator
Worth was still in the House of
Representatives, this bill came
before the House Energy
Committee.
And at that time solar was the
latest, greatest thing that was
gonna be going on and
I remember the.
Representative work.
Was being
Pounded if you want to say that.
Over certain areas of Santa Fe
that would allow no solar panels
on rooftops.
They wanted to preserve the
historic aspect of those areas.
So anyway, he kind of had to
change his mind right here. I
didn't know if any other
community have had.
Input on this that does prevent
a certain area of any town in
our state from being able to do
this.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, this
bill is
Doesn't apply any type of
mandate. This would be
communities, uh, municipalities,
tribal communities, counties,
uh, applying for grant funding,
um, for this to happen.
So if there were those protests
or those concerns, um.
That would be happening at the
community level.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
that that is a very real and
life thing that is out there
because people.
There were
Like I said, the, the people
here in Santa Fe that did
protest that and that's been
1617 or 18 years ago, I can't
keep track of time because of
his.
impact.
Also in uh
So uh
It'd be the northwest side of
Travis County.
That's
Certain neighbors said we don't
want them here, and they
appealed before this, the board,
the county commissioners in that
project was stopped there. I
understand that this is a grant
program.
But
I
We're using lots of taxpayers'
dollars to do this.
I guess what I want to say if
we're going to be
creating the local solar access
fund in the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
Madam Cheer, all I can say is
drill baby drill.
Because that's what's paying for
all this right now.
And it's underappreciated.
And it does pay our bills if
we're going to go solar.
You have to have copper. You
would not understand that. How
is copper?
inquired. It's through, I don't
know, mining.
We're trying to stop all these.
entities that do.
Pay the bills up here and
provide things for our solar
panels and all.
Madam Chan and Senator.
In case of a hail storm, what is
a person supposed to do with
their solar panels that have
been damaged because it does
have.
Mas said one of my experts.
Thank you, Madam, Senator, most
solar panels have been tested
for hail.
They can handle most can handle
up to a golf ball size.
Um, in the
12 years I've been working in
solar. We've replaced 7 solar
panels in the state of New
Mexico for hail.
Um, I think that the
Industry has has moved.
quite far in terms of being able
to provide equipment that has
warranties up to 25 years for
the product, 30 years for
production.
Um
They're pretty good.
Madam Chair,
That might
And your expert witness there,
Senator, thank you for that
information, but uh.
That's not always the case.
Whenever we have had certain
hail storms hit.
Solar panels have been broken.
And my concern is, what do you
do in case of?
But what is a person supposed to
do for the disposal because
there is
Certain lifetime that these
petals.
Are optimal. What is a person
supposed to do with the disposal
of these.
And will there be a charge?
For disposal.
Adam Cur Center, I'll let my
expert respond.
Madam Chair, Senator, there
there's companies that recycle,
um, solar panels. Um, there's a
big facility in Arizona that
actually makes quite a lot of
money by doing so. Um, there are
a lot of projects where they
will take old solar panels, take
whole arrays apart, stack them
up and ship them, and this
company recycles every element
of the solar panel possible.
Um, it's gonna be a growing
industry, and there's the big
aim within the industry is not
to
put anything in any landfill,
Madam Chair, thank you for that
information but I asked if there
was also a disposal.
You know anything about that?
Madam Chair and senators, often
this company will actually
purchase.
Um, large amounts of solar
panels given the quantity of
materials that they can extract
from them.
Um, there might be some shipping
fees, but generally, um,
These are done in large
shipments.
Um, to
cost.
Madam Chair.
I guess it all goes back to.
I, I'm, I'm not opposed to
anybody wanting to put up solar
panels on their own if they want
to, if there is a builder out
there that uh
builds a house and sells it to
somebody is the solar panels
that he this person has put on
the roof of that
he this person has put on the
roof of the house
is that warranty transferred to
the.
Even though this builder has a a
ask for and received.
Madam Chair, Senator, usually
any solar system that is on a
house that has been fully owned.
I can't speak to any lease
opportunities as we've seen in
the state that um leased systems
have a different type of
ownership.
But own systems that transfer,
do you carry the transfer their
warranties over, OK?
That's good to know for these
people out here that might.
in
Um
I'm just
The way I'm reading this bill,
madam Chair, and Senator, this
is.
Under the empire, I'm, I'm kind
of confused at what they're
saying and what you are
particularly asking for because
Uh, on the very last page of
your bill.
I think that's where it is
you're asking for $60 million.
From energy, minerals and
natural resources department.
For expenditure and fiscal year
26 and subsequent fiscal years
for finance authority to carry
out this purpose.
That's an awful lot of Madam
Chair.
But I do see it as
A recurring cause because with
the going through NMFA there
will be an added, an added
charge here.
Madam Chair, I'm assuming that
there will be an audit on these
phones.
Senator
Madam Chair, Senator, um, this
is going to the New Mexico
Finance Authority and so
processes that are currently in
place, um.
This legislation will follow
those.
Auditing procedures.
OK, so Madam cheer the way I'm
reading this, none of these uh
funds will revert to the general
fund, is that correct?
That is correct, Madam Chair and
Senator, because it's not, it's
just a one time at this point,
it's not recurring.
Madameer on page 3 line 9 saying
that some of this money will be
used to pay administrative cost.
by the authority.
Even though some of these may be
grants, is that correct?
Madam Chair Senator, um, those
are administrative fees to NMFA,
which is what they do on some of
the other projects as well, that
is correct.
Madam chair, my last statement
is on page 4, there was an
amendment put on there, and I'm
glad to see you did that,
Senator.
A blind 15 page 4, including.
By hiring the Mexico workers.
I'm glad to see that.
That time we gave our.
Workforce ability to be able to.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Charlie. I
have a comment and I'll go back
to Senator Scott.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
What, uh, Madamarian senator,
with the awarded projects own
the infrastructure.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
So speaking on behalf of rural
and tribal communities where
there's a historic lack of
investment.
Um
The ability to have autonomous
options for
Energy
Julian's priceless.
Um, more often than not.
Our tribal communities.
Um, or at the back and call.
Of
Exploitive.
Um
Energy providers.
Um, so I really, I do appreciate
that and, and it, it's a real
investment in local ownership,
and I would argue local control.
Um, Madam Chair and senator.
I agree $20 million for 6 to 7
megawatts is shocking.
Um, but could you tell us some
of the other costs that we
aren't thinking about within
that $20 million.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll let
my expert.
Madam Chair, Senator, to put
that in perspective, we're
talking about potentially
hundreds of small scale projects
across the state in our rural
communities funded by that $20
million. That is a one-time
investment that um will
eliminate utility costs or
significantly reduce them for at
least 30 years if not longer,
for, for, for the communities
that receive these resources.
Um, there's economic benefit
from
Um, the workforce benefits of,
of, of installing and building
workforce through these
projects. And then if the, if
the communities build storage,
there's also the resilience
public safety benefits. So we're
talking about a one-time
investment that eliminates
utility costs for decades and
provides public safety and
resilience. So I feel like the
way we're thinking, you know,
it's not like a large utility
scale.
You know, make a multi-megawatt
project we're talking about
hundreds of small kilowatt
projects that benefit our
communities across the state and
their resilience needs and
eliminate costs. You know, some
conservative estimates, uh,
estimate that one megawatt of
solar and storage will save more
than $10 million over 25 years.
Um, you know, perhaps, uh, my
colleague Thomas might have
other numbers beyond that, but,
um, you know, we are actually
saving money with this. This is
an investment in the future in
resilience and public safety for
so many reasons. This is not
expensive and the cost of solar
keeps coming down in the last 10
years, it's dropped 80%.
Madam Chair and Senator, I would
just add that.
This is what's needed in these
communities that are asking for
this, but don't have the
resources. So,
I don't believe we can just look
at it as this much money, this.
many megawatts.
We are paying for possibly
battery storage.
We're paying to hire also
technical expertise because some
of these communities might, they
might not have that.
To um get this work done one and
if there is the possibility even
for federal funding, right, to
have the matching funds and the
techno technical expertise to
maybe even do more in their
communities. So I think we need
to really look at the 20 million
and not just directly to the
solar.
its cost
But there's all those other
auxiliary costs that we're
paying for.
make this happen.
Um, Madam Chair Senator, I, I
really do appreciate that, um,
expansive answer because what I
was thinking was labor and
materials, but you're absolutely
right, this is an investment in
Um, a clean future.
And I started to do a little bit
of um
Searching to think, to look into
how much it costs to clean up.
Um, a solar farm, a solar panel
versus um some other ways that
we've
Utilize, um,
Resources, extractive resources.
So
It costs anywhere from 14
million to 2.2 billion.
To clean up one uranium mine.
It costs about
$51 per mile to clean up a
pipeline.
Uh, in New Mexico, Madam Chair
and senator.
Alone
When that oil is gone, and we're
done drilling.
It's gonna cost
$8 billion to clean up.
the.
Um
And Madam Chair and senator,
it's gonna cost 15 to $25 to
remove a.
Um, so I think when we're
talking about
The overall cost.
Um, I thought it was important
to share those numbers. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um,
sco for the 2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The
The number that I was expecting
to hear.
When I asked that question was
substantially higher.
In 7 megawatts.
$20 million.
Madam Chair
The senator and experts.
This is over 30 times.
What a utility scale natural
gas.
will put power on the bridge.
So
With these systems will run for.
About 6 hours a day.
With maybe a little longer than
that with battery storage.
So
From the standpoint of providing
emergency resilience.
Once you get
through one cloudy day.
You're out of solar power.
And, and with respect to energy
costs for the poor.
This is hideously.
40 times, 30, 40 times.
And
And madam chair.
I just don't see that as a
responsible use of fire.
We can do better than that.
For our constituents.
I had no idea.
The
That was numbers we were talking
about, even if you put 250 or
300 of the system.
The net effect
Our generation
search to destabilize the grid a
little bit.
Although some megawatts is not
gonna make.
Much difference one way or the
other.
And
It looks to me like that's.
Tremendous words too.
Ex
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. I'm gonna conclude
this by just saying that the
savings for the future.
Looked to be worth the
investment.
So I'm ready for a motion.
Senator Hamlin moved to Duke
passes her second. There's a 2nd
from Center Cia Lopez.
The Secretary, please call the
vote.
Cervantes.
Excused
Senator Charlie
Charlie, yes, Sanel of
Charlie, yes, Sanelenel, no,
Senator Hamlin and Halin, yes,
and our pope, yes, and a Pope,
yes, and her sky.
No. There's got, no, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, no. Lopez, yes,
Senator Dia Lopez, yes, Senator
Stephonics, yes, there's the
phonics, yes.
And uh before I go to the
spoke
or Pope you might want to let
Pledge council know that it's
showing up with one amendment,
but there's really two behind
the the number, OK? So by a vote
of 5 to 3, you have a due pass
on this bill. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you. Our last bill
for the day is committee
substitute for House Bill 291 as
amended,
uh, Senator Steinbor.
And is it our committees up or
whose committee sub?
OK.
I'll keep it real brief.
I know it's hard to believe with
me, but I will do my best.
Nothing in this committee is
brief.
We like to, we like to discuss
this. Very good. No problem at
all.
Madam Chair, colleagues, this is
actually a bill, part of which
you all have heard before, um,
didn't quite get all the way
through, but, uh, but this time
I think it's a year. I'm sure
this is uh pretty simply a
recycling pill in a sense. It's
a uh it updates our state's rate
fund, which is recycling and
illegal dumping act.
which creates a fund called the
Raid Fund, which is the
principal fund used by the
Environment Department for all
of our communities.
There is a committee that
assesses these grants made up of
a lot of rural people.
some urban people, I think
majority of the money goes to
grants to rural communities, um,
but this is basically for
recycling infrastructure for
communities.
Uh, because of the history of
the fund, there's some outdated
language in the fund that said
that 75% of the money has to go
to cleaning up illegal tires,
but we have abated a lot of tire
sites and there's a need and it
and it kind of overly restricts
the fun. So we get rid of that.
We still say it's a priority,
but we get rid of that kind of
Um, unhelpful language, frankly,
so that the, so that this
committee and the department and
use the funds as needed for
qualified grant applicants. The
other thing it does, man, is
this rate fund is perpetually
sitting with a million dollars
plus balance. So we do something
kind of smart, which is we use
that fund to create some new
staff positions. One is a
recycling education coordinator
to help cities.
Um, which is something that we
used to have, we used to have a,
uh, the, the Soloway bureau had
probably 1520 staff people and
it's been whittled down to
almost next to nothing.
Um, and then the other thing it
does is we
We create this concept people
have been asking for for a long
time of a circular economy where
we seek to actually leverage
recycled products for creating
industry.
And we create a position to do
that all the circular economy
coordinator that works to
actually create economic
development from recycled
materials and uh
Be a little smarter about that.
So with that, I'm joined,
honored to be joined by Shirlene
Sitton, who is our dynamo new
bureau chief for the Solid Waste
Bureau at the New Mexico
Department environment
department is doing a great job
and I'd love her to make a
little statement and then stand
for questions.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I,
I'm surely sitting here solid
waste bureau chief, OK, tell us
your name again. Sirlene Sitton.
S S I T T O N, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Yesterday when talking about
this bill, I was asked a very
important and logical question
about the recycling about the
profit profitability around
recycling. Um, I've been
delivering trash and recycling
services at the municipal level
for 22 years, and I've been
asked that question many times.
It's, it's logical. People wanna
know.
But in all that time I've rarely
been asked about how much it
cost to handle trash through
landfilling.
In New Mexico, we direct our
local governments to be
responsible for handling trash.
And no matter how they do it,
trash or recycling, I can assure
you it's very expensive, and we
all pay for that. Um.
So
I, I, I want to say that we've
accepted a system where we're
burying our resources and then
expensive engineered hole in the
ground.
Um, and
Wouldn't we rather keep our
natural resources in the value
chain so that we can make new
products out of them as long as
possible and only landfill what
we really need to.
And that's the idea of the
circular economy.
So this bill just opens the door
to start making that change.
to divert more waste, um, local
governments be able to divert
more waste, but also they'll be
able to clean up more illegal
dumps by changing the way the
grant allocations go.
it invites more economic
development around recycling,
um, which does improve the
profitability of recycling. So
thank you so much, Madam Chair
and members of the committee for
your consideration of this bill.
Thank you. Do we have members in
the audience in support of this
bill?
How many are opposed to this
bill?
OK, let's have the supporters um
come up and if you could self
select 5 or 6, that'd be great.
I said 5 or 6, not 1.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, Glenn I'm sorry, I didn't
realize we started at 11. I
thought we started at 11:30, so
it's good if you could keep your
comments uh down uh or because
we don't have opponents trim
them down, keep them short.
I'll be very brief. Uh, Glenn
Felty, uh, CEO and founder of
Sunate Solar were a local solar
company based in Albuquerque.
Focused on the Albuquerque Santa
Fe Metro, and I just want to say
that when it comes to the solar
recycling, which is a big part
of this, right? That was in the
conversation earlier. Solar
panels are about 95% recyclable.
There are more and more
recycling facilities coming
online, and this is gonna be big
business in the future, so I'm
in big support of this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schulz,
registered lobbyist for South
Central Solid Waste Authority,
we hall municipal solid waste
and provide recycling services
for Donana, Otero, and Sierra
counties. Our mission has always
been to divert waste from
landfills and prioritized
recycling where possible. We
support the modernization of the
rate fund in this legislation.
We appreciate the sponsor and
governor's office for
prioritizing and recognizing the
importance of diverting waste
from
landfills and the needs to
develop recycling and reuse
markets in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you.
When a chair members Committee,
I'm Ken Hughes with the
Coalition of Sustainable
Communities, our 7 members all
really support this bill.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jim
Desjardin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industry Association of New
Mexico, there are 50,000 solar
systems in New Mexico and so
while these components last a
long time, we need to have a
thoughtful approach about their
end of life. So we're really
excited about this bill and the
concept of a circular economy.
Thank you. We urge you to pass.
Thank you, and I believe we have
2 people on online.
do we have?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is uh Dick
Mason. I'm a board member of the
League of Women voters in New
Mexico in the league stand in
strong support of HB 291, the
League of Women's voters
supports efforts to reduce solid
and has hazardous waste and
reuse and recycle such waste in
order to protect public health.
Um, in, in air, water and land
resources, HB 2291 contribute to
these goals by strengthening the
statewide program to recycle
wide range of waste materials in
addition to tires. The league
wants to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
urges the committee to give it a
due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Mason, um, and
next we have Sarah.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sarah Pierrepont. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Recycling Coalition.
We are a statewide members
supported nonprofit organization
with over 220 members working in
the solid waste recycling and
composting industries. Our
members depend on this fund for
infrastructure and to apply for
grants for their programs, and
we strongly support the access
to more funding and availability
of resources to our members.
Please support and pass HB 291.
Thank you.
Thank you. So with no opposition
in the room, no opposition
online. I'll turn it over to the
committee.
Senator Hamlin.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and um I'm, I'm very excited
about this, and we've talked
about this and Senator Steinbor
knows my.
Uh, with the South Central Solid
Waste Authority, uh, where the,
uh, just recently retired
director Patrick Peck was
acknowledged as one of the top
landfill managers in the
country, and in, in uh going out
and talking with uh the
employees who are doing a lot of
the work that is not very
pretty.
Um, it is, uh, uh, a science,
there's technology out there,
uh, receiving a tour, seeing the
methane valves that are all
strategically posted, uh, and,
and planted there and, and so
the opportunity to, to recapture
that and to harvest that is
brilliant. Um, we, we should be
doing that. You know, we, I
worked with the South Central
Solid Waste Authority to
implement glass recycling in Las
Cruces, and it was something
that the community wanted.
And it's not something that you
make money from, but it is
something that is a service to
the community, and there are
people who use the glass color
all over the place in terms of
their, uh, their yard cleanup,
it replaces rock. I use the
glass color uh in replacement of
uh landscaping of arscaping, uh,
in my yard. Um, but there are
also opportunities for
public-private partnerships
here, um, because if we're going
to continue to, to do this,
there are opportunities to
create not huge impactful jobs,
but jobs for solopreneurs.
Uh, that can work with that and
work with the glass recycling to
help our, our restaurant
industry, um, and so on and so
forth. And so I'm just grateful
for this and when we had spoken
the other day, as I said, you
know, this is something that I
get to do in my job. So I'm
really happy to be able to do
this and support this here in
this capacity of the state
legislature. So thank you for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, I'm, I'm a little
confused as to what.
This actually accomplishes.
What are we
What are the goals and
objectives?
What is the practical effect.
Of the passage of this
legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
for that question. So I think
the number one most important
thing is removing that old
language that says 75% of the
recycling and illegal dumping
fund has to go towards scrap
tire removal.
Because
That was the genesis of the fund
because it was collecting a fee
on purchases of tires or car
registrations, yeah, and it was
created to, but now we've
evolved and it is the primary
mechanism your community and
mine uses to get grants from the
state for recycling
infrastructure. We remember that
language and so what's going to
translate to is more grant money
being available for all of our
communities for recycling
infrastructure that could be a
bailer or other equipment used
in our recycling centers for
things like cardboard or, I
mean, it could be glass like.
from Las Cruces, and they
started using glass rather than
throwing it away to make um
smooth surface almost like
pebbles. People use in
landscaping and stuff so that,
so we have a market for it. So
the equipment like that
pulverizer, right? It, that,
that's the kind of grant that
you would get as a municipal
government, and this is going to
make more funds available.
That's number one. The other
thing it does is we use this
fund that's sitting on a balance
to hire more staff for a for a
bureau that almost has no staff
to proactively work with.
communities. And again, I
appreciate the point that was
made. We're paying a lot of
money to landfill. I mean the
landfills are expensive, so we
can invest more money in waste
aversion, then we're saving
money, it's better for the
environment. We can create new
jobs. I mean, these do create
jobs as well. And so, uh, so
this bill also does that. We
direct the creation of these new
coordinator positions within the
bureau were not appropriating in
general fund to do it. We're
using an existing funds, so it's
kind of.
I think those are the two
benefits.
So, Madam Chair, Senator.
that prompted two more
questions, one, is the tar
problem solved.
And how much money is in.
The fund
I'm gonna let um Charlene answer
those questions.
Madame Chair, Senator, thank you
so much for that question.
Absolutely no the tire problem
is not solved, and we are not
taking our eyes or our
priorities away from tires. It's
a, it's a main part of the raid
Act, and we even have a staff
person. We have uh it's the only
commodity we have a staff person
dedicated to managing. So this
will actually help us clean up
more illegally dumped tires
because the, the current way
that the grants are allocated.
If an illegal dump site that a
city applies for cleanup funds
doesn't have 50% or more tires
than it's not counted as the 2/3
mandated tire projects. So we'll
be able to clean up more illegal
dump sites, and that includes
tires.
Um, we will still absolutely
look out and prioritize higher
product um projects. But there
is no real tire to tire
recycling.
And, and that just, that isn't
in just in New Mexico. It's
really just crumb rubber and so
we
Um, the balance of the fund, uh,
it's about 2.9 million, but that
includes what's encumbered for
this year's projects.
It gets about a million uh into
the fund every year.
And
Madam Chair
Just
There's
There's 1.9 million out of that
2.9 that's encumbered.
And we're going to add a couple
of employees.
Mm
Expand the scope.
Of our recycling efforts, so
You know, if I did the math
right, we've still got.
enough money to
pay for those folks without any
additional state.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator, that is
correct. Um, we really only have
about a million encumbered, so
uh this will allow us in the
next grant cycles to start
giving away more of that money
so that we're not sitting on it
and pay for the employees.
Madam Chair, Senator, and Ms.
Sit are.
Are you aware of any technology
I believe in our conversation
yesterday.
I represented that I did not
believe that recycling was ever
going
To be viable until it got to be
more economic than landfilling.
That is
Until you get the private
sector.
We're gonna keep taking this
stuff to the landfill.
Is there any technology that you
are aware of that would
Alter that.
Economic
Consideration to make this
recycling.
Madame Terence, more available.
Yes, madam Chair, Senator, thank
you so much. Recycling is a
private sector, um, activity and
each commodity is a completely
different story. So, um, we do
have one recycling manufacturing
plant in New Mexico, and that's
McKinley paper. They're a
national company and they make
Cardboard boxes out of recycled
paper. If they were not
profitable, they would not be in
business. your mic off.
Thanks. I'm gonna answer the
question a little different
because this is an age-old
question when it comes to
recycling policy. And I think
it's a misnomer that recycling
has to be profitable, but
landfilling can be unprofitable,
but somehow that's OK and
recycling is bad. I think you
have to look at a life cycle
cost. You have to look at a lot
of values that we get out of
recycling materials. We're
saving landfill space, so we're
saving money there that should
be on the balance sheet. We're
saving um natural resources if
we're reusing that material.
We're making products out of it,
so we're saving natural
resources that we use like trees
or other things, and, you know,
I mean that has a carbon impact
as well. So,
So there's a lot of value
getting out of recycling it has
to be figured into the balance
sheet, not just simply what you
were selling that commodity for
that's paying for its
collection.
And, and typically like curbside
programs and things like that,
the value of selling commodities
don't always pay for that cost
of collection, but you have to
look at the whole
Um, economic picture.
And Madam Chair and Senator,
I completely agree.
With that premise, but until it
becomes.
Cheaper
To recycle
Then it is to landfill.
We're gonna keep
so
And
Uh, particularly with respect to
The mountains of plastic that we
generate.
Oh
With
The new convenience of using
plastic.
Oh
That's going to, that's going to
be
And continued to be a problem.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, sir.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Senator Steinborn.
Miss Sutton, uh, I'm assuming
everybody could receive the same
handout that I got yesterday.
it and brought it by my.
Thank you.
I guess my concern with this map
was I was a little bit appalled
because my particular area of
Thes County and Eddy County.
have had
cried
Religiously.
You start recycling projects.
And guess what, they've all gone
by the wayside.
Because whenever I'm looking
right here.
I'm not seeing anything on the
eastern side of the state.
That gives me cause
Whenever you're asking for
funding right through here,
Senator Steinborn. I know where
the funding comes from, you do
too, and yet.
We're just a big old blank right
down there, OK?
One of the problems I have
whenever you're talking about
the tires and everything and
maybe.
Senator Charlie Ma.
Relate to what I'm fixing to
say.
I do live out in rural area.
More often than not whenever
there is something that nobody
else wants it, it's brought out
to the country whether it's a
dog.
Or a horse.
And especially tired.
Those are dumped out there.
And if we try to clean up our
land after a situation like that
with the tires and trash and
everything else.
Whenever we take it to be
disposed of at the landfill.
Guess what?
We are now hit with that burden
of pain for the tire recycling
part of it, which there isn't
one in our area, but we still
have to pay for it. Then we also
have to pay for that, the trash
that we have got to the great
measures to
picked up, so our land will look
good because I do not like trash
all over the place, and I do it
along our bar ditches as well.
I, I don't like it that we are.
Forcing people.
Sometimes
To do just that.
Whenever they don't know what
they're supposed to do with
recyclable material because it
does end up and become a burden.
For me and other people that do
live out out of the city limits.
Because if we take something
Our trash we have to pay a
collection.
For trash to be picked up.
And then if we do take something
to the dump, unlike city
dwellers, we still have to pay a
price on that.
So I do have a problem with
that. I wish there was something
that we could do with these
tires, especially in light of
the two fires we've seen
recently over, I think that was
on the west side of Albuquerque,
is that right? with those black
plumes of whoever set the tires
on fire.
Concern I have is um page 8 and
I'm just gonna go there because
that was the one I turned to
cause I've had it marked
throughout this particular
field.
The positions of recycling and
waste reduction coordinator and
circular economy coordinator are
created in the department shall
be funded from the recycling and
illegal dumping.
My question is,
What are they gonna be doing?
defer to uh to Shirlene. I can
answer.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
so much for um all of your
comments. The, the RAID Act is
meant to address almost
everything that you mentioned,
illegal dumping, um, improving
the handling of tires, and we
continue, we'll we'll continue
to focus on that. We'll be able
to clean up more illegal dumps
by again um just changing that
wording slightly. Um, and, uh,
just I, I don't have all of the
projects, but Eddie County has
received 2 rate grants to um.
Almost $900,000 in the past. I
don't have the specific
projects. There may have been
illegal dump cleanups. Um, this
was just uh this year's of great
grant, so it just depends on who
applies every year, so I
encourage you to keep applying
and, and we'll keep um assisting
to clean up the illegal dumps.
The positions.
Um, one of them will be a market
development coordinator, as we
mentioned, um, many states, both
red and blue are working on
market development for recycling
to, to utilize the resources and
attract markets to the state,
and we're a little behind on
that and that's, that's the main
thing that that physician will
do.
And I just, I'll just say, you
know, one problem communities
have, Senator, Madam Chair, is
they don't know the markets.
They don't know necessarily
where to find a market for their
commodity and what's needed is a
position to help work with them
and help connect them to other
communities, which also the
circular economy position will
do as well, so.
Madam Chair, I guess that
answers my question, but I'm not
happy.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Townsend.
I'm
a decay.
Decayed old rule.
support the
Senator Steinborn's bill today.
It's, it's
It's new ground, um very, I
moved to that.
I'd like to second Madam Cherry.
OK, with a uh do pass motion
from Senator Townsend.
And a second from Senator
Hamlin, um,
Any other discussion?
Um, I just wanted to, to say
that on page 9 and I understand
this is existing law, the sector
shall appoint members of this
alliance to serve two-year terms
as volunteers with no
compensation from the state, um.
I always wonder why
environmental um initiatives
have volunteers with no
compensation and other boards at
least get per diem. Um, I know
there's, it's it's existing law,
you decided not to change it,
but I just wanted to point that
out. Um, with that, Madam
Secretary.
Um, would you call the boat?
Terence Cervantes is excused
Senator Charlie.
Charlie is excused Saintel.
Then Oiselle, yes, Senator
Hamblin, Senator Hamblin, yes,
Senator Pope.
Yes. And our Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Senator Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, yes, Senator Dia
Lopez, yes, that De Lopez, yes,
send us toonics. Yes.honics,
yes.
OK, um,
No one to explain their vote.
That's kind of cool. I'm waiting
for the after we call the vote.
Yeah, we better go down to the
floor um with a vote of 7 to 27,
yes, 2 excused. You have a due
pass motion. Congratulations,
Senator.
Thank you. Um, members of the
committee, we are not meeting
Saturday.
There is no meeting for a
conservation this Saturday.
We'll see you Tuesday. We're in
recess. Excellent.
I'm very disappointed with that,
madam chair.
You're meeting on Saturday. What
time?
