Scott
State Senate District 42,
Southeast corner of the state.
I have been in the House of
Representatives for 10 years.
My first year in the Senate and
looking forward to the service.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Candy Spencesill, state senator,
District 32 of previously served
in the house representing
District 58.
For 20 years and I jumped out of
the frying pan into the fire,
and here I am, and I'm looking
forward to making New Mexico
better.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Oh, excuse me, I represent
Chavis County and Eddy County.
Good areas of the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, State
Senator uh Harold Pope Junior.
District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque, Bernalillo County.
And I'm known to wear a bright
suit every now.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. Good morning. I'm,
I'm used to wearing a bright
smile, right? It's whatever the
reputation they have for always
being smiling and curious. I'm
Joe Cervantes. I'm from Donana
County, represent about 1/4 of
the county. It, uh
Ors El Paso and Mexico. So it's
an interesting place and we're a
farming family down there, and I
also practice law and hang out
with you all for about 25 years.
Thank you, Chair. Good morning,
Gowasi Halpa. I'm Angel Charlie,
senator for District 30, you can
see up here is Bernalio Sabola,
McKinley Socorro, Valencia, it's
a very rural community and I'm
honored to serve, um, in the New
Mexico legislature.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Carrie
Hamblin, senator for District 38
in southern New Mexico, uh,
which is, uh, Las Cruces proper
and then a lot of the farming in
rural parts of southern New
Mexico, including the Santa
Teresa, La Mesa, Chammarino,
Mesquite, uh, a lot of rural
communities, a lot of colonials,
uh, in that district and so I'm
very happy to be on this
committee and uh thank you very
much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Antoinetil Lopez. I represent
District 16, which is the CNM
UNM um base area in Albuquerque
in the southeast and northeast
part of the city. Um, I actually
people are emphasizing their
rural uh background. I grew up
in Los Chavez, New Mexico, which
is a rural community in Valencia
County, um, and I've served on
this committee for 6 years, and
I'm very happy to be here again.
Uh, I am the chair of the
committee Liteanics, uh, Senate
District 39, my six counties got
cut down to 4 counties as of
January 1, San Miguel Santa Fe,
Torrance, and Valencia.
I'd like to introduce our
committee secretary Michaela
Gonzalez and uh please feel free
to contact her with any needs.
My, uh, personal legislative aid
is Julia Valdez, and I'd like to
have the committee analysts,
please stand up.
We have Lucinda Folsom and Mary
Jane Parks as the committee
analysts at this time, uh, with
all the pool analysts, please
stand up and introduce yourself.
If you come up and uh use one of
these microphones.
He
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Mike Schneider,
uh, son of pool analyst, uh, I
reside in District 39.
Good morning Madam Chair Gary
Lasky.
Uh, Senate pool analyst.
From Albuquerque.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Paul Biederman. I'm a Senate
pool analyst for the Democratic
majority and have worked in the
Senate over 10 years now.
Good morning. My name is
Samantha Salopek. I'm an
attorney from Las Cruces. I'm
the minority pool analyst.
Thank you. Uh, any other
analysts before we go to
attendance and security.
OK, so let's have the attendance
start, or do you wanna start,
Miguel.
Good morning. I'm Deputy
Sergeant at Arms Miguel
Gabaldon. I live in Santa Fe.
Hello, I'm Sid Schulte, and um.
been misunders to phonics for a
moment now and anything you need
done, just let us know and we
will get it done.
Hello, I'm Karen with the
Sergeant at Arms in the Senate
and a committee attendant for
the conservation.
Good morning everyone. Luis
Trujillo from Espanola.
Luy the Hills and and security.
Guys, I.
Uh, my name is Ron Twilley, uh,
I've been doing this for about
12 years and I'm the Senate
Security supervisor.
Good morning. I'm Dan Nava. This
is my 3rd session that I'm
working with security for the
Senate.
Good morning. Welcome to this
committee.
My name is Ted Pepperos, and I'm
from District 38.
John Roberts, Albuquerque,
Senate Security.
Jonathan Carew from Survey
Security.
OK, thank you very much, and I
know that all of our attendants,
security and analysts will serve
well during the session, we
appreciate it very much. The
committee secretary has asked
That committee members put down
your preferred email and your
preferred number, cell number or
phone number for last minute
changes or messages about delays
or anything like that, so we'll
start it to our right, um,
members, you have a save the
date on your table. Um, the New
Mexico agricultural groups
wanted to do a dinner for us,
but we had uh trouble selecting
a date. Senator.
Mel and I did confer about this,
uh, so they landed upon a
breakfast on a non uh committee
day uh at in room 326, it will
be catered February 19th from
7:30 to 9:30, and you will
receive more information about
the groups uh presenting this
breakfast. Later on in the
session after the, this is about
midpoint later on then different
groups will do breakfast
burritos once a week um.
for the committee, but uh this
is from the New Mexico
agricultural groups.
Uh
Going on into our organization,
there is a, there are a few
guidelines, uh, that we put out
and the guidelines really uh.
are addressed to the presenters
and the proponents and the
opponents, this will be put
online, it's available, I think
in the back.
And we will have more uh copies,
basically, we will start at 9
o'clock.
As a subcommittee, and we will
not take any votes until we have
the uh forum necessary for
votes, and I usually try to make
sure that we have both parties
represented for votes.
Uh, secondly, if there are
lengthy amendments or uh
committee substitutes we need to
have those 24 hours in advance
for analysis. Now, for public
comment, I'm gonna ask the
sponsors to keep it to 10
minutes with their experts, then
we will move on to proponents
that will have 10 minutes, then
opponents 10 minutes.
A preference will be given to
the people in the room, but I
will go to Zoom, um.
Comments as well, and I will
always ask for uh.
A show of hands on both sides of
the issue, and I know that the
ranking member will remind me if
I forget one of these things
because sometimes I do.
Uh, also, then when we get to
questions and answers and
dialogue, I think we'll we'll
set a time limit for the entire
discussion and then uh see how
many people want to talk and
that'll help us, uh, arrange the
amount of time talking and today
I know that we have some
complicated bills and I've
discussed this with uh Senator
Isel. So let's see if we can get
through 2 of the 4 bills today.
The FIRs were delivered uh to
everybody and they were online
by 4 o'clock yesterday,
our committee, um, analyses were
available 24 hours in advance to
the uh committee members. So,
senators, oh, let me just stop.
Any questions or comments?
Yes, Senator Scott.
a chair
That we were only going to hear
Senate Bill 4 today, so
unfortunately, that's all that I
have.
Prepared for.
And then, secondly, there are a
number of people.
Out in the hall that could not
get in today, so I would
respectfully request that after
those folks either support or
opposition have made their
comments that some of those
people be allowed to rotate in.
Thank you for that suggestion.
So we are gonna do Senate 4 for.
Sure. And then if we have a
great deal of time left, let's
start the discussion on uh the
next bill and not a final vote.
Because we don't go to the floor
today until noon, and I don't
want to rush you right up till
noon, of course, but we could
maybe start the discussion.
Yes, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I agree with uh with
Senator Scott that yesterday it
was announced that we would only
be hearing Senate Bill 4. I did
not receive my FIRs until 3
o'clock yesterday afternoon and
we did not have all the analysis
as well, and I, I like to come
into a committee very well
prepared.
And knowing all the facts about
it and this.
It's a time constraint if we do
go on to another bill because I
purposely have.
Prepped for Senate Bill 4. So if
We do have extra time if you
make the decision to roll on to
21, I would respectfully ask
that we do not take any action
on that until the next meeting.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I think that's
been agreed upon, um.
And so Makayla, uh,
We did send out the committee
analyses when?
Um, they went out, I believe
that.
Yesterday morning.
The
Yes, yesterday, yesterday, the
20. So the committee analysis
will get out to you and um
We, uh, the committee analysts
are going to strive to uh get to
that until we have too many at
the end, and uh we will keep you
posted about that as well. As
you know, we have crunch time
and we already have 32 bills
assigned to this committee.
And as I shared with uh
Senatorel when we were speaking,
sometimes we'll have 4 bills on
the agenda sometimes we'll have
8 or 10.
And as you know, sometimes when
we have just appropriations
bills, those discussions are a
little quicker.
Then a substantive bills. So I
think we're in agreement, we're
gonna hear Senate Bill 4, if we
have time, we will start a
discussion about Senate Bill 21,
but hold off on any action until
the next day.
So any other questions or
comments?
OK, Senator Stewart, Madam
Protem.
So we have several uh handouts
that are coming around and I
would let you know that when I
Handout is presented to the um
committee secretary, as long as
it is not offensive, it will be
distributed and by offensive I
mean calling people names, being
racist, etc. So, um, we will
distribute uh handouts.
OK, Madame Protem, if you would
This is for
I think we're ready if you'd
like to do your introduction and
introduce your expert.
Uh, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
At first, I will go ahead.
There's one more item for the
audience, when our webcast goes
down.
We have to pause and stand in
place because this is open to
the public.
If there is an audio recording
that keeps going, then we can
keep going as long as there's
something for the public to see
or hear of what we have done
while we are here at the state
legislature, OK?
I'm sorry.
All right.
Um, madam chair members of the
committee, um, my expert today
is Gabe.
Sinak
A cape is a Keller and McLeod
professor at the UNM Law School.
He's taught for 8 years his
expertise is in climate change
and clean energy.
He's previously worked for 8
years for the Georgetown Climate
Center at the Georgetown
University School of Law, so I'm
so glad I have this kind of an
expert because I sometimes make
errors, and I'm expecting him to
correct me.
Uh, so I'm here, first, let me
just tell you that uh.
Uh, my office has uh this past
year, uh.
I'd done a study of climate, uh,
we've gotten people to help us.
We've had some young
researchers, they didn't
research as much as compile, and
that's what you have in the
document that you just got that
looks like this.
timeline of where New Mexico has
been with climate policy since
we've uh been working with
Michelle Lujan Grisham, but
includes the bills we've passed
for executive orders, the
regulations and other things so
we have done an incredible
amount, the last 6 years on
ensuring that New Mexico is
paying attention to our climate.
Uh, what you have today.
Is a bill that uh should help us
move forward.
Uh, the governor has talked for
6 years about codifying her
initial climate executive order.
And that is one of the purposes
of this bill, and that isn't
section 2.
So our state has really shown,
and you can see it through this
timeline that we can work
together.
We can work with agencies, we
can work with industry. We can
work with our community.
And there is a lot of support
for taking the uh kind of
progress that we're asking for
today all over the state.
We've had bold steps with our
energy transition Act, we've had
our methane rules that if you
read Missy Curry's op ed, we are
really doing well with that
rule.
Uh, this bill considers those
progress and commitments that
we've made.
And it uh seeks to have us uh do
more with what we have.
So, as I said, the bill codifies
the governor's first executive
order that's on page 5 lines 7
through 15.
Um, it puts in place the
Uh, emissions reductions that we
need to make in New Mexico by
2030, at least 45% fewer
greenhouse gas emissions than
the 2005 level.
Uh, by 2040, at least 75% less
than the 2005, and by 2050, 100%
less than 2005.
These standards are now have
been taken up in 14 other
states, uh, significant states
in the West in particular, the
bill also tasks to environmental
uh, agencies acts that we have
it in.
It amends the environmental
Improvement Act and the Air
Quality Control Act.
Uh, the definition section in
section one is then repeated
later in the Air Quality Act.
Some people read the bill and
think you've you've done this
twice, and that's because we
have two different environmental
acts to amend.
I will say also, Madam Chair,
that we have been working on
this for several months, and we
sent out an earlier version of
this bill that some people may
still think it's what's before
you.
Uh, this is the 0.8 version.
Uh, so anyone who's who is
looking at previous versions uh
still has been changed
considerably.
They'll also applies climate
equity principles.
Uh, to ensure that those folks
the most impacted in our
community are paid attention to.
We have used the terms
overburdened communities in part
because that's a term that the
EPA uses, and they have a nifty
gadget that makes you able to
map over burdened communities
all over.
The New Mexico environment
department who has done just
incredible work with our methane
rules, with our waste rules with
trying to ensure that we are the
healthy industry.
This bill does not hurt our oil
and gas industry in any way.
It's a good industry. There are
many in that industry who've
already reached these goals, the
first goals, and you have made a
commitments uh to follow these
kinds of emission limits, uh, in
several other states and in New
Mexico.
So that the amendments to the
Air Quality Act, uh, tasks are
environmental improvement board
and the Albuquerque Air Quality
Control Board to adopt
monitoring protocols uh for data
collection.
Data collection is really
important. Uh, this bill sets in
place a yearly inventory.
Of our emissions.
Up by the Environment department
working with all the sectors,
uh, we give them time to do
that, the first report is not
due until July 1, 2026.
Uh, they need to be able to
determine uh the greenhouse gas
reductions, bisectors.
Andre methane emissions for
exploration and production from
oil and gas, using well known
methane emissions intensity
standards. We met with several
people in the industry, and the
moa.
Uh, the people from the industry
really looked at the technical
aspects of this bill and helped
us get that section correct.
Again, we want to ensure that
overburdened communities are
considered.
that existing regulations in
games are considered.
So that is a brief outline of
the bill.
I've used 6 minutes, I think I'm
going to uh ask uh uh Gabe to uh
add in uh things I've left out.
Thank you, Senator, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'll
just briefly add a few things uh
to Senator Stewart's comments,
um,
First
Um, I'll mention that the
structure of this bill is
similar to the structure that
other states have used to
achieve the greenhouse gas
reductions that are necessary to
prevent, to address the climate
crisis and in particular this
bill, like other, like the,
this, the legislative structures
in other states, particularly
our focus in Colorado starts by
establishing in statute
economy-wide goals for the state
to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
And then requires the state
agency in this case, the
Environment Department and the
local board to propose.
a
Excuse me, to pro
a plan.
Ah, right.
Uh-huh, sorry about that. OK.
Um, I think I got it now.
Ah
Thank you. I apologize to Madam
Chair.
Um
The
The this legislative structure
just like in Colorado calls for
in this case enemy to develop a
plan to propose how to regulate
the different sources of
greenhouse gas emissions to meet
these statewide goals. EIB would
then be required to put that in
place through regulations.
Again, this is very similar to
what happened in Colorado and
Colorado has both developed that
plan in 2019 and then move
forward with regulations for
different sectors of industry
and
Colorado, their regulatory
agency decided to um put in
place regulations, methane
emission intensity regulations
for the oil and gas industry and
those regulations would be
similarly allowable under this
under this structure, and then
they also put in place
regulations for large industrial
sources, transportation sources,
etc. Again, this structure is
similar in type to what's in
place in Colorado and in other
states like Maryland and
Washington.
Um, and finally, I'll just note
that New Mexico has made really
substantial progress and is a
leader on climate action,
enemy's recent reporting has
shown that uh that projects that
New Mexico will actually exceed
the governor's goals for 2025,
which is thanks to the hard work
of enemyD but also the regulated
industries that have complied
with regulations, including oil
and gas regulations. However,
the same reporting
has shown that while New Mexico
is on track to meet its 2025
goal. It's not yet on track to
meet its 2030 goal. Right now
it's on track to have about 32%
reductions from 2005 levels, and
yet the target is 45%. That same
analysis by NMED, however,
showed that it is possible to
get to those 45% reductions with
additional um with additional
work. And that's why this
legislation is needed because we
need to get to that those.
2030 goals and beyond to make
sure we do our share to address
the climate crisis. Thank you.
Ah man, I'm sure, I think we're
ready for other supporters.
I, let me just mention that I
have given you a a technical
amendments, very short
amendments to make it read
better, but we would like to
talk about those when it's time
for the committee.
Thank you very much. The first
thing I will do is I will go to
the audience for a show of
hands, all those supporting this
bill, please raise your hand.
All those and let's count those
online please as well. All
those, thank you. All those
opposing this bill, please raise
your hand.
OK, we have about 8.
Our 10 in the audience.
How many online supporting.
9 supporting online. How many
opposing?
I'm sorry?
19 opposing online, OK? So now
we will go to um
Madam chair, yes, Senator, I
would like to point out, as was
stated earlier, that there is a
big, a great number of.
Opponents that are outside that
were not able to come in to be
seated.
Is there any way that we could
get their their count as well
that's outside, yes, and Miguel
is offering to go do that right
now. Thank you, and we will add
that in the record. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, so on the proponent list, I
have uh an organized list of
speakers, uh, first I have
Travis Kellerman, if you would
come to the middle.
Because the microphone or you
can sit here at the end, uh, the
microphone has to pick you up
for the Zoom and the webcast.
All right.
When we get to everybody else,
yes.
Please introduce yourself in
your position.
Don't touch them.
Won't touch it.
Thank you for time.
Because we all have germs.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you and good
morning.
I stand in full while I sit in
full support of.
This bill
There's a few key alignments
here between past climate action
by the governor.
And what's being proposed in
this bill.
Uh, as the pro tem highlighted,
it affirms and codifies the
greenhouse gas reductions in the
2019 executive order.
In particular, extending to the
75% reduction.
Milestone by 2040 and also the
100% reduction by 2050.
I think it's very important to
formalize and codify these,
these elements because we have a
plan, we have a lot in motion.
And as was just discussed, we've
made significant progress, but
we have to maintain that
progress. And we're not yet on
track for 2030.
The Paris Agreement.
was recently
Withdrawn from by the US
government.
In Mexico is one of two
co-chairs of the US Climate
Alliance.
Which reaffirmed that commitment
in the wake of that withdrawal.
New Mexico also has an outsized
role to play as an oil and gas
producer.
What we do here sets a new model
for global energy production.
And the impact of this bill and
other climate actions extends
far beyond the state.
So I encourage support and sit
in full support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Secretary Kenny and uh if you
would just stand and use the
hand mic after Secretary Kenny
is uh anyola.
Or a varna. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, it's good to be
before you in support of this
bill. Um, I think one thing that
has changed over the years is
the New Mexico Environment
Department through the
investments you've all made in
our agency has gotten more
efficient and effective, and I
appreciate that very much. We
can support this bill fully now,
having worked with the sponsor
of the Protem and uh advocates,
industry, etc.
And the one thing I will point
out is that the Environment
department, I think, has set a
model for how we engage with
stakeholders, and a lot of this
bill sets a direction but
doesn't prescribe exactly how to
achieve the results, we will
then do that through the
environmental improvement board,
which has safeguards in it and
on it, as does the department to
consider things like cost to to
consider things like what is
achievable, um, and we look
forward
those discussions in a little
bit less of the pressure cooker
of a, of a 60-day session and to
work more methodically and
earnestly with those
stakeholders who come to the
table and want to think about
carbon intensity, carbon
reductions, market mechanisms,
and all the things that the
Environment department can bring
to the table for New Mexico. So,
thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
be remiss if I didn't say that
working on climate issues
improves air quality as well
locally, and that should always
be a goal.
of these synergistic um
outcomes. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Secretary.
uh, after Aniela comes Adriana
Martinez. Please come to the
middle and uh take the
microphone.
Hello, madam chair.
I am a yellaoractivarna, and I
am an 8th grader at the Santa Fe
Girls' School.
I grew up in the state of New
Mexico.
This place, its environments,
and its communities have shaped
me.
I am invested in creating a
healthy future for the Mexicans.
I strongly urge you to support
the clear Horizons Act.
Here are 3 reasons to support
this bill. First, climate action
must happen now.
In my science class, I have
learned about the tragedy of the
commons, which occurs when each
well-meaning individual takes or
uses only what they need. But
the total is greater than the
resource available.
In the case of our environment,
this plays out in small
emissions that total more than
our atmosphere can handle. At
current rates of emissions, our
climate will be nearly 2 °C
warmer by the time I start
college. One of the best things
we can do is impose regulations
that cap resource use at a level
that is sustainable for a long
period of time.
Second, this bill utilizes the
power of states to make distinct
changes that impact our entire
country. In my history class, I
have learned about the balance
of power between the states and
the federal government, as well
as the responsibilities that
both entities have in protecting
and supporting citizens.
Thank you very much. After
Adriana Martinez, we have
Santiago Hardy.
Hello, madam.
Chair. My name is Adriana
Martinez. Regardless of national
policies, you, the house, and
Senate are the individuals who
determined the future of this
state. We are counting on you to
to fulfill your responsibilities
to the people of New Mexico. So
we urge you to choose
legislation that will protect
the future of our beloved state
and the people who call it home.
This bill prioritizes
communities and climate equity.
At my small school community is
important and I see the value in
making choices that impacts not
only my personal welfare, but
those also those around me. This
bill protects minority,
low-income, and tribal
communities who are often more
impacted by climate issues. I
have classmates who are from
Pueblos and tribes in New
Mexico. Their communities are at
greater risk from climate
change, and I want to protect
their communities and cultures
and give them the opportunity
for a future as bright as the
rest of us. This is a bill about
hope. Please vote yes.
Thank you very much. After
Santiago Hardy, we have uh
Victoria Alarcon Macias.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Santiago Hardy.
Um, I'm honored to be speaking
with you all today.
I'm gonna be speaking um about
So
Oh, I'm a youth intern with NMA
vote. I'm 18 years old. I'm born
and raised in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. I'm Jane in Spanish, and
today I'm gonna be in support
with SB4, the Clear Horizons
bill, um.
It would be beneficial not only
for our economy, but for our
health communities and the
environment.
It is important to take the
opportunity to pass the bill to
provide and maintain a
sustainable economy for New
Mexico.
Our state is full of an
abundance of extra of
extraordinary beauty that is
slowly getting thrown away due
to iron in action.
Now more than ever, it is
imperative that we take action
to pass climate legislation. The
consequences of our negligence
are are affecting not only New
Mexico, but the whole planet.
And the evidence is all around
us.
With more devastating wildfires,
extreme weather, and prolonged
droughts.
Climate change is no longer a
distant threat or an abstract
concept.
It is here affecting millions of
lives and immediate action, the
consequences will only worsen.
Some may argue that addressing
climate legislation is too
expensive.
The passing legislation now
would place undue strain on our
economy, but the truth is, the
longer we wait, the more
expensive the solution.
become. Each day compound each
delay compounds the damage,
making recovery not only harder,
but in some cases impossible.
Our tribes, nations, and pueblos
are particularly vulnerable to
the impact of climate change
through the deep reliance on
natural environment, sustenance,
and cultural practices.
Are people often experience
disruption in the in our
traditional food sources, water
access, and air quality due to
extreme shifts and pollution.
Leading to significant
challenges in our livelihoods
and cultural identity.
With that being said, on behalf
of the youth, please vote yes
for the Clear Horizons bill.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, after
Victoria, we have uh Santa Fe
County Commissioner Lisa Kakari
Stone.
I'd like to let you know you
have 2 minutes left.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Larcon Macias,
representing the media project
as an advocacy fellow. Today, I
stand before you to advocate for
Senate Bill 4, which is not just
a climate initiative, but a
blueprint for future proofing.
New Mexico's economy through job
creation for our youth.
This legislation offers a
proactive approach to climate
change by setting emissions
reduction targets, and
pioneering in innovation in
energy generation.
Like integrating climate equity
principles, it ensures that bipo
communities are central to
crafting climate solutions,
aligning with our mission to
advocate for justice and equity
in all forms.
New Mexico faces severe climate
impacts from wildfires to
droughts.
which threatens our way of life.
Yeah, in every challenge lies an
opportunity. Senate Bill 4
harnesses, harnesses this by
promoting green job pathways for
our youth, ensuring they not
only inherit a healthier
environment, but also a vibrant,
sustainable economy.
As a lifelong resident of Santa
Fe, New Mexico. I have witnessed
the increasing urgency for
action and the potential for a
renewable energy and technology
to drive economic growth.
Supporting this bill means
investing in the educational and
professional futures of our
young people, preparing them to
lead in sectors that will define
the global economy. I urge you
to support and pass Senate Bill
4. Let's seize this opportunity
to reduce our carbon footprint,
innovate our energy resources
and create job opportunities
that will empower our youth and
care for our communities. Thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Um,
Me pretend we're already at 10
minutes. So I will give you your
5 more minutes and I will do so
for the opponents as well.
So, uh, but that includes the
people here that the remaining
people on the list here and the
virtual. So let's go. Uh, we
have Santa Fe County
Commissioner Lisa Kakari Stone,
and then Camilla Feibelman, and
then we go to virtual. Good
morning, Char Stephonics and
committee members. My name is
Commissioner Lisa Cacati Stone
with District 2, Santa Fe
County. I'm speaking on behalf
of the coalition of sustainable
Communities of New Mexico. This
is comprised of 7 cities and
counties from around.
the state. As a public health
professor and working in public
health leadership. I want to
highlight the impact of
emissions on our communities and
their health. Fossil fuels and
specifically the impacts on poor
air quality. It causes
respiratory disease,
cardiovascular disease, asthma,
heart stroke, lung cancer, and
pre premature death. This bill
is important to take significant
steps for future generations.
Like the young people that are
here today in addressing climate
change by setting clear.
An achievable greenhouse gas
emission reduction targets. The
bill.
Also acknowledges the importance
of environmental justice,
particularly for overburdened
communities. May I mention that
60% of New Mexicans are racial,
ethnic populations, and almost
18% live below the poverty
level. This bill would require
that our state agencies apply a
climate equity principle to the
rural development, and this is
critical. While this bill
presents ambitious
Skulls, we can stay a leader in
climate change in New Mexico.
It's imperative that state,
local governments and private
entities work together to find
innovative solutions on behalf
of New Mexicans. I support this
bill on behalf of the coalition
for Sustainable Communities.
Thank you.
Thank you, Camilla. I'm Camilla
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter, speaking for
all of the environmental groups
in the room, if you can just
raise your hands. I'd like to
note the progress we've made.
We're replacing fossil fuels
with renewables to generate
electricity. We passed in our
implementing national nation
leading methane rules, and in
fact, that's why oil and gas can
tout improvements in their
operations because we
established clear enforceable
rules we're cleaning up our
transportation.
in our buildings, but with the
Permian oil boom, our climate
pollution reduction goalposts
get pushed ever further out. The
latest data from NMED shows
we're making good progress, but
we've got to do more. Our state
has all the solutions, all the
mines, all the tech technology,
all the innovations, but this
innovation doesn't come without
clear instructions from you.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, there's 2.5
minutes left. We have professor
Zach Sharp, ED Dillman, and
Doctor Paul Charlton, Professor
Sharp.
Please go ahead, professor.
Hey, do you hear me? I'm so
sorry. Yes, we can hear you now.
All right. My, my apologies.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Zachary Sharp. I'm a
distinguished professor at UNM.
I've been teaching environmental
sciences for the last 25 years.
Um, we're aware, all of us, of
the impacts of climate change,
and yet some uh people are
concerned, uh, that the economic
impacts on our community of this
bill, and here's where I have
great hopes for the future and
this bill because transitioning
to renewable energy sources
won't just save the planet, it
will save all of us money as
well.
The fact is, electricity
generated from wind and solar is
cheaper than all other forms of
energy, prices will continue to
come down while the cost of
generating electricity from
fossil fuels continue to go up,
transitioning to renewable
energy makes sense. It will
lower our energy bills and will
bring good jobs to the state.
What we need for this, of
course, is sun and lots of
space, New Mexico has this in
abundance. We can become a
leader in cheap electricity
generations. We can lower energy
costs.
sell electricity to our
neighbors, um, and entice high
tech firms to locate in our
state. Fossil fuels have
provided considerable financial
benefit over the years, but
moving forward, we want to be on
the trailing edge of a shrinking
industry, which is the status
quo or a leader in the future of
energy production and economic
growth. Senate Bill 4 brings us
closer to this new future and
it's a win-win for everyone. I
look forward to our coming
energy renaissance. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, ED Dillman
online.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and
esteemed committee members. I'm
Edie Dillman. I am the co-owner
and CEO of a Santa Fe and Las
Vegas, New Mexico. Company B
Public Prefab, and I am here to
share my support for Clear
Horizons Act.
Our public benefit corporation
is a leader in sustainable
manufacturing and wood-based
construction for low embodied
and operational carbon in new
home construction. We are
proudly representing New Mexico
as a green leader on the
national stage. We believe that
every business owner is
responsible for focusing on
sustainable practice and
counting carbon as much as
profits, jobs, and sales. It is
irresponsible.
not to focus on climate impacts
of business practices and
products and impacts well past
our own lives. New Mexico's
incredible 21% growth in clean
energy jobs goes well beyond
solar and electric cars, energy
efficiency and conservation are
critical in the balance of
progress. Investments in
reducing energy demands in
conjunction with renewable
generation are where we have our
most powerful.
for change. Not only does the
clear Energy Act support
continued growth of clean jobs,
but it allows us to lead the
nation in a way forward and
protects our vital state's
health and well-being for
generations to come.
Your actions here will outlast
us all.
Make investments and cap carbon
emissions are among your
greatest powers to protect New
Mexico's future and ensure that
investments are a stabilizing
factor in our economy. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. uh, Doctor Charlton,
we're out of time, but 30
seconds, please.
OK, they don't see him online,
so we're gonna move on to the
opponents, uh, with everyone who
would like to speak as an
opponent, please line up here in
the middle.
And we'll count how many uh
are in the room and then how
many online we'd like to speak.
OK.
We're done with the proponents.
Uh, how many are online would
like to speak against.
For?
Yes, Miguel, Madam Chair, uh,
outside when there were people
outside, there are 8 in support
and 0 in opposition. Thank you
very much.
OK, so, uh, we in the room we
have.
How many opponents like 12345,
and we have 5 online, so, um,
We gave the other side 15
minutes as long as you stay
within 15 minutes, uh, Miss
Cole, go ahead and please
introduce yourself. Good
morning. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I'm here today to
testify in opposition to Senate
Bill 4. The scale and scope of
the bill would affect all
buildings and structures in just
5 short years, emissions have to
be cut by 45%. We are very
concerned with the unintended
consequences to our job space
and overall economy with such an
aggressive mandate.
In particular, we believe the
oil and gas industry will be
negatively affected and the
message to businesses wanting to
come here and business is trying
to grow here will be negative.
Just the opposite of what all of
us want and need. This bill
needs a realistic plan for
implementation, which is
difficult to achieve when the
definitions lack clarity. The
bill will affect virtually every
sector of our of our economy.
Electric generation,
transportation, home heating
fuels, buildings, all forms of
ways, manufacturing and
extraction of raw materials,
agriculture and forest products,
and of course, again.
oil and gas. We believe this
transition is too aggressive and
lacks a necessary balanced
strategy. Thank you very much.
We uh hope you vote against the
bill.
Thank you very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members.
My name is Tom Patterson. I'm a
cattle rancher from rural Catron
County.
Catrin County is exclusively
rural. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers opposes SB 4.
We do so because of the
questions, the unknowns here.
What is the peer reviewed
scientific basis for setting the
levels in section 2A for New
Mexico.
Where will greenhouse gas levels
be tested?
Throughout the state
How will they be tested?
Will any allowance be made for
naturally occurring.
Greenhouse gasses.
In terms of remediation.
Is there some connection between
where the excess levels occur.
And where the remediation is
performed.
What analysis has been done
about the impact of these rules
on the cost of our electricity
and fuel.
What analysis has been done
about the impact of these rules
on our oil and gas sector that
generates so much of the revenue
that we have the privilege of
having in our budget this year.
If the methods don't work as in
the Netherlands.
Well we have to shut down
industry.
Shut down agriculture.
Looking to California as an
unspoken but apparent model for
this.
What's their experience been in
actually meeting their
greenhouse gas objectives.
My understanding, it's been
poor.
If so, why would we want to
reproduce their failure in New
Mexico.
What has the impact been on
their citizens in terms of their
electricity rates.
Do we really want
Replicate California's lead.
Respectfully, there are many
questions unless and until they
are competently answered
aspirations and hope.
are not sufficient.
Cattle growers
Urges you to pause on this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association, Nimoga appreciates
the work that went into this
bill and the outreach from the
senator's office. Respectfully,
Nemoga opposes Senate Bill 4
because the proposed
requirements are overly
burdensome and with no offsets
until 20,550, the goals are
simply not achievable. In a
state with a large low income
population, we are especially
concerned that this bill will
increase costs and adversely
affect the communities that it
seeks to help.
Nemoga,
uh, eneED claims to already be
overburdened, understaffed, and
underfunded if passed, this bill
will create additional agency
work while setting up one of the
state's most important
industries for noncompliance and
failure. S&P Global has proven a
26% reduction in methane
emissions from oil and gas
production operations in the
Permian Basin in 2023 alone.
This achievement is not just a
win for the environment, but
also a testament to the
industry's ability to innovate,
adapt, and companies' commitment
to stewardship, innovation is
driving change, not overly
burdensome regulations. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair, senators, thanks
for the opportunity to speak
here. My name is Laura Riley.
I'm, I'm here on behalf of the
clients of Gambalan Solutions,
as well as myself personally. My
grandchildren will be 6th
generation agriculturist in New
Mexico. We operate uh century
farms in Torrance and in Ri Riba
County. These are the very farms
that that many people are very
reliant on, um, in the United
States, one farm feeds 100.
69 people.
This bill will adversely affect.
Disproportionately these small
farms in these rural areas.
Electrical services already
difficult in Torrance County,
we're having difficulty changing
over from um diesel generation
into electric because the
inability to hook up electric uh
capacity to our sprinklers for
our pin of beans and our other
things. What we're really
concerned this is going to
affect these farms because of
the effectiveness of technology.
will, it will reverse the
technology that we currently
have in agriculture, and it's
gonna increase the cost of
operation. Um, as I said before,
this disproportionately affects
the smaller and historic farms
we have in New Mexico cause
these people are less able to
adapt and financially change to
other methods of operation to
meet the guidelines as set forth
in here and for these reasons I
would.
Really respect you to oppose
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
We'll do 1 or 2 more in the
audience and then go to the
Zoom, please, go ahead.
Madam Chair, committee members,
good morning. I'm Gerald Wain.
I'm the vice president of
regulatory strategy and External
Affairs at New Mexico Gas
Company. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the company, and
I'm here to speak in opposition
to Senate Bill 4 as it's
drafted.
I'd first like to say that our
company has taken voluntary
steps to reduce emissions in our
operations as well as customers'
use of natural gas.
But we do not see imposition of
GHG reductions on the same
timeline for each sector of the
economy as our best path
forward.
As the LFC Financial impact
report points out there's no
clarity in this bill as to how
reductions would actually be
achieved nor the cost.
SB4 holds an expectation of
massive reductions in
residential use of natural gas
for space and water heating,
starting in 2030.
That change is not something our
customers are keen about. And
for the more than 500,000 homes
we serve just meeting the state
of 2030 target would force more
than 40% of residential
customers to leave the NMGC
system and convert to new energy
sources and equipment.
That takes away their choice,
imposes cost, and remaining
customers will each pay more to
maintain a system they count on.
Those are new costs many can't
afford.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you very much. Uh, we had
5 people online who wanted to
speak.
Well, let's see how the time
goes, so let him, let's go.
First person is you need to
introduce yourself, and if you
have an organization, please go
ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Mike Miller with Premium Basic
Petroleum Association. I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak today regarding Senate
Bill 4. While I understand and
respect the goal of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. This
bill presents serious risk to
New Mexico's economy, energy
security, and long-term
prosperity. Senate Bill 4
expands the authority, the
Environmental Improvement Board,
granting it sweeping power to
regulate emissions across all
industries with no clear
accountability or economic
impact assessment. This opens
the door to
The regulations that could
cripple not just oil and gas,
but also agriculture,
manufacturing, and
transportation. The broad and
vague language of the bill
creates uncertainty for
businesses and threatens to
drive away investment, pushing
jobs and economic opportunities
to neighboring states with more
balanced policies. Finally, the
bill's financial appropriation,
just $3 million is grossly
inefficient to implement such a
massive regulatory overhaul. If
the state is serious about
implementing transformative
climate policies, it must take a
measured and
thoughtful approach rather than
pushing forward an underfunded,
overly ambitious mandate that
lacks critical infrastructure
planning. Madam Chair and
members, uh, we all want a clean
and sustainable future, but the
future must be achievable,
economically responsible and
considerate of the working
families who power our state.
SB4 is not the right path
forward. I respectfully urge you
to reject this bill and instead
pursue policies that encourage
innovation, balanced economic
growth with environmental
stewardship and ensure a
sustainable.
po s ition that protects all New
Mexicans. Madam Chair, members,
thank you for your time.
Thank you, the next person.
Online?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Carla Sontag,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We
represent hundreds of businesses
and thousands of individuals in
New Mexico and our focus is on a
place where we can have abundant
good paying jobs to provide for
our families. We respectfully
oppose Senate Bill 4.
Because we think that passing
this bill could significantly
damage many of the industries in
the state. It's primary focus is
against oil and gas.
But that affects every industry
because every industry needs oil
and gas, and that impacts all of
their employees. We don't feel
that zero emissions is an
attainable requirement. We've
seen in Colorado and California
that they had similar goals and
they could not meet them and
they've had to go back to their
legislatures and try to
readdress that. It would be wise
for us to look
As a state at what is
attainable. I think New Mexico's
done a wonderful job of reducing
emissions where we are, but what
we're doing right now is not
attainable, and when you put
that requirement on people,
we're losing the opportunity and
limiting our choice for food,
our opportunity to grow that
food for the automobiles that we
drive and how we live our lives.
We urge you to oppose this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. The next person.
Madam Chair, uh, Jim Winchester
with the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
just a few quick comments, um,
while well-intentioned, uh, this
bill does have unintended
consequences for all industries,
you know, not just limiting the
ability for New Mexico to
produce oil and gas, which I
represent, but it also hits
agriculture and many other
industries that provide the
basic necessities of life, like
food, transportation, health
care, and
All of that will really hammer
the underprivileged communities.
Communities that all of you
legislators in this room
represent from Donia Anna County
to Torrance County, to even
Santa Fe and Bernalillo
counties. As far as emissions
reduction goes, oil and gas
sector continues to reduce
emissions substantially
estimated by the Environment
Department's own eastern
Research group to be down 72%
from 2005 levels projected to
2030. The aspirational
reductions for the future goal
deadlines of 45%.
by 2030, 75% by 2040 and 100% by
2050, based on 2005 levels are
simply unattainable, full stop.
That is, unless you literally
shut down all industries. So
with all due respect, please
vote against this dangerous bill
that will stifle our entire
state directly hit those in the
poorest communities and continue
to discourage new industries to
come into our state at a time
when we really need to attract
businesses.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, um, how
many more people do we have
online?
OK, there's 2 minutes and 15
seconds left, so it's timely.
Thank you. Let's go to the next
person.
Hello, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Ashley
Solar and I'm speaking as a
concerned citizen of New Mexico
in opposition to this bill,
although many of the previous
speakers have already so
eloquently expressed why this
spill is bad for our state that
is so dependent on our robust
oil and gas industry, I would
like to raise a question about
the appropriation. The bill says
that any unexpended or
unencumbered balance remaining
at the end of a fiscal year
shall not revert to the general
fund. Where does that
unencumbered balance
go and will New Mexicans, um,
get a receipt of where that
unencumbered balance uh will go.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and I think
the last person, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Espinoza speaking today on
behalf of the New Mexico Farm
and Livestock Bureau and the
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico. We do have
several concerns regarding the
legislation. First, the unclear
implementation. The lack of
specificity and how reductions
will be achieved really creates
uncertainty for farmers,
ranchers, the construction
industry, potentially impacting
long term planning. I also have
concerns again because of that
lack of specificity.
questions around, you know,
increased cost of operations,
uh, for agricultural products,
especially for small family
owned farms, the potential on
supply chain disruptions, uh,
both for construction and the
agricultural industry as well.
Um, so there are significant
unanswered questions that really
create considerable uncertainty
for both industries, and we
strongly urge you to pause this
legislation until we have a
clear understanding of its
actual impact. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, we were
able to do this on both sides,
and I thank everybody who is
here to uh share their opinions
about this. So we, would you
like to do your closing now or
after our questions and
comments.
of chair. Could we just do a
couple of minutes of response
and then I'll do a closing at
the end. Yes, briefly, please.
If I can ask to do just a few
responses.
Me and chair members of the
committee, I just want to uh
respond to a couple of points.
First, the statewide greenhouse
gas emission limits that are
identified in this bill are
consistent with the best
science, including science
coming out from the United
Nations Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, which gathers
scientists from every country to
develop the best science on how
to address climate change and
also the US National Climate
Assessment. The limits included
in this bill, 45%.
by 2030, 75% by 2040 and 100% by
2050 are consistent with US
commitments under the United
Nations framework Convention on
Climate Change and also the
commitments of many other
states. Um,
Second, I just want to mention
that this bill does not require
that each sector of the economy
meet those specific limits. This
bill uses a tried and proven
process where the expert
agencies and consultation and
outreach with many stakeholders,
develop a plan and use New
Mexico's very robust formal
rulemaking procedures which
allow all interested parties to
participate to, to put that plan
into place through regulations
and to
ate different levels of emission
reduction among sectors if
that's how they choose to go and
just as an example, um when
enemy D uh did an illustrative
projection of how we could meet
the 2030 goals. They didn't,
they assessed that the
agricultural sector would not
necessarily need to make any
further reductions that are
already expected for 2030. Um,
and I'll, I'll end with that.
Thank you.
So Senator Stewart, would you
like to explain the amendment,
please?
Yes, thank you so much. So these
are technical amendments that
came up even after a 0.8 version
on page and they're all on the
1617 and 19 so on page 16.
Uh
Between lines to 8 and 9.
We insert a new tube.
So this is the part, January
1st, 2026, the Environmental
Improvement Board and local
board shall adopt greenhouse gas
monitoring requirements of that.
Number one, consider data
reporting and other requirements
already in place. 2, it's what
we'd like to add in between 1
and 2, include requirements to
monitor, measure, report, and
verify emissions from all
sectors, and then you would
renumber.
On page.
16 lines 17.
Um, after.
The words then you insert
methane from. So it's reading a
reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions from sectors other
than methane from oil and gas
exploration.
On page.
17.
Line 16.
You strike a.
On line 16, the oil and gas
industry and insert in lieu
thereof.
Nothing from oil and gas
exploration and production
operations and page 1994.
Uh, put an end after the
semicolonage 19 line 6.
Strike the semicoloner a period.
Uh
And then for section 8.
Uh
We turn that, uh, we turn.
Number 8 into section H.
So instead of 8, it will be 8,
the environmental improvement
Board and local board shall at
least once every 5 years. Uh,
so, and then we renumber.
So pretty technical things that
people came up with.
Ask that you support them.
OK, Senator Sadia Lopez.
Uh, Madam Chair, I move the
amendment.
OK.
Is there opposition to the
amendment?
Yes, and it's also included in
the analysis. We received it in
time to include it in the
analysis, seeing no opposition
to the amendment, the the
amendment is adopted.
Oh, too loud. I know. Everybody
reads.
OK, wake up, everybody.
OK, we are back on the amended
bill, and I'd like to uh just go
back and forth and let's start
over here. Senator Scott.
Oh
Let's talk about timing. It's
1010.
Let's see, um,
How far we can get by uh 11:15.
So if everybody thinks about
that, that's an hour for the
entire committee, so Senator
Scott.
Yeah, Madam Chair.
This is a very big deal.
Sets the course
New Mexico energy policy for
perhaps.
The next 100 years, so.
I hope.
That it gets
Uh
Thorough Q and A opportunity
here.
And again
If it comes to the floor.
That's it.
Madam Chair and senator.
This is a big deal. In order to
know.
Where we are going.
With these emissions.
My first question would be,
Where are we starting?
According
To the
Energy information
administration of the US
government.
New Mexico's emissions from all
sectors in 2005.
Were what.
But I'm sure I'm gonna let Gabe
answer that 2005 question.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
members of the committee based
on enemy D's recent GHG
inventory, um, they were 964
96.4 million metric tons of CO2
equivalent in 2005.
that
Number, Madam Chair.
And what last name again, sir?
in ia
Painia, yes.
P, P as in Paul, sorry.
Escape works.
OK, Madam Chair, Mr. Pinak.
OK, that information differs
substantially from what.
The energy
Information administration has
on the website for 2006. Is this
I guess this is my next
question.
Is this
Proposal
For the consumptive.
Emissions only in the state?
For all of the emissions that
are produced in the state.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
members of the committee, um,
The, the proposal includes um
All the consumptive emissions,
uh, all the directly emitted
emissions in the state. So and
it, it, it is uh there is a a um
Convention that states use in
assessing the greenhouse gas,
the greenhouse direct greenhouse
gas emissions, it generally
typically only includes it
directly emitted greenhouse
gasses in the state, the one
exception to that is that we
assess emissions from imported
electricity.
Madam Chair, Mister.
Thisacia.
Could you repeat that answer
again. So assesses all the
directly emitted greenhouse gas
emissions in the state. So from
all the sources that that
combust fossil fuels and emit
them in the state, cars and
stationary sources, the one
exception to that is that this
definition in many other state
definitions also account for
greenhouse gasses from imported
electricity in the state.
OK, so, Madam Chair, Mr. Painia.
The answer to my question was 96
million metric tons annually.
Correct, in 2005. In 2005.
So
The emissions target.
Then, Madam Chair.
And Senator would be a reduction
of 96 million metric tons of
CO2.
Annually
Is that
Thank
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator, members of
the committee, uh not annually,
the, the, the way that this
works is that every year there
would be a specific target of
annual emissions. Um, so, for
example, in 2030 that target
would likely be around 65 um
million metric tons of carbon
dioxide emissions, uh, and so,
and this bill would call for
enemyD to propose an EIB to
establish a
declining pathway to get to
those targets in 2030, 2040, and
2050. But they'd be measured on
an annual basis. So again, the,
the goal would be in 2030, um,
to hit, I'm sorry, the, the 2030
target would be about 53 million
metrics.
But Madam Chair and Mister
Pinia.
In 2050, the goal would be.
96 million metric tons, is that?
That's 100%.
Of the 2005.
Emissions levels.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
members of the committee.
That, that is, there's actually
some flexibility in 2050. The
bill requires direct emission
reductions to hit the 2030 and
2040 targets. That means that
that requires that we achieve
those targets by reducing the
emissions from sources of
greenhouse gas emissions.
Bill allows flexibility for the
environmental improvement board
to consider and determine
whether in meeting the 2050
targets, it could also include
expanding carbon sinks. So for
example, by um.
Uh, increasing natural carbon
sinks like forests or perhaps by
using tools like direct air
capture. Again, the bill is not
mandate that it does not, um,
it's, it leaves that to EIB to
determine.
So Madam Chair, Mister Pinia.
Those carbon offsets.
Would come at.
Typically a cost.
Do you have any estimate?
Of what those costs might be.
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
members of the committee, uh,
there's, there are a variety of
so.
First of all, we refer to them
as carbon sinks, and there's a
variety of different tools that
can be used. Those costs can
range from currently
Uh, $100 per ton, much greater
than that. Part of the reason
that that is something that is
left up to EIB to determine for
2050 because right now it's a
lot cheaper to um reduce
greenhouse gas emissions than it
is to use carbon sinks.
Madam Chair
Mr. Pinak, after we've already
reduced those emissions by 75%.
Which
I would postulate will be very
difficult to achieve.
Given
The
Various economies in New Mexico.
That last 25%.
could be offset with carbon
credits.
Which will cost New Mexico
consumers.
$100 per metric ton, so of those
25 million metric tons, there
would in fact be a cost.
New to New Mexico consumers.
Associated with that last 25%
reduction.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
members of the committee, the
bill does not um.
To be clear, the bill requires
meeting the levels of emission
reductions through statewide
action. It does not.
And there's nothing about carbon
credits there, the, the
difference between 2030 and 2040
is simply that the EIB can
choose to consider New Mexico
carbon sinks. Again, including
potentially natural sinks um
versus only direct emission
reductions, and Madam Chair, Mr.
Pinak, is there any other
mechanism out there that would
be available for the environment
department to consider.
Beyond
Carbon
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Yes, there are many mechanisms.
There's, there are, um,
Many scientific studies that
could show an economy going to
100% 0 carbon, um, without
using, just using renewable
electricity, for example, there
are many other models that use
different technologies, um,
there are
There is the possibility of
expanding natural sinks through
forests, um, and I don't know if
Secretary Kenny would like to
add to that.
Don't touch it. I forgot. Uh,
Madam Chair, and, um, Senator,
uh, I, I think
You know, you're asking what
will the technology and the cost
be available in years out. I
think we are specifically aware
that there is investments and
there's opportunities in those
out years.
But we are not going to
prescribe that technology today
because we may not be aware of
that technology in the future.
So, you know, I think a hallmark
of what we've done multiple
times in this administration and
through the legislature is be
technology agnostic, so folks
like Secretary Black can attract
that technology here through
economic development, and we're
seeing that every single day
from direct air capture, um,
to other carbon sinks that it
could be established, um.
I'm not gonna bet against our
national labs, I'm not going to
bet against our economy. I'm not
going to bet against our
innovation. I think that's
precisely what we're trying to
develop.
And Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary.
All of those technologies.
With perhaps the exception.
Of growing more trees.
And it cost
And that cost today.
Somewhere I think in British
Columbia, it's up to $400.
metric ton, but $100.
is certainly.
What's in the hopper today?
So if we're using.
If for absent.
Orders of magnitude improvements
in the development of these
carbon credits.
We are going to impose on New
Mexico consumers.
Substantial.
Additional costs for that last.
25% of reductions.
Let me
If I could move on.
Madam Chair and Senator.
Are you familiar?
With the term GDP.
And
Could you, madam chair and
senator, could you describe what
that
term GDP means.
To the audience
And me
Uh, no, I'm sure you know what
it is.
Uh
Madam Chair and Senator, you are
correct and that I seldom.
Ask a question that I don't
already know the answer to GDP
is gross.
Domestic product.
And Madam Chair,
Senator, can you tell me what
that represents.
And chair of Senator Scott, all
I want to talk to you about is
the billions of dollars that
it's costing right now for the
fires that we've had in New
Mexico fires they've had in
California.
That impacts our GDP and the
thousands and thousands of
people who've lost their homes.
That affects our GDP.
So there's many things that
affect our gross domestic
product and not just the spill
and you're 25 years out that you
seem to be focusing on.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Senator. GDP.
A generally accepted definition
is the economic output.
Of a state or country.
The gross domestic product.
This is in goods and services.
It is a measure, if you will.
Of the wealth
Of a state
Or country
Now
There is a strong correlation.
Betwe emissions.
And gross domestic.
Oh
So
By limiting
These emissions.
Do we limit
Economic prosperity.
With that course of action.
I'm sure I'll have my expert
answer that.
Thank you, and I'd like to let
you know you're almost at 20
minutes, so your colleagues, all
the colleagues might not have a
lot of time to talk. So please
proceed. Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, members of the committee.
There's a well known um uh curve
in environmental economics that
shows that um GDP, you know, and
basically quality of life
increases as you say, with
emissions in the beginning of
the development of a country.
And after a certain
point as countries become richer
and shift some of their
economies to, for example,
financial services like we do,
you'll see continuing growth in
uh the quality of life and
improvements of the economy and
a decline in emissions.
Thank you.
I'll share this, Madam Chair.
With the entire committee, that
one's yours.
Mountains.
And that one's mine.
Madam Chair,
And senator.
This is CO2 emissions.
Per capita
Versus gross domestic product.
The year 2022, which includes
4 countries.
And rich country
In the United States, as it
turns out.
Emits per capita.
About 16 metric tons.
Of CO2.
A person
United States, obviously.
Madam Chair and senators, one of
the richest.
Nations on the planet.
Now
At the other end of the
spectrum.
We have African nations.
That emit on the order.
Of less than one metric ton of
CO2.
per person
Obviously
These countries are incredibly
poor.
They are
They're wanting to be us.
So
I think the correlation on this
curve.
Madam Chair and senator is
virtually.
100%.
What this will do with these
emissions reductions.
I take us further down the road.
To poverty
In a state that is already
represented.
There's a poor state.
This policy is just misguided.
It will make us.
Third world.
And this.
Piece of data
From around the world.
At 100% correlation of emissions
versus prosperity.
Proof
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
believe.
I'm done.
Thank you very much. I have
Senator Cedillo Lopez on the
list. I have senators on the
list. Is that correct?
Oh, Senator Townsend is dead.
Then I have Senator Cervantes,
so Cen C Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
think I'll start by reading um
and commending um.
Uh, Madame Protem or following
our constitution, which Article
article, well, we don't have an
individual right. We as a
legislature have a duty.
Um, Article 20 section 21 of the
Constitution says the protection
of the state's beautiful and
healthful environment is hereby
declared to be a fundamental
importance to the public
interest. Health, safety, and
the general welfare. The
legislature shall provide for
control of pollution and control
of despoilment of the air,
water, and other natural
resources of this state
consistent with the use and
development of these resources
for the maximum benefit of the
people. So I commend you for
following.
This and picking up on our duty,
uh, that we have to the citizens
of of New Mexico.
I also commend you in doing this
as a rulemaking because the
rulemaking will involve all of
the stakeholders and will be
robust in in doing this. My
question is, um, I was involved
recently in um a rulemaking in
which the body, it instituted
best available control
technology as a as a way of.
Um
Not denying permits.
But because the rulemaking
didn't provide for denial of
permits, but providing for the
granting of a permit as long as
this analysis took place, the
best available control
technology analysis, and that
analysis was was an economic
analysis of practicality
analysis, um, could you, uh,
explain a little bit, not that
you're prejudging what your
rulemaking would be like, but
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, would
um this be one of the, one of
the potential tools.
That could be used in achieving
uh.
These goals.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
thank you for the question and
I'm just pulling up the
environmental Improvement Act,
which gives rise to the
environmental improvement board,
which I think you're alluding to
the duties they have in the
guard rails that are put in
place by law, not by rule, as to
what they have to consider in
terms of uh the petitions that
come to them by my department or
any other stakeholder to bring a
rule into the administrative
code, and there are
caused practicality available
technologies and things that um
We, that it should be there in
law to ensure that what the
executive agency is trying to do
is achievable by the industry.
That they are trying to
regulate. So, so there are
checks and balances that happen
outside of this body, but within
the rulemaking itself.
And I, I can get into them. I
just have to pull them up and
that's fine.
I think that you made the point,
and that is that these
considerations aren't for us to
debate here, but therefore the
process would include, which
includes all of the stakeholders
to to be involved.
Um, and so I think that's
another strength of this rule,
um.
And I was looking at this.
And gosh, what this tells me is
the need for environmental
justice. What it tells me is the
poorest countries, uh don't have
access to
To what we have had access to,
which tells me that our country
has a greater duty to reduce
emissions and to not only affect
you or or affect climate change,
which has led to so many of the
The horrible, horrible
devastation we've seen with
fires and flooding, but it also
tells me that we need to step
up.
And, and do something about it.
To, to help
Again, with these tragedies, but
also with our public health.
Um, Madam Chair, one of the
things in, I'll ask you about is
when you plot health outcomes,
cancer, um,
Asthma and toxicity.
On New Mexico's map.
It's a very high correlation,
and I don't know if you've seen
that, Madam Chair, um.
With minority communities.
Yeah, uh, Madam Chair and, and
senator, um, I think what you're
pointing to is the use of the EJ
mapper that, you know, the pro
tem indicated is already in the,
in the legislation, um, I think
the reason you'll see that is
because
Communities that are
Um, you know, of color
socioeconomic, they are the most
burdened by the emissions or the
the causality between the
emissions and the climate or air
pollution, etc. So
This is exactly why we need to
reduce emissions in communities
and in the outer years, think
about what are the other ways in
which we can reduce emissions,
um, once the low hanging fruit
is is achieved.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am so
impressed with this legislation.
I think it is really thoughtful,
really comprehensive, and I.
I'm just so impressed.
Thank you.
Thank you. I have Senator
Townsend, Senator Cervantes, and
Senator.
Senator Townsend
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Proteum.
Experts, um,
It's been quite a bit of
conversation about minority
communities, low income
communities and indigenous
communities are those
definitions in your bill.
Uh, so, Madam Chair and Senator,
uh, we have in section, I think
it's section 3.
find the page number here.
Section 3 in the bottom. These
are the
Uh
Climate equity principles that.
We've been putting these into a
number of bills.
in the energy transition Act,
it's in the clean fuel
standards, um, so that we, uh,
pay attention to these
overburdened communities, so
there is a definition of
overburdened communities.
And that is on page 3.
But my question, um, Madam Chair
and senator was.
The minority community, the
low-income communities and
Indigenous communities, is there
a definition for those?
Uh
Madam Chair, they are part of
the overburdened community and
if you read that overburned
community definition there it
is, so we're not, we don't pull
out terms like that in this
bill, we have the climate equity
principles, and then we have the
definition of the overburdened
community and we moved away from
a few of those terms, uh, to
ensure that we could use the uh
instrument from the.
EPA to map.
These communities because there
you can do it right now, you can
go and get on this, what's
called the EJ.
No,
not for each mapper Madam Chair
and
Senator, if those
specific
Terms are not defined. Who is
going to make the determination.
Of what impact and what their.
What, what their role is. I
mean, how are we gonna get there
if we don't even know what the,
if the, well, my chair, uh.
We've, we've defined him in the
bill can read them, uh, the
climate equity principles, our
state agencies have been working
with now for many years. Uh, one
thing I failed to mention in the
beginning is that, you know,
we've all been under the first
executive order in 2019.
That executive order applied to
all state agencies. It's one of
the reasons why we are so
further ahead on emissions is
because of the methane rule and
other things that the agencies
have been tasked to do by the
very first executive order in
2019.
So this issue has been cropping
up in our fields since then, and
we've been putting it in um all
of our environmental bills.
Madam Chair, and Senator are the
climate equity principles
defined in this bill.
Uh, sure, yes, they're on page 7
and 8. I'll also to further
answer your question, Madam
Chair, Senator.
But environment improvement
board is the body that's going
to set, we have them a
requirement that they have to
set these rules by July 1st,
2026 at plenty of time.
er input, etc.
They're the ones that have to
put this into practice. They've
been doing that through other
bills, the clean fuel standards.
I've mentioned fun air quality
Act.
Uh, so, um.
So we believe that we've
followed what we have now.
We have good agencies that know
what they're doing and asking
them to increase the emissions
reduction through rulemaking and
through uh stakeholder
engagement.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, as you know, many of us,
including myself, represent.
Communities that I would
consider to be
Lower income, disadvantaged.
One of the things that I'm most
concerned about and I hear from
them constantly.
Is the price of energy.
And the availability of energy.
And if energy is not abundant.
And available and economical.
They're harmed.
I don't see a way.
Maybe you can
Maybe you can enlighten me.
Of this bill is going to make
Gasoline
Cheaper at the pump.
Natural gas, cheaper at the
meter.
And their livelihood.
Less impacted by a bill that
raises the cost.
Can you
Am I wrong? I mean, please.
Well, Madam Chair, senator, I
don't believe there's anything
in this bill that raises the
price of energy.
The company right now.
Many of them are almost at the
20-30 already.
They are proud of their clean
energy machines, uh, mechanisms
and process that they've put in
place.
So I believe that the maturity
of the industry is already on
its way to achieving these
standards, so.
They're not complaining about
those, they've agreed to those,
they agreed to the ones in
Colorado, which are very similar
to this bill.
Uh, so there's nothing in here,
I believe that will raise the
cost.
Well, Madam Chair, and uh
senator.
You could probably get my yes
vote on this bill if we had an
amendment to it that we agreed
that it wasn't going to increase
the price of any of those fuels,
and if it did, we would have
guide drills and guard rails to
to uh
Slack off to protect those
people that are so
underprivileged and that we say
we care about, but we pass bills
that harm them.
And that's what I'm most
concerned about.
There's
We have a population in New
Mexico.
That, um,
By, by many standards is poor.
And I just don't like that. I
think we ought to help them
flourish.
In all across history, if you
look at countries.
And communities that flourished.
The one thing that they had in
common.
was abundant.
Economical.
Energy.
And that's what we ought to be
trying to do and we need to
protect those people. One more
question and I'll get off of it.
On page 16, uh, line 15 through
17.
The bill requires the adoption
of rules for the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions from
sectors other than oil and gas.
What is the sector and how many
sectors are there?
Um, I'm gonna let my expert
answer that, ma'am.
Senator.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
members of the committee, uh,
that.
That is the definition is left
up to first the department to
propose allocations by sector
and then to the EIB and it's in
it's um rulemaking to allocate.
posed the emission reductions
among sectors, but the EIB has
flexibility in this bill. They
can regulate if they wanted to
they could regulate all, all of
the green source of greenhouse
gas emissions together, or they
could break it up, and this is
based on the experience of
Colorado, for example, that
decided to do um 3 different
rulemakings for its stationary
sources, one for oil and gas,
one for uh industrial sources
and one specifically for
industrial sources that were
what they
called trade trade exposed
carbon intensive industries. So
the idea here is that this, this
idea, you develop a plan and you
see how we're gonna get this
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions from these different
sectors and we do, we do know
sectors because we report
emissions already by sector. So
for example, that includes
electricity generation,
transportation, buildings,
industrial, but ultimately it's
gonna be up to first the
department and then
the regulatory, then the EIB to
determine.
How they're going to regulate
whether it's all together or by
different sectors.
Will there be an allocation for
tractors on farms?
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
members of the committee.
This bill recognizes that um
It puts in place statewide
emissions targets, but then it
recognizes that there might be
different strategies for
different sectors and that some
sectors are taking voluntary
action. There might be federal
policies, as I mentioned before,
enemy D's, um, analysis that
they just put out for how to
reach the 2030 targets.
Shows that you can reach the
2030 targets without any further
regulation of the agricultural
sector.
Besides the, the emission
reductions that would already be
achieved.
Madam Chair, Excuse me one
second, Senator. I wanted to
thank the students for coming
this morning. I see they're
preparing to leave, but thank
you very much. OK. Thank you.
And centered please proceed.
Thank you.
I, I'll, I'll uh.
Up close with the a that it
appears to me that it, it would
be.
Incomprehensible.
Look at this
piece of legislation.
And think that it was not going
to
Demonstrably
Impact the price of energy.
I don't see any way around.
Because even if you go to the
75% level and then you start
having some type of credits.
On the end, those, those are
costs that are, that people
The pump or people at the meter
are going to pay.
And that
I, I think it's just um
It's unclear.
It's undefined.
And I
I hear what you're trying to do,
and, and I'm not opposed. I
mean, I'm not opposed to, to the
effort, but this is a bad piece
of legislation because it has no
guardrails to protect the public
long term. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Cervantes.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair,
members.
I regret the uh students who
were here.
Left uh
I wanted to thank them for being
here.
But
What song?
There's a time delay I'm having
to listen to you a second time.
No offense, no, no offense, but
yeah, once was enough.
I, um, I wanna commend the
sponsor and everyone here and
embrace their concern with
climate change and particularly
now with what we're seeing at a
national level.
And those concerns, I think are
heightened for all of us, so I,
I share the concerns and I share
the
Of those who are committed to
addressing climate change. I, I
appreciate the sponsor talking
with me and um note for some of
you who've been around for a
long time.
This is not a judiciary
committee, I realized that and,
and this bill is not going to
Judiciary Committee, so I, I
resist and will resist with the
sponsor turning this into such.
Um, but, but I think there are
some
Some points that need to be made
by me, particularly as an
attorney.
In all the presentation of
supporters and oppositions and
comments in the committees so
far, nobody's spoken about any
language in the bill.
Nobody.
Um, and, and that is kind of uh
what I see really a great change
here in our legislative process
is there's a great deal of
attention on the goals they're
laudable goals, their goals I
share in terms of addressing
climate change and the concerns,
laudable goals for economic
development, protection of
agriculture, and our economy
and.
Gross domestic product, I know
what GDP means too, Senator, um,
all important goals, we talked
about the goals, but we never
really get into the weeds.
And, and I think that's
unfortunate because it's in the
weeds that that's what we're
doing here. We're lawmakers,
we're making laws.
And we seem to overlook the
language of the laws we're
making and the implications of
doing so.
And I think that's unfortunate.
I, I, I know that um
That there's good reasons why
this would not go to judiciary.
I think um I can understand
oftentimes with respect, I'm
glad the leaders here why bills
do and do not go to the
judiciary.
I, I'm concerned here because
this bill doesn't have
implications of judiciary in it,
and yet at the same time, same
time, I assure you that I can
predict the future of this bill
and this law if it becomes law.
Which is litigation.
Years of litigation.
And, and we shouldn't be blind
to that, the stakes are so high.
The dollars are so high,
hundreds of millions of dollars,
probably at stake on both sides,
and there will be a lot of
litigation over this, and there
will be injunctions and there
will be efforts to slow it and
stop it. And, and I always find
that deplorable when I'm up
here. I always look for laws
that that do not have
ambiguities, that do not.
Promote
Opportunities for litigants to
slow things down and
unfortunately, on both sides of
this, I see where oil and gas
are going to litigate this bill.
Uh, or industry or business are
gonna to litigate it because of
Replete ambiguities and
inconsistencies in the drafting.
And at the same time, the
environmentalists will probably
engage the litigation as well
too, and they'll have, and this
is a a field day for lawyers.
This bill I, I, I don't think
that's good.
I think that there's time wasted
and there's opportunity wasted
when we do so, but I, I, I would
like to have a better
understanding.
Of some of the things in here
and again without turning it
into too much detail. I also
want to improve the bill and not
have you senator or anybody
else, end up with problems that
maybe we can foresee and maybe
address.
So for example, we just adopted
amendments and if you would just
take a moment with me, um, on
the Seventh Amendment.
And I just want to make sure
that I'm understanding it
correctly and counsel service is
extraordinary, so I, I bet I'm
reading this wrong.
But if you look at the amendment
number 7.
It is a change to
19.
And it reads on line 7 to strike
8.
You all will stay with me.
And I know it's starting to
already feel like judiciary,
isn't it?
But, but, but I, I promise this
will be isolated.
If you look on page 19 line 7
striking it.
Like in the 8
And then it says inserting in
lieu of their age in the
environment board and local
board. If, if you're striking
just the 8, are you intending to
leave all the remaining language
on line 7 through
11 and then inserting before
that the
improvement board, or are you
intending to strike all of the
paragraph 8 because the way it's
worded right now is you're
striking only that designation
of the parentheses in the 8. Is
that the goal here? It's just
like only that 8 man chair
Senator Cervantes, yes, it is if
you'll, if you'll start on the
page before um for a rule
adopted pursuant to this
section, the
environmentalrovement Board and
local board, and then there's
12345.
8 is not really one of those
duties, 88 is a separate new uh
portion, so you take off as they
say, the number 8 in
parentheses, and you replace
that with an H.
And then the environmental
improvement board and local
board shall at least once every
5 years, and then you continue.
I've got it. I understand. And
so then if I can take that uh
change and then if I can go back
with you to, um, age 16.
5.
There is a reference in this
subparagraph C, it says by
January 28th, y'all with me on
that part there? It says the
environmental improvement Board
and local board, which local
board are we talking about
there?
Uh, Madam Chair, we have another
uh air quality board and that's
the Albuquerque Burnleyo County,
uh, waterboard.
Yeah
Airport
And is that the only local board
that would be involved in all
throughout this bill when it
defines what is a local board.
It's only the Albuquerque local
board.
And I'm sure, yes, we only have
that local board. Right. And
then if you look down a couple
of lines to line 22 on that same
page, it refers to the
department and local agency.
Um, shall proposed rules before
that, it says the local
improvement board, local board
shall adopt rules in that same
section says department local
agency. What is the local agency
as opposed to the local board.
Madam Chair, Senator Cervantes,
members of the committee, that
air quality Control Act, which
this section amends, puts in a
new section defines local board
and local agency in practice
that's uh believe the
Albuquerque Department of
Health.
But are they one and the same?
The local board and the local
agency, no, because just like we
have at the state an
environmental improvement board
and then we have the New Mexico
Environment Department, which is
the agency. They have different
duties, just like that here,
there's the, there's some duties
that are attached to the
department or in this case, the
local agency, there are other
duties that are tasked the
environmental improvement board
and the local board, which is
Albuquerque Burley Ehart.
air quality board.
In that same subsection, we're
gonna be empowering certain
rulemaking authority to the
local agency and then other
rulemaking authority to the
local board.
the saying yes and you're saying
no, so understand I'm confused.
Um
Not quite in in that section,
the, the local board, and I'm
sorry, could you direct me to
the, to the, was it?
16
see.
The the department and the local
agency shall propose rules
because under our petitioning
process, um, the agencies or any
other person can propose a rule,
but oftentimes the department or
the local agency is tasked with
proposing a rule. It's the
boards which uh conduct the
rulemaking.
And I, I just want to understand
the difference between the two
of them.
There, there is a specific
definition in this section of
the law is what is the local
board and what is the local
agency.
The local agencies as uh the
Albuquerque Department of
Health, the board is the
Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Air Quality control board. So
the local agency would propose
the rules for rulemaking. The
board would then conduct the
rulemaking and promulgate the
rules and, and that would be at
that local at the Albuquerque,
that right?
For, for the, because under the
Air Quality Act, the Air Quality
Act, um,
Allows
Certain counties to develop a
local board if they choose.
We've only had the Albuquerque
Berlio County, that's the only
local board. And so this
maintains the same consistent
structure which is throughout
the air qualitytrol Act, where
the local board has jurisdiction
over resources of emissions
within its, it's boundaries.
And the, and the reason that I'm
perhaps um
Excessively laboring on this
issue is again one of my
concerns in New Mexico always
remains that we have different
laws that apply to different
parts of the state and we, and
we do.
Uh, we're talking a lot about
crime in our state criminal
justice. Interestingly, there
was a poll done by research and
polling and.
In certain parts of the state,
my colleagues across sitting
across from me in in parts parts
of state crime is falls in the
7th or 8th importance on the
polling, uh, Albuquerque number
one, right? Uh, same state laws,
but completely different
outcomes and results and, and so
one concern I have is that when
you have an air quality board or
agency for Albuquerque.
Putting certain impositions and
restrictions uh locally that
they're gonna have a different
law. They're gonna be operating
under different laws and
different conditions and that
may be appropriate. I, I can
imagine that um if you have
rulemaking done in
Chavez or Eddie or Otero County,
you're gonna have different
rulemaking procedures and
outcomes than you are in Santa
Fe.
Um, and we may decide that's a
good thing as a state. I'm not
entirely sure, but I, I want to
be cautious about that, that
notion because fundamentally
really one of the great concerns
I have with this bill.
again, is not the
goals because again I'll I'll
repeat, they're laudable, the
concern I have, frankly is
something the secretary said,
and I understand and I think
it's, it's honest and I
appreciate that, which is,
we're, we're gonna determine
later what is doable, right?
What, what we can do and how
we'll do it and we'll determine
all those things later in the
rulemaking process, and I think
that should cause all of us a
lot of.
I think our job up here as I
began, is to be lawmakers.
Um, I think we should make those
hard decisions ourselves as
elected officials of the people.
And I think delegating too much
authority.
And and we've been doing a lot
lately in, in the years that
I've been here of late, more and
more we're delegating authority
to a process outside of here.
Uh, to rule making so and I, I
think there's, there's times and
places for that.
Um
Because of the expertise of, of
agencies and so forth and when
they're complex issues. I see
the, the point and purpose of
that. At the same time,
This this bill really is largely
dependent on a lot of things
that are gonna happen someplace
else, some other time by
somebody else.
We're going to determine limits
later. We this doesn't
determine.
Uh, limits precisely, it allows
for some flexibility was
determination, and then those
will be black stuff and one of
the, one of the great obstacles
I think to New Mexico.
is a lack of predictability.
And I think that's part of why
we have a such a an unfavorable
business climate.
Is that business is perceive New
Mexico to be kind of
We kind of we we twisted the
wind from time to time on
business.
But I, I, I do appreciate the,
the goals very much and um again
I'd like to have the
opportunity. I look forward to
the opportunity to to learn more
about the specifics of the bill
to avoid the litigation
inevitability and again I'll,
I'll, I'll assure you right now
that's where this will all head,
and I I don't think that's a
good thing.
But
I wish that um we could get to.
The climate change goals and
objectives that we know are
going to be done next year and
the year after, as opposed to.
34 or 5 years when when the dust
settles in the courts are, are
done with us.
Thank you, man.
Thank you, Senator. I have
Senator then Senator Hamlin.
And.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, please correct me. Am I
saying your last name correctly?
I, yes, ma'am. Thank you. That
is perfect. Thank you very much.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
uh,
Madame Protein, I appreciate you
being here today to.
Explore this bill that you've
brought forward.
Madam Cheer and Madam President,
I guess my concern is on your
definition starting on page 4,
line 10, that more or less
follows what California has
done. It's very similar to what
California has done, even though
they are going back on some of
these.
Proposals that they put out
there that have now been
mandated.
But I'm kind of concerned about
the addition of let's see.
Uh, transportation fuels,
heating fuels, and I'm just
gonna kind of skip Bill, well,
going on, building structures,
residential commercial,
institutional, industrial waste
management.
Manufacture processes, the
extraction processing of raw
materials, production of
agricultural and forest
products, oil and gas
exploration production storage,
distribution is transportation
within the state can you tell me
why those were added onto this.
I mean, I know you were probably
trying to call her.
Cover all bases, but Madam Chair
and Madam President.
I think some of these might be a
little bit extreme and then as
Senator Cervantes pointed out
what is the end go? How will
they know if they've met those
standards?
I know it's kind of convoluted
question. Sorry about that.
Uh, madam chair, so certainly
we're putting in place a long
term project.
These are the areas the sectors
in the state that have
emissions, greenhouse gas
emissions. If you look at this,
it's got the current little
circle, every one of those are
mentioned in here.
Um, you heard from my expert
that uh what it looks like with
agriculture is that they're
already at a certain limit and
they wouldn't be that impacted
by this.
They make going forward, but
when it's, it's not really fair
to just talk about one sector,
uh, yes, oil and gas has the
largest uh emissions in this
state, but it's not the largest
around the country around the
country, it's the
transportation.
So we have to look at what
emissions uh we would like to to
uh control or lower, uh, and
those are the ones, these are
the sectors that we have in the
state.
Madam Chair, Madam President, I
appreciate the enthusiasm that
you explain that to me, but.
We don't have an end.
An end game on this.
These sectors that are mentioned
specifically in this bill on
page 4 that go further than what
the California standards are
these sectors.
I've already been working. They
understand the importance of
what you are wanting to do here,
what all of us want, which is
clean air, clean water, we want
a good environment to raise our
families. I get that I'm one of
those people.
And I helped to promote that
too.
Through my farming and ranching
practices.
I'm also involved in the oil and
gas sector too.
And whenever that industry is
doing everything they can
through private enterprise to
bring those standards to an
acceptable level I think that's
remarkable, but yet we need to
say, OK, when is this gonna
stop? Are we going to have to
quit using our.
1950 and 1960 model tractors
that.
Small farmers are still driving
because that's all we can afford
because guess what?
The agricultural sector.
isn't in the best shape it's in
yet we're responsible each one
of us is responsible for feeding
160 people.
Whenever we have restrictions
put on us through the growing of
our crop that the Environment
department has shut down all but
two of our cotton gins within
the state and I don't know I
don't know if the one over there
in senator Cervantes area is
still open or not?
Whenever I see.
My pecan growers.
are being harassed.
Because they're trying to get
their crop harvested.
And they are getting complaints
from the environment department.
There is too much dirt that is
being stirred up.
Madam chair and Madam President,
whenever I am out there working
and I do, I work for a living,
folks. I may look old, but I
still have to work for a living.
And I'm proud to do it that's my
heritage we've been here for 4,
well, actually 5, I'm the 5th
generation here.
And in light of that we don't
have anybody that's coming up
through the agricultural sector
that's gonna replace this so
who's gonna feed you?
Right now we have utility costs
that are very, very high.
And whenever these measures are.
If they are pushed through.
To get to where you want it to
be in 2050.
The area that's gonna be hurt
the worst is the underserved,
it's the.
Let me see what your
What you called overburdened
communities are.
I live in one of those
overburdened communities.
Because we have been hit
recently with a flood, madam
chair, Madam President.
And we got our yearly rainfall
in 5 hours.
And it was devastating because
we had homes that were washing
away we had fields that were
washing away we've had fences
that have been washed away,
water gaps washed away. We've
had people rescued off of their
roofs by my farming and ranching
community.
And we had no control over that.
We've also experienced some of
the worst dust storms possible,
and some of that dust is coming
all the way from White Sands.
And how are we going to stop
that?
Madam Cheer, Madame President.
Well
What I see happening, and I
agree with some of the
statements that have been made.
Whenever we start implementing
this if it does pass.
The effects.
Of our energy.
Will affect
Those of lesser means to a
greater extent than any anybody
else.
The cost of food will be
exorbitant.
Would like I said earlier
whenever.
Me
Most of the other farmers around
the state of New Mexico.
are still driving that.
I won't
Lest John Deere's heart, that's
all I can say, OK, because they
do make good tractors in the.
I happen to have one that is a
1964 model that I still use on a
daily basis. We have upgraded a
little bit, but that new tractor
is now 25 years old, OK.
Caused by a combine combine,
it's over $500,000 by a new
combine, you have to mortgage it
as long as you can for it to run
one month maximum out of.
That's how we feed 160 people.
For farm.
folks.
I really do have.
A problem
With what is going to cause
these people that are affected
the worst.
By the cost of their
automobiles.
What is the cost of gasoline
going to be then? What is the
cost of our diesel fuel that we
have to run in our tractors
gonna be.
Are we going to be able to
afford that.
I'm passionate about what I do.
I love what I do.
Just as your're passionate about
this bill right here.
I
Looking back over my notes real
fast, I've just put something
aside that I didn't mean to
right now you're looking at this
particular handout right here.
Madam cheered Madame President.
You say that um.
Agriculture is at 12.4%, oil and
gas, 18.2. Oil and gas with CO2
emissions 22.9.
And when were these?
This is your 2021 inventory.
Has there been an inventory done
since that time and I know there
has, you may not have the
results on it.
Uh.
We, we didn't change the 21 on
here we should have because this
is 20 just now 24, this is the
current from the environment
department.
OK, so from the time of the
2021, which is not represented
by this.
Versus this one that is the
2024. What are you seeing as far
as those sectors that I just
named.
Where have they dropped to?
Because there has been a drop.
I'll let my expert answer this
man.
Madam Chair, uh Senators,
members of the committee. This
is the 2024 inventory, but it,
there's a lag with the data, so
it does use 2021 data,
represents emissions in year
2021, but it just came out.
OK, so this is actually outdated
that we are seeing represented
on this handout, is that
correct? I'm sorry.
OK, so it is old data OK not
really old. I mean it
it's behind the times. OK,
all right.
OK.
All right, um,
Madam Chair, Madam President,
whenever we're talking about our
air quality, our water quality,
our.
quality of life.
During the past 15 years we have
an agency within our state that.
They have not done or stayed any
favors.
That is, you know, they are in
here because of what we have in
our state. We used to have
beautiful forests in our state
used to.
They have overgrown to the point
now whenever there is a
lightning strike whenever there
is a person out there with evil
on their mind setting fires
whenever there is some other.
Event that does take place we
have catastrophic fires.
Catastrophic fires and we have
experienced those.
in the Las Vegas area that have
been.
Oh, just terrific in the past 15
years in the Ridosa area, there
have been 3.
Major fires.
The air quality at that time.
During the first one during the
little bear fire was to the
point where people.
were told by the Department of
Health if you have breathing
issues, you need to get out now
because it will be worse.
This past go round whenever the
fires took place in the Ridoso
area.
Same thing happened there. I was
up there working in Ridos at the
time trying to help those
people.
Just survive.
Then the floods hit.
We saw what happened then
because of the problem that
there was with the devastating
forest fires, not just the
current ones, but the ones in
prior years, the little bear
fire, the 123 years ago that
affected, and I can't remember
what it was called.
The erosion that took place the
the amount of.
devastation that was created by
these problems.
That not only affected the
redosa area that areas down
below.
Because the Honda River goes 8
miles through my ranch.
8 miles.
Then it goes another 12 miles
through my neighbor's ranch
before it hits the city of
Roswell.
And what we saw and what we were
able to smell and what that
water looked like that was being
emptied into the Pecos River.
Gives us all concerns there.
So Madame Cheer, what I want to
point out and Madam President.
I just want people to know that.
There are some things that are
beyond our control.
That we can't control.
But whenever we have agencies
that are not helping our state.
There is a problem there.
As a farmer, I take pride of
what I do produce because my
growing of alfalfa of.
Plants
is helping our air.
But what I am also seeing is
it's getting harder and harder
and harder.
For people to afford the food
that is ultimately gonna be.
A huge increase in the price of
it because of what the mandates
are gonna be as far as es being
able to provide that food.
To 160 people per farm or ranch.
And if you would like to respond
I'd love to hear what you would
like to say, madam.
Proteum.
Uh, madam chair senators so I.
You know, we all watched what
was happening to Roswell and
Rudo, so it's, it's a huge
concern.
Um
You know, it's hard to turn on
TV news these days because you
see California just burning to a
crisp.
Um
I've done enough study and by
the way, I thought bibliography
for anybody who wants to read
all of the data behind this
bill, um, to know that it's part
of the warming of the planet.
drier
And hotter with less water in
the southwest, every scientist
is saying that.
I think these are examples of,
yeah, I mean, I agree with you,
we can't control everything, but
I think these are examples of
what we can look for in the
future. Uh, I wanna be part of
the process, um, that tries to
eliminate the greenhouse gasses,
it's what is heating up the
planet, there's just no question
about it anymore. We could argue
about it, but.
So let me tell you that I'm
concerned about the overburdened
communities and communities that
aren't overburdened that in you
that are impacted by this, uh, I
have a series of 3 bills that
are part of this climate package
and the next one is a community
benefit fund that has over $300
million in it for communities to
do things that they need to do,
um, before fires after fires,
uh, to recover to.
mitigate what's happening in the
Southwest, uh, so that bill, I
think everybody likes cause
there's money in there for
everything having to do with
having your community be safe
from these type of events, uh,
so, um, I, I, I agree that the
communities is where we should
focus, but.
You know, I, I just don't agree
with these generalized oh my
God, people aren't gonna be able
to buy food and gasoline is
going up. I mean, gasoline goes
up and down based on things
that's at what's out of our
control, uh, it, it's certainly
not a lowering emissions on the
industry, which they are
starting to do and we are proud
of that.
Madame Chair and Madam
President, I appreciate your
Talk right there, but yes, there
is a way to.
Be able to help our underserved
communities, that is to make
sure that we don't price them
into a spot where they can't
afford to pay rent, utilities,
food on the table, just a little
bit extra there, Madam Chair, I
do, I forgot something that I do
want to ask, does anybody?
And now nobody here.
Experiencing the dust Bowl.
Times have changed since the
dust bowl, so whenever we're
talking about global warming,
all the all the other stuff that
we are trying to.
It leveled out
What caused the bold, does
anybody know? I don't, I don't
think there, there's an answer
for that, is there?
No, there isn't.
I don't I don't think that is
exactly right, the dirt blows,
the wind blows, cattle did not
cause that sheep did not cause
that pigs or goats did not cause
such.
There was a
Lack of rain helped cause that.
It was not because of
overgrazing.
Um
But I guess I need to ask
secretary Kenny.
You said that you'd needed at
least 10 full-time employees, is
that correct? to, to, uh.
Get this ball rolling and to be
have everybody in compliance by
2050. Is that correct? Madam
Chair, I wanna answer that
because we asked the department,
we gave them the bills we met
with them, we've met with so
many people I can't even
remember and we asked them to do
an FIR on the bill and they did,
and that's what came up with a
10 FTDs and then contract work.
OK, so, Madam Chair, Madam
President, that's where the $3
million will be used at you have
in the
Revealed itself, is that
correct?
OK.
But what I have a problem with,
I guess, in this, um,
I don't like any agency being
able to make rules, OK, Madam
Chair and Madam President,
mainly because.
Or being told to make rules,
I'll put it that way, being told
to make rules. We've just seen
what one rule two rules.
Make
Rule changes in different
departments have caused me great
grief, OK?
No, I'm not alone in there.
But uh
Whenever we have an agency that
is making up rules without any
safeguard that diminishes my
role as a legislator, and it
should diminish y'all should
feel the same way that it does
diminish our role as a
legislator.
Making sure that there is
oversight.
And therefore I, I have a big
problem with that.
I've
I, I'm still gonna.
stand by what I said earlier
about what people will be facing
very, very soon as far as the
cost of the food, cost of
utilities, cost of gasoline, the
cost of living.
And I do have concerns here. I
don't like agencies being able
to make up the rules without
guidance from the legislative
body.
Um
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair and
um Senator, good to see you,
especially breakfast this
morning. Um,
The, uh, you know, I'm gonna say
I don't like making up rules
either. Um, what, what, when the
pro tem came to us with the
draft of the bill, we said that
if you don't specify that this
these roles need to go through
the EIB.
As a legislatively created body.
Then it would be up to the
secretary of the department to
publish those rules. I don't
want to take on that
responsibility in the current
administration. I don't want a
future administration to take on
that. I think to your point, the
legislature created the EIB and
that should be the body that
adopts.
Or as we I've had personal
experience with doesn't adopt
the rules that I bring before
them. So I
I share your point. I don't know
that if I'm uh mitigating it
fully, but I just wanted to let
you know that that is the role
of the EIB, not the department
to adopt a final rule.
I appreciate you doing this, uh,
Madam President, Madam Chair,
Madam President, Secretary
Kenney.
Uh, uh,
But there's still problems
there.
And, and rules have been made
that are impacting different
sectors.
In a harmful manner.
I would like, uh
I have little stickies all over
my bills here so I can remember
to ask a question I did forget
to ask one on page 15 of your
bill.
Um
Starting with EE is talking
about statewide greenhouse gas
emissions and uh they're using a
methodology determined to be
appropriate by the department.
And this is based on
Scientific evidence, I'm
assuming, is that correct?
From where? Madame Charlotte the
cave answer for that. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator A, members
of the committee, this is
particularly referring to
expressing a statewide
greenhouse gas emissions and
carbon dioxide equivalents, so
there's more than one greenhouse
gas, and they all have different
levels of carbon forcing and
there are some different factors
that you could look into like
what, what is the lifespan of
these gasses that we're looking
in when we're making them
equivalent to each other and so
there are some, some best
practices and there's different
methodologies like um the
United States, uh,
Under um congressional action
has a greenhouse gas reporting
program. They have one specific
methodology that is used for,
for um calculating carbon
dioxide equivalents. So this is
left to the uh
Department to determine which
methodology to use. In this
case, just, just for how, how do
we, how do we know, you know,
how much?
Apples to apples we're comparing
here between methane and carbon
dioxide, etc.
And can you tell me how, who,
who did this study?
There's, there are, there is
just a huge, huge amount of peer
reviewed data that goes into a
different methodologies for,
for, um, assessing the carbon
forcing nature of different
greenhouse gasses. Thank you for
that response, but Madam Chair
and Madame President going on
down in that bill, it does say
uh determined but to be the
determined to be appropriate by
the department, including
emissions from electricity
generation for.
consumption in Mexico of
imported and produced in Mexico,
and that includes.
Transportation fuel, heating
fuels combusted in New Mexico,
buildings and structures
residentials, can you expand a
little bit on that residential.
Madam Chair, secretaries, all
members of the committee. It's
just um refers to the different
sources of greenhouse gas
emissions that would be captured
in the inventory of statewide
greenhouse gas emissions. So
there are, we already have
methods, departments already
using methods to.
Um, assess how many greenhouse
gas emissions come, for example,
from, from all of those of us
who use gas heat.
Um, and have gas furnaces.
What does that make up in terms
of the overall statewide
greenhouse gas emissions. That
doesn't mean that um these are
the sources that we would use to
identify what the level of
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions is importantly, it
does not mean that we're going
to regulate all of those
sectors, just means we're
counting them all to understand
how we're going to get to um the
targets.
So Madam Chair and
Mr. Basset, I can't say.
Is that right? Perfect.
So where there is a higher
concentration of residential
homes, that number is going to
be higher than it would be and
say.
Like Arthur New Mexico, is that
correct? If that was in
Albuquerque versus like Arthur,
I, I'm assuming that so you
don't have to answer that. Then
we go on down to commercial
institutional industrial waste
management.
I understand that.
Anytime there's a new uh waste
area that's going to be put in
effect.
Secretary Kenny has his people
out there checking to make sure
everything is OK.
Uh, extraction and processing of
raw materials, I get it that
does include oil and gas and
copper and any other mineral
that's underground. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, uh, senator and
members of the committee. I just
know that that's only the
emissions from the operations.
It doesn't, for example, we're
not looking at the content, the
carbon content of gas extraction
industry, OK.
A agricultural products. Can you
explain that one.
The
This refers to the emissions
from the um that come from the
manufacturing of agricultural
products and forest products.
So the, then it does include um
Cotton gins. Sure, yes.
Does
also fall into uh.
Dairy would be a good example of
that too, wouldn't it? And a
feedlot would be a good example
of that too, and they.
Poultry enterprise would be a
good example of that too.
Anything that a person may eat
uh.
The processing of green chili in
our state.
All of those because those do.
Contribute as well, so it's
food.
It's food and as far as I can
tell everybody in this room is
involved in agriculture because
they do eat.
It's as simple as that,
so I would just remind this is a
statewide emissions. Yes, ma'am,
it is not gonna be going in and
saying, oh, your gin is too hot
with whatever these are.
Global emissions that we're
looking at, not individuals, not
a farm, not a ranch.
But Madam Chair and Madam
President, all of these single
ones do add up to the end
product on what you're trying to
get done here.
Madam chair, I.
I, uh
I just really have a problem
what we're trying to do to a
sector of our population that is
going to be.
Really?
Heding from what the end result
of this may be.
Private enterprise is doing what
they can.
to make sure.
That they are going to be in
compliance that they are
working.
That their families live here
too, they live in the state and
we are all working towards it in
goal of having clean air.
Clean water and a healthy
environment for everybody.
But to put a mandate on it with
no.
Guidelines for these entities to
follow is kind of troublesome to
me.
Madam President, thank you for
your responses with your expert
witnesses, Madam Chair, thank
you very much.
Thank
you. I have Senator Charlie and
Senator Pope, and then Senator
Hamlin asked to make a motion.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, protem.
Expert witnesses, thank you for
being here today. We heard from
youth.
We heard from certain folks who
are representative of impacted
communities.
But as someone who is directly
from an overburdened community.
I'm a citizen of the Pueblo of
Laguna. I live in the pueblo of
Akima and one of our sacred
mountains.
For the Navajo Nation, a sacred
place for all of our publicsis
Mount Taylor.
And this year, Mount Taylor did
not have snow until months after
it was supposed to have snow,
and that is an environmental
marker for our farmers, our
agricultural ways of systems to
begin planting.
Up here in the north.
Um
burnt because it was so hot.
We want to talk about food.
Wanna talk about food ways.
We're gonna have these resources
if we don't set some of these
emissions, I'm really curious,
um, pro tem in talking about
Um, overburdened communities.
Um, two questions. What has and
have conversation with tribes
like I appreciate the language
around tribal consultation, but
a tribal tribal communities
overrepresent these burdened
communities. And then the
second, I would love for you to
speak to.
What is the urgency? Why now?
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie.
So we had a meeting, we we
actually uh reached out to um
the only Indian pueblo council
and asked for everyone to come
in uh hear about the bill.
Uh, so we had about 88 people
show up.
Um, and we talked at length
about these bills and certainly
uh showed the tribal
consultation in the bill and.
They're an all three bills, and
all three bills.
Uh, so, um.
It it was good conversation, uh,
we need to do more of that, uh,
I, I would like to meet with
more of them, but, but at least
we had that first meeting.
You know,
you heard Senatorel talk about
her community.
Uh, I mean, Roswell's never been
hit like that.
Uh, you heard her talk about
rude do so Dosa's never been hit
like that, they've had fires.
They haven't had that kind of a
fire that almost took out the
whole village.
Um
So I, I've been thinking about
doing climb bill for many years
and uh thanks to my chief of
staff, we did it this year, we
got a lot of people together.
Expert, like it's just amazing,
uh, so I believe the time is
now, I believe the time has
passed, really, it's past
where're we're just in trouble,
I think our world is in trouble.
Uh, my sister gave me a book
that I read it basically says
the world's gonna survive, it's
all you people that have messed
it up.
That are on their way out and
you know that just might be
true. I, I certainly have a
daughter, don't have any
grandchildren. I'm mad about
that, but there's plenty of
people around me with
grandchildren, I mean, we need
to think about our our future
generations. I think about what
I did as a kid, just ran outside
and played all the time. I
wasn't afraid of guns and the
schools, it's just the world has
become a different place and I
think that the uh
around what's happening with the
climate or ever present, and we
don't talk about.
I went to a conference this
summer.
About climate and energy and how
to do things like this, and I
had 2 men stand up and say, OK,
well, we're we're gonna talk
about this, but we can't use the
term climate change.
We're not gonna use that.
And so I said, well.
Well, what do you call it?
And
They just bumbled and bumbled,
they had, they had no answer.
I mean, climate change is here
every day right now and I
believe it's up to us to try to
uh continue the good work that
this governor has started. This
executive order, which I really
only fully read last night.
Uh, I mean, it's amazing what
she uh uh directed her agencies
to do.
So many of them now have climate
bureaus.
Uh, so I just think that we all
have to pull together, it's time
for all this to work on this,
you know, if there's changes
that need to be made in this,
OK, we have changed this
repeatedly over the last 6
months after hearing from
people, it, it used to have a
pretty significant penalty
section in it, uh, took that
out, uh.
So because we have mechanisms
right now to rank people and
that aren't gonna do this work.
But it all seems like we're
mostly all doing the work. I
can't wait for the community
benefit fund, that's the bill
that's important to give money
to communities to do this work,
so, uh, you got me started,
Senator Charlie.
Madam Chair, uh, pro tem, thank
you. Uh, I would call it climate
chaos. I'd go a step further.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Protem. Thank you
experts, um.
I think a lot of what I was
gonna say.
has been said.
But I just want to touch on the
cost.
Talking about costs here.
And I think about the cost of
A friend of mine his family at a
state.
Because his son
was having health issues.
I think about the cost of folks
who've lost their homes up
north.
And I get insurance.
Build a new one.
And we can go on and on. We can
talk about folks who've had
homes and now they're like, it's
so hot. What do I do to cool my
home is the reality we're living
in.
And so we have to do something.
And I realized right now in
Washington.
Broken. They're not doing
anything. They weren't doing
anything before.
And so it's up to us to lead on
this.
And while we're
A state of 2.1 million people,
small state and people think
that doesn't make a difference.
It does make a difference.
And we can lead here.
So let's do it.
I look here
On the map here with GDP.
And from what I take from this
is.
Once again
Or the United States we're
contributing.
A lot to this issue.
When are we going to stop?
That's what we used to do.
That's what we
So, um, I respect.
Some of the concerns and the
comments. I believe that you're
willing to work this
legislation.
With some of those concerns.
better.
Um, I will be supporting this
because just like the young
people that were here.
somewhere
And they ask, what do we, what
are you doing on this issue?
What are we gonna do?
And so I applaud you for
stepping forward and doing
something.
Um, we do need to do more, of
course.
But thank you for taking this
step because
I know it's not always fun to
sit here for a few hours, take
all these questions, but it's
worth.
Like
You.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I don't
have any questions. I just have
a comment. I'd like to
appreciate you can't make a
comment and then a motion.
OK.
So are you making a comment a
comment, Madam Chair.
Yes. And then maybe somebody
else can.
That's right. All right. But I
was so excited about this
because I'm, I'm, I thought we
learned that in our first term.
I know you know it's been a
while. It's been a while.
So I, I do want to express my
appreciation for this, um, and
for you, you, uh, sitting this
uh the the stamina that you have
is, is amazing.
Very
That
But I do feel that we need to
continue moving forward, you
know, as mentioned, we are past
the point of no return when it
comes down to correcting the
things that we have created.
Um, you know, in terms of
protecting our airline and
water, I think that's critical
and it's critical for a number
of things, a number of
industries that have been talked
about today.
Um, and I do appreciate Senator
Charlie's, uh,
Recommendation of changing to
climate chaos.
Um, because we've heard, uh,
conversations and we've heard
testimony about how it's
impacted communities. We've
heard about it flooding in
Roswell and the fires in Ruido,
so, um, you know, we're seeing
this nationally, snow in New
Orleans, um, even in Las Cruces,
it was 65 degrees this last
weekend, uh, when I went home
and, uh, my 45 pound tortoise,
uh, named Beaver was out in the
yard and beaver should not be
out in the yard right now. Um,
beaver should be in their home,
but beaver, by according to the
beaver cam, beaver is not in
their home.
And, you know, and, and if I'm
using a tortoise as a gauge for
climate chaos, um, you know,
I'm, I don't have the fancy
tools and and the things that
are necessary, but it's, it's
really, I think we all have the
personal impact from this, uh,
in some way or another, and I
appreciate the voices that were
heard today that were spoken
today. Uh, and I appreciate the
sponsor making sure that those
underserved communities are
overburdened communities, um,
are at the table because for so
long,
When we talk about climate
issues, those voices have not
been at the table. And so out of
anything besides the initial
intent of this and the purpose
of this, I want to commend you
for making sure those voices are
heard, because we've long
ignored those and um and I
appreciate that. So, uh, thank
you, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
uh thank you uh Protem for
bringing this forward. Thank you
experts for being here. Um, and,
uh, I will, um, uh, say I'm done
so that somebody else can make
the motion.
Senator Pope.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass on
Senate Bill 4 as amended as
amended.
Thank you very much. Um, the
Committee secretary will call
the roll.
Yes.
No.
Want to know.
Senator Charlie, yeah
And it's hard, yes, and.
el No.
Senator Hamlin, yes.
And I have one, yes.
Pope
Yes.
Yes.
spot
to explain my vote.
Heather Townsend. No.
Townsend, no. Center Sevilla
Lopez.
Yes
And yes,
thereophonics.
Yes, and before I call the boat,
uh, Senator Scott, to explain
his vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
This piece of legislation.
Abdicates the legislature's
responsibility.
For New Mexico energy policy.
To unelected regulatory
agencies.
Depending on.
Undefined technology.
At, at a cost that is
That is also undefined.
It will turn New Mexico.
In its entirety.
Into an underserved.
Community
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, madam uh Protem, you
have a do pass 5 to 4. Thank you
very much and for everybody here
in the audience and the
committee members.
Senator Wirth has asked us to
start at 8:30 on Thursday so we
can start with his bill. Uh, we
don't normally start at 8:30,
but we will, at his request
because we have a joint session
that morning at 11:30.
So at 8:30 we will start with
the very next bill, which is
Senate bill 21, 22 and 23. If we
can move to anything else, we
will.
Um, and we will post it on the
agenda so that we can get the
FIRs continuing.
Thank you very much for our
first meeting today. We are
In recess
What.
figure out how
this is a trial.
Just.
