Financial risks from a vented
wells are, you know, things like
delaying action increases
cleanup costs, which are
exponentially exponential and
taxpayers often bear the
financial burden of addressing
abandoned wells.
Also, property values are
diminishing.
Um, because it's impacting the
tax base.
The proposed fees increase.
Um
The proposed fees that we are
proposing here.
Um
are putting accountability to
the industry.
Further, there is a real and
present danger that the
abandoned wells will erupt as a
result of overpressurized water.
Wastewater injection.
High pressure wastewater
injection deep below the surface
is how the industry currently
disposes of most of the produced
water.
However, that is leading to
unintended consequences,
unintended consequences
unintended consequences.
Such as wastewater leakage,
leakage.
Fault slips, sinkhole subsidence
and whale blowouts, being
improperly plugged wells or old
pluo wells that have been
corroded.
Essentially is a pressure on the
ground has increased to very
high levels.
It seeks to relief.
A highly pressurized wastewater
travels along the path of at
least resistance underground and
erupts from abandoned well.
There was a blowout just 3
months ago in Texas. That was a
100 ft geyser that spewed
hydrocarbons for 19 days. This
was 36 miles from New Mexico.
While the fee imposed in my bill
is modest. Senator.
I just learned.
that the webcast came up and
went down and so I'm not sure
how much was lost.
OK, there is a backup recording
that will be posted, senators,
just so you know, um, that not
all is lost, but I wanted to let
you know, OK?
I'm sorry. Do you want me to
wait or should I? Good.
OK, we're good now. Thank you
very much.
Madam Che, while the proposed
fee in this bill is modest and
admittedly not enough to plug
and remediate all abandoned
wells. It's a start to address a
very serious problem.
Of external health and
environmental and fiscal risks
to our state.
The second issue, uh, this bill
seeks to uh work on these
changes to the water Quality
Act.
The first change is to delete
section P at the bottom of page
10 of the bill of this bill, a
paragraph very similar to this
was in was in law in
Pennsylvania.
But there was a 2018 peer
reviewed scientific study that
demonstrated that produced water
should never be used in road
construction maintenance,
roadway ice or dust control or
other construction or in the
application of treated produced
water to land.
Because it caused radiation and
other toxic contamination
poisoning.
After this peer-reviewed
scientific article was released,
the Pennsylvania legislature
changed the law to forbid.
Oil and gas wastewater from
being used in road construction
maintenance, roadway ice and
dust control, or other
construction.
Or other states have followed
Pennsylvania's lead.
And have now outright banned or
have an active stringent
standards. These are, this is
New York, Massachusetts,
Vermont, and Ohio.
Um, and we're asking that we
should just follow the same lead
for the environment and for our
health.
The second change is to insert a
new paragraph.
P that allows for bona fide
research of produced water in
accredited labs.
The FIR acknowledges that
there's no existing technologies
available right now,
commercially that will treat
these huge volumes of produced
water at a reasonable price.
This is consistent with the
sworn testimony in the recent
water quality Control commission
hearing of many experts,
including NMED.
And the Moga expert and another
expert from the New Mexico
produced water.
consortium.
So until produced water is fully
characterized and and treatment
standards are set based on
credible scientific evidence.
This bill prohibits the reuse of
treated or untreated produced
water off the oil field.
This is consistent with the
current state of science.
In the meantime, research.
should continue.
I'll note that the FIR correctly
states that this bill conflicts
with the proposed NMED
regulations, those proposed re
regulations allow for the reuse
of produced water that is
inconsistent with science and
law.
Specifically, the NMAD's
proposed regulations defines
reuse to produce water, a
treated wastewater originating
from produced water sources that
has undergone a level of
treatment.
appropriate for an application
such as agriculture,
Audible water supplies, aquifer
recharge, industrial processes,
or environmental restoration.
Even in the governor's strategic
water supply bill, HB 137. She
has forbidden the reuse of
treated produced water for
drinking water or agricultural
activities, including crop
growing and livestock watering.
This bill
Prohibits produced water reuse
of the oil field, except for
research and accredited labs
because the science states.
To properly assess having in a
priori understanding of the
ecotoxicity effects are produced
water.
Different organisms is necessary
for both risk management.
And in helping to define the
most toxic components and
necessary treatment strategies
prior.
To produce water discharge and
reuse.
And as our former House Speaker,
uh Brian Egoff, the lead sponsor
of the Produce Water Act in
2020.
Stated, I'm unaware of any safe
or fully researched application
for produced water outside of
oil and gas operations.
Since 2020.
Um
Mr. Goff wrote those words. The
science has become clear only.
For one thing,
Permian Basin produced water
contains radioactive
nucleotides for chemicals, heavy
metals, and a litany of
carcinogenic compounds, as well
as hundreds of unidentified
chemical constituents.
The research has not
demonstrated the safety of
research.
Of reuse of produced water.
The Science has simply shown us
how much more science we, how
much more science we have to do
before the use to produce water
can be contemplated.
Lastly, lastly, Emner points out
that there's already a
reclamation fund.
At Mner and we are not
interested in creating a
duplicate fund. So, um,
This is the main reason why
we're uh and this is part of the
amendment um to where we're
we're moving, um, adding a new
font and using the current fund
that is available.
Uh, with that, Madam Chair, I'd
like to give my two experts a
minute to introduce himself. OK.
So, Madam Chair, um, you should
have a copy of the amendment for
Senate Bill 178.
And so on page 1 lines 16 to 17,
uh.
We're removing
Striking, creating and plugging
remitting abandoned wealth fund.
Um, and then
23
45 and 6, all in 7, all go along
with that and what this is
really doing, Madam Chair, is
removing the establishment of
the new fund.
And so that's really what this
part of the amendment is.
Part 8
of the fund is, we're removing
or the environment or for the
use of produced water, and that
is just to be consistent with
the language in the bill. So
we're just striking that part of
the sentence.
That is basically uh the
amendment.
OK, so just for clarity.
And um
The first one through 7 really
has to deal with taking away the
language for the fund.
That is correct. And on page 8.
Oh no,
sorry. 8 page 9 lines 6 and 7.
Drake
Or the environment or for the
use of produced water, 6.
7.
manager.
Could I have a motion for
discussion purposes?
I move the amendments for.
Madam Chair, I moved the
amendment for discussion
purposes. OK, so let's go to
discussion on the amendment.
Committee members are committee
analysis, um,
did take into effect the
amendment, correct?
So anything from.
Mit memories just on the
amendment.
OK, so is there a motion to
adopt the amendment.
There's a motion and a second to
adopt the amendment.
Uh, let's take a roll call on
the amendment, which is mostly
about the fund and then that
last Cervantes.
Senator Charlie.
And Charlie, yeah, San Jose.
And, yes, Senator Hamlet, Senor
Hamlin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
And Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
00, no, Anna Dia Lopez.
Yes. And I said Dia Lopez, yes,
and there's Stephonics, says
Stephonics, yes.
OK, Senator Townsend, to
explain, oh, sorry, it was
Senator Scott, sorry, I'm not
awake yet.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
only reason I voted no was that.
This just showed up I'd like to
have.
A bit of an opportunity to
Study it, huh.
Of the amendment was emailed, it
is included in the committee
analysis that was not.
OK.
I appreciate your comment.
Senator, to make a comment
before I announced the vote.
Yes, ma'am, I do, even though I
voted for this amendment.
I too am concerned that we are
just now getting it, but if it
and it is showing up on our
analysis.
Yes, and, uh, I, I'm not sure if
our analyst.
Prior to
Could we ask the secretary when
did everything get emailed out,
please.
I believe it was
yesterday.
Yesterday morning.
Mm
Yes, ma'am I'm sure, because we
have the amendment ready for
Friday morning.
I mean Thursday morning.
OK.
The amendment was sent out. Uh,
thank you very much, Mikaela. We
appreciate it, madam.
We do appreciate the work of the
secretary. OK.
Uh, by the, um, a vote of 6 to
2, the amendment is adopted. Now
you can go to your experts,
please. Thank you, madam. I'd
like to um give my two experts
an opportunity to introduce
themselves.
Please, and you have a few
minutes if you wanna say
anything.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Mariel Nanassi. I'm a lead
counsel for new energy economy
and relevant to this proceeding,
um, I was the attorney, um, one
of the attorneys at the produced
water hearing uh this summer
that was about 12 days um before
the water quality control
commission, so I'm steeped in
this topic. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
My name is Norman Gum.
I'm a retired, licensed
professional water engineer with
many years, many decades,
including.
A stint as the New Mexico
Interstate stream Commission
director.
I originally was a member of the
Produce Water Consortium,
technical Research steering
Committee.
Um, I resigned after I
identified myself as such after
I'd been a member of the
consortium for a year.
And the consortium director
relayed a message from the
president of NMSU that that was
not by myself.
As a member
Of
Produced water consortium,
technical research was a witness
for new energy economy in the
11-day hearing.
extensively
Listen to that. I also attended
the produced water Research
Consortium's annual meeting.
In December, 12 hours and heard
the state of the art of the
science.
Thank you. So now let's go to
the audience. We're on, um.
It amended bill. How many people
are here to support this bill,
please raise your hands.
1234 in the room.
And um
2 online. How many are here uh
in the room against opposing the
bill.
123456 in the room and 2 online
are opposing.
So let's start with the
supporters.
In the room, if you'd please
come to the middle.
We have uh only 10 minutes.
Let's go.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Bernardin. I'm
here with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter speaking in
support with federal funding
uncertain, developing a source
of funding for cleanup of
abandoned wells that goes beyond
the holly inadequate bonding
rates that the state charges
seems wise. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Sharon
Argenbright. I'm a nurse. The
state of Penn Pennsylvania had
funding allocated to plug
abandoned wells and restore
abandoned mining lands.
Today,
um, Pennsylvania Governor
Shapiro is suing the federal
government to guarantee the
release of more than $3 billion
allocated to their state
agencies to plug abandoned wells
and restore.
Abandoned mining lands which has
been impounded. It's clear
what's going to fly this
administration and what is not.
New Mexico must not rely on
federal funding period.
To take care of our state's
needs, please vote to pass
Senate Bill 178, funding to plug
abandoned oil wells George, the
5% fee and adopt water quality
standards based on credible
scientific data. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Sure.
Committee, my name's Athena
Christodoulou. I'm a retired
Navy commander, and energy and
environmental engineer and I
have spoken much about produced
water, produced water is in
essence, hazardous waste, even
if you dilute hazardous
materials, hazardous waste, it
is still hazardous waste,
calling it produced water is
like trying to call a rose a
Stinkberg
Only this is in verse. I also
think that the additional money
that will be used for plugging
the industry's past mistakes is
of great importance, otherwise
we are indirectly subsidizing
the industry. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Good morning,
Madam Chair. Senators, my name
is Colin Cox with the Center for
Biological Diversity, and the
Center is here to support SBU
178, um, the produced water fee
would encourage uh reuse of
produced water.
On the oil field where it
belongs, um, and alleviate
freshwater demand from this very
thirsty industry, um, and it
would make industry pay a larger
portion of their liability for
unplugged, abandoned orphaned
wells. Still not their full
liability, um, but a larger
portion of it. Um, NSB 178 also
respects the current state of
the science by prohibiting the
use of produced water off of the
oil field, and this is why we
support it and urge you to vote
yes today on SB 178. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We're going
to the web, uh, let's do this is
Sarah or Sara?
Saira
Uh, good morning. My name is Saa
Namaste, and I am the program
co-director of a nonprofit
called the American Friends
Service Committee, New Mexico.
We serve small scale family
farms across New Mexico, and
we've created programs like Farm
to school, Farm to preschool,
farm to food bank. We support
Bill 178 because the cleanup of
abandoned wells is very
important to us, and we're
concerned that oil and gas
wastewater is toxic and should
not be used on farmland. We want
to protect our farmers and the
food grown.
Thank you very much. Next, we
have Sophia Jenkins Nieto.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Jenkins. Nieta.
I'm here speaking on behalf of
Yucca. I urge you all to vote in
support of SB 178 SC 178
proposes a solution to address
the urgent needs of plugging and
cleaning up the 1700 abandoned
walls that continued to pollute
our land, air, and water.
Let's be clear, produce water is
not water, it is toxic waste. It
contains radioactive materials,
heavy metals, volatile organic
compounds and dangerous
unidentified components. It is
critical that we do not allow
experimental proposals like
produced water to be used in our
Agriculture or food systems. At
the moment there's no scientific
process that can fully treat,
produced water to make it safe
for reuse. If even small amounts
of these contaminants enter our
groundwater, the damage cannot
be undone.
SP 178 establishes necessary
methods to ensure that produced
water remains on the oil fields,
aside from the needed research
to be conducted and accredited
labs, reducing the risk and
exposure to communities on
experimental proposals. We
cannot let this industry
continue to use New Mexico as a
dumping ground. They must be
held accountable for the billion
barrels of toxic radioactive
waste that they create and
charging a fee for a barrel, we
would be able to create the
necessary funds and jobs for the
plugging and remediation of
abandoned wells.
We bear a duty to protect our
land, air, and water.
Which is sacred, precious, and
irreplaceable. New Mexico is
positioned to do just that by
voting in favor in favor of SB
178. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, would
the opponents in the room who
would like to speak, please
start lining up.
Committee members, you have a
little bag with a bottled water
that it's in glass and it came
from nurses around the state
that distributed it the other
day and they just didn't get out
to you in time.
OK, so let's start the
opposition, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 members.
Nemoga opposes Senate Bill 178.
The state created a reclamation
fund in the 1970s, which I am
glad the sponsor has recognized
in the amendment.
The oil and gas industry pays a
conservation tax on every single
barrel of oil produced. Part of
that tax automatically funds the
reclamation fund. Unfortunately,
over time, the percentage paid
into the fund has been reduced.
The fund is still available and
utilized by OCD but the tax is
not fully utilized for its
original and appropriate intent.
For the produced water tax,
Namoa's membership supports
water reuse and recycling, and
the science that proves treated,
produce water, may be utilized
in appropriate settings after
meeting stringent standards. As
a as allowed by state
regulations, New Mexico
producers already reuse and
recycle millions of barrels of
water per day.
Until appropriate standards are
set to allow additional reuse
and treatment standards,
membership cannot support a tax
that is unavoidable and
unnecessary.
This bill would doubly tax
industry and attempt to create a
new fund when one has already
been in place for over 50 years,
which we're glad that got
amended and would ignore science
allowing for water reuse
innovation and utilization as an
important tool to conserve New
Mexico's fresh water. Thank you.
Thank you, next.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
Committee members.
My name is Tom Patterson. I
serve as president-elect of the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association, cattle growers
opposes SB 178.
We've now sat through the
hearings on Senator Wurst's SB
21 and SB 22 here and in Senate
Judiciary.
Section 1 Y in SB 22 defines
water to be all water.
There's no apparent exception in
SB 22 to jurisdiction over
produced water.
It's also clear
The SB 178 is not confined.
It produced water. Section 3D in
this bill charges the water
quality control commission,
among other things, with
adopting water quality standards
for surface and groundwater.
Section 3E charges the
commission with promulgating
regulations to prevent or abate
water pollution. We should know
if and how the duties in SB 178
conflict with the duties in SB
21.
We also think that we should
follow the science.
As I recall from an interim
water meeting this summer in
Socorro, our scientists at New
Mexico Tech have told us that we
have the technology to treat
produced water to make it safe.
That's why we don't agree with
Section 3P in this bill, which
would forever, forever prohibit
the use of produced water for
anything other than research. We
shouldn't hog tie ourselves if
produced water treated on a
commercial scale can meet
applicable water.
Quality standards for a certain
purpose, it should be added to
the inventory of state waters
that we may use.
We've reviewed the agency
analysis. We share their
concerns. Cattle growers urges
you to vote no on SB 178.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mike Miller,
Premium Basin Petroleum
Association. The imposition of 5
cents per barrel fee on produced
water will add an unnecessary
financial burden on oil and gas
operators, restricting the use
of produced water off the oil
fields solely for research
purposes may stifle innovation
in water treatment and reuse
technologies. Companies and
research institutions have been
exploring ways to repurpose tree
produce water for industrial and
agricultural applications,
potentially reducing reliance on
freshwater.
Sources by limiting the use of
produced water in practical
applications. This bill could
hinder progress towards
sustainable water management
solution. The bill introduces
additional regulatory burdens
that may create uncertainty for
oil and gas operators. They need
to track and report each barrel
of produced water for taxation
purposes could require new
compliance mechanisms that add
administrative costs and slow
down operations. Additionally,
prohibiting the use of produced
water for purposes such as dust
control, road main, and.
Or environmental restoration
eliminates practical and
beneficial applications. By
discouraging the mental
beneficial use of treated water
produced water. The bill could
lead to an increase in deep well
injection, a practice that
raises concerns regarding
induced seismicity in
groundwater protection. For
these and other reasons, we
stand in opposition 178. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Next
please.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. While we are glad the
amendment recognizes existing
reclamation funds, we still have
some issues with this bill as
written.
The bill's restrictions on the
future use of treated produced
water are counterproductive,
limiting innovation and
restricting potential solutions
to industrial freshwater uh
usage.
The bill introduces regulatory
uncertainty, and we know the
industry needs certainty to
survive and keep investing here
in New Mexico. This bill sends
the signal that we are willing
to move the goalpost on
businesses operating here. So
for these reasons and all those
others mentioned, we urge you to
vote no.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair
members of the committee, Jim
Winchester with the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico, and I won't be
repetitive of my colleagues, but
we do agree with, uh, everything
that they have said specifically
in the oil and gas field, just a
couple of quick points, um.
The 5 cents per barrel idea, um,
comes really without any
consulting of industry, um, and
that's after all of these forms
that we've had over the course
of several years. Um, it will
disproportionately impact the
smaller producers and the
independents and um my lawyers
tell me that it's legality is in
question. Uh, and the second
point, real briefly, is been
mentioned, but let me just sinct
it this way, um, this bill, if
passed, will kill an entire arm
of industry that has been
working since HB 546 and 2019,
to reuse produced water in a
safe and efficient manner, and
that's saving freshwater
resources. So we do strongly
oppose this bill. It does make
the water problems in New Mexico
worse. Thanks.
Thank you. There were 2 people
online who were opposed, but one
of those people has changed to
his support.
So, is there anybody, uh, I had,
this is still only one person
online. Would they like to
speak?
OK, so let's start while he's
checking.
Brandon
He's still checking.
OK, so one person checked out
that was going to speak and the
other person hasn't answered if
they wanted to speak.
So we are now going to uh
committee members. Senator,
you'll have a chance to respond
or to do a summary. Is that OK?
Thank you.
So
Who would like to go first?
We'll start with Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I mean
Let me start with some
fundamentals, uh, I believe.
Madam Chair, and Senator, I
heard that this water was
Incredibly dangerous.
And I guess I'd like to start
with.
Where this water came.
To begin with
Could, could we talk about?
The source of the water.
And what made it so dangerous.
Madam.
The water came from the sort.
No, Madam Chair and senator,
yes, sir. That's exactly the
question. Where did the water
come from?
Madam Chair, Senator, this
produced water, as it's termed,
is.
Coming from oil and gas
operations, it's.
Coming up
From the ground.
OK.
And Madam Chair sends her.
Of course that's
That's when it becomes visible.
But would it be accurate to say.
That this, uh, hydrocarbon
production.
In all of its forms.
is a consequence of
Uh
Mother Nature's pressure cooker,
if you will.
Uh, developing these long chain
hydrocarbons.
Out of marine shales.
Is that
Madam Chair and
And Senator, your understanding
also.
Oh, madam chair, Senator, uh,
That is correct, and that's how
you're producing a lot of these
fossil fuels which are
carcinogenic. OK, so.
So this
These marine shales were laid
down in
What I would call ancient
oceans.
Is that
also an accurate statements
correct.
OK. So, Madam Chair and Senator,
Composition of these oceans
would not have been
significantly.
Different
In the composition of today's
oceans.
So I coming back to the
question.
Of what makes
Madam Chair and Senator, what
makes this water.
So dangerous.
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I'll
respond and I'd like to have one
of my.
I, I'm not an expert in oil and
gas operations.
I'm not a water expert.
But
I
have a chemistry background.
And so
Whether it came from oceans that
we have now, we're talking
about.
Former
See life that
You know
has been
turned
fossil fuels.
We as human beings are also.
Carbon based and
trees, everything around us.
And they can have it can.
Change to that
And so
What I, my response and what I
would say to that is.
science is clear that
Oil
When we
Refine it to gasoline.
These are carcinogenic and
harmful materials. There's a
reason why we need to go pump
your gas, there's a warning out
there not to inhale things.
Or to
Let it
your eyes or drink it.
In addition to that, we have
natural occurring.
Radiological
Materials in the ground that are
mixing.
On top of that, we have.
Things that are the industry is
using to get the oil.
chemicals that we are not even.
Have a full understanding of
what it is.
And, and are they carcinogenic,
so is there mixing with the
carcinogenic fuels.
With our water
The fracking
We have horizontal
drilling that happens as well.
And so
That's what we're really trying
to address.
OK, so, Madam Chair and senator.
Are you representing that what
we're trying to address here is
The recovered.
Crackwater
Or
The water that is naturally
occurring in these formations.
Madam Chair, Senator, what this
bill really addresses is that
We have an issue of
Unplugged wells here.
We have an issue of
Uh, contamination and we want to
deal with remediation on some of
our sites.
And also, lastly,
To to ensure that
This toxic waste that's being
called produced water.
is not being used for anything
else.
But for use
In oil and gas operations
because the science is still not
clear.
To show us that it can be.
Cleaned up
Or agricultural.
Or
For
Use for drinking from humans.
Oh
Madam Chair and senator, that
answer covered quite a bit of
territory.
So
If you would
Um
Let's, let's talk about
I'll shift gears for just a
minute off of that.
And now discuss.
The
Uh, orphaned well problem, I
believe it was represented some.
2000 wells.
Is that
Is that the number that I that I
heard.
Madam Chair,
Senator Levi, I want to get you
the number that I stated.
right up.
ies
I had 2,391.
And Madam Chair and Senator, you
are aware.
That the industry pays annually
a.
Conservation tax that was
originally intended.
To help address.
This
Um
And that tax is still being
collected today. Are you aware
of that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I'm
aware of that. I'm also aware
that the federal government is
also brought.
OK.
Can you tell me what the
conservation tax is the tax
rate.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'd like
to defer to one of my ex.
Madam Chair and senator, I don't
know, um, what the current.
tax rate, the conservation tax
rate.
Madam Chair, and senator.
You will find that I don't often
ask questions that I don't
already know the answer to, so
let me inform you that it is.
0.19% of the taxable value of
the product.
Now, if we do some quick math.
$70 a barrel, 2 million barrels
a day, 365 days a year.
We would generate with that
conservation tax about.
$100 million a year.
Now y'all can check the math.
Madam Chair and senator, it
looks to me like.
That the average.
That's a P&A cost for these
orphaned wells ranges from about
$500,000 up to $250,000 and is
represented in most of the
literature as being
About $125,000 so.
If $100 million is a
is a plus minus number that
we're working with.
With regard to this conservation
tax.
We would be able to afford to
plug.
With those resources only about
800 of these wells a year using
those.
Average values. So if we've got
20.
12,200. We've got the problem
solved if this tax is directed.
Existing tax is directed.
Toward its original intent.
That's problem solved in about 2
years.
The obvious question is,
Why do we need additional funds.
On top
And I'm sure Senator like my
expert.
Madam Chair, senator, um, the
reality is, is that while that
might be the average for
Of a $125,000 to plug in, um,
that's just for plugging, it's
not for remediating, and I have
a document in front of me that
is from Mnerd, um, in December
2023, and it says that
remediation of the sites, um,
the well sites starts at $35,000
but could be a million dollars
per site.
And we know from the state land
office that in 2021, I believe
it is, and I could.
Double check it if that's the
exact right date, but I think
it's 2021 that the current
Money needed.
address abandoned wells that was
at that time was $8 billion. So
we are so far from it. And what
this 2023 document was that they
had already plugged 354 um.
Uh
So excuse me, not plug. 170, 107
plugging orders and 354, um,
remediation and reclamation
sites. So they're working on it,
but we're far from from dealing
with the thousands and there's
there's, there's.
What I'm told is that there's
many more thousands of orphans
and waiting, um, and so this is
a, this is like a crisis across
not only just New Mexico, but
across the United States.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Massi,
could you describe
The plug in a bandment and
remediation process for the
body.
I don't know the technical what
happens technically, but I know
that, um, they.
So
does your, OK, you don't know.
Stop there and or do you want
your other expert to respond?
If you have the answer, No.
Senator Scott, I know one thing
about remediation that I heard
in um.
Um, at the produce water
Research Consortium annual
meeting in December.
And that is um when they sample
a site to determine if all of
the hazardous constituents are
below standards, and they find
places that are not.
What they do is plow the
contaminants further.
I do not know other than um.
Cementing exactly what the well.
Thank you. You still have the
floor, senator.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, as
As an independent producer in
southeast New Mexico, I have
plugged and abandoned.
A number
Of wells
Remediated the well sites.
And had them inspected and
approved.
As remediated.
Either New Mexico oil
conservation division that's,
that's the process.
And I can go through.
That process and some detail.
With this body, but I, I can
assure Madam Chair and senator.
That an $8 billion price tag.
Is nonsense.
I, I have done this. I have
supervised.
The work
To make this happen and the
expensive part of these
projects.
I
The plug in abandonment of the
well to ensure that those well
fluids do not rise to the
surface.
If the location.
Which is a 100 by 200 pad of 4
inches of compacted caleche.
I ripped and reseeded with
native grasses which is.
Exactly the process that we
undertook.
Every time
Going back to that location.
5 years down the road, you could
not find it.
Unless you could locate.
The dry hole marker that we were
required.
To erect
Over
The plugged and abandoned wha.
Uh, Madam Chair, let me
Let me stop here. I'd I'd like
to reserve additional comments.
But I, uh.
I am very skeptical.
Of the need
For these additional funds.
Because of all of the funds that
are currently being generated.
To address this issue. Thank
you. I have Senator Cedillo
Lopez and Senator Townsend.
Anyone else? Senator Cervantes?
And there studiolo place Lopez
please. um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, thank you for bringing this
bill.
Um, one of the issues with
abandoned wells.
That the state needs um that
causes the state to have to plug
them is that
These companies, and I'm not
referring to senators Scott's
company in any way, I'm not
trying to diminish that. A lot
of these companies, um, declare
bankruptcy.
They
Then
You know, they disappear and
then they come back as some
other LLC corporation.
And um do you know whether the
state kind of traces that at all
to try to get, um, the, the
person, the polluter to pay for
their pollution.
Madam Chair
Madam Sherrill at my expert
answered.
Madam Chair and senator, um, I
think that there's some bills in
the legislature right now that
are seeking to um address that
so that there can't be this
basically Ponzi scheme of
transference.
So let's ask the audience, is
there anybody here from Mner or
NMED.
We went through this the other
day too.
Um
It's Saturday they're off.
OK, Senator Sadia Lopez, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, but um,
Madam Chair, just to clarify the
answer to the question though is
no.
At the at the current time, we
can't, uh, we can't do that. So
that really puts another burden
on, on taxpayers. Um,
The, the thing, one of the
things I really like about this
bill. So when 2019 was my first,
um.
My first session. So I remember
it very well. And I actually had
to produce water bill, but the
one that passed was Senator
Smalls, um, I never got a
hearing, but Senator Smalls, um,
bill passed and what was
interesting about that bill is
it created a possessory interest
in produced water, which is
something that, um, and I want,
I, my first year I actually had
a reading group at my home about
water, um, and it moved actually
to um.
You know, we moved it around and
we, we had several sessions, and
I know um that norm or um
participated uh quite a bit and
I learned a lot about this, this
issue that the the water law and
one of the problems I had is
what is a possessory interest,
and when you have this
possessory interest, can't you
trace the water and then or or
trace his possessory interest.
And then
But liability on where this
water damages things. And the
reason I was so concerned was
because at the time, Texas and
um
Oklahoma, we're experiencing uh
earthquakes.
Because of the injection of this
water, which has to be injected
in layers so that it does not
interfere with the.
Uh, with our, um, aquifers.
And my question is,
Have you followed uh Madam
Chair, if you followed this
issue of possessory interest and
connected it to any kind of
liability for this, Madam Chair.
And I'll connect it to the bill
in a minute.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, we
haven't, unfortunately, I just
asked both my experts on that.
Because that's yet.
Um, another source of liability
for these abandoned wells and
the damage caused by produced
water is one of the other things
that produced water uh has done,
and I know one of your experts
is very familiar with this, um,
and Miss, Miss, uh, a coin
actually has passed since then,
but there was a a small farm
where there was a pipeline to
produced water that exploded on
the farm, and could you describe
Madam Chair, the damage that was
caused by this pipeline
explosion.
Man.
Madam Chair, senator, um, I
represented M O Kwan, um.
And her family and there was a
produced water pipeline
explosion that rained down on
her house and actually on her.
And, um, her husband and her
animals, um, and the.
Uh, it, it if.
Initially they didn't know.
actually was responsible.
For that pipeline, and they
couldn't find, which is crazy
because you know you go and get
your, you can do something with
your ATM machine in a second,
but they couldn't find who was
even responsible for that
pipeline for at least 45
minutes. Um, so it was just
spraying and they didn't know
who to call. So there's like no
emergency number, um, that's
associated with it that the the
local people have, um, but
eventually, um, it was a double
WPX, um, uh.
pipeline and there was a
settlement between that family,
that family and WPX and that
remains, um, under seal and so
the amount is confidential, but
um, but that, but Ms Ola and her
family, um, moved.
Um, and all her animals were put
down um.
My madam chair.
This possessory interest, the
the producer of the produced
water.
Um
Uh, I guess all the liability
was put on the pipeline for the
explosion, but the creator of
the toxicity that caused the
damage, um, Madam Chair, did
they escape liability?
Man.
My expert answer that. I believe
that this produced water
pipeline was WPX, um, was they.
They claimed that it was there
so they had the possessory
interest.
The reason I ask these questions
about the possessory interest is
I didn't vote for that this
produced water bill, even though
I thought that it had some some
good elements to it. I didn't
vote for it because I was
concerned about this possessory
interest because it was not
clear where the liability would
be from the damage caused by
this, this.
As you called it hazardous
hazardous waste, and what I
really like about this bill is
that it creates an incentive.
For, for reuse of produced water
and not the transportation of it
and not the injection of it, and
I, I think that that's really
important. I thought that the
produced water bill originally,
that was its purpose to
incentivize. That was what was
told to us over and over in
committee and also on the floor
was the whole purpose was to
incentivize the reuse of
produced water, and I noticed
that on the FIR, um, it says
that.
Only 27% of produced water is
reinjected or reused, and about
72.9%.
Um
It's not reused, it's injected
something else happens to it,
and it could have a fee imposed.
So my question is, is, do you,
have you done any modeling or
anything about um
The reaction of industry to an
increase in fees that would
change its behavior to
To use technology to reuse more
of this.
Um
Reduced water.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Senator, to answer
your question, the answer is no,
but I think you're bringing up a
great point.
Something we need to look at. I,
I think that that's, that's
important. I wish the department
was here too to talk a little
bit about this because it
doesn't look to me like despite
the passage of the produced
water that much more the
produced out Water Act that much
more is being reused than was
originally reused, um, because
it's an economic decision.
Um, about what to do with this
produced water, and if it's
cheaper for them to inject it,
and then be relieved of all
liability of earthquakes or
whatever else happens, that's
what they're gonna do. And
they're not going to clean it
cause it has to be cleaned to a
level to be reused in the oil
field. And so what this does is
it shapes the economics of this
in a way that I think would be
really positive for the state,
not just the liability you
question uh issue you raised,
but also
The, the conservation of water
and the preservation of our, our
environment. So this bill um is
not just about
Imposing liability where it
belongs. It's also about
creating incentives, and I
thought, I think those
incentives are really important.
Um, the, the
Well
On our the oil and the gas on
our public lands belongs to the
people.
And the oil and gas industry
makes a lot of money.
Um, exploiting that resource.
They spend a lot of money
exploiting that resource, but it
seems to me that the profits
that they have been gaining for
For decades, and especially
since um the the fracking
industry really developed that
technology is immense.
Um, and I think that it's
important to create incentives
for them to do the right thing.
And that is to
Reuse that water, clean it up to
an area, and not just inject it
into the ground and take it out
of our overall water system.
Um, I really commend you,
Senator for bringing this bill.
I think that um.
We
We'll probably see some good
coming from it. I know over and
over again people or people
argue that, oh, they'll go to
Texas. Well, in Texas,
Um, the royalties are.
25% of the gross.
In Texas, they have a best
available technology rules, so
they have to use the best, most
expensive technology.
Um, and in Texas they're
beginning to have earthquakes.
Um, so,
Yeah, uh, I actually got a text
that there was an earthquake
last night.
So, um,
I think that this is a very wise
thing to do at this time to
protect our people from the
damage that was caused, um, and,
you know, I know Mr A Coin's
family, um,
Had severe damage and the other
thing just made me so mad, is
the company came and took 6
inches of topsoil from her farm.
Um, when after it happened.
Um, because I talked to her
length, and I thought that was.
Destruction of evidence.
But, um, it was, it was really
problematic and when you look at
what happened to her and, and
the radiation, you know, all of
the studies about the rate, the
naturally occurring radiation
and slaughter. It's something we
really have to think about when
we're thinking about the health
of our people. So thank you for
bringing this bill, um, I think
it's a, a really wise thing to
do at this point in our history.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Before we go on to
Senator Townsend, um.
Senator Kenny is in a different
committee. He indicated this,
this bill is under the purview
of M nerd and Deputy, uh.
Secretary Ben Shelton will be uh
arriving to help answer
technical questions from the
department, so, uh, keep that in
mind for the future. Senator
Townsend, you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator.
Um, but I briefly or would you
Uh, explain the
position of your experts and the
Concordium meeting.
Um, that has been referenced. I
mean, what side were they on
during that process.
Madam Chair, Senator, are you
asking my experts what side were
they on, on the issue? Um.
Give them an opportunity, Madam
sure senator.
So
I missed the question. Could you
tell me again
what during the consortium
meeting that has been
referenced.
Both of the experts have said
that they were there. I'm trying
to decide which side of the
fence they were on during that
meeting.
Great, thank you.
Just
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend.
Um, I was the only one of uh
senator votes.
Experts who attended uh produced
originally in 2019.
The consortium applied or
advertised for applications of
qualified.
People
Serve on a technical research.
Steering committee.
I applied for that position at
the time I was um representing.
Amigos Bravos, the Sierra Club.
And uh the New Mexicovironmental
Law Center.
I was selected based on my
qualifications. I attended the
first consortium meetings.
And COVID hit.
The remainder of the meetings
were um.
Virtual
Um, and in 2021 after.
Senator, um, Sadia Lopez
sponsored a bill.
That I was an expert on.
Uh, that had to do with oil and
gas and produced water in the
consortium. It was uh really AA.
And after I testified, I got a
call from Mr. Hightower,
director of the committee,
relaying a message from the UNM
Chancellor.
Uh, that I was not allowed to
identify myself.
Technical research steering.
And shortly after that, because
I didn't think that they stopped
participating.
Most recently
Um, after, um,
Researching the issues and
catching up and serving as an
expert witness in the 11th day.
New Mexico water quality control
commission hearing, I decided to
attend the December annual
public meeting of the
consortium.
Held at the Indian Public
Cultural Center in Albuquerque.
Several of the people who
testified.
Against the bill
We speakers at that.
About the state of technology,
training resources, um.
And everything else, and I heard
a number of things at that
hearing.
That were frank admissions that
they don't know what's in this
wastewater. There was a great
deal of testimony.
On targeted and non-targeted
analysis, non-targeted analysis
is in joints.
That are not known
Um, there were remarks that
constituents were showing up in
treated produced water.
Uh, that were not.
And the water that they tested
before treatment.
And um
I, I, I left that hearing with
the opinion that
The researchers at New Mexico
State University, the
professors.
Our acting with scientific
integrity.
In their research, it's peer
reviewed.
They're doing the best job they
can. They are all for this.
But I think that they have
integrity in their work.
Consortium director on the other
hand,
As a salesman.
And many of the things that he
says publicly are simply not
true.
Um
Including, um.
Public statements that the
technologies is available under
oath, he testified at the
hearing.
That the science was at least 18
months away.
From
From delivering the science.
It would serve as the basis for
standards.
And then
Readers could proceed.
Ma'am, and um.
Senator,
um, um, can you
And that water quality
construction agreement or a
opponent of the.
Of the process, uh, and, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend, I
was standing against the water
quality.
And and chair the.
The attorney and that's with
you, um.
What position has she held?
of your center, although my
experts answer.
Madam Chair and senator, new
energy economy, and that's who I
represent, um, oppose the
regulations because they were
unlawful and contrary.
And
Madam Chair and
Expert witnesses both.
What expertise have you?
Required and demonstrated on
treating produced water.
Madam Chair, Senator
Mary.
Um
I don't personally have
expertise, but I was an attorney
cross-examining the experts who
imoga.
Um, put up to MAD put up who um.
The
Research Consortium and under
oath.
The testimony.
Was that
This science is not there.
Yet
They were hopeful
That it might be someday.
And that's fine.
But today, after 5 years of this
body.
Subsidizing the Mexico produced
water research consortium.
We have
No data
As in zero data.
That has been tendered to the
New Mexico Environment
Department.
That shows that reuse.
I commercially available. That's
the testimony of those
witnesses. And so that part I do
know, and I know very clearly.
question was, ma'am, what
expertise did you have?
Not and and have acquired not
what the testimony was.
Uh, Senator, um,
Mr. No, on, on your right.
He
Address that as well. Madam.
Oh, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, I have a master's
degree in water and wastewater
engineering from New Mexico
State University.
I have um.
Uh, managed wastewater treatment
facilities and been responsible
for non um.
NPDES permit.
Compliance and signed off on
those permit reports.
Or produce water, um.
My, my produced water expertise
is is associated with my
participation in the consortium.
And extensive reading.
I have read um all of the pilot
studies that are available from
the produce Water Research
Consortium.
Pretty easy because there's not
much, Madam Chair, that brings
me to the point.
And I, I believe, and Mister No.
That the science wasn't there
yet, and then
Most recent testimony, we were
at Lee Technology.
Does your bill, madam chair, and
Senator, does it allow for
science to occur in 18 months or
at some point in the future, or
does it eliminate it completely.
Madam Chair, Senator, this bill
does not stop the research.
The research is still done in
the lab.
We are just
In this bill saying
You know, you cannot go any
further, it's ready and and all
the expert to Senator Townsend.
Um
The science isn't there and um
it will be a while before the
science is ready to say what the
standard should be.
In the meantime, that research
can go on in laboratories, but
most importantly,
One of the big uh topics of the
produced water research
consortium annual meeting in
December.
Was presentations by technology
providers about the state of the
technology.
And Bechtel
I will soon have available.
Package plant
That can be installed uh at a
wellhead to do all sorts of
process research.
And the energy, minerals and
natural resources department
called into the meeting.
To relay the comments that they
are.
eager
process
Applications for permits were to
do that treatability research.
On the wellhead
On the oil field.
Doesn't require any
transportation.
But
I'm sure senator.
In all businesses.
Whether it's an oil field
business or.
What drives the economy is the
opportunity.
Invest money to deploy capital
where you have a return on your
investment.
Senator Sidia Lopez mentioned
that.
The one of the important things
is to incentivize industry to
clean up.
water to a different standard
for use in in a different way.
And I, I believe what your bill
has done.
intended to do for this to occur
is you have set the price.
On a nickel you dispose of it
and you don't worry about it
anymore. And what you ought to
be doing is exactly right.
Senator said Lopez said it's
is incentivize them.
To clean up and reuse. Many of
the constituents of Madam Chair
and Senator like Mercury is, is
a, is a chemical that has
You have identified or has been
talked about as one of the bad
constituents in this produced
water that we, we got to
protect.
Is that, isn't that correct?
Madam Chair Center, yes.
But
Mercury is used in many of the
medicines that we take every
day.
It's involved in cancer
treatment. It's involved in all
sorts of different issues. Many
of the constituents.
Many hazardous chemicals.
When used properly,
Uh, valid uses and in fact,
Extend and better the lives of
New Mexicans and Americans all
over the place.
I believe we're missing the boat
when we don't incentivize.
Technology.
And ingenuity to drive.
what we want.
Always going out and trying to
penalize and set the and set the
standard.
Or
What we want in the end. We
missed the boat, and I think
this bill misses the boat.
I, I want
I want to make that what we do
enhances the lives of New
Mexicans.
And, and the population in
general.
But when you, when you say
For nickel, you dispose of it
and you never have to, we're
never gonna.
We're not gonna have.
And I honestly believe.
That if technology was applied
to much of this water.
That the value of that water to
New Mexico economically.
Vastly exceeds.
The oil we have.
Thousands of acres all across
New Mexico.
That it only lacks water to turn
into productive farmland.
And going through the process.
And making sure it's cleaned up
to where it's usable is, is a, a
valid point. I would agree
wholeheartedly, but discounting
that going forward and just
saying no, we're not ever gonna
do it.
is irresponsible on our part.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Uh good morning everybody. Norm.
E
Uh
Senator Sadi Lopez was taking me
on a trip down memory lane,
produce water. Bill, you and I
were the only two Democrats to
vote against it in 2019.
6 members of the entire Senate
who voted against the time. You
and I were right, I think then,
Senator, and I think that's the
point you're making is that um
there's still a lot to be done.
I see Muriel nodding her head
affirmatively. The vote was
premature in 2019. It probably
premature today, I think, uh, to
do this, so, uh, I, I wanted to
remind Senatoro Lopez of
sometimes we stand together, you
and I alone, uh, uh, in any
event the with regard to the
specifics of the bill, I
appreciate the
Being told that that Ener may be
sending somebody here, a deputy
or whatever else it may be, but
looking at the analysis, very
critical of this bill, um, the
FIR are very critical of an
agency that
Right now, I generally thought
is probably one of the stronger
parts of this administration is
their commitment to the
environment and the agency
efforts and so it's a little
concerning to me that that they
would be so critical of this
bill, but let me just ask some
specifics if I can, Senator. Um.
If you look at page 3 of the
Analysis
Please.
There's a table
And
Uh, in the
Our right-hand column.
talks about, I think, I think
what that's intended to reflect
is the revenue that would be
generated.
At the 5 cents for the volume of
water that's described as
non-exempt to produce water.
In millions of barrels.
So
I'm trying to figure out in, in
that uh far righthand column.
Are those dollars in dollars or
those in thousands of dollars.
The column doesn't say anything
about thousands of dollars or
millions of dollars, I think it
just says dollars.
You see what I'm looking at?
Adam chair center is that the
one that's FY 22 down to FY 29.
Well, that's the table, yes, but
I'm looking at the far
right-hand column.
There's, there's no numbers for
FY 22 through 25, I guess
because they don't.
Have a way to project that uh
that soon.
And obviously we're not gonna
have anything for 22, 23, 24, or
25.
Yeah, so Madam, Madam Chair,
senator, we believe that's
millions and if you go to Madam
Chair, Senator, we believe it's
millions. Um, if you go, I
think, to the 3rd paragraph,
it's mentioning millions there
as well. That's, that's our
assumption.
Yeah, and it's unclear because
it doesn't say that, right?
Number one. And then number 2,
when it says in that paragraph
you're referring to it says Ener
estimates the projected revenue.
Could be between 85 and 90
million, but it doesn't say
annually, right? It just says
that.
Numbers, so pretty unclear to me
uh what
What this is expected to
generate really.
And, and I'm, I'm trying to
figure out, do we?
We know, Senator, or we just
kind of gonna have to assume for
today.
That's in millions of dollars,
even though that's not what it
says.
Madam Madam Chair, Senator, um,
the answer I believe is that
it's in the millions and I have
a a printout here from a uh
November 26th, um, 2024 slide,
um, um, that's my birthday, so I
know I remember that day, um,
it, uh, it says here from Ener,
um, that this would generate 68
million.
dollars. Um, so it's somewhere
between 68 and $90 million a
year that, um, uh, the 5 cents
per barrel fee would generate.
And, and Senator, uh Mario, but
you're saying, you keep saying
per year and there's nothing in
here that says per year. Um,
and, and here's, here's why,
because I did the math. So if
you look at that table.
Let's just take fiscal year 26,
and if you take the number of
barrels that are non-exempted in
millions because that's the
column there's so, so I take.
1609.8 and I, and I multiply
that in the millions, right? I'm
trying to figure out what that,
that number uh turns out to be
and.
Like, again, I'm trying to
figure out what this is actually
gonna generate in terms of the
tax, right? Um.
I'll go back and do the math
again, maybe you all can do it
quickly too. I won't have the
whole, yeah, have the whole
committee.
Held up here.
Um, anyway, I, I, I'm just
trying to figure out.
Again, what, what the expected
generation is gonna be. The
other thing is I would tell you,
unfortunately, this doesn't go
to the judiciary.
Joking, um, everybody, the, the,
the, I, I find the bill to be
inherently inconsistent and all
explain why before I get to the
agency analysis.
So, um, in section one, which
would be all new language, if
you look at page 2, subsection
A.
says that there's this tax and
then it says um
You're exempting from the tax
certain uses there and those are
in paragraphs 1 through 3,
right? And again, I've seen
Marriel nodding her head
affirmatively, so make sure I'm
reading it the way you're
reading it the same way. So, so
you're exempting from the tax
all of these other uses, which
would include enhanced or
secondary oil uses or recycled
or reus uses um at the well or
at a facility, and, and that's
in paragraph 2, and then it, and
then it uh paragraph 3, another
exemption from the tax. So there
are a number of uses to produce
water they're exempted, but
then if you go to um.
The
Section
Is it section 3, it's whatever's
on page 11.
This is, this has been raised
and it's caused some concern.
I guess it is what Section 3, it
is section 3 on page 11. It says
the use of permitted uh produced
water.
I'll be used for research
purposes only.
Right, and, and it says, and it
says permit shall not use and it
lists a number of things, but
when you say it should be used
for research purposes only on
the preceding section one you
say that it can be used for all
these other purposes.
Right, in other words, you're
saying it can be used for
enhanced or secondary oil, it
can be used recycled and used at
the well or facility.
As permitted by the conservation
division. It can be used for
water quality. So there's a
number of uses in section one
that say it can be used for
Section 3, it says it can't be
used for any of those things.
How do I, how do I reconcile
those things?
Adam
Madam Chair, Senator, um.
I will explain to you under
section 70.
133.
Of the produced water act.
There it
And this is from that bill, uh,
546, it's separate some things.
So all.
On oil field, which is not
described, but or defined
anywhere in law, but all.
All youth on oil fields.
Is, is under the OCD.
All
Off
Use of, of produced water is um
under the water quality control
commission. So what this says,
it's not actually contradictory
because what.
These 1st 2 under A on page 2.
A 1 and 2, that's has to do with
on oil field reuse.
So that's why that this rest of
this has to do with the water
quality control act and under
the water Quality Act, we are
allowing one use, and that is,
so there would be no tax if on
off the oil field, it was used
in a laboratory for research. So
we are exempting that. So that's
why they're, it is not
contradictory.
They are complimentary.
Yeah, but that's not what the
analysis is either. The analysis
reaches the same conclusions I
do, which the analysis says
there's a lot of conflict
between this bill and any number
of different statutes. So for
example,
Um, the and including in the
attorney general reaches the
same conclusion. So for example,
if you look at the analysis on
page 4 it says M nerd expresses
concerns to propose changes with
conflict with proposed current
regulation changes before the
water quality control commission
and then goes on to say the
passage of this bill would
create conflicts and negate the
rulemaking process. I I, I
understand you're going to
disagree with all this analysis.
So, so I, I won't, and without
the agency here, I'm, I'm
I trouble, right? Uh, and I, I
know you're jumping out of your
skin to come to me, but I, I'm
just, I'm noting that um that if
I'm looking at the analysis
because of with the with the
agency not here.
I've, I've got to go to what the
agency's written, right? And the
agency's written a pretty
extensive critique of the bill.
Um, and.
Without them here and me not
having the expertise either,
this is not my area of the law.
Um, I, I'm relying a great deal
on the agencies' analysis, which
talks a great deal about.
Uh, duplications of purposes and
conflicts, uh, in the fun.
And so. Excuse me, Senator, we
now have an agency
representative
Deputy Secretary Ben Shelton,
please come sit in the hot seat
next to Miss Mariel.
And there might be some
questions for you or not.
We, we catch you off guard here,
uh, Ben, are you, do you know
what we're on and what we're
talking about.
We've run Senate Bill 18. Yes,
did the babies keep you up all
night.
Mm-hmm
Comment.
OK, so you got very excited to
be here
and you're very excited. That's
interesting.
OK, so we have had extensive
conversation about this Senate
bill and the FIR.
To which your department has
taken quite a few.
Uh, positions or comments. So
Senator Cervantes has some
questions and some other uh
committee members might as well.
Senator Cervantes, you still
have the floor. Thank you, Madam
Chair, so, uh, Shell, and I was
looking at the analysis really
on pages 45.
which relate to agency analysis
and then conflicts, duplications
and technical issues.
So this analysis says Amner
notes this particular bill
duplicates.
Uh, the purpose and applications
of the reclamation fund.
that goes on to say, for the
same work done by the OCD.
Um, then it goes on to say that
the AG's office says it echoes
these concerns where analysis
reads and says the proposed fund
is duplicative and if passed
would complicate operations and
then.
And then a couple of paragraphs
below that M nerd's analysis
expresses concern.
This would conflict with
proposed regulatory changes
before the water quality control
commission.
That the uh possibility of
passage of this bill before the
issuance of rulings.
By the water quality Control
Commission would create
conflicts and possibly negate
the rulemaking process done.
And then on the next page, page
5, again, I'm summarizing Madam
Chair quickly, but it goes on to
say, I'm there uh analysis notes
the implementation of new rules
in this bill would be difficult.
Because the bill does not
differentiate treated and
non-treated produced water.
Um, and, and I won't go through
the entirety, but then if you
look to the conflicts and
duplication.
Uh, then there's indications
here this bill would conflict
with the House bill in terms of
the use of the of the funds
perhaps.
And then, and then last under
the technical issues it notes
Amner notes the language of this
bill is not consistent with the
concern current authority and
practice.
Regarding which entity would
promulgate the rules regarding
the regulations.
Which now rests the authority
with OCD, so I'm, I'm hoping
you're able to follow along with
me, Mr. Shelton, as I'm going
through all this, all, all of
this suggests to me the agency
does not think this is a good
idea, um, and it's it's a lot of
pretty critical language there.
Are you all, do you all support
the legislation or do you not
support the legislation or you
wanna, uh, sit on the sit on the
wall for a little while longer
on this one.
Not a
Madam Chair, and Senator, I just
Um, Madam Chair, my name is Ben
Shelton. I'm the general counsel
and acting deputy secretary for
the Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department been asked
today to come here and provide
some technical support for some
questions relating uh to the
bill provided.
Uh, and the analysis provided on
the bill by OCD.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator
Cervantes, of course, the
Division and the department
don't support bills, the
governor supports bills, so I
can, I can give you um a little
bit of support for the um
technical analysis, the
reclamation fund is the current
fund that we use primarily to do
plugging and abandonment work
and remediation of well sites.
Um, this bill as, as my computer
will begin to work with me a
little bit as I understand it,
this bill is effectively
duplicating the 5 cents a barrel
fee on produced water that is
proposed in a House bill on the
other side.
All right now, but directing the
funds to a new fund to be used
for reclamation.
Um, and well plugging work. So
in that sense, it is duplicative
the reclamation fund exists
where plugging wells with that
fund today.
clarify to everyone in the
amendment, we did change that.
Um, the deputy, no.
So the amendment, we didn't
start a new fund and we're
putting this into the
reclamation.
Will do.
And thank you, Madam Sharon, um,
Ms Sheldon, you and I've been
around here a very long time,
um, and I appreciate your
statement, but it's not very
consistent with my history here,
which is when you say agencies
and divisions don't take
positions on bills support or
opposing, um, I appreciate that,
but that really doesn't, it
doesn't really answer my
question, cause I'm familiar
with the agencies very
frequently, individuals do
frequently take positions on
legislation supporting or
opposing, at least they did
before today, uh, and so I'm,
I'm, what I'm kind of hearing
you say and
that's perfectly acceptable is
you're just not prepared to take
a position in support or
opposition today, and I, I, I'm
fine with that answer. Um, and,
and I accept it. I'm just, I'm
looking at the analysis and the
analysis is, is pretty critical
of the legislation, but it
doesn't say you oppose it.
Uh, but, um, but to say,
Again, I'm, I'm just trying to
get expertise from somebody who
I respect you and and your work
and what you're doing. And so
I'm trying to, I'm trying to
decide how to vote on this bill.
It, it's helpful for me to hear.
Somebody like you with your
expertise to say we support
this, we oppose this, and
Even when you say the governor
may support or oppose it.
Does the governor support this?
As the governor
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I don't
know. I, I'm not, I haven't been
read in on that.
OK
Um
And and Mr. Shelton, the other
question I think that I had
earlier is the fiscal
implications of this. So when I
was looking at the table in the
in the analysis, we're trying to
figure out what the, the
Dollars generated would be.
And um
I think we're going to assume
that this is in.
What, millions of dollars
annually, we're gonna, we're
gonna assume that that's, for
example, in fiscal year 26, it's
gonna be $80 million.
Um
Madam Chair and senator, that's
low.
Uh, we
Ran some numbers on this a
couple of weeks ago, we went a
little bit deeper into some of
our produced water reporting.
Um, and at the rate of produced
a lot of the test year, we tend
to use, um, Madam Chair and
senator is 2023. We're still a
few days away from having a
complete data set for 2024 and I
think at 2023 numbers at 5 cents
a barrel, assuming that you are
using the same sort of um fee
avoidance processes 137, which I
think we're discussing here.
Um, the number that we came to
is closer to $89 to $90 million
a year at 5 cents a barrel.
I think, I think that's what the
assumption was earlier too.
Doing, doing the math out.
Yeah
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, I was
working with the staff here,
yeah, I, I'm looking at that,
that table.
On page 3.
And
For example, uh, in the first
two columns you'll see a
reference there in parentheses
that the number there is in
millions of barrels in the far
right-hand column there's no
indication there that that's in
thousands or millions of
dollars. So if I'm, if I'm
reading this literally, it says
$80,000 a year generated.
Uh, annually, you're telling me
it's $80 million a year
generated and, and I'm just
trying to, am I reading, reading
that table wrong somehow.
Madam Chair, Senator, closer to
90 million a year by our
estimates, um, we didn't.
I'm not sure if this table is
ours or if this is sort of an
approximation from LFC.
OK. I'll, I'll spend some time,
um, studying.
Oh
Muriel's point, which again,
I'm, I'm still, I'm, I'm gonna
have to try and reconcile that.
You're telling me it's not in
the bill, it may not be in the
statute, that's what I'm always
gonna have a little bit of
trouble with trying to
understand you're telling me
because of where they're at in
the law that I've got to read
those in some kind of context
and so I'll try to do so, but,
but I, I'm a little concerned.
With the language here that says
you can't use the produce water
for any purposes other than
research. I think that's are too
limiting.
Only, only because
And elsewhere we know we, we are
using that produced water for
something other than research,
right? We're using it for
production and reuse, recycling,
and I think we all recognize
that's probably a good thing. I
think we would probably all
agree. That's a good thing.
So I'm concerned about the
language and here it says it can
only be used for research. And I
just want to make sure that in
context, that's not.
Although it reads that way,
that's not.
And, and, and if you, if that's
true.
On page 11, then the remaining
part of that section is all
surplusage, right? In other
words, if you say reduced water
should be used for research
only, then you don't have to say
that it can't be used for
agricultural or irrigation.
Or aquifer recharge or
industrial processes or
environmental or construction or
roadway or ice or dust control.
If you say it can be used for
research only, you don't have to
say all the stuff you can't use
it for. You've already said we
use for research only, right?
Madam Chair Senator Mary
respond.
If you look, Madam Chair,
senator, if you look at where
this all starts first, um, just
um.
This is um.
On page 3.
74
Uh, line 20.
This has to do with.
The duties and commission and
duties and powers of the
commission and 74-6-4 only
addresses the water quality
control Act, so I just wanted to
get to that first statement that
you said, um.
So that's all that this
pertains, which is to off oil
field use. So basically, the
amendments to the water quality
control commission, not.
Not OCD.
Water quality control
commission.
Says there's no reuse except for
in an accredited laboratory. And
this is explicit.
And the reason it's explicit on
no reuse on agriculture,
irrigation, etc. etc. on page 11
is because of the um research
that um we sent to all of you,
um, that said that this used to
be in the bill that allowed.
Um, the water quality control
commission to produce
regulations.
For
Exactly what's been crossed out
here, which is, which it says
reuse on roadways, ice, dust
control, etc. and so we want to
be explicit. No, that's not
allowed off the oil field, on
the oil field is a different
story and this story there is
that, yes, it should incentivize
um.
Produce water reuse in fracking.
To save on fresh water. That's
why that's.
Ma, I'll, I'll wrap it up, but,
but you what you, what I hear
you saying, Muriel is that that
language is produced water
should be used for research
purposes only applies only to
off-site uses, but show me where
does that say that anywhere in
the bill here or in the law.
In the law on 70-13-3.
Let me just get it to make sure
that I that page of the bill is
this? It's not in the bill, but
this is what's been set out in
70133, and it's called produced
Water jurisdiction and says if I
can.
It's very short.
This splits up those
jurisdictions. It is the
jurisdiction of the oil
conservation division of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resource Department to regulate
produced water as provided in
the oil and gas Act.
And
the water quality control
commission to regulate produced
water as provided in the Water
Quality Act and the Equality Act
says this is only for off.
Oil field.
Well, I'll I'll continue to
listen more, but, but I'm, I'm,
I'm not sure I can disassociate
the two things, and again, I
think that that's part of why
the agency analysis reaches the
same kind of conclusions that I
do, right, you're saying it's a
conflict.
Uh, repeatedly throughout the an
agency analysis by Amner itself
says that there's a conflict
here with the water quality
control condition.
WQCC.
If the bill's passed, and I'm
trying to avoid those kind of
conflicts.
I'll I'll keep trying to
reconcile that and see how I,
see how far. Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Uh, senator Pope and your expert
witnesses there.
Unfortunately, center of their
ask quite a few of my questions,
but I do need clarification
there.
Uh, whenever we're talking about
some of the.
Constituents that might be in
this produced water, one of them
that was brought up by Senator
Townsend was Mercury. Do you
realize?
Do you have any other positive
constituents that might be in
produced water that might be a
beneficial use.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm sure
there are. I mean, there's
research looking at, you know,
maybe some rare earth materials,
metals, things that we could use
and.
EV batteries, I'm sure there are
some. I, I would say.
Are there some things we use
mercury for, yes.
But mercury is also poisonous,
carcinogenic.
You don't bring a thermometer
and pour it down the sink. Those
these are toxic chemicals.
Madam Chair, it is also used in
some medicines and stuff what I
was going for was the list we
have an industry out there that
is.
Going forward with what y'all
are trying to stop right here,
it's amazing to me that y'all
aren't up to date on what has
been done because there have
been a patents already in place
and granted for the cleanup of
produced water.
And to me that's very.
Helpful because I do come from
an agricultural background and
Madam Chair.
And senator and expert
witnesses.
We do have land out there that
could be put to beneficial use
by this water that has been
cleaned up. We could also use it
whenever it is cleaned.
To
I don't know, fulfill our
obligation to the state of Texas
for the amount of water that
they, that courts have deemed
necessary that we
Give back to them.
Whenever I am
I do see the contradictory
language that has been pointed
out by several of our members
already.
Um
Madam Cheer
I too am kind of.
Whenever you are talking about.
But you can only use this
produced water for secondary
used for enhanced or secondary
oil recycled or reused at a well
or facility that is permitted by
the oil conservation division of
the Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department or for use
regulated by the water quality
Control commission that goes on
there.
But then on page 11 as senator.
Uh, Cervantes pointed out, we
are already saying we don't want
you to do that whenever.
You guys are not informed on
what has been has taken place in
the industry itself.
The clean up produced water
instead of reinjecting it or for
the use.
In the industry itself.
So the possibilities of this
water.
That might be used for other
things of benefit to all the
state, you're immediately just
shutting the door on that, and I
have a problem there, Madam
Chair.
I looked around and she was not
there, OK, Madam Cheer, I, I can
go over all this too because you
will notice on my little sticky
notes over all my page over
every analysis that I've gotten
where there is a conflict of
interest there.
Where this is already being
done.
What are we trying to do here?
Madam chair.
And senator and expert
witnesses.
On, uh, I think this is the FIR
make sure on that before I jump
off here and just.
Yes, it is the FIR.
Page 4 of it.
About the 3rd paragraph down it
says a study done by the US
Environmental Protection Agency
notes.
And I'm gonna skip on down to.
The 4th line
Say industry indicated that
unless the produced water has a
total dissolved solid
concentrations.
General, generally of less than
a few 1000 mg per liter.
Treatment using membranes such
as reverse osmosis.
Or distillation would be
necessary to generate water that
is suitable for agricultural use
or for discharge to surface
waters.
Madame Cheer and Senator and
expert witness, would you
dispute that statement that I
just read.
Madam Char I'll let my expert
respond.
Madam Chair, um, and senator,
that is what this says.
You correctly read that.
No, you correctly read that.
Are you dispute disputing Madam
Chair, and expert witness what I
just read.
Madam Chair, Senator, we, it's
coming from the EPA. We're not
disputing it.
OK, and, and I would like to let
my expert.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Um, I don't disagree with the
statement, but membranes of the
Permian Basin produced water,
which is the only place in the
state that we have a real
problem.
it's much too salty for the use
of membranes.
It likely will require the use
of membranes and distillation.
To achieve
A suitable quality treated water
for other purposes and I have
followed the research.
And um as I just explained, the
research.
Has not yet been demonstrated.
It's not there.
may be possible in the
laboratory, but it's never been
demonstrated, Madam Chair and
Senator and expert witness
whenever there has been a not
only one, but a few patents that
have already been granted for
the cleanup of produced water. I
think you might be wrong.
That's just my opinion on this,
because if they have proven that
this water can be cleaned up and
put to other use besides just in
the industry itself.
That is speaking, volumes here
yet in this particular bill
we're saying.
No, we are always, we're going
to ban it.
With agricultural use and all
the other things that are
pointed out here on page 11 of
your bill, which includes
irrigation, potable water
supplies, aquifer recharge,
industrial processes,
environmental restoration, road
construction, maintenance,
roadway ice or dust control or
other construction. We are
already stopping it before it
ever gets started before all the
facts are known on this, and I
would also like to ask.
Um, Ben Shelton,
I am, I'm reading several of
these different analysis and the
fiscal implications and senator
Cervantes is already gone over
the table on page 3.
Whenever we are dropping on down
enemy D expresses concern the
proposed changes changes.
Uh
Let's see.
It would create a conflict or
possibly negate the rulemaking
process currently done by the
water water quality control, so.
I would like to ask Mr. Shelton
if he is in agreement with that
statement on the FIR of this
bill.
Uh
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
represent energy, minerals and
natural resources, not the
environment department,
generally speaking, if you are a
midcourse and a
On a rulemaking, I think that
the best practice is typically
when a bill gets signed into
law, that it's going to impact
that rulemaking that
You basically restart it because
you're, you're operating off of
a different set of authorities
and
May, it may require that the
WQCC rulemaking has been ongoing
for a while.
Now so I can um
I can understand sentiments in
FIR that are expressing a little
frustration having to reboot
having a hard time hearing you.
Sorry, I'll try to get a little
closer.
So the short answer, Madam
Chair, as I understand it, as
not a representative of the
Environment department is that
yes, it may require them to
restart that rulemaking process.
OK, thank you very much, Madam
cheerlessly, there is another
conflict uh.
And this is coming from the uh
let me see where this is coming,
another analysis we have gotten
with this bill, Madam Chair and
senator, with this be in
conflict with the governor's
strategic water supply
legislation.
I wouldn't say it's a conflict.
I think it's a decision what we
do as a legislature.
Um, there's a strategic water
supply bill. We have a bill, uh,
we both have a.
5 cents per barrel.
And so I don't see it as a
conflict. I see it as what
decision does the body do and
what, what bill do we pass?
Keep turning this on and off.
Uh
This report says that this bill
would conflict with House Bill
137 and Miss Madam Chair and
senator, are you familiar with
House Bill 137.
Madam Chair, uh, yes, I am.
OK.
Madam Chair and.
Senator, uh, where's my next
little tab here.
I'm not gonna be redundant and
re-asking other questions.
Um
Madam Cheer and.
Senator and Mr. Shelton.
You state that you are
representing the uh the inner
EMNRD. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, and
there is an analysis here from
one of your persons that is do
the analysis on this, and under
significant issues under this
particular analysis, it says the
new fund duplicates the purpose
and applications of the
reclamation fund established in
NMSA 70-2-37 and does so without
allowing the OCD to utilize any
balances to defray the cost of
administration.
Are you in agreeance with that?
Um, Madam Chair for the
introduced bill that was our
analysis. OK.
And Madame Cheer
Madam Chair, senator.
We have heard Senate Bill 21. Do
you see that there might be a
conflict between your particular
bill and Senate bill with the
duties that are.
You may not be familiar with
that particular bill.
We have heard it in this
committee, so you should be
aware of that because you did
vote on that bill.
Correct, Madam Chair, I did. And
so once again.
There could be conflict if both
bills pass, but right now.
That's a decision of the
chamber.
Well, Madam chair, what I'm
trying to get at right now. I
appreciate the answers from you
and your expert witnesses.
But right now we do have the
technology in place to clean up
produced water if it's not going
to be reused in the industry we
have an opportunity here.
To help the whole state by
cleaning up this particular
water for municipal use.
For agricultural use or dirt
mitigation for road construction
and the list goes on and on it,
so I'm kind of confused.
With all the conflicts that I
have been reading and I will
again point to my book with all
my little sticky tubs all over
it.
Why, I do have a problem with
this particular bill. I do want
to thank Mr. Shelton for coming
in and answering some of the
questions here.
As stated by two gentlemen
sitting to my left and the one
over there on, uh, to my right
and gentleman sitting over there
on the far left, there's some
problems with this, and we're
trying to kill what we should be
working towards promoting.
Madam cheered, Senator, thank
you very much for your
responses.
Thank you, Senator Scott, for
the 2nd time.
And then is there anyone else
who wants to speak before we go
to a motion.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
We produced somewhere between 4
and 5 barrels of oil of water.
For every barrel of oil.
It's my understanding the
states.
Now producing approximately 2
million barrels.
Of oil a day.
If we reuse some of that, say.
8 million barrels of water a
day.
would be
What's needing to be.
Addressed with this nickel a
barrel.
That's plus or minus 100.
And $50 million.
A year.
That would be additional cost.
To the industry.
Uh, I'd like to circle back now
to the
Prohibition on reuse of this
water.
Under any circumstances.
Outside of the oil field.
And I believe that's what.
This
Legislation does.
So water.
In contact with.
Sedimentary rock.
Under heat and pressure.
Over millions of years.
picks up what's contained in the
rock.
And that is
What comes to the surface?
Has produced water.
Is there, is there any argument,
Madam Chair.
Senator or expert witnesses that
that is.
The exactly the case.
Madam Chair center, I would
agree with you, but
and
anything else that comes in
contact with.
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
that you, you're right, it's,
it's in contact with.
With a lot of rock.
Over a long period of time.
Dissolving some of the
chemicals.
Some of the constituents
contained in that rock.
And and is brought to the
surface.
So
I guess the question would be,
and, and it's been represented
that it's just not possible.
To clean this water up.
Or beneficial use.
Is, is that accurate? Now, is
that
Madam Chair and experts.
Is that a technical issue or an
economic issue.
Madam Chair, Senator.
I don't believe that we will
never be able to clean it. The
science is just not there. You
just brought up a point of this
water.
I, you know, uh, in the soil, in
the rock, it's absorbing
different constituents,
different analytes. It's also
absorbing different materials,
compounds, chemicals that are
used.
And fracking in the oil and gas
industry. It's a huge mix.
Included with that, you're going
to have compounds that are in
there, going to react with other
compounds and you're gonna even
have new constituents in some
cases that we don't even know
what they are.
And so
I believe that we will, we will
get there one day where we're
able to clean this up. And
that's because we have to.
This water is already here and
we have to do something to clean
it up. What we're seeing in this
bill is
The science isn't there.
And we shouldn't be using it off
of the oil and gas fields, and
we're not stopping it from being
used there.
But until the science is there
and we're able to show that this
water is safe.
For human consumption and for
our environment and for
agricultural.
Us
We are just not ready.
If that science changes soon, I,
I'm happy to see that. We, you
know, then we could use it, but
We have not seen that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair and senator,
Produced water.
Has been
Collected and contained.
In open top tanks.
Throughout the industry.
Since the beginning of time.
Each one of those tanks.
Evaporates.
About 7 ft.
Of water
Or 220 barrels out of a 15-foot
diameter tank.
Is, is, is, is this
Representation.
that that evaporation.
Contains
Enough harmful constituents.
That we should now be covering.
These water tanks?
To prevent
That evaporation.
And I'm sure senator, maybe that
is something we need to look at.
Is that causing issues with
health concerns and people who
live nearby?
We don't know,
Madam, but I'd argue that.
Just because we're doing it
doesn't mean it's safe.
Madam Char and Senator, I was
actually
A bit afraid to bring this up
cause I was afraid that's what
you might say.
I can, I can find nowhere.
In the literature.
Anywhere.
That an open top.
Produced water tank.
His caused
Any problems ever.
And I would challenge.
Anyone in this room.
Or any of the experts.
The dispute that
This
The cleanup of produced water.
Because it is accumulated.
These constituents.
In such concentration.
is purely
An economic issue.
Because the technology exists
today.
To make this water.
So clean.
That we would need to add
minerals to it.
To make it fit for human
consumption.
That
It is a technical fact.
That cannot be disputed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the answer.
Senator Townsend for the 2nd
time. Oh, I'm sorry. So we have
Senator Charlie for the first
time and then
Senator Townsend, the 2nd time,
and then Cervantes for the 2nd
time, though, Senator, we're
gonna go to Senator Charlie for
the first time and then we'll
come to you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, and thank you, Senator let
me cut in line here.
Um, Madam Chair,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this legislation forward.
I produced water currently
allowed to be used for
agriculture.
now.
Your, your question or your
statement, Senator
is, uh, Madam Chair is uh is
produced water allowed to be
used for agricultural purposes
in New Mexico right now,
Madam Madam Chair, Senator, or
no?
Madam Chair, why is that?
Madam Chair, Senator, because
it's not safe to use. I have not
seen any technology.
that cleans this water to a
safer level where it can be
used. I have not seen any
literature that shows that.
So I don't know where this
techno this fact is out there
and they can be used.
safely.
We've not seen any evidence of
that.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you,
um, and the reason I ask and
focus and hone in on agriculture
because we're specifically
addressing.
Inflation, but I'm getting to a
point around human consumption.
Madam chair, is it safe for us,
for humans to consume in any
shape or form produced water
either in its original produced
form or after it has been
treated and.
So-called
Madam Chair, Senator, I do not
believe so. I have not seen any
literature to show that.
Just the science to show that
this water is clean enough to do
that. I think just like
chemicals that we're concerned
about like PFOS, you know, it
can go into the environment.
The animals can uptake it if you
eat that meat, that can cause
serious disease and injury to
you. The same thing that
happened with uh produced water,
some of these chemicals could
cause cancer and other ailments
in your body.
Madam Chair, thank you, Senator,
why is it? Why is this
legislation important for us.
to consider right now.
Madam sure Senator, it's
important because I think as
we've laid out, we still have
remediation issues and unplugged
wells that we need to take care
of. And this basically uh
creates more funding, um, to
deal with that issue.
The second part of it is, is to
ensure
That produced water is only
being used in the oil and in oil
and gas operations and not off
of oil and gas operations in
consumption, either drinking or
in agriculture until we know
that the science is sound that
we can actually clean this
water. I want to reiterate to
everyone, we don't want to stop
the research. We want this to be
done. It has to be cleaned up.
This produced water is already
here and.
and in our state, so it must be
done. What we want to do is
protect our people, protect our
environment. We cannot
Haphazardly rushed to using
produced water and saying it's
clean when it's not and putting
our fresh water in our aquifers
at risk.
Madam Chair and senator, one
last question, what is possible
if we pass this legislation?
Chair, Senator, could you repeat
that? I'm sorry.
Madam Chair, Senator, what is
possible for constituents across
New.
Apologies. We're gonna be able
to mitigate some of these
orphaned wells, um, our hope is
that we could prevent some
blowouts. We're going to protect
public health, groundwater
contamination, um,
Of course, this also aids also
in climate change in a way with
methane emissions.
Um, and also
You know, there's talk of
economic stability. Once again,
we're not stopping.
The research and the science
with uh cleaning up produced
water because we want that to
happen. That will still happen.
But it's gonna just make sure
that the science is done in the
right way before the water is
introduced to our aquifer.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you very much. Now on to
Senator Townsend, then Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me
just follow up on that, uh,
senator. How does this piece of
legislation.
Madam Chair, uh, senator, um.
how this deals with methane is
if you have an unplugged or
orphaned well in many cases, the
methane is leaking from the
well. Our hope is by plugging
that we're decreasing that.
So, um,
Madam Chair and Senator, just
how much methane is that?
Madam Chair, Senator, I, I do
not know.
But uh.
The fact is it's methane would
be seeping out.
Just as we track our um our dump
sites when methane is produced
when those materials are
breaking down and we try to
contain and deal with those
methane releases.
So madam chair and Senator.
Based on some of the comments
that have been made, I would
I would suspect.
That some see this as an ability
to directly attack the industry
and we want to reduce.
Crude
Natural gas production.
Or increase the cost of it.
To make it less consumable by
the public, is that not correct?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, no, it
doesn't. This bill has nothing
to.
Do with uh attacking the
industry, uh.
I support the industry every
time. What this does is it's a
plan to deal with the issue of
Orphaned and abandoned wells and
ensuring that to produce water
that comes from the operations
doesn't end up.
Um, being used by consumers.
Well, there's another important
point.
If
If you look at California
waterboards today. Did you know
that California uses produced
water and agricultural today.
Madam Chair, Senator, I do not
know.
I have not heard this.
I suspect, uh, Senator, um,
more, much more investigation is
needed, but I will tell you that
there's
Several sites I invite you, any
of you to look it up on.
On your
On your apps on your phones or
laptops, and it'll show you that
California today.
Users produced water and 4 water
districts in in California.
And I would strongly
Suggested the committee that
limiting
The
The ability of entrepreneurs
across America.
Invest dollars.
Into cleaning up.
Water
Whether it's produced or not.
Where it has more benefit.
Beneficial use for society is in
our best interest, if you want
lower cost of food.
If you want more,
Abundant food available to the
people of the world.
You're gonna have to have water
and land to do it on.
Yeah.
That
statement's been made that it's,
it's bad, but I'm telling you,
California does it.
Lord knows New Mexico tried to
follow every other indication in
every other initiative that
California has picked up. Why
not this one, Senator? Madam
Chair, Senator, I have not
heard.
of California you produce water
except for.
Oil and gas operations, but I
allow my expert to comment.
And I'm sure Senator Townsend.
California, the
California prohibits produced
water reuse if they produced
water came from a well that was
fracked.
They only allow produced water.
The single most important
characteristic of determining
the hazards of produced water.
Whether or not.
Oh,
so, and the chair and uh
senator.
Are you willing to accept an
amendment to your bill that
It allows a produced water from
conventional drill wells that
are not horizontal, they are not
horizontally drilled in
practice, that water could be
used.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, I'm
actually not because I, you
know, I know you get upset about
us following the lead would be
unfriendly for this bill.
Yeah, there's uh there's several
things we could continue to
argue about, I'm sure, Senator.
I would tell you that, um,
That is my main objection to
this bill is that it is a direct
attack on the industry.
Saying that it's going to
reduce.
Uh, pipeline burst.
I, I see no.
Evidence.
To support that quite to the
contrary.
Today in New Mexico is
Almost
Impossible to get a disposal
wheel.
Permit.
I know of people that have
waited 4 and 5 years to get a
permit.
So what you're doing
Is you as all and gas production
increases.
You're causing more and more low
in existing pipes and into
existing wells.
Absolutely contrary to what I
think you want to do.
Because you said you're gonna
reduce and it's not gonna
reduce, it's going to increase.
You're gonna put more hydraulic
pressure and more flow rates on
older facilities. That's what
you're doing.
You're taking away the incentive
from any industry to go out and
and deploy capital to clean up,
produce water, to enhance food.
And uses in in
New Mexico. That's exactly
opposite of what we need to be
doing. We need to be telling
people, enhancing.
Promoting
The industry, the utilize their
capital that they have.
To accomplish
A goal that we all want.
So
Um
Madam Chair, Senator, this bill
doesn't do this bill does not do
what you say it does. It doesn't
do what California does today.
And
And
To specifically
Say, no, I'm not gonna accept an
amendment.
The fall of California.
I mean that that just uh
completely pulls back the guise
of what the initial I.
believe that we're not doing the
Mexico a service, and I think
the agencies have understood
that in their analysis. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator
Cervantes. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for allowing me a second
time. I'll try and be brief with
direct questions. Uh, and this
is probably for Mr. Shelton, but
it may be for the sponsor or
others. Right now we have a fun
referred to as the reclamation
fund that is used to uh remedy
uh abandoned wells, cap wells,
and so forth. What is the
balance in that fund right now?
Madam Chair, senator, that's a
complicated question given the
Um
Nature of, well, candidly, the
federal government.
We're not hearing. I'm sorry
it's not always the easiest
question to answer. I would say
that our annual expenditures out
of that fund are around $30
million. We spend it down pretty
quickly when we get it.
Um, so
Uh, I don't have a, I don't have
a balance for you today, but it
is, I anticipated somewhere
gonna be at the moment between
probably $5 and about $20
million.
The balance in that fund between
5 and 20 million. That's
probably what we're sitting on,
Madam Chair and senator, that's
probably about close to what
we're sitting on today. Again,
we tend to spend it fairly
quickly once we get the dollars
appropriated in there. And where
do, where do the funds for that,
uh, come from now.
The primary source of dollars
going into the reclamation fund
is from the oil and gas
conservation tax, uh, we get
about 10.5% of the outlay from
the oil and gas conservation
tax, uh, every year directed
into the fund.
So, so how much is that
generated in that funding
annually?
Uh, that, that, that oil and gas
conservation tax generates
around, I think the last full
year we have numbers for about
$16 million. 16, yes.
I'm, I'm, I'm struggling with
this bill a lot, Senator, you
probably gathered that, but I'm
trying to approach it from an
economic standpoint for a moment
too, which is you're right went
back and checked the tables and
the numbers. So we're generating
now $80 million to that fund.
Uh, and
It's a non-reverting fund so
we're gonna be generating $80
million by estimates here every
year. We're only able to spend
maybe
1015 $20 million a year for
reclamation projects right now
and those result, there's a
finite number, I assume of
contractors and people that can
go back and, and spend the
money.
And if it's a non-reverting fund
my my concern is this, which is
um.
A couple of things. There's
really two points. One is, do
you really need 5 cents per
barrel. Is is the tax somehow
related to the need.
In, in my mind, right? Um, I, I
don't think it ever makes sense
to tax people or just because we
can. I think it makes sense to
tax for a purpose and if the
purpose or the need is not $80
million a year, maybe the tax
should be less, a thought.
Number one, but even more
important to me is, uh, we
already have the fund, we
already have a source of
revenue, we're already using it
to do things we need to do,
which is to cap abandoned wells
and and and do remedial things
in my mind, it seems to me the
money that's generated from
this should be put to a direct
association with the produced
water itself. In other words,
I'd like to see the tax on this
center going to clean up
research uh of the produced
water itself instead it's really
being used tax on produced water
for an entirely different
purpose, right, which is to cap
and remedy wells, which has to
be done and needs to be done,
and we should fund that and we
do, we do fund that. We do have
a fund that exists for that now
and that's why I asked what is
the balance in that fund now? Is
that, is that
A fun, uh, too small and it's it
holding us back from cleaning
things up, but I could see a
point, I hope, where we get to,
we clean up all the abandoned
wells, and we're still going to
be taxing this and having an
enormous amount of money, it's
$80 million a year that we won't
need and we'll be back here
trying to figure out what we're
gonna do with all this money
that's in this fund. I'd rather
really see the fund being used
for something related to clean
up of the produced water itself
or or treat the produce water or
research it and something that's
related to the.
acts as opposed to using the tax
completely for completely really
unrelated purpose. I, I know
somebody can make an argument
that it's a related purpose, but
it's gonna be a stretch.
To persuade me that there's
really a good, a good nexus
between the two, so I, I think
you've answered my questions
really, but I want to know what
that fund is and Senator, I, you
know, I would just encourage
you, uh, again, I'm struggling
with this bill, but
Uh, I'm not sure that the tax
amount is, it seems excessive
really for the ability to absorb
the cause, and if it's a
non-reverting fun, we're just
gonna end up with another one of
these huge funds the money just
sitting there and, and that's
probably not.
I'd rather use it for a
different purpose. So I'll
struggle with your, I'll
struggle with your bill a little
bit. I know the finest people
will probably ask a lot of the
same questions, I assume over
there and um.
I know this is not the Finance
Committee, Madam Chair, but it's
hard to disassociate my mind
from the economics and the
finances of, of this, of this
initiative. So thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Sitting here listening that I, I
appreciate what Senator
Cervantes said.
And I think I'm looking around
and I think he is the only other
legislator that might be in tune
to this.
Because it was either in 2007
and 2008 under the Richardson
administration, I thought we put
forth a fund that would help New
Mexico Tech.
On this particular issue that
we're talking about right now,
the cleanup and the research on
produced water.
And it could have been lighter
than that. I'm really not sure
I've slept since then.
But if that's the case, why
aren't we going back to find out
what the technology or the
remediation that New Mexico Tech
has come up with.
And I don't know if Mr. Shelton
would be.
Up to date on what has happened
over at New Mexico Tech.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm afraid
I can't help you there. I'm so I
can respond to that, um.
Inim water and natural resources
uh committee had a meeting in
Socorro this last summer, and
they do have a produced water
clean.
I'm getting the name of the
You're wrong, but they have a
bureau that's specifically
working on that topic. Thank
you.
And Madam Turer, that's.
That's something that I think we
need to have a report on.
To see what strides they have
made in cleaning this up, but
like I said, industry is.
Working through industry to make
sure that this produced water.
Will be potable for humans
consumption.
Or agriculture and all the other
things that we have noted here.
I'd just like to be reminded
again what New Mexico Tech has
come up with, Madam Chair, thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator Pope to uh
close your closing comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
really enjoyed the debate. It's
great being in a hot seat for,
you know, about 2 hours, 15
minutes, and I enjoyed myself.
Um
I, we will always take the
comments from folks and some of
them were were constructive as
well. Um, this is really to deal
with the issue.
Of abandoned orphan wells and
protecting our water. Uh, this
is not an attack on the
industry. Um,
Chairman Cervantes, I also
respect what you're saying,
looking at what that tax is, um,
and while this doesn't directly
deal with the money going to
produce water. It's for us, it's
also addressing the fact that
some of these orphan wells and
pipelines in some cases have
burst with the.
water. So that's kind of the tie
in, but I do understand your
concern to look at.
in there.
Um, with that, Madam Chair, um.
clothes and we're at the will of
the committee.
Thank you very much, Senator
Cedilla Lopez. I move the do
pass.
Uh, there is a motion to table
that is non-debatable.
And the secretary will please
call the roll on the tabling
motion.
And Charlie.
Charlie, no. Then.
And herself, yes, and her
Hamlet.
Pope, no, Senator Scott.
Scott, yes, thenard Townsend.
1000, yes, Sandi Lopezonics.
No.honics, Senator Cervantes to
explain his book.
I'm, I'm, I posed the tabling
motion because I do think this
is a discussion that should go
to finance, and I hear the
sponsor willing to maybe be a
little more thoughtful about how
the money is going to be used
and the amount. Again, it's uh
you know, 5 cents a barrel kind
of sounds like it's pulled out
of the, you know, what I'm gonna
say next, uh, and, and we do
that around here a lot these
days, which is 10 million sounds
right, 20 million sounds right.
We're just kind of making up
numbers and pulling them out.
There's no logical thought here
in terms of the need, right? And
there, there is a need, clearly,
and I'm reminding, uh, reminded
again to.
Senator Sadil Lopez, we didn't
like this, uh, 5 years ago we
saw these problems 5 years ago.
Here we are, and, and uh let's
clean up the water, let's use
the money that you're gonna
generate from this deal with the
water, not to cap wells. We've
got another, uh, procedure in
place for that. We've got a fund
for that. We got a method for
that, and if that's not fun
enough, let's put more money
into that initiative as well
too, but I don't see conflating
the two things. They, they seem
like they should be
disassociated, so I hope you'll,
you'll decide what the need is
and the tax may be much less
and.
industry is probably still never
going to support it, but at
least it would be logical to me,
as opposed to just kind of very
arbitrary, which right now this
is pretty arbitrary.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. The um
Motion to table failed uh 3 yes,
6 no. We are back on a motion
center serio Lopez. Uh, thank
you. I renew my motion to, to um
Or do pass on the bill as
amended on Bill's the number.
178 as amended.
Thank you. Is there a second?
There is a motion in a second.
With the secretary please call
the roll.
Cervantes
Yes.
Yes, and to explain my vote.
Senatoria Lopez to explain her
vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I took
up the challenge to um that
Senator Scott level to uh.
To look at um.
Hazards from these open open pit
or whatever uh open.
What they called?
Um
Yes, and what I found here was
that a study that was conducted
in 2018, um, found 9 oil and
gas.
Um, extraction workers, uh, were
died.
And 11 of them were
hospitalized.
Um, and that they have, they
were defined by case type.
And 4 workers were working the
of the people who the fatalities
or workers were working with
produced waters. 3 workers were
working with crude crude oil and
one with flowback if you want
so, Madam Chair, I just rose to
the challenge and there is a
health hazard hazard from
produced water. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. If you want to share
that with people, that'd be
great, but we're gonna move on,
so by a vote of 6, yes, 3 nos.
Your uh en bill 178 as amended
has passed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members.
To
OK, Senator Brantley.
I hope you were inspired by our
discussion.
They came in late yesterday.
Are they?
OK, so let's keep going, um, I
believe we can, it's a long
bill, but let's see if we can
get this done by noon.
Um
Now
Senator, is your
Um, and welcome to conservation.
Is your amendment
Strictly administrative except
for number 3.
Yes, ma'am. Madam Chairman, it
is. This is an amendment that we
had reached an agreement with
with the beekeepers that
addresses the registration of
commercial apiaries, commercial
aviators, not private.
No, ma'am.
OK, so could I have a motion to
adopt for discussion the
amendment.
0883.
What?
I
Thank you.
Is there anyone who has a
comment about the amendment.
Is there anybody in the audience
in support of or opposed to this
amendment.
The amendment only.
Yes, please come forward.
There's a handheld mic.
Coming.
Please introduce yourself.
I am Adam Chair and esteemed um
senators on the committee. My
name is Melanie Kirby. I serve
as the extension educator and
pollinator specialist at the
Institute of American Indian
Arts. I'm also a professional
queen bee breeder, and I've had
my farm here in New Mexico for
over 20 years. Um, I'm standing
up in support of the amendment
for the agreement that was made
with the beekeepers. Thank you
very much. OK. Is this on the
amendment, Pam? OK, briefly,
please. Yeah, Madam Chair,
committee members, New Mexico
Food and Agriculture Policy
Council.
fully supports this amendment
and the bill itself. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anybody
online for the amendment?
OK.
Sorry.
That was me, uh, nobody is
online.
This amendment. So, uh,
committee members, any
discussion or opposition to the
amount I'm gonna have the
secretary show all those
present.
Uh, at this time, uh, in support
of the amendment.
Onto Senator Brentley, onto the.
Longbill
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. This is a this
is a large bill, but it is also
very straightforward. A Senate
Bill 214 updates 11 different
acts at the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture has
administrative and enforcement
powers and duties over.
Um, as you know, the New Mexico
Constitution places NMDA under
the control of the Board of
Regents within New Mexico State
University, one of the crucial
ways that this department serves
its constituents is by
periodically reviewing the
statutes and the fee structures,
which is the purpose of this
bill.
So specifically in this bill, it
addresses the need to update
plant protections.
Be
fertilizer, pecan buyer's
licensure, commercial fees, egg
grading weights and measures,
the way masters and all of which
come under regulatory authority
of the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture. There are 11
different acts in here, and I
have um I have with me today the
Secretary of Agriculture, Mr.
Jeff Whitty, who will very
briefly go over the 11 different
sections of what this act is
updating.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, madam.
Well, this is a long bill 89.
I've never brought an 89 page
bill anywheres.
What we have put together is a
bill that cleans up a lot of
statute and, and most of the
pages are on.
For functionary uh.
cleanups, um, that the
legislative council service
likes to do, but let me go in
quickly with what we do.
Pesticide Control Act, this, uh,
what we're doing with that is,
uh, adding sections that will
fulfill the environmental
Protection Agency requirements
regarding the, the uh uh code of
federal regulations sections to
meet examination requirements
for pesticide applicators. So
that's a cleanup and in addition
to keep us in compliance with
our EPA at the state level.
Um
And I'm gonna go really quick
and if you all have any
questions please don't go quick.
This is a long bill. We want to
understand it and see if we're
in agreement or if it's
controversial. Thank you Thank
you, Madam Chair. And Section
1020, the Plant Protection Act,
the New Mexico Plant Protection
Act protects consumers by
preventing the spread of plant
pest and diseases, and again in
in this section we are doing
some cleanup and and uh a little
bit of additions, but sex
specifically, I'll look at
section.
12, we are amending 765-15
inspection of nurseries. It
repeals the department's
requirement to uh issue
inspection certificates for
businesses following
inspections.
And, and primarily the reason
we're doing that is because we
can inspect and as fast as
products are moving these days,
they're out the door. So even
our inspection certificates and
we can still give those if the
nursery wants them, but it
doesn't do the nurseries any
good.
Um, and again we are updating
and all throughout, let me just
say all throughout, we are
updating our fee caps. Many of
these fee caps have not been
changed since the 70s and, and
we're not raising fees, we have
to go through a
Uh, rulemaking process that
where we hold hearings across
the state. And then we uh take
that to the Nimacy border
regions, what I call the border
of agriculture, uh,
affectionately and they would.
Provide any final approvals or
or so that's, that's really the
biggest thing in the uh uh
nursery act, uh.
Uh
When I moved to.
the
Be act and you just heard the,
the, uh, amendment that has been
adopted, um, but we're cleaning
up some of the aspects of that
that don't work with the current
commercial bee industry and uh
and I think with this addition,
we have the ability then to uh
protect any.
Uh
Commercial apiaries and frankly,
uh.
Non-commercial Apis from we have
the ability to inspect out of
state folks that are bringing
their bees in because of the the
uh transitory nature of of
beekeeping.
And in New Mexico is is what we
what the beekeepers consider as
a clean bee state.
And so a lot of folks like to
Bring their bees and park them
here for
for what section are the bes
here
are section 21-30. Thank you.
I see page 24 to 25.
Yes.
Go ahead. All right, and then we
go to the fertilizer Act,
Section 31-45.
And again, there we are updating
the definitions, uh, and
registration process, we are.
Taking out, um,
Any reference to soil
conditioners?
And the reason for that will be
the next bill that follows, uh,
Senator Boone's bill.
Uh, there's a bill that, that,
uh.
Where we we call it the
beneficial Substances Act. It's
a new product. It's new products
that are on the market, um, that
have been.
We are also proposing new
requirements for submitting
tonnage reports quarterly,
really cleaning that up so that
everybody is clear as to when
they have to submit their their
reports.
Section 46-49, the pecan buyer's
Licensing Act.
Um
That was an act that was passed
a few years ago, and there's
been we're we're moving it from
section 60 to section 76,
recompiling it. And the reason
for that is all of our statutes
are in the 76 sections, and when
this bill was originally passed,
it was in the 60 section, so.
Needless to say, some of our
folks that that are regulated
have a hard time finding it in
section 60. So if they bring it
to section 76, everybody will be
able to understand what their
requirements are.
And section 50-51, the
commercial feed Act.
Um
And these are some of our oldest
acts, uh, essentially all we're
doing in that section is
updating the fee caps.
Section 52-55, the egg grading
Act.
And Claire we're clarifying
languages and adjusting the fee.
Section 5670, the weights and
Measures Act.
Again, we're making
clarifications in the definition
section.
And we're repealing one of the
unique things that used to
happen at the Department of
Agriculture when our petroleum
inspectors would be inspecting
gas pumps. They also had the
ability to fix said gas pump.
There was not a service
establishment anywhere in the
state of New Mexico. Well, the
service entities have formed and
and there's private businesses
that now do that. So a few years
ago, I, we stopped uh all of our
inspectors from fixing basically
competing with private industry
and fixing these pumps and so
originally that required our
inspectors to be bonded for any
of the repair work that they
were doing.
We're not doing that anymore and
we have no plans to ever do that
in the future. We're repealing
the section on bonds and then uh
cleaning up the authority for
the uh the uh registered service
establishments and 70 section
7175 of the Wamaster Act, same
thing, we're cleaning up, uh,
some of the, the language and.
Uh, raising the fee caps.
Section 76-80, the petroleum
products Standard Act.
Um,
Again, we're cleaning up.
Uh, some of the language and
cleaning up some of the language
around service technicians. We
are uh.
Repealing several sections, um,
uh, and, uh.
Uh, Article 17 standards and uh
weights and measures. There's a
section 57, 1716 hindering or
obstructing officers and
penalties. Article 17 whites and
measures, uh, impersonation of
an officer and penalty.
Um
The, the way Master Act, the
bond that was required, as I
mentioned earlier.
Um
Section chapter 76, 76 4 15.
The public pest management
consultant.
We're taking that away, um.
And it's not like we're reducing
their ability to do that. They
just don't, it's it's changing
the licensing requirements.
Um
The, the, in the nursery area,
the inspection before sale,
inspection certificates and
location of a apiaries in the,
in the BA is is being changed
and, and one note, um,
Chapter 76, 76-5-1 is a repeal
and that that that statute gave
county commissioners the ability
to prohibit the coddling moth
and other worms and insects from
destructive being destructed to
fruit.
When the legislature passed the
test.
Control a
Years ago that made that act
irrelevant. And by the way, that
act was passed in 1898.
I think Madam Chair, there's a
brief summary of the changes,
um, so Mr. Whitty and Senator,
um, Senator Cervantes and I have
had a discussion about not just
this bill, but other bills.
When you have a bill like this,
we really need a handout that
tells us the section that we
have in our bill, not you're
going by statute that does not
relate to the pages and the
numbers in our bill.
So that
Any committee member could be
looking at that, and you're
going to judiciary after this.
And while we might look
favorably upon the needed uh
changes, you really need
something very clearly spelled
out.
Page 50, this section does this.
So please keep that in mind for
your next committee.
So, uh, I'm gonna go to the
audience. We have an amended
bill. How many people are here
to support this amended bill.
Please raise your hands.
OK one
To
345.
How many in the audience are
here to oppose this.
How many are online to support.
One didn't support anybody
opposed.
OK, great. So let's have the
supporters come forward.
And please uh be clear about why
you are supporting this.
Versus I support this.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Pam Roy. I'm here
representing Firm to Table in
New Mexico Food and Agriculture
Policy Council.
We are in full support of this
bill. It is a cleanup bill for
the Department of Agriculture or
Department of Agriculture is
taking on really honestly over
the last few years and this year
and be and moving forward.
Building its um programs, almost
doubling its programs with
healthy soils program, New
Mexico grown programs, um, the
approved supplier program, we're
hoping for a water efficiency
grant program as well. Um, so
it's, it's time for the cleanup
and we look forward to your
passage of this, Madam Chair,
Secretary, Committee members,
uh, my name is Laura Riley. I'm
with Gavilan Solutions. Gavin
represents a group of large
landowners encompassing.
over 1.5 million acres of land
in New Mexico. We're here to
support the NMDA on
administrative issues and
updated fees and bondings to
what is the current economic
situation. Additionally, the
clean up language of weights and
measures section of this law
more closely reflects how the
practice are currently in place
on ground. It's also important
to my, my, uh, clients.
Who are users of pesticides and
fertilizers that the state and
federal laws are in sync and,
and that we're able to, to
minimize our record keeping and
reporting systems and make sure
they're they're in an accurate
way. So, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee,
Kelly Faja I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico um New Mexico
landed Livestock Bureau. We
expressed strong support for
Senate Bill 214. The bill
represents a significant step
forward in modernizing the
operation of the Mexico
Department of Agricultural,
which is instrumental in
promoting, regulating and
enhancing our state's
agriculture. By introducing a
penalty system for regulatory
violations, increasing fees and
fine caps, directing penalties
towards the state school fund,
SB 214
s the agricultural sector meets
new standards and
responsibility. This legislation
not only enforces compliance but
does so while contributing to a
broader social purpose. It is
pivotal for ensuring that New
Mexico's agricultural practices
are environmentally sound,
economically viable and
beneficial to all stakeholders
involved. We ask for your
support. Thank you.
I'm Melanie Kirby again, um,
extension educator at the
Institute of American Indian
Arts and Professional beekeeper.
I'm also um a member of the New
Mexico Pollinator Protection
Plan working group, and I also
serve on the USDA National
Agriculture Research Extension
Education and Economics Advisory
Board. I do stand in support of
this. One of the things that I
really just wanted to bring up
was um a lot of gratitude to not
only Secretary Witty but also to
Brad Lewis to Candy Sweetzer, to
all the staff at NMDA.
really worked with the
beekeepers to reevaluate the
situation. So, um, yeah, thank
you. We stand with support.
Thank you. Online we have Terry
Kate's supporting.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cates, and I'm
president and state policy
affairs representative for New
Mexico Pest Management
Association. Today I'm here on
behalf of our association to ask
you to support this bill. This
bill will greatly benefit our
industry as well as New Mexicans
and our environment. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you very much. Is there
any opposition once again.
In the room
Is there any opposition on OK,
the first person I have is
centered Lopez.
Anybody else?
OK.
And I would refer people to the
FIR page 4 and 5. Thank you.
Um
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair. I
like clean up bills. I think
that they're, you know, we, we
should do it every once in a
while, uh, to look at what we're
doing and um and make
modifications accordingly so I'm
favorably inclined, um, I just
had a couple of questions about
this rulemaking, um.
Authority. Why is it in the
board of regents?
Of ennoSU manager.
I'm gonna defer to Secretary
Whitty in a in a minute because
because uh the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture
resides under Secretary Whitty
reports directly.
Madam Chair.
Senator Si Lopez, so the
original constitution of the
state of New Mexico, uh, one was
crafted in 1910, the one that
was finally adopted in 1911,
created the State Department of
Agriculture under the border
regions of New Mexico A&M
University.
Um, all the way back in those
days and so as such, the border
regions are governing body.
They, uh, so when I ever I have
a rulemaking, what my process
is, is that we
The staff will, will meet with
Consumers, the affected
industry, that affected every
anybody who's affected and then
we'll go through.
Special rulemaking.
I make a recommended decision to
the board of Regents at New
Mexico State University. They
have at an open board meeting,
they will uh take testimony if
there's any and do.
Proper consideration and then
it's up to them as to whether
the the role is, is uh approved
or not approved.
Madam Chair, do they comply with
the administrative procedures
Act in the rulemaking.
Madam Chair, Senator Si Lopez,
absolutely.
Um
I guess it's the and I've read
the Constitution. I don't
remember that, um.
And I've read this constitution
quite a few times, um, I think
that that's weird.
Because um.
now normally when you have a
rulemaking, you want individuals
with expertise in the area and
with Regents.
They have
Their expertise is in education.
Um, and not necessarily
agriculture. Madam Chair, do
they mostly just rubber stamp
your proposals, madam, Lopez,
um.
There, there are many times when
they, they ask really good
questions. Remember they're
consumers as well. And so
they're looking at it from that
perspective as well. Uh, we have
typically had some member of the
border regions, a member or
maybe two,
at times or or even more who are
members of the agricultural
community and so they are very
in tune with what's going on.
Um, I've had board meetings
where the hearings before the
board have been um
Quite interesting and the
questions have been really good
and and and appropriate, um.
So I would say typically,
typically it's a, it's a good
approval process, but it's never
a rubber stamp. There there's a
lot of good dialogue.
Madam Chair, have they ever
rejected any of your proposed
rules?
Um, Madam Chair Lopez not well I
have been in this capacity.
Madam chair, so you're, uh, the,
the new authority that's going
to be given to the NMSU to
design a system of
administrative penalties.
For your use, your department's
use in uh.
In violations of state laws.
Um
You know, which, which the
department enforces, that's,
that's what it said here. So
this new authority.
Um, do you perceive any kind of
uh
Again, I think that the
structure is weird.
So you will be proposing
something to the port of
Regents.
That will give you authority.
And the, I just think that it
the regions don't have the same
accountability.
Um, to the stakeholders.
In this in the same way that um.
That other commissions have.
And, and, and I, I really
appreciate, Madam Chair, when,
when it was stated that um you
have meetings with stakeholders
and you go through that process,
which is, is good. I mean,
that's an excellent, excellent
hallmarks of a rulemaking
proceeding, um.
But I just think that there's a
disconnect from having the board
of Regents.
Set up something so specific.
Um, and review your work. I just
feel like that that
accountability piece isn't
there, however, it's
unconstitutional, it, it because
it's in the Constitution,
there's not much we can do about
it, um, cause I was gonna
suggest, you really want.
You know, but then I was trying
to think where is the
commission, where is the where
is the, the decision making
body, um, and
the decision making body is an
MSU regions.
Madam to remember that when we
confirm uh.
Nominees to the Board of
Regents.
Mad, Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
a couple of, couple of remarks,
um.
So the penalty authority that
we're proposing is a is
standardizing a uniform policy
across our statutes, our laws
and regulations we have.
Some authority in certain areas
and we don't have any in other
areas and we're cleaning this
up, but what I what I'm
proposing is that we would have
a framework for a standard for
the entire department across all
of our statutes. So it's not
really a new authority. It's
something that the regents have
been dealing with for
Quite some time now, uh, over
time. So, they have determined
penalties? Yes, Madam Chair,
yes,
and then, and then to the, to
the degree of, of the regent's
responsibilities, um.
You are correct in in that when
you're going when they're going
through the confirmation
process, a lot of times our
regions will receive a number of
questions about, you know, their
knowledge of, of agriculture or
the Department of Agriculture or
or whatnot.
Um
And, and
I don't along those lines is,
um,
This seems like a a lot of
authority, the uh repeat
provides a willful repeated
refusal to correct a violation
or pay penalties is a 4th degree
felony may be punished by a term
of up to 18 months or up to
$15,000 fine. That's a lot of
enforcement authority, um.
Is that new to you as well,
Madam Chair, or do you already
have that authority? Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Lopez, we
have
Some of that already in our
statutes.
Um
So we were trying we have Madam
Chair, we have never.
Achieve that level of penalty.
You, you know, the, the way that
we have operated the Department
of Agriculture the way that we
are a compliance assistance
department.
We want to keep the environment
clean. We want to keep the
consumer protected. When we find
somebody that's out of
compliance, we work with them
first to get them back into
compliance, get them the
training, get them what tools
they need to be in compliance.
I, I would say that probably 95%
of the people that we regulate
never need a regulation. There's
about 3% that need to be
reminded in about 1 to 2% that
have to be
You know, reminded a little
harder.
Um
That's the best way that I have
seen to.
To deal with issues is, is most
of the people we regulate want
to do it right, and we help them
get there.
Madam Chair, could you give me
an example of somebody who.
Just hypothetically, you said
you, you indicated you probably
have never done it at least in
your experience, an example of
someone who would be um.
As wilful and repeated refusal
to correct.
So what, what does somebody like
that look like, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, if you don't mind,
I'm gonna ask one of my handle
that.
Madam Chair, I've got 3 of my
division leaders here today who
represent various parts of the
bill and uh um.
Come on up.
So I'm gonna defer to this is
Brad Lewis. He's a division
director for A and Environmental
Services.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, Brad Lewis, New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, I
think probably the one that uh
comes forth.
First is pecan buyers. So pecan
buyers in the state bringing in
pecans from Oklahoma that have a
pecan pest in it that we do not
have, uh, our.
Ability to penalize them, uh, is
rather limited, and I think this
gives us a little bit more
authority and the uh immediate
action to take care of these
things that we've had before and
so, you know, somebody bringing
those type of insects and that
uh impacts in the industry
almost immediately is probably
one example I could provide at
that point in time.
Madam Chair, I, I just think a
felony is a lot of authority for
an agency, um, myself, um, I, I
agree with substantial fines and
everything, but a felony
requires so much due process and
so much, uh, it just seems, um,
and when, when you can when you,
uh,
Find that somebody
Violated this and committed a
felony, then what's the next
step, Madam Chair? Is it
referred to the courts for
sentencing or how does it work,
manager?
Madam Senator Lopez, that would
be, it would be referred next to
the, the district attorney.
And so the district attorney
does the prosecution. You just
make the finding, then you, you,
Madam Chair, that's correct.
And that's in your rules. Yes.
I haven't read the rules that
that cover the Department of
Agriculture, I'm very supportive
of the Department of
Agriculture's work. I like the
cleanup bill. I was not aware
of, of this, and it just seems a
little strange, um, but given
that you said.
And I'm gonna look at that
provision of the Constitution.
That's so interesting and I'm
sure it was back in the day
where they just didn't have the
expertise in the territory, um,
and so needed to find it
somewhere and found it in a in
an educational institution,
Madam Chair, what senator Lopez,
the stories that's been passed
down to me over time through
through the historians has been
that the founding fathers of the
state of New Mexico saw the
conflicts between the State
Department and marketing areas
and the land grant institutions
of other uh experiment stations.
and and teaching and they did
not want that in New Mexico.
They wanted all the agricultural
entities governed by the single,
a single entity in this case the
border regions of New Mexico
State University so that there
would not be those conflicts,
and it's worked out in my
opinion really well over the
years. We are, if we look at the
size of our agency, we are
relatively, um, primarily
because I have resources down
the street at the College of
Agriculture across the street at
the College of Engineering
across the street the other way
at the water resources.
Research Institute. So those are
staff members that I don't have
that I have access to that I'm
not having to pay full-time
salaries for all the time and,
and when I see the Washington
State Department of Agriculture,
they hire their own ag
economist, um, that are
typically in university.
Because of, of different
entities.
I think overall and, and I'm
very proud of our Department of
Agriculture. I've been there a
long time, but
And and so I'm not, I am
tainted, but I'm not tainted
that way. I just see it as an
efficiency that the state of New
Mexico has enjoyed for since
statehood.
Thank you, Madam Chair, the
wisdom of our founding fathers.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Sudia Lopez
turn off your mic.
Senator Ham.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mine's
more of a comment and maybe some
clarification. Um, I'd like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward and thank the
secretary because it's always
nice.
to see State departments located
below Socorro.
Because we often get ignored
down in southern New Mexico.
And so I'm really grateful for
all the work that the department
has been doing, uh, on the New
Mexico State University campus.
And I do want to clarify that
New Mexico State University is
the original land grant
institution in New Mexico.
Um, and given the other
departments that uh the
secretary had mentioned, it is a
perfect fit to have that at New
Mexico State University. I
understand some of the concerns.
However, seeing the work that
the department is doing in the
area, uh, especially in an area
that is highly, highly.
agriculture. Um, I think it is
appropriate for them to.
Under New Mexico State piece
that is uh included in the
faculty and staff there. Um, and
so, uh, uh, I'm always grateful
and it was really lovely to I
wanted to see the facility that
we got to see the ribbon cutting
on uh that is going to be a
state of the art facility there
as well. Um, that's gonna
address all sorts of issues.
Um, president, former interim
president Torres was telling me
about the butchering.
Uh, department, the, the new lab
there that I'm very happy about.
Uh, because then we don't have
to send our products out of
state and give other people our
money. Um, I like to keep it
here and it's also a great
training opportunity, which I
know that we have a shortage of
butchers. And so, um, I, I'm
very appreciative of that. And,
and along with Senator Brantley,
we funded the Healthy Food
financing initiative, uh, worked
with Pam Roy and a number of
folks, uh, on that, and that
continues to help small farmers
uh have access to the resources
that they are not able to get
access to uh at the federal
level, so.
in the past have supported the
pollinator initiatives as well,
and very grateful and love that
you uh focus on queen bees
because that's.
That's the madam of them all,
um, and so we, we need that. Um,
and so I just really, I stand in
support of this and, and one of
the things that I really
appreciate about cleanup bills
is because we have a tendency of
getting in our own way and
creating
Instances where we are expecting
departments to really work
efficiently and yet we're
continuing continuously.
Uh, expecting them to walk
through mud to do that.
And so I feel that this is an
opportunity to kind of reduce
that mud field that you have to
work through, um, in order to
serve so many of the different
areas that are so critical,
especially to our part of the
state, the southern New Mexico,
so I'm just really great
secretary, um, and I'm.
My comments.
OK, so, um, I'd like to offer
you uh a reiteration of
identifying section by section
for the next committee.
I have um
Heartburn, about uh senator
about creating felony, it just,
there's long lasting
consequences about that, so I
just kept concerned and then the
third item here.
I I wanna, I'm looking at the
fee increases.
And some are 3 and 4-fold.
And they don't look high.
With an amount of money, but it
is a multiple.
Uh, increase, and I'm looking at
the FIR. So those are my only
comments. What is the pleasure
of this committee?
I'd like to 2.
There is a pass.
Oh, I'm sorry, yes, there is a
motion uh for Du pass as amended
in a 2nd.
Senators and Senator Hamlin.
Could the secretary please call
the roll.
Then, then a Charlie.
Sanel tablet
table, yes, Senator Pope. Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And Senator Townsend to uh
explain his story.
Successful for so long.
And I would just hope that the
um MIDI and the members
legislature would
Look at that.
And think about applying it to
maybe PED and some other
organizations where we might
have great
Success if we had some
continuity.
And not a revolving door that is
a politically motivated.
Thank you very much. Happy to
support.
Thank you very much, and this
has a unanimous vote, so
congratulations, Senator
Brantley. We are going to recess
my apologies to all the
remaining sponsors, but we said
