done as many bills as possible
this morning.
So today I'm here for Senate
Bill 37 strategic water reserve
and
I have an amendment to put on
the bill.
Madam Chair, do you move the
amendment?
I would move the amendment uh
for discussion. 230466.1 for
discussion.
OK, the amendment is uh is open
for discussion. Would you like
to explain the amendment?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, on page 5 line
3.
After depletion.
Let's see, page 5, line 3.
I'm on the wrong page.
Line 3, insert a comma after
depletion.
On page 5 line 5.
Strike reserve and insert in
lieu thereof.
The purpose of this paragraph,
which I know might be taken out
in another committee.
And on page 6.
Lines 8 and 9.
Strike
Whether the acquisition will
provide.
And insert in lieu thereof
potential shall consider
potential supplementary
benefits.
And Madam Chair, this is a uh an
amendment that was requested by
the working group and approved
by the uh department.
So, uh, I can stand for
discussion on the amendment.
Are there any questions on the
amendment?
Any comments on the amendment?
Is there any opposition to the
amendment? The amendment is, is
done.
Oh
If, if, uh, it's unanimous, uh,
you just have to identify to
the.
Yeah, we don't do that usually.
Yeah, it's not been our custom.
As long as we have 4.
All right.
Um, so, Madam Chair, would you
explain your bill so let's go
back to the entire bill.
The strategic water reserve is
not the strategic water supply.
The strategic water supply is a
governor initiative, the
strategic water reserve is a
program that was championed by
Representative Joe Stelle, and
enacted in 2005 with broad
bipartisan support.
And Representative Joe Ste was a
champion of water and trying to
protect water and looking to the
future of water here in our
state.
The strategic water reserve is
an important and effective water
management tool overseen by the
interstate overseen by the New
Mexico Interstate stream
Commission. It allows the state
to acquire in-stream water
rights through lease, purchase,
or donation to benefit
interstate compacts or to
support threatened or endangered
species, including to prevent
the listing of new species.
Forward thinking legislators
recognized nearly 20 years ago,
that spending money today to
prevent costly litigation and
other costly conflicts is the
fiscally responsible thing to
do.
This bill builds on the
knowledge gained from 20 years
of operations of the.
The strategic water reserve and
makes 3 key improvements.
Setting the reserve up to
successfully meet the water
challenges of today and the
years ahead.
Number one, it creates a
non-reverting fund for any
future appropriations to the
strategic water reserve.
This bill does not appropriate
new money.
It simply creates an account in
which current or future
appropriations can be deposited.
Currently, appropriations for
the strategic water reserve are
simply included in the
interstate stream commission's
general funding, which can make
it harder for the agency to
track them.
It also means that
appropriations can revert in a
single year.
Even though it takes multiple
years for the agency to complete
the research, negotiation, and
permitting needed to lease or
purchase a water right.
The bill sets a limit on this
fund of 15 million.
Any money over this limit will.
Revert to the general fund.
This limit is in place to ensure
that this fund is not in place
to amass great sums of money but
rather to allow sufficient funds
to be available for the time
required.
It also adds a purpose for the
strategic water reserve to allow
the interstate stream
commission.
To acquire water for aquifer
recharge or reducing depletions.
This purpose is in addition to
the two existing purposes for
which water rights may be
acquired.
To assist with interstate
compact compliance or endangered
species recovery.
Enhancing aquifer recharge via
in stream flows aligns with the
established uses of the
strategic water reserve.
Aquifer recharge is an effective
way to protect endangered
species and in a drier future
healthy aquifers will become
even more important for
sustaining rivers and habitats.
Maintaining the connection
between rivers and aquifers
achieves multiple benefits for
New Mexicans.
No more than 25% of the money
expended over any five-year
period may be spent on this
purpose.
It also allows Madam Chair, the
Interstate stream commission to
consider supplementary benefits
when prioritizing funding.
As our water supplies grow more
scarce with estimates of 25%
reductions in water supply over
the next 50 years, we have to do
everything we can to get the
most out of every drop.
Prioritizing water acquisitions
for the strategic water reserve
that support multiple benefits
is the path forward to securing
New Mexico's water future.
This provision gives the
Interstate stream commission the
option.
To prioritize acquisitions that
not only serve one of the three
primary purposes but also might
benefit other cultural or
recreational in-stream purposes.
This change will not compete
with the main purposes of the
reserve.
And Madam Chair, I'd like to uh
emphasize that this is the
strategic water reserve, not the
strategic water supply.
With me today I have a my
experts.
Oh, San.
I have, uh, with me is Angeli
Bean from Western Resources and
for technical expertise is
Hannah Riley White, the director
of the Interstate Stream
Commission, and I'd like to turn
it over to Miss Angeli Bean.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I think Char
Stefaniks did a great job of
summarizing this bill, um.
I don't know that I have too
much to add. I think that was an
excellent summary, so we might
just go to questions.
Thank you. Thank you and uh
director Riley White, do you
have anything you wanna say?
Sure.
Um, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
pleasure to be with you this
morning again, Hannah Risley
White, director of Interstate
Stream Commission. I just want
to take a moment to thank the,
the sponsors of the bill, um,
and the proponents for their
willingness in part to include
some of those amendments or
suggestions coming from us at
the agency. Uh, we see this
program as being critical for
New Mexico over the last 20
years we've used it, um, in the,
the Rio Grande Pecos Canadian
San Juan Rivers, our largest
challenge in implementing this
program has been having
and sustained funding and so
we're pleased to see the
addition of the proposed fund in
this bill and happy to answer
any questions. Thank you so
much.
Um, thank you. How many people
in the audience support this.
How many people in the audience
oppose this bill.
OK.
Um
Online, are there anybody?
Online we have um
24 and 1 nay.
So why don't we go ahead and
start with the opponents since
the
Since there's only 1 or 2.
So with the opponent's lying be
lined up behind the.
The panel.
All right.
Am I?
Uh, uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Larry Reagan, president of New
Mexico Farm and Livestock
Bureau, uh farm bureau just has
policy against uh.
Any government agency purchasing
private water rights and so that
that's where why we're opposed
to it.
Thank you.
Well, the opposite opponents had
10 minutes, but I don't think
we're gonna use it. So let's go
ahead and uh go to Miss Miss.
Mr. Howard Hutchinson, who is
online and also an opponent.
Mr. Hutchinson
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you.
I, I actually worked with the
Honorable Joel Sel in the
crafting of the original
language on this.
Um
While our organization, uh, like
the Farm Bureau opposes the
purchase of any private water
rights.
Uh, we would
We still stand in in support of
this.
Uh
The organization I represent is
the Coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
And we would hope that the
agency understands that the
purchase of private water
rights.
Uh, would be better served if it
were a mere lease.
With a
specified period of time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, sponsors.
Thank you, Mr. Hutchinson, um,
so we have 10 minutes for the
proponents, and I don't have a
list of anyone that you would uh
like to speak, so we could just
get proponents to um
Stand behind the panel, make
their comments, and you'll have
10 minutes.
To support this bill.
It.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque-Bernelio County
Water Utility Authority. Uh, we
stand in support of Senate Bill
37, strategic Water Reserve. We
believe that it provides
additional resource for
interstate compact compliance.
It helps with environmental
regulation compliance, and it
supports aquifer recharge and
reduces groundwater depletion.
Thank you very much. I have to
apologize. I did get a list, um,
Madam Secretary gave.
me a list and it's here. So
Camilla uh Feebleman, you're on
the list or Feibelman.
Great, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Camila
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. I like the
anecdotes, uh, the hickoryia
Apache water rights that were
leased for the San Juan River
are just a great example of how
these waters can make a
difference for recreation.
In addition to the real purposes
of the reserve, but then there's
the story of the dairy that was
willing to sell its rights to
the Rio Grande, but the money
wasn't there, and so these are
just examples of the way that
these waters can be used so
fruitfully for our state, um,
being able to add water recharge
um into our aquifers is a really
great third purpose for the
bill.
Have on the list, Christina
Fisher.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Um, Christina
Fisher, associate director of
Think New Mexico. So back in
2005, I think New Mexico worked
with Joe Stelle and, um,
legislators of both parties and
a broad coalition of
stakeholders, uh, to enact in
the original legislation
creating the strategic water
reserve. Um, in the 20 years
since then, it's proved to be a
valuable tool to help the state
keep a little more water in our
rivers. Um, it has helped, uh,
New Mexico meet its obligations
under Interstate compacts, um,
and help with the recovery of
endangered species. However
during the past two decades,
we've also seen some ways in
which it can be improved, and
that's why we're supporting the
bill here today.
I think the most important
aspect is the creation of a
permanent fund, um, as a sponsor
noted, it takes 2 to 3 more
years to close on a water lease
or purchase. And so having a
non-reverting fund for
appropriations, make sure that
that money is there when the
deal closes, cause if you have
water, you're interested in
leasing, you need that
confidence before you go forward
with the deal. It puts the state
on more of an equal footing with
other um potential uh lessors or
purchasers of water. Um, adding
an additional, additional
purpose makes the strategic
water reserve a little bit more
of a versatile tool for
improving our stream flows. So
we hope you'll support it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Ms. Fisher. I have
Zoe Barker.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Zoe Barker. I am the
conservation director at
Conservation Voters New Mexico.
We, um, stand in full support of
this bill, and if you all have
the one pager that should have
been handed out to you. You'll
see a number of organizational
logos at the bottom, and those
are all people that are standing
in support of this bill today as
well. Um, I won't repeat
anything that was just said. I
just hope that the committee can
support this legislation today.
Thank you so much.
Thank you Ms. Barker.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Tricia
Snyder. I'm the Rivers and
Waters program director for New
Mexico Wild and a registered
lobbyist. We stand in strong
support of this bill, um, as my
partner and I, uh, are welcoming
our first child. I've spent a
lot of time in this session
thinking about how to build a
New Mexico for our future
generations, and to me, this
bill represents all of the
things that we need to do. We
have a lot of challenges ahead
in our water resources, um, but
by prioritizing uh solutions
that uh
work towards, uh, meeting as
many needs as possible. We can
move forward, um, and build a
New Mexico that is, um, great
for our children and their
children. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, online we have
Annali Rigglebrook.
Riegelbrook, uh, from the
Environmental Defense Fund.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to
comment. My name is Annelise
Regelbrugge, and I'm
representing EDF Action in full
support of SB 37. New Mexico's
groundwater and surface waters
are becoming increasingly
constrained due to climate
change and overuse. SB 37 adds
much needed flexibilities to
enable the strategic water
reserve to continue to implement
proactive and adaptive water
management, allowing the reserve
to support aquifer recharge and
reduce groundwater depletion for
environmental and stream flow
benefits.
acknowledges that groundwater
and surface waters are
fundamentally interconnected,
and the health of both will have
immediate and long-term impacts
on our ecosystems and
environment, as well as our
water, a community water
security. In this way, SP 37
aligns with the original purpose
of the reserve to avoid water
management crises and support
New Mexico's rivers and the
ecosystems that depend on them.
Thanks very much again for the
opportunity to comment.
Rachel Khan from Amigos Bravos
online.
Good morning, Chair Stephonics
committee members. My name is
Rachel Khan, and I'm the deputy
director of Amigos Bravos. We
stand in strong support of SB
37. In addition to the other
positive aspects mentioned
already. I want to highlight the
importance of the supplementary
benefit addition to the
strategic water reserve statute.
The governor's 50-year water
plan and numerous scientific
reports highlight that New
Mexico could see a 25%
reduction.
in water supply over the next 50
years. This means we need to
have water management tools that
take advantage of every drop
available we have in our state.
In some cases, we can utilize
those drop drops twice.
This addition to the statute
would allow the ISC to
prioritize water transactions
that benefit multiple users of
water. An example would be water
that is left in stream for
critical endangered species
habitat could also be used again
downstream to benefit
agriculture.
By focusing on opportunities
where water supports multiple
benefits, we can help our state
water managers meet as many
needs as possible for our local
communities, farmers, hunters,
anglers, and other recreational
users, while also protecting
important habitat for New
Mexico's famous flora and fauna.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you, I don't have anyone
else online and anyone else in
the audience, um.
So with that, we will turn it
over to Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Senator
Expert witnesses. Anna, this is
kind of directed to you, you and
I both.
Um, or long
Well, I think you know I was a
longtime friend of Joe's and
I'm sitting here looking at
this, trying to figure out what
would Joe do?
Is this Joe's? Is this hijacking
Joe's initiative.
Whereas, how does this change
what Joe still envisioned.
Originally.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Townsend, um,
You know, I think that those two
original purposes of the reserve
are critical for New Mexico and
we will continue to implement
those, including significantly
in your neck of the woods on
the, on the Pecos. Um, what I
like about this additional uh
purpose is it highlights, um,
the interconnectedness between
surface and groundwater. It is,
it is limited that third purpose
to um purchases that support
stream flow for environmental
purposes. That does not.
Prevent us from continuing to
purchase groundwater, uh, just
for compact, uh, purposes which
we're already doing in various
parts of the state. So in my
perspective, it adds an extra uh
flexibility for the reserve and
an and an acknowledgement of
that interconnectedness between
service and groundwater, but
certainly doesn't take away from
the existing purposes that we
are continuing to pursue.
Appreciate that, madam chair.
My, my real concern is, does
this dilute
What he was trying to do by
spreading it out over more.
Um, and, and will it, does it
dilute what the original purpose
was.
I would say, Madam Chair and and
Senator Townsend that as a
senator Stephanic mentioned,
there's a limit to how much the
state can focus on that 3rd, 3rd
purpose. Uh, we will continue to
set priorities as called for by
the original statute, um,
annually with regards to how
we're focusing acquisitions for
the reserve, uh, that process is
an important one and something
that we'd like to engage further
with you on others on we're
we're really seeing this year,
2025.
As kind of a review year for the
reserve cause as Senatorsanics
mentioned, the original statute
was passed in 2005, um, and so
we're taking a hard look at it
at the agency in terms of where
it's worked best, where, where
we need to improve and what that
needs to look like, including in
that prioritization process.
There is also the statute called
on us to do rulemaking, will
likely revisit that rulemaking
coming out of this review here
as well, and that rulemaking
speaks to the priority.
ization question that that
you're highlighting.
Um
Madam Chair, um.
That.
Water rides and
All across the Mexico or
Um
Highly valued.
One of my concerns is, will we
be taking state money.
And inflating
Water right cost private
ownership.
And how do we control that?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and,
and Senator Townsend, um.
You know, I, that is something
that you all on the Pecos know
well, not because of the
reserve, but because of the 2003
Peco settlement agreement and
the significant water rates that
were purchased there by the
state.
I think that's one of the key
lessons that we learned in terms
of water acquisitions, whether
for the reserve or otherwise,
um, and we've been very
cognizant of that as we've
looked to purchases on the Rio
Grande and thinking about what
the influence on the market
would be. At this point with the
strategic water reserve, our
issue is that we haven't had
really sufficient funding to
make much of a dent, um, so, you
know, if we had the $15 million
in this fund, which as Senator
Stephanic said, this, this bill
does not include any.
appropriation, so we'll have to
work to fill that fund, but
certainly that consideration is
one that we have front and
center as we look at uh
prioritizing and then
implementing acquisitions for
the reserve.
I appreciate it, um, I'm sure
I'll, I'll continue to listen
and uh I may ask.
And I asked to come back again.
Something trips my trigger, but
right now I'll listen. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator
Townsend, and next I have
Senator Scott.
Oh, thank you.
Madam Chair and Senator and.
An expert.
Madam Chair
I'm trying to wrap my arms
around this and, and it appears
to be.
Of working toward.
In stream flow.
As a beneficial use and water
right.
I
Is that
Correct
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Senator Scott, um.
Potentially, uh, the office of
the state engineer and I, I
don't work for the office of the
State Engineer, but they do
currently permit.
Uh, water rights for in stream
flow purposes. There are fairly
stringent requirements in terms
of how that water is tracked and
accounted for in the system.
Some rights in the strategic
water reserve would fall into
that category depending on the,
the purpose, um, some rights in
the reserve are essentially
intended to reduce depletions,
which brings a benefit to other
water users by making more water
available. So, it's applied in,
in, in a number of different
ways, and those are are
considerations.
that we make as we look at
acquisitions for the reserve
boat and I should say both.
It was discussion earlier about
leases. We have implemented this
reserve significantly with
leases as well, not just
purchases, so we do both.
Hopefully that helps answer your
question somewhat.
And miter Miss Rosly white, this
does.
Fairly significantly expand to
the purposes.
For which those rights can be
purchased or leased because now
it's
Pretty much strictly for
Compact
Compliance
Is that
not correct, um, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott, the the two
original purposes of the reserve
are both compacts and species
issues. And so we have
implemented it in both ways
currently.
A compact and what was the other
explanation
uh threatened or endangered
species or to prevent additional
listings of species. And so that
was those those two purposes are
the original statutory purposes
from 2005, and we certainly have
implemented the reserve uh to
support both of those in the
last two decades and Madam Chair
and
Miss, why could you?
Did you
Articulate for the committee how
that expands the utilization of
that stream flow.
to other
Are
I think recreation was
Mentioned in here
Along with some other things
and Senator Scott, I think the
3rd.
is explicitly calls out the
potential for acquisitions of
groundwater that is connected to
surface water so that it
supports additional stream flow
and environmental benefits
through the acquisition of, of
that groundwater.
Um
The other amendments, um, the
other additions in this bill
include just calling out that we
would consider.
Um, the
Additional benefits that could
be brought from acquisitions,
not as their distinct a separate
purpose, but that we would
consider potential to implicate
our support traditional cultural
uses or recreational purposes,
but neither of those are called
out as a third purpose. It would
more be like looking at does
this acquisition have um
multiple benefits besides the,
the core purposes as one of the
considerations that the state
would would look at in.
been thinking through potential
acquisitions.
Hopefully that helps. Madam
Chair, this would.
With those
Cultural benefits create.
A right to that water then.
Uh, Madam Chair and, and, and
Senator Scott, no, we would look
at be looking at existing.
Water rights uh with existing
purposes and then.
Uh, currently we permit, we file
an application to the Office of
the State Engineer to transfer
water rights into the strategic
water reserve. So the, the
purpose wouldn't be those
ancillary benefits, they would
just be something we would
consider and looking at
potential acquisitions.
OK.
And
One of the questions that I had
with respect to
Purchasing these rights to
maintain stream flow is.
Uh, Madam Chair.
The senator and Miss White, how
far downstream does that right,
continued to exist.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
senator Scott again, you're,
you're asking very savvy
questions cause that goes back
to your question about in stream
flow. It depends on the defined
purpose in the permitting,
right? So if we're saying we
want to see this water
throughout this reach that that
would be defined through the
permitting process. Um,
sometimes we're just making a
purchase to reduce reduce
depletion. So it, it depends on
the specifics of the intent of
the purpose and how it's then.
permitted through the office of.
That is defined in the
acquisition, the intent of the
acquisition and then through the
permitting process at the office
of the state engineer.
So Madam Chair, Senator, what
we're saying.
is that uh it would be uh
writing of the.
Permit upfront. OK, Madam Chair
and senator, so this
Was I right, if you will.
Would then depend on a
rulemaking or permit to
determine.
How for
Downstream from the purchase or
lease of the original right.
Would exist.
And am I on the right track?
That's correct.
But it, again, Madam Chair and,
and senator, it it depends on
the purpose of the acquisition.
Where, where we're looking to
see that water and what the
associated, um,
Administration of ensuring that
it's in the right place where it
was intended, how, how that
plays out depends on the
permitting process.
OK.
Uh, um
a little bit fuzzy on this, but
let me, let me move on.
With regard to
Oh
Acquisition of these rights for
Uh recharge from the natural
river channel.
Is that one of the objectives of
this.
Piece of legislation.
Of Madam Chan Senate.
And Madam Chad, I'll have uh the
director. Thank you, Madam Chair
and senator, yes.
That is a potential additional
purpose in the additional
purpose that's added here.
OK, and Madam Chair, Senator,
and Ms. White, would, would it
be accurate to say though.
That recharge of these river
basins occurs someplace else.
Besides, in the river bed.
Mm
Adam Char and Senator, yes.
So there may be limited
application in this 3rd, 3
purpose, but where it may be
applicable, it may be helpful.
OK. Uh, Madam Chair.
Senator and and Miss White, I'm
gonna cogitate on this for a
little bit, but I would reserve
another bite of the apple
because
Um
I'm a little bit confused.
Uh, thank you very much for your
answers. Thank you, thank you,
Senator Scott, uh, Senator
Hamblin, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for bringing this
bill. Um, I just have a few
questions because I'm, I'm
curious about looking at page 5
line.
And I'm just wondering, how do
you see the interstate stream
commission coordinating with
governing bodies.
Um, around the effective areas,
uh, the affected river reach or
the, the groundwater basin. I'm
just kind of wondering how this
is envisioned.
Should this bill pass.
Where you see that really um
uplifting what you're able to
do.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Hamblin.
Um, we currently set per this
original statute, priorities
annually, including we send a
letter to the Attorney General's
office now in New Mexico, uh,
State Department of Justice. um,
letting them know what we're
prioritizing and it's soliciting
their input. Um, so, and then
there's a process by which we
can engage with them around how
we're setting priorities. That
process is already in place and
we will. OK. Thank you so much
and there's just one other
question. Um, on page 6.
Uh, line 5.
Um, would you be able to give
some examples of how the ISC has
has taken those supplemental,
uh, supplementary benefits, uh,
and because I, I do like.
The, the lines such as
supporting traditional and
cultural practices, and I'm just
wondering, are there examples
of, of you already being able to
do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Hamblin. Yes, I, you
know, I would say when we're
looking at acquisitions
currently, we're always trying
to look for where are their
ancillary benefits, right? And
so this, I think, in effect,
just memorializes that that we
would take that into
consideration. They won't, it
won't necessarily be the driver
for final decision making, but
we'll certainly be, be, be sure
to be looking at that and
reflecting that those
considerations in our decision
making.
Thank you. That's all, Madam
Chair.
Thank you Senator Hamblin.
Anyone else, Senator Cervantes,
and then Senator Azel. Thank
you, madam chair.
Good morning everybody.
Um
Couple of questions, I guess the
uh if I'm looking at that page 5
again.
With the questions.
This is um.
Let's see, all of this section 2
is existing language, my
understanding, is that right? So
sec section one is the new
material and that's the $15
million.
appropriation
Uh, my, my concern here is uh
not reason enough to not support
the bill, but what, what finding
somewhat curious is we, we're
appropriating $150 million to
purposes that we already
addressed with the water trust
board water project fund and,
and elsewhere, how, how is this
gonna be any different than
that, in other words, why don't
we just create two parallel
systems where we, we try to
reach the same goals that are
designated here with our, our
water project fund and our
trustworth, isn't that the,
isn't this the same thing?
Madam Chair and Senator, this is
not an appropriation bill.
This is uh determining that
money that's put into this fund
can remain there for up to 5
years in which the interstate
stream commission could then con
uh complete their negotiations
because oftentimes an
appropriation into the House
bill to budget.
Cannot be accomplished in one
year.
So this allows up to a certain
amount of money to be held for
up to 5 years, and uh these
purposes that are here to
determine the permitting the uh
purchasing of water rights is
not included in those other
entities that you were
discussing.
And, and you're right, I, I
misread that uh section one to
be an appropriation, but you're
really not providing for an
appropriation here. So is there
a companion appropriation bill?
Madam Chair, Senator, we always
ask for an appropriation every
year for this particular fund.
Sometimes it's been as low as 3
million. I think the highest we
got was 7.5 million, so the, the
idea is that we could build it
to up to 15 million so that we
have the leeway to negotiate
over the years.
And, and I appreciate and I
appreciate the existing language
that says there's got to be a
purchase of fair market value
because some of my colleagues
were concerned about that, and
I, I'm gonna, I'm gonna smile at
some of you all over there who
remember the storyentel
remembers the story well enough,
but for the newer members many
years ago, Joe Stelle was a big
proponent of trying to deal with
the shortfalls on the CID
deliveries right on the Pecos.
So, uh, New Mexico came up with
a brilliant plan to appropriate
something like $100 million to
go buy and acquire water rights,
much like the idea here, make
those back deliveries.
So we as a state went in and
bought a bunch of farms.
retire water rights.
So we can make the compact
deliveries. It didn't turn out
to be enough to meet the combat
delivery, but on top of that, we
owned $100 million worth of
farms.
Suddenly, as a state which we
didn't know what to do with.
So we spent a few years spending
a bunch of money trying to
maintain those farms and, and
deal with the weeds and
everything else that all farms
turned out to be.
And after a few years of
realizing that wasn't any fun
and very expensive and pretty
unsightly we sold the farmers uh
back again, uh, in many cases
acquired by the people who sold
them to us in the first place,
so.
You know, if you're in business,
you realize, well, there's a, a
cost to the sale and there's the
appraisals and there's the
realtors and and the
transactional fees and then you
know, and people made a lot of
money, candidly by selling us
the the farms and then buying
them back without the water
rights so it was just a disaster
really. It was a really terrible
idea. I didn't support it at the
time, but I have great affection
for Joe Stelle, who taught me a
great deal about water, but it
was, it was a big plan, and I, I
just get really concerned
whenever the states in the
business of buying water rights,
but the concerns that were
expressed.
and the state begins to set the
market.
Uh for water rights, I am.
I spent this last weekend in Los
Angeles.
And years ago I traveled up to
some high rise. I'm a farm guy
from South, New Mexico, so I got
some 30, 40-story high rise, um,
Bill Richardson was being
recognized for something and uh
it's an amazing thing when you
think about it in your downtown
Los Angeles looking out and
realizing that just 2 or 3
generations ago that was all
farmland and that was all ranch
land.
Um, and that's the realization
that it had for me too. So the,
the reality is that more and
more of our farmland in southern
New Mexico where Hamblin and I
have our districts, that's all
been, uh, acquired by Texas, um,
housing developments, real
estate development all through
that, that valley is now
becoming very, very developed
and someday we'll look out and
see no no farms left, so the,
the, the natural evolution is
what we saw in Los Angeles,
which is people will buy these
farms, buy the water rights for
development purposes and I want
to be very careful that we don't
get too involved in the market.
Pricing of, of what those farms
are worth for the water rights.
Um, specifically on page 5
though, um, this is new language
to that section too, the purpose
is to assist the state uh with
management water conservation
efforts, you, you lay those out.
The second sentence there in
subparagraph 3, which begins on
line 4, says service water
leased or purchased shall not be
converted to ground water.
By any methods other than
natural passive infiltration
through the stream bed.
Um, why, why are we limiting
ourselves there? Why wouldn't we
want to be able to acquire water
that we then use to recharge an
aquifer directly as opposed to
putting it into a stream bed and
allowing it to, uh, in, in the
words here, infiltrate the
stream bed because frankly,
that's kind of an inefficient,
inefficient way of recharging an
aquifer, isn't it, to allow it
to passively infiltrate, you're
gonna have losses, evaporation
losses, and so forth that way
where a direct injection would
be, I think, much more
efficient. Am I wrong about
that?
Madam Chair, I'm gonna have the
director respond.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
and Senator Cervantes, um,
there's a uh amendment to this,
um.
bill that's under discussion
that would limit that sentence
that you just referred to
starting on page 5 line 4.
Uh, so that the surface water
leased or purchased for the for
the reserve for this purpose,
for that purpose 3, which should
not be converted than in any of
those means, I would say, we
certainly, you know, look at
acquisitions for the reserve for
the other purposes, including um
aquifer recharge.
To support compact issues,
including in your neck of the
woods in the, in the lower Rio
Grande. So I don't see uh this
as limiting us for from doing
that for those other two
purposes where we see that there
is a technical connection and a
benefit for compact purposes,
um, so this, uh, this 3rd
purpose that's being added in
this bill, um, I think is is
really intended to promote
stream flow or other.
Hopefully that clarifies.
Well, and I'm looking at the
amendment and I understand your
explanation, but, but the, the
amendment.
Let's see.
It isn't really strike that
qualifying language in in
material part though, does it?
In other words, you're still,
you're still including even with
the amendment.
That the surface water.
Um, shall not be converted to
groundwater except by
infiltration, and that, that
stays in place, doesn't it? For
that purpose, yes.
Yeah, it, it doesn't make sense
that you.
Um
I, I understand that.
That the purpose of this is to
really use this fun.
We're promoting stream flow, but
we all know this committee after
serving here for a long time
promoting stream flow sometimes
means assuring the health of the
aquifer, right? Um, and we know
that an aquifer depletion.
Right, affects the stream flow,
so it would seem that you would
in some cases want to promote
stream flow by assuring a
healthy, good aquifer, and that
might mean in my mind as it may
seem at times to acquire water
rights that you're putting into
the aquifer directly rather than
saying we're going to have to
put it into the river and allow
it to seep into the aquifer,
which again may not be an
engineer, but um would seem to
be pretty inefficient.
Farmers are pretty good at
efficiencies of water even
without being engineers. I just,
am I right about at least that
point that's not the most
efficient way to do this.
Uh, Mad, madam chair and
senator, yes, and I would let
the bill proponents speak more
directly.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Cervantes, you're absolutely
right. This is a limitation, and
I will say that this language
was pretty delicately negotiated
amongst lots of different
stakeholders who had.
Some of them had concerns about
this groundwater acquisition
piece being too broad and kind
of the impact it might have on
the reserves other purposes, and
then also from smaller farmers
and assass and small water users
had concerns about surface to
groundwater conversions and how
that might impact surface water
flows, so.
We crafted this language to open
the door to groundwater A
broader groundwater acquisitions
within the reserve while still
understanding that there were
kind of conflicting opinions
about how it should be used.
Well I'm still confused I I'm
sure because you said acquiring
groundwater, groundwater
acquisitions, but this is not
about necessarily
Aroundwater acquisition, is it?
Madam Chasen San Fontes, uh,
apologies if that was confusing.
You're right.
But acquiring surface water to
directly inject, say through an
ASR of more traditional aquifer
storage and recovery project.
There was concerns about how
that might impact surface water.
Spots.
I, I understand folks are
concerned and I understand
there's delegate balances and
discussions that I, I don't have
that in front of me right now. I
don't have them here and I don't
know what that concern would be,
to be honest with you. So I, I'm
still thinking I, I, I wouldn't
limit yourself in this way is I
guess what I'm saying, there's,
I think you're, at least I hear
you agreeing, there's a more
efficient.
Way to do this from a standpoint
of engineering, right?
A direct injection is going to
be a much more efficient than
saying, they're saying the same
thing, which is
By your bill, you can acquire
surface water rights, and you
can use it to recharge the
aquifer, but only by putting it
into a river and allowing it to
seep in the aquifer which
To me is a very inefficient way
of doing that, right? If, if the
purpose is to do that, the
purpose is to uh recharge the
aquifer.
Putting it on a stream bed is
probably the least efficient way
to make that happen, better way
to acquire the surface water
rights and put it into the
aquifer.
Um, so
I just, I understand that some
folks may be worried about this
and like it was water, everybody
worries about everything and
motivations and what people are
up to, but it just seems to me
that that last sentence really
ought to go, um, if you're
trying to do this really from
the, from the standpoint of
having the greatest opportunity
and effect and again I, I
understand there may be some
folks concerned about it, but I
know that they're here today for
them.
So that's, that's just a thought
about that, um.
The, uh, then on the page 6
subparagraph E.
These are some of the
priorities.
for this
Um
You, you use the right word a
moment ago.
Um
You memorializes some of the uh
goals. I'm always real cautious
about is, is again as a not to
where, where my lawyer had too
much, but I'm always cautious
about we're making laws here and
and I try and distinguish
memorials from laws, uh, we, we
pass a lot of
Bills that are really memorials,
but um when, when the language
here just says that the
interstate commission.
It's on line 12 says May
prioritize transactions that
meet at least one of these
supplementary benefits when you
say something may prioritize,
uh, you may or may not, right?
That's, that's, you're right,
you use the right word. It's
memorial at this point in time,
um, and so I'd either say, you
know, you prioritize distraction
transactions or you don't, but
saying you may do this.
Yeah.
Um, it, it's again, you should,
I think we use the legislature
should really
Tell people what we want to have
happen, not what they might do
or might not do.
And ultimately this is uh.
One of the, I think, I think
this is a bill that I can
support, but it can cause, cause
me concern.
That I increasingly as a
legislator see more and more of
us delegating our
responsibilities away as
legislators, so we're putting
more and more responsibilities
on the agencies to come up with
rules and procedures and methods
and measurements and
Um, standards and so where we're
and then we're talking about
well we need to pay ourselves
and we need to professionalize
ourselves, but we're giving away
more and more of our authority
and someone that we won't even
need to show up around here at
all, so, um, I just, I, I would
be more concrete in your wishes.
Senator, as as far as uh, as far
as what you want this to be and
I'll support you doing so. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, said, uh, Senator
Cervantes, um.
Senator Azel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Madam Chair and your
expert witnesses there.
Along the same lines, senator
Cervantes was talking about
whenever I first came up here.
Joe and I would meet about once
a week in his office and he was
on one side of the fence and I
was on the other because he was
from the Carlsbad irrigation
District. I was from the PBACD
base.
And they were trying to.
I don't know.
Supersede what are.
Priority dates were on our
water, and it, I can remember
uh.
In the 60s, uh.
Farmers north of Seven rivers.
We're at odds with people that
live south.
South of S Seven rivers and
there was.
Something that developed out of
all that kerfuffle if you want
to call it that.
Where our farmers had meters put
on their wheels.
Did make better farmers out of
them because they didn't waste
one drop of water.
But the opposite side of that
story is CID did not have to
have those meters in place until
very recently.
The one thing I can say about
both of those basins and Mr.
Stella and I both agreed that
this was the way they needed to
move.
Is to have both of those basins
fully adjudicated and they are.
Whenever the interstate stream
commission started buying up the
water rights along the first
off, they bought up river rights
so they could meet the.
The compact agreement on the
Peer side of the river.
Then they started buying up.
Water rights and farms.
And pictures speak 1000 words
with the next couple of years
whenever I came up here, I was
bringing pictures to show what
the interstate stream commission
had not done.
Their job is not to run farms.
Their job is to manage waters
into the stream flows.
We got that particular law
changed, I think Senator
Cervantes supported me on that
bill.
Where the farm where the water
rights could be sold exclusively
from the farms.
If those farms, if that was
granddaddy's farm, grandma's
farm, they could stay there if
they wanted to, but they could
not, and it's very explicit in
the law. They could not go back
and develop it as a subdivision
unless they bought water rights
or retain certain water rights.
Because if that was the case,
everybody would be doing the
same thing, hey.
We're gonna sell the water
rights, but we're going to
subdivide now and.
Unless they retain, have
retained each of the rights by
some.
It's not gonna happen.
I understand, Madam Chair and
Madam Chair.
That right now
The Interstate stream Commission
can acquire water rights.
Oh groundwater.
Through compacts and for the
endangered Species Act, but I'm.
Again, over here on page what
missed the page number, page 6.
Uh
Line 1, recreational
opportunities, so Mister Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, and.
Expert witnesses.
This is gonna be an expansion in
my opinion, it's gonna be an
expansion of this program.
And it's gonna
Allow y'all
To be able to acquire water
rights to put in these river.
Watercourses, if you want to
call them that.
Uh, that there's never been
compact.
Program in place or an
endangered Species Act in place.
That's the way I'm seeing what
we're trying to do here. Am I
way off base on that?
I'm sure, I'm gonna ask the
director to respond. Thank you.
uh, Madam Chair and senator I
uh.
I would say no, we can't make an
acquisition under this proposed
revision to the statute purely
for recreational purposes. It
would have to meet one of those
three outlined above.
Uh, I think what it's saying is
that we look at like, is there
the potential to benefit those
other uh benefits as we're
prioritizing acquisitions, but
it would have to meet one of
those three called out earlier
in the statute.
Madam Chair and Madam Chair and
Miss.
And Hannah
In section, let's see, what is
that? Well, just on page 6 under
E it is specific there.
Uh, supplementary benefits such
as supporting traditional and
cultural practices, habitat
improvement or recreational
opportunities.
I, I'm just very bothered by
that. I, there was a concern
from the office of the State
Engineer over your.
On page 5, line 3.
Reduce groundwater depletion.
I also had 2 conservation
districts call me very concerned
about.
That particular language
starting on line one going all
the way down through line 7 on
page 5. There is a concern there
and it doesn't include the
office of the State Engineer.
Madam cheer
I just, I'm very concerned about
this. It's.
It has the potential.
If you're gonna recharge your
basin, it does not go down the
riverbed. Best use is just like
senator Cervantes said.
That going down the riverbed is
not gonna recharge the basin in
the manner.
injecting it would,
would have the best benefit of.
If you're putting it down a
riverbed, it's gonna go to the
end result of where it's going.
It's not going to help, not
going to significantly recharge
bison.
Uh, groundwater and surface
water.
You are going, I, I think those
terminologies you're getting
mixed up in my opinion again.
Uh, you want the water rights
that are going to be acquired by
this program as surface water
for in-stream flows.
But it also that you're this
bill, madam Chair, Madam chair,
it also speaks of groundwater
through infiltration and stream
beds.
And
I think
I think that that needs to be.
Better defined on what we're
trying to do here.
I do have the concerns of the
state engineers' office.
Of what they have said.
And uh
My concern is.
If y'all are going to be
purchasing water rights for
environmental in-stream flows,
that's.
potentially do.
We have seen what the purchase
of water right has done whenever
we are trying to make sure that
we do meet our compact
requirements.
Those prices of the water rights
on these lands has been overly
inflated.
Overly inflated.
Right now you can take a.
A water right down in my neck of
the woods, and they're gonna be
selling upward of $15,000 a
water right. There's no young
farmer that can.
Afford to get in. It makes me
very sad whenever I drive
through my neck of the woods
from Fort Sumner all the way
down and see.
Dried up farmlands that are just
fallow now and it's a.
That used to be one of the most
verdant valleys that there was
in the state.
All the old farmers, we just.
Said goodbye to.
An old farmer yesterday he was
laid to rest. He was 95 and that
was the last.
Of that particular generation
that I grew up with in my area.
That is very, very sad.
Unfortunately, I have now become
the old generation in that area,
so.
We're gonna try to hang on, but
there are some problems here.
Whenever nobody can because of.
Interstate Stream commissioner
or the Office of the State
Engineer whenever that price of
a water right, skyrocketed the
way it is.
There's problems.
Madam chair, madam, cheer.
I'm assuming that this bill if
it is passed, you would have to
follow the notification
publication system.
And protest period. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, I will defer to the
director.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, that is correct.
OK. And this would be done
through local newspapers.
Which
Those becoming scarcity anymore.
I, yes, that's correct and
posted on the website of the
Office of the State Engineer,
and I should say that we
conferred with them on the
proposed amendments, um, that
resolved, I think all of the
issues at both ISC.
Well, Madam Chair and Madam
Chair, I'm not going to be
redundant and bringing up issues
that.
The other members have already
talked about, but I do find uh.
Uh
There's a lot of ambiguity here
and uh
I think we need to look at the
concerns that the state engineer
has and the concerns that my
conservancy districts has
regarding recharging through a
stream bed or a more efficient
system of doing it through
injection. So thank you very
much, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Azel and um
Senator Townsend for the 2nd
time.
I'm getting people are.
Sending questions like crazy.
There's a lot of concern on this
bill. One of them that I keep
reading is the new language in E
on page 6.
And, and it.
Establishes the priorities for
purchases.
And it's
It allows the commission to
I workize purchases that meet
one of the other.
Directives, correct? Does that
not limit and
And Madam Chair, I just want to
understand. Does that not limit
The, the purpose of what I, I
found myself writing WWJD. What
would Joe do?
And, and I started thinking,
This
Does this unduly limit
The ability of the of the
interstate stream commission to
meet the compacts.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna have the
director of answer the senator's
question.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Townsend. I, I don't think so.
Um, I think it and through our
process of how we prioritize
purchases, this calls on us to
better document the
consideration of these
supplementary benefits, but not
limit us to those.
But it does require you.
To prioritize.
Your purchases to those
Purchases that meet one of the
other.
So it has to dilute in my mind,
I think, the lute the original
purposes of supporting stream
flow.
Um,
Madam
Senator Townsend, I think.
That's where it says we shall
consider them.
Um, but we then may prioritize
based on those and to me and I
and I appreciate the comments
from Senator Cervantes earlier
about memorializing, but I think
it is gonna be uh we're willing
to commit to consider those, um,
but we also wanna have the
flexibility that ultimately we
we may prioritize something that
feels critical to the state for
a compact purpose that doesn't
have one of those. And we'll,
we'll need those supplementary
benefits and we'll then.
need to die document how we're
making those decisions.
Thank you, I'm sure I don't
believe. Where did this
originate? Can you tell me that?
Where did the idea for this bill
originate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, this was a broad
stakeholder process that we
worked with the Interstate
stream Commission and a group of
stakeholders and advocates who
have been working to to help and
prioritize the strategic.
I appreciate that, Madam Chair,
and
Can you tell, can you refresh my
Or memory who you represent and
Why you're here.
Absolutely, Madam Chair, Senator
Townsend, my name is Angeli Bean
and I work for Western Resource
Advocates. We are a nonprofit
working on supporting the
environment communities and the
economies throughout the Western
states.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Experts.
Um
Thank you, uh, Senator Scott for
a second time.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
H
H 5 paragraph.
E
Excuse me
Page 6
Paragraph B
Seems problematic to me.
Madam Chair, madam chair, Miss
White.
It appears as though we're using
The justification of aquifer
Recharge.
To
Create
Some stream flow rights.
For these traditional and
cultural practices, habitat
improvement.
In recreational opportunities
that have
Not been present.
Previously
And water
So
I guess the question.
Is this fundamentally put into
conflict.
The rights.
Of water that
those people that's already been
appropriated, for example, to
agriculture.
And
These purposes.
Is that a conflict that is
created.
And
Or are we looking down the road
at
And lots of legal issues.
With respect to
These acquisitions
And somebody answer that.
Madam Chair, senator, thank you
for that, but I will have our
director answer because we're
still going back to the primary
purposes of this.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and Senator Scott, to be clear,
um, and, and based on your
questions earlier, these rights
would be permitted through the
office of the state engineer,
Office of the state engineer
currently does not consider.
Recreational opportunities of
purpose of use, right? So they
would be permitted for the
reserve, which, which is how our
rights are currently being
permitted and then we'd specify
one of the three purposes, um,
called out in the reserve or
multiple because many of the
rights we currently have in the
reserve actually meet uh both of
the current two purposes, so
it's still would, it doesn't
create another purpose of use
under state law.
based on this, this proposed
statute revision.
OK, Madam Chair and Miss White
wouldn't.
It's the purpose of this piece
of legislation was truly to
create a reserve.
Would we allow a more efficient.
Mechanism
Recharge those. So, madam, Madam
Chair and Senator Scott, uh, I
think.
There are instances in this
state currently where aquifer
recharge supports the first
purpose of of this statue of the
original statute compact uh
compact compliance. And we can
look at aquaf for recharge in a
more traditional sense for that
initial for that first purpose
of the reserve.
Um, and we do
So hopefully like the
limitations that some of you
have flagged on the new language
in the third purpose.
Apply and this is why our
proposed amendment was to have
that language apply specifically
to that third purpose because we
see the opportunity for aquifer
recharge to support compact
compliance separate from this 3
additional purpose. Does that
help?
Thank you, Senator. Thank you.
Miss White, for your answers and
that's all I had. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Um
So, um, anybody else?
Madam Cherry Moo passed on
Sunday 13.
Thank you. Do I hear a second?
Madam Secretary, will you call
the roll?
Senator Cervantes, Senor
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Reel.
Saint Joel, no, Senator Hamlin.
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope. Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Scott? No, Senator Townsend.
Senator Townsend, no, San us a
de Lopez, yes, Sano Lopez, yes,
Sano Stephonics.
So Stephonics, yes.
Before we announce the vote,
Senator Thompson, to explain his
vote. I uh.
I appreciate, um,
The bill and, and the
consideration. I do not believe,
I think this really dilutes what
Joe intended and envisioned and
um
And I think that purposey
originally intended to be
upheld, and that's why I say no.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend on a
vote to 6 to 3, your, your bill
passes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, and if you
would just
We're running the meeting.
OK.
So Senator,
Woods.
We have a
There's the committee sent for.
One is out now.
Yes.
Would you go ahead and pass out
the committee sub.
4
remember
Yeah.
Make sure
So everyone's getting a a commit
a committee sub, do we, do I
have a motion to, um,
Do not pass the first.
Um, the original bill and I move
that we do not pass Senate Bill
56, but do take into
consideration for
Uh, discussion purposes, Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 56.
Thank you, Senator Ada perfectly
stated.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Uh, I do want to note that this
is uh the number on this
committee sub is 230087.
4
Thank you, Senator Woods. That's
what we have.
OK.
Uh
I, I come before you today with
kind of an odd situation.
That uh I'm asking you to
consider.
And uh
Madam Chair, this is.
A situation that.
Ask to
Restrict certain information.
During a very trying time in
agriculture when uh.
Uh, very specific, very small
parameter.
That were trying to protect
agriculture producer.
And because it is so specific.
I'd like.
My expert witness to kind of
explain what it does and I, I
have with me today the state
veterinary,
uh, with me, uh, uh.
Samantha, if you will introduce
yourself.
Good morning Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Samantha Holllock. I'm
the state veterinarian with the
New Mexico Livestock Board.
In 2024, um, we had a rather
unique situation arise with uh
avian influenza getting into
dairy cattle, and that was
something we'd never seen in
this country before.
New Mexico was right at the
forefront of that, um, we were
affected by the disease before
we even knew what it was.
Um, unfortunately, that created
some challenges for us because
pictures were were pretty
fearful one because of the
disease itself and what it did
to their dairy industry, but
also just because of the fear of
being put on a map, more or
less, um, they were reluctant to
come forward and talk with
anybody in a regulatory
capacity, um, mostly because, as
they said, they did not want to
be put on a map.
And uh that created a lot of
hurdles for us to be able to get
more information about the
disease, what the disease was
doing and how widespread it was.
One of the challenges that we
face is not being able to um
redact information, if you will,
that provides personally
identifiable information of
these producers, so names,
addresses, uh, information about
their livestock facilities that
could potentially create a
target.
For these people, um.
I will admit that I am a little
bit jaded in the uh
agro-terrorism side because of
my background and training, but
one of the things that was a a
big concern to me was the
potential for these producers to
become a target, the liability
that it put on our agency for
Managra terrorism perspective.
And so, um, over the course of
time, we did find out that there
were some federal protections
that we could have followed, but
it was more than 6 months into
the course of the disease.
And it was far too late for us
to put that into effect and we
also were not sure that we could
leverage that federal protection
from a state perspective.
And so, um, we
Through some of our discussions
with other states.
Found out that Colorado did have
a statute in place to protect
this type of information.
And so this proposed legislation
is patterned after that Colorado
statute.
And, and Madam Chair, also I
have with me, uh Linda. I'm
gonna have her introduce
herself. She's the director of
the State Livestock Board.
Thank you, Senator Woods. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I am Belinda Garland. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Livestock Board, um, I
don't really have a lot to add
to Doctor Hollick's comments,
but I would like for you to
consider something as we move
through this this morning. When
you walk into the grocery store
today and there's no eggs on the
shelf, consider what we're
asking.
So we can't fix something if we
don't know what's out there and
if we don't have producers
coming forward with this
information and advising us that
there could be a potential
problem in their production.
And we can't help them fix
what's going on.
So this avian flu is really a
very uh progressive disease, it
adapts very well. It's adapting
through all the livestock
species and it's adapting into
the humans.
So this is something that we
think is very essential to the
food chain of the nation and we
would really like for you to
consider that this morning.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, we would stand for
questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in support of this
bill?
Anyone in the audience in
opposition to this.
Uh, since there's no one
opposed, um, oh online? Nobody
either way.
Since there's no one opposed,
Senator, would you mind if we
had a smaller, like 5 minutes
instead of 10 minutes of support
for the bill? just trying to
save time.
You know, I love for anybody to
brag on anything I do.
But I guess I'll concede as it
goes. OK, if we, if we could
have people come up, um,
And just briefly state your
support since there's no
opposition.
Uh, if you could be brief, Madam
Chair, committee members, my
name is Tom Patterson. I'm
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We support SB 56.
This bill had its genesis in the
detection investigation,
handling with the bird flu
outbreak we had last spring in
eastern New Mexico in dairy
herds and poultry operations.
During March, April, and May,
others in this room and I sat
through at least 2 hour-long
meetings every week to follow
the status and
ask questions to make sure that
actions followed the science.
Producers understandably.
A reluctant to provide
information on what they're
encountering when a release of
their information in response to
a document request will disclose
personal and confidential
information about them and their
operation, particularly to
groups that are committed to
eliminating them from the
landscape.
Or a state vet needs that
information to do her job. This
bill addresses that tension. It
authorizes the state vet to
redact personal and confirm.
Confidential information when
she responds to a document
request. I doubt if any of us
here wants to pay $6 for a dozen
eggs or a $1 surcharge at
Blake's for a breakfast burrito
because it has eggs in it.
Those are real world
consequences of the avian flu,
and there has been a recent
detection of yet another strain
of bird flu. Those incidents
confirmed that we need this bill
to protect our food supply and
keep it safe.
You can help do something about
it today.
We ask for your favorable
consideration. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, man. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Larry Reagan again, New Mexico
Farming Livestock Bureau, uh,
for all the reasons, uh, that,
uh, Mr. Patterson stated.
Uh, we firmly support this bill
with without it our farmers and
ranchers out of fear would not
would not report possible
problems.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Beverly Itzinger, executive
director of Dairy Producers of
New Mexico. We stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 56, as
was stated in March of last
year, I learned about a
mysterious illness affecting
dairy cows in Texas with drastic
losses in milk production. I
immediately contacted the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture, and they looped in
the livestock Board and Doctor
Hollig. We got to work on
finding out what was going on.
That was on a Monday. By that
Saturday, I learned of the first
case in New Mexico that was.
That was hit in the Clovis area,
and I notified Secretary Whitty,
um, within an hour and a half,
the EOC, the emergency
operations center was activated
and a call with ESF 11, which is
agriculture, was put together on
a Saturday, in less than an hour
and a half. Um, I tell you all
of this because it was an
excellent coordinated effort.
Federal agencies that have been
involved in this situation in
other states had said New Mexico
has done it the best.
Later, the illness turned out to
be a strain of H5N1 in dairy
cattle. Testing took place on
both animals and in milk. Milk
was determined to be proven
safe, especially with
pasteurization. And our
producers were willing to comply
with testing and wanted to help,
so a solution or prevention
could be found and questions
could be answered. However, for
additional testing, they did not
want their name, dairy, or
location to be released for fear
of being put on some sort of
list or map where they could be
targeted, including
agro-terrorism. Since New Mexico
has extremely transparent
IPR laws and anonymity could not
be guaranteed, and producers
were reluctant to participate in
additional voluntary testing.
Senate Bill 56 would help in
protecting private information
in such an instance, allowing
producers to participate in
voluntary testing programs
without fear of being targeted.
Please support this important
piece of legislation and thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jason Thompson, and I'm always
take a chance to brag on.
Um, and Linda here, uh, I'm
registered lobbyist for the
state veterinary Medical
Association and on behalf of the
veterinarians that work on these
particular animals, especially
in rural areas and on livestock.
They fully support this
legislation. We really
appreciate the sponsor, uh,
blend to bringing it forward. We
stand in full support.
Thank you.
Thank you, I'm adding a little
extra time because these are not
duplicated.
Madame Chair, good morning and
members of the committee. This
is Carlos Salasad, um, executive
director for Northern New Mexico
Stockman's Association, former
president.
Uh, we support this bill, um.
Because, uh
I'm just gonna like all the
comments and I'm gonna.
Expand too much on that, but we
have a lot of people up in
northern New Mexico that for
personal reasons grow a lot of
agricultural products, and for
that reason, we're in full
support of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we're out of
time, so I'll go ahead and um
Turn it to the committee. Uh, I
see that we have a senator is
out.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Uh, Senator Woods and your two
expert witnesses. I'm glad y'all
are here today to help clarify
any questions that may come up.
I know that there was a concern,
Madam Chair.
And Senator Woods uh.
Whenever you were talking, I
believe that is showing up. I'm
having to identify it over here
on this one.
And I think I have.
Uh, contains this bill does
contain confidential data
pursuant to the veterinary
patient client privilege. Can
y'all explain that? I know what
it means, but some people out in
the audience and the listening
audience may not, may not
understand what that means.
Certainly
I'm gonna let my experts explain
that to me.
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
the, the veterinary client
patient privileges um from a
private practice standpoint,
similar to, I, I guess what you
would call HIPA in the human
realm, so veterinary medical
records for a private
practitioner are considered
confidential information.
And so, um.
Not subject necessarily to IPRA.
Because of the the privacy
there.
Um, from a regulatory
perspective, we do not have that
protection as a, as a regulatory
veterinarian, I, I don't have
that same.
Um
Um, it
Opportunity if you will, because
I am exempt from the veterinary
Practice Act.
Um, private veterinarians,
however, can protect that
information.
And madam and Senator Woods.
And uh Doctor Holle I guess.
What I'm trying to get out right
here.
A person.
If there is an outbreak of any
type, but you're trying to check
those.
People who this outbreak might
have taken place or has spread
to.
To protect them from the media.
It protects you guys as well. Am
I understanding that correctly?
Uh, I'll let, uh, Blenda, the
last top board.
Father explained OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
senator, what we're trying to do
is protect.
Any potential for uh an attack
on a producer, so it could be
agri-terrorism, it could be
individuals, it could be, um,
actually a threat to their their
business if somebody hears that
maybe uh producer has an
outbreak, they can't sell their
product anymore, even though it
could be safe, um, that's our
job to determine if their
products are safe or not. Um, we
also work with NMDA and USDA on
those processes, but.
It is just really to protect the
producer out there.
And Madam cheered, that was the
point I was trying to make.
Thank you, Senator Woods, and uh
Director Garland for that.
That's exactly where I was
hitting agri agri-terrorism,
that is a very real thing that's
out there.
Madam chair and uh Senator
Woods.
I'm also reading on page 3 of
the committee's substitute.
That, uh, starting on line 13.
It's to prevent the release of
biological livestock samples to
authorize 3rd.
Party entities for scientific
testing, OK? Nothing in this
section can be just OK. So go a
little bit further into that.
As long as the testing entity
agrees to maintain the
confidentiality of the
information it received.
If there's a certain outbreak,
whatever it may be in our state,
it could be.
Terrible outbreak of trick that
hit our state whether it's the
dairy industry or ranching
operation or it could be.
Uh, fascicular stomatitis or
whatever took place down at
Sunland Park a few years back
or.
Uh
Scabies and sheep, I can go on
and on about listing all these
other things.
But how will the information be
disseminated to the people.
That need to know about it so
that confinement of their
livestock can be met.
To prevent any further outbreaks
in our state. That's my, that's
my question.
Um
Senator, Madam Chairman.
state veterinary gas.
Thank you.
And I'm chairman senators all uh
so the first part of your
question about the third party
involvement when when the
initial um outbreak occurred in
dairy cattle and we didn't know
what the disease was, there were
several entities coming on board
trying to help us understand it.
And so sometimes those are
universities, sometimes those
are private uh laboratories and
so this would give us the
ability to um allow them to
interact with the uh producers
and um.
To examine that disease and and
try to understand it better one
so we can identify it, but also
so that we can learn how to
contain it.
OK, I appreciate that response.
Yes ma'am.
Madam Senator, uh, Madam Chair.
Was you asking more about how
the quarantine took place or
Am I putting words in your
mouth.
Well, I would like to know
because.
A quarantine.
Can affect smaller, it could be
statewide, it cannot cross state
lines, blah blah blah all this
type of stuff. So yes, let's go
ahead along that line that
you're just talking about center
towards, Madam Chair.
I'll, I'll let the state
veterinary answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senators, so, um, the question
of quarantine, um, often comes
up in these diseases and we are
fortunate here in New Mexico
that we actually have 3
different levels of how we can
handle that, so quarantine often
carries a a stigma with it that
word alone can often frighten
producers away. We do have the
ability to initiate what we call
a disease investigation.
And so if we do not necessarily
need to restrict movement of
animals, if, if restricting that
movement does not give us any
advantage in controlling that
disease, then we can go with a
lower level of investigation and
disease investigation in our
system does still allow us to
track those inspections and uh
link all of that information
together to allow us to
understand the epidemiology of
that disease much better, uh,
second level up is a hold order
where we may still have
restriction of movement, um, but
It again will be a a risk-based
assessment on what movement can
and cannot be allowed.
Um, and then, of course,
quarantine is the the highest
level um and does carry a much
more restrictive purpose, and we
can still dictate the means by
which that quarantine is carried
out.
And so, um, that quarantine may
extend to one particular
location or it may extend to uh
to an entire region. It really
is going to depend on how that
disease is spread and what the
risk factors are.
I appreciate that response
because to me that's very, very
important.
And Madam cheered the reason I
bring that up.
is a number of years ago there
was a.
A airborne disease that was
brought into our state.
A certain establishment was put
down on high high alert
quarantine. Everybody was in
hazmat suits. A lot of animals
were.
Succumb to this airborne
disease.
Nobody went out to.
I don't know how many different
areas asking what caused this?
Where did it come from? What
were the symptoms of it and
everything else.
The disease was brought into our
state from another state.
So whenever a quarantine like
that takes place, do you notify
the other state where it might
have started.
And notified them that there
might need to be a quarantine
put in place there.
Madam Chair, Senator Zel, yes
ma'am, if we find an
epidemiological link to another
state, that state would be
notified as quickly as possible.
I think one of the um most
important functions that we have
here in New Mexico that missinga
referred to as the ESF 11 or
emergency support function 11,
which is an agricultural
emergency response we have uh an
outstanding and um very well
established uh.
um liaison, if you will,
cooperation between our state
agencies and our federal
partners, and we also are good
at looping in our state
counterparts, um, when those
things can potentially cross
state lines. OK.
So there is reciprocity and that
that makes me feel a whole lot
better.
Cause I know the concern that
Mr. Zynga was talking about is,
is very.
troublesome.
I'll put it that way. I guess I
also need to ask a question
about
Is it
The Livestock Board that
suggests to the veterinarian
board that there does need to be
a disease investigation.
Or is it vice versa.
Sure, I'm gonna
I'm gonna turn that to the
livestock.
And I'm sure Senator Gel. I, I
think in my experience that that
could be.
Based on each individual
outbreak or each individual
occurrence. Um, we collaborate
as a team very well within this
agency. Uh, I will tell you that
New Mexico is very unique that
we have the uh state
veterinarian house with the
livestock board, so she has at
her really beck and call all of
our inspectors out there to
assist her in any type of
outbreak. Um, many of you know
and some of you don't, whenever
there was an outbreak in a
Texas.
this poultry farm, there was
some strike Force teams that we
took down to the eastern part of
the state and our inspectors
went door to door canvassing and
looking for any sick poultry and
advising any poultry owners on
what to look for. It was very,
very effective, um, and so we,
we had that event happened
twice.
So we collaborate as a team, um,
it could be that the state
brings it to the light of the
state that brings it to the
livestock board or vice versa.
It could be either way. I like
the collaboration effort that
goes on there, Madam chair.
I'm just playing devil's
advocate here, OK? There's
nothing in your bill, Senator
Wood, that if there's an entity
out there where there does
happen to, excuse me, have.
Some outbreak that is
devastating to either the
poultry, the cattle, equine.
Swine, the list goes on and on.
What if there's an NTT out there
that doesn't divulge this
information and there is an
outbreak.
Is there any process that the
state board has or the
veterinary board has.
That can prosecute these people
that failed to.
For the safety and welfare of
the people and the state of New
Mexico. That's, that's where
this one is going. Is there any?
Anything in here that would help
them along these lines?
I'm not seeing it.
I will, uh
uh.
manager, uh, senatoriesel.
So, if um, if you'll look at the
original bill, there was a, a
section in there, the original
subsection B that kind of
referred to maybe placing blame.
That's not what this bill is
intended for. We, we do not want
this bill to place blame on
anybody. What we're trying to do
strictly with this bill is to
protect protect the producer's
information. There are other
avenues, and there's
investigatory avenues, there's
other, um,
If it's, we just determine it
could be criminal. I mean, it
could be handled through our
investigators, the state police,
there's other avenues for that
type of action, OK.
In.
Doctor Hawley.
Madam Chair and senator, if I
can add to that, there actually
is current language in statute
that addresses people who failed
to report and so that is it was
not addressed in this additional
language does show up somewhere,
Madam Chair, that does make me
feel a whole lot better.
Whenever you're talking about
intentional or unintentional.
Happenings, events that do
happen.
Um
Whenever you do start an
investigation, I'm sure there
are blood samples that if
there's a death, there's any
cropsy probably done there's
probably.
Blood and urine samples drawn,
uh,
tissue samples that are drawn on
all that is is New Mexico
equipped with a lab that can.
help figure what the causes are.
How severe it's gonna get before
an animal may succumb or if they
can uh recover with medicines or
vaccines.
and Madam Chair, I'll let the
state veterinary answer that
thank you.
Excuse me, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, our state
diagnostic lab is equipped to
handle, uh, most disease
investigations. There are some
things that um because of the uh
severity of the disease or or
um.
The rarity of it that our lab
may not have full capability,
um, uh, and they are a
nationally accredited lab, but
um there are a series of
nationally accredited labs
across the country, each with
different capabilities depending
on what uh specific diseases
they are allowed to test for if
it is beyond the scope of our
state lab and we have uh
partnering labs in neighboring
states and we also have the
support of the National
Veterinary Services Lab.
Uh,
and there are those uh locations
in, in a few different parts of
the country and depending on
what that disease is and what it
affects, if those samples will
then be forwarded to that lab.
OK, I appreciate that.
And Madam Chair and Senator
Woods and Doctor Holland, uh,
I'm assuming you don't have to
have a contract with say
industrial lab in Colorado or
A&M or Matty Lab or anything
else because I know that these
labs.
For the safety and welfare.
That whole aspect there they're
gonna be able to work with y'all
to get you the results that you
need to stop this, this spread,
and I do appreciate that.
And Madam Chair and the state
vet.
you.
Madam Chair and senators they
all, uh, oftentimes those
initial samples are submitted by
private veterinarians, and so,
uh, are, you're correct, the
contract is not necessarily
needed in place, um, if we do
intervene as a state agency to,
you know, provide a regulatory
sampling, then we usually will
have a, we, we, we've got
prearranged um agreements to
submit to our lab and
neighboring labs as well as the
national lab.
Thank you very much, Senator
Woods, thank you for being here
today, Madam Chair, thank you
for allowing me this time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Senator for
bringing this forward. Um, I am
familiar with what's in your
bill, but my question is right
outside your bill, but it still
could be disease.
And I'm referring to PAS.
So when
PAS, high levels of PAS are
identified in certain areas of
our state.
And it affects the water and it
affects the livestock and it
affects the product.
That's not covered anywhere in
this bill. Is that correct?
Um
Madam chair
Speak to the
State veterinarian on that.
Madam Chair, uh, you're correct,
um, PFAS and other non-sea
issues are, are not um addressed
in this bill, so, uh, Madam
Chair and senator, uh, my point
is that.
There might be other
Uh, livestock owners that are
affected by circumstances here
in our state.
That might need um.
Some protections
And I know that usually there
are
Quite a few media reports when
these things happen around PAS,
uh, even around.
Uh, bird flu and other uh
entities that are going on and
people could start guessing the
livestock owners and producers,
but I'm just thinking in
advance, so please take that
into consideration. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill because I recognize
that.
This can be catastrophic on a
number of levels.
Um, you know, not only are we
talking about the producers,
we're talking about public
safety and I understand that
this is to remove barriers so
that you can gather the
information that you need to
prevent the disease from
spreading further.
Um, and also understanding that
people don't want their public
information out there.
Um, so that you can get more
reports, accurate reports and
accurate reading.
But I'm, I'm wondering what I
want to make sure though is that
that this would not allow you to
restrict access to the
information on the public. My,
my point is, is
You're gonna get this
information and you need this
information.
But you're still going to share
with the general public that
we've got an issue, we've got a
crisis, we've got to, we've got
to take these precautions. So
my, my right on that or or can
you assure me that that's
We're talking about public
safety here on all levels. So
I'm wondering if that's
something that you can assure me
about. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Hamlin, Madam Chairman.
I would like to state that uh
the state uh livestock board to
address that very question.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you for the question, Senator
Hamlin. I really do appreciate
that, um, we have tried to be.
specific on what can be
withheld, um, just so you are
aware we are working with some
open government advocates to
ensure that their concerns are
being met with some
substitutions that we're working
through, um, we don't want to
withhold vital information to
the public. We don't want to do
that while we're simply trying
to do is protect the producer
itself. So we've tried to
outline very specifically in
here what we can withhold and
the rest of it will be
available.
upon a request.
Do you have anything done?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Hamlin, I think one of the
biggest concerns that has come
forward obviously is public
safety and our collaboration
with other agencies such as New
Mexico Department of Health are
critical in helping to prevent
spread of a zoonotic disease and
that's that's the most
concerning thing, obviously, um,
so you're correct that we would
not be withholding information
about the disease itself or um a
general location of it, it would
specifically be that identifying
information of a producer.
Great, thank you very much.
That's all I needed. And, and
with that one last comment if I
could, as you know.
Um
Agriculture producers in the
state they're getting to be a
smaller piece of the all the
time.
And
And we're trying, we're striving
to get a small producers back in
we're trying, you know, just
like we was talking about that
uh case uh a bird flu when we
had to go out and
And try to track every bird in
the county.
And and think about that a
minute with that that had to be
done, but when you're trying to
incentivize or trying to
encourage small producers well
it's, it's uh uh uh again, uh,
uh, how do we protect those
producers
to to become.
Um, uh, profitable.
And, and one thing just to wipe
them completely out because of
the possibility of, of
ecoterrorism, anything like
that, so that's, that's one
thing this bill is trying to do
is is produce the produce uh
protect the producer himself.
I, I appreciate that, Madam
Chair, just 11 quick question
based on the sponsor's comments.
I'm wondering, my neighbors have
chickens and um.
When something like this
happens, if you can explain to
me briefly like.
If there are like folks who have
chickens in their backyards. How
do you go about like,
releasing that information,
working with those.
Backyard farmers, you know,
folks who have chickens who want
to know where their eggs come
from as well. How do you do
that?
and the state that will.
I got you.
Madam chair Sen Senator Hamlin,
that's a great question. Um, we
actually have a protocol in
place when there is a disease
located in a particular area as
Director Garland had mentioned,
um, with one of the responses um
from a Texas poultry flock.
Um, we, we literally went door
to door and uh in less than 48
hours, we had canvassed um
almost every neighborhood, um,
in that control zone based on
what was established by USDA to
make sure that one we could
identify where all of those
backyard flocks were located and
2 to make sure that there was no
presence of disease and most
importantly to educate those
poultry owners uh what to look
for and who to call if they did
find any disease.
Great, I really appreciate your
responses. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry I had to step out for just
a minute. I may be wrong about
this, but I heard nothing but
supporters lined up for you,
Senator, not one opposition.
And I've heard mostly I think
all support from everybody on
the committee so far.
Let me ruin your day, uh.
Uh, the bill goes to Senate
Judiciary, so I won't belabor
too much here too, but I, I, I
don't think this is a good idea.
Um, and what, what it does, of
course, is it says the board,
says the board or any authorized
representative.
Uh, may deny access to
information. That's always
troubling to me whenever we say
we're gonna deny information out
there and that that would to me
would mean denying information
to say the Department of Health
in a situation like this, which
could be pretty important.
Um, and it's denying it says
deny information when the
dissemination may cause harm to
a person.
I'm a poultry farm owner or
livestock owner and I've got an
outbreak of some kind of
disease, disseminating the
information that I've got that
outbreak or that disease is
going to be harmful to me.
Um, and I, I think that that's
unfortunate, and I regret that
as a farmer and a rancher
myself, but um it doesn't mean
that I should be able to keep it
private. And then, and it does
mean that I should be able to go
to the board and keep that
private. And the information
that would be private and
confidential would be.
Things like the numbers,
locations and movement,
movements of livestock. It'd be
pretty important, I think if I'm
trying to control a disease, uh,
to know the numbers of animals
affected and where they're at.
Um, and where you're moving them
or whether they're being
transported to, I would think
that's pretty important
information for the Department
of Health to know and perhaps
the public at large to know.
Again, it's gonna cause harm.
Uh, to that owner, I understand
that it could happen to you or
me or any of our businesses, but
I, I think that's important to
know. Also, this would mean that
they wouldn't have to disclose
their operational protocols,
that'd be pretty important, I
would think if you're trying to
control this, um, um, and, um,
information regarding the
disease itself information
related to the livestock
disease.
That would identify a person or
location.
That would be pretty important
to get if I'm trying to control
the outbreak of a disease is to
know the location of where that
disease is at and to say that
that we should keep that uh
confidential and private. I, I
don't think is ultimately in, in
the, the good of the of the
public at large in the industry
at large.
Um, so this would keep that um
confidential. I, I was looking
um you made, you made reference
one of you to, uh, about your
experts about.
This says that you can keep con
uh confidential data pursuant to
the veterinarian patient client
privilege. I'm looking at some
of the lawyers in the room.
There aren't very many, but I
don't think there is such a
thing. You told me there is.
I've never, and you, you, and
you nodding your head
affirmatively. So you think
there is, there is a veterinary
patient client is that in
statute?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you very much.
Actually, um,
Mr.
Senator Woods and Senator
Cervantes, yes, there is, and my
husband.
Made this point very clear to
the New Mexico Racing commission
investigator.
She went to the veterinarian
that was taking care of our
horses on the traction, and she
said, I want that information
for that horse. The veterinary
called us and that my husband.
I sleep with my attorney folks
and he is very he's a very good
attorney and uh.
He said absolutely no way, that
is our horse that horse can't
speak for itself, we are the
ones that would release those
papers to the investigators. So
yes, there is, there is protocol
there, whether it's in statute
or not, I don't know.
But it's just like
As somebody.
I'm
That that's all right. That's
right. And, and I did, I did
think that she might have a
direct answer. I don't really
all respect. I didn't, I don't
hear a direct answer. I don't,
my question is whether there's a
statutory privilege and in, in
New Mexico, most places a
privilege has to exist by
statute or by common law, and
that common law means there's a
case where the court is
recognized a privilege to exist,
so I, I'm not aware of a
statutory veterinarian
privilege, but um I'll, I'll
look forward to finding one if
there is one, and, and if there
isn't one, in the common law.
Then I'd have to disagree that
the one exists, so to say that
uh that you can maintain, that
you can maintain data.
Uh, confidentially pursuant to a
privilege, an argument might be
made that the legislature
established that privilege here
in this bill that we recognized
a privilege to exist and a a
good lawyer like uh Senator's
husband would say, hey, a
privilege exists because now
we've created one, right in this
bill and I, I just want to be
careful that we're gonna do
that, that we do so knowingly,
so, um.
Then, then sometimes your bill
doesn't make sense to me,
Senator. I'll just give you an
example. So in, in subsection A,
you're saying all the
information that could be
withheld, right? Uh, when
there's this finding that it's
gonna do harm to a person to
disclose it.
Um, then in subsection B it says
if the information is denied.
Pursuant to that section, the
board shall redact confidential
information and make the
remaining information available.
If you've denied the information
in subsection A, there'd be no
reason to redact the
confidential information because
you've already denied it, right?
So, subsection B doesn't make
sense to me with a if if you're
following along what I'm saying.
A says you don't have to
disclose all this stuff, he says
if you, if you've denied the
information, then you shall, uh,
release it, redacted and if it's
denied in it's denied, right?
There's no reason to, to give a
reactive version of that, again,
unless I'm reading that, so
that, that part didn't make
sense to me.
Um
Some of this also
Doesn't make sense to me and
again if you get to judiciary,
we'll probably work with you on
it, but you, you're in
subsection D says nothing in
this section shall preclude a
person in interest from
accessing the person's own
information.
Um
Senator, you, you, you've been
practicing law with me a long
time now, uh, to pass a law that
says nothing prevents a person
from having access to their own
information kind of uh
axiomatic, isn't it? I mean, you
know, you don't have to pass a
statute that says you can't keep
me from having my information
that I have, uh, that, that
didn't make sense to me.
Um, that says nothing in this
section prevents the release of
biological livestock samples. I
think that that's, I think that
that would be important to do,
to be able to be able to give
lab samples and biological
livestock samples. It says here
the third party entities for
testing.
That that would seem to be um
important to, to me the bill,
the bill says nothing prevents
that in this bill from
happening, but it doesn't uh it
doesn't also authorize it, and
I, I think that we should be
able to
Expect somebody to produce
biological samples of their
livestock or their fowl, and
we're trying to control a
disease or a terrorist, uh, you
know, motivated attack or
something of that kind, so.
Um
Then then subsection E reads at
the bottom page, she says, when
disclosing the information here,
the board or its representative
shall release only so much
information as is necessary to
address the situation. That's,
that's always the kind of
language that gets, you know, my
attention too, cause there's um
we're gonna make you only
release whatever information.
It is necessary to address the
situation doesn't mean anything,
right? If I'm a judge or I'm a
lawyer or I'm trying to advise a
client and I said, how much
information do I have to give?
And I tell him only that
necessary to address the
situation. Well, that, you know,
nobody's gonna agree what that
means, that'll be a fight,
right? Um, so respectfully those
are just some thoughts again, we
may have the same conversation
between now and judiciary or in
judiciary, but I, I didn't want
to give you my reasons for
voting against the bill at this
stage. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Would you like
What the heck.
Yes.
You know, and, and I apologize,
senator, that, that.
I'm trying to be very diplomatic
here.
That, uh
Sometimes we don't get bills
drafted maybe to say what we
should say.
Oh
We don't have the uh
particular legal expertise to
see the formal law.
That needs to be addressed.
Uh, what, what the intent was is
probably not is.
Well written
To say that we would not release
information to the Department of
Health.
It's probably a uh.
saying a misnomer.
Um, if it's written that way, I
don't think that's was the
intent that we have here.
Um
The intent is, is to protect.
food supply.
Is the intent
The uh
I've heard that uh you could
introduce.
Uh, foot and mouth disease into
a livestock hauling trailer.
If that trailer wasn't washed
out and it carried 10 loads of
animals across the nation.
We can have a break.
Widespread.
Thing happened
Within days
So the intent is to, to control.
The spread of disease.
And
If you have.
Uh, locations notified and
Curiosity seekers walk out
there.
And get contamination on their
feet.
On their hands on their.
Clothes
And then walk into a very
crowded public.
Space
And automatically start
spreading something.
Just because the information
came out that over at Joe Blow's
farm, something happened.
That's more of what we're
thinking about here.
It's, it's not
Trying to starve the the media
or the general public of
information.
It's trying to control the
disease outbreak.
And the more protection of
identity we give to a producer,
the more likely he will
voluntarily.
come forward
When something happens that is
unusual and as you know in a
confinement feeding operation.
And you may or may not know, but
in a confinement feeding
operation.
Sometimes a whirlwind comes
through, and all of a sudden you
have perfectly healthy animals.
You're sick.
And, and we want at that point
in time, we want them to notify
their vets to make sure they
come on and we want those vets
to notify our state vet or state
livestock board.
And we want that to happen
quickly.
And, and that
More the intent here.
Probably not written.
To that intent
It's not to restrict
information.
that information to the general
public that there's a problem
it's a restrict the exact
location.
So that we don't have a mass.
prompting over there to um
Googlers to look good lookers.
Look, he loses.
Maybe
That's eastern New Mexico. I'm
sorry. I forget that I'm in
Santa Fe once in a while.
But that's my intent, Madam
Chair, is, is more that, and I
know that it's probably not
written.
To the right degree.
And
I will be happy to uh uh.
other
Concentrate on the drafting.
But uh and I know we're not
supposed to.
Pass law that makes us feel
good.
With emotion
This is a this is a definite.
Deal
That I'm trying to address.
And uh
As you know,
I'm only shooting about 60% of
your committee,
the best I've ever done, but uh
if uh if it does go forward, we
will try to draft it to a better
degree than what it is today.
To address some of your
problems.
I'm cheering I, I just, you
know, you'll know it on the
first page it says that we're
going to build the board or its
representative may deny access
and when it says deny access it
says doesn't say to who. So this
is deny is presumably that means
to anybody or everybody without
any qualifications, so that,
that's the reason why I had the
concern and I'm just, I'm I'm,
I'm amused by the notion, but,
but I say this with respect that
somebody's got an outbreak at
their uh feed lot or their or
their fowl farmers and and
everybody's gonna want to
traipse over there and go check
it out. That, that doesn't seem.
like the world in which I
reality I live in, it's more
like, you know, I wanna get the
hell away from uh whatever it
may be, rather than let's go,
let's go check it out, but I, I
respect the fact that you're
telling me that happens, that
folks wanna go see uh a disease
or go break through it that
seems odd to me, but I, I
accepted that may happen.
For, for example, the
The uh race track down it.
So Park
There was an outbreak of of uh
horse disease down there and uh.
tried to react as quick as we
could.
Those horses started being
shipped out of there.
And, and we had a very hard time
tracing where those horses went.
And you know, uh,
It was
One reason was because those
owners of those horses.
Wanted to get him away from that
disease.
But if we could have caught that
quick enough we could uh.
We could confine that problem
instead of exposing the whole
industry.
do that.
So
I'm looking for a better way.
I'm looking for a better way and
looking for suggestions on top
of that, madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I'll be quick.
Just have some of the same
concerns as the chairman and
just what this bill is, and I
understand your intent.
You really feel.
With
Disease to really protect.
Some of these folks working in
Farming and an agriculture from
these outbreaks, but I'm just
concerned about the transparency
in the.
So
You know,
I'm well aware of those
concerns, ecoterrorism,
agro-terrorism.
Um, we all know what happens on
the internet, social media,
right? Really wreck someone.
I don't know if even doing this
protects folks from that, and my
concern is just the transparency
piece, just the way that
And so
I'm not going to be able to
support it as is.
Um, but I want to see what you
continue to work on, um, because
I think you are dealing with an
issue that we need to deal with.
I just can't support the way the
bill is presently.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
And Senator Woods, thank you. I
just two points on this. I
appreciate the, um, centering
the safety of producers and
trying to balance transparency
for the public. And to that
point, I'm looking at page 23.
Um, such information would cause
harm to.
And I'm not feeling well today,
so bear with me.
Information would cause harm to
such persons, I understand how
that is centering the safety of
the producer.
Then it goes on to say or would
be contrary to public interest
and that piece, the contrary to
public interest, I feel like
that's too much discretion who
deems um
What is contrary to public
interest. I just, I have an
issue with that. And then
further down on that page, line
12, um, when we're talking about
personal identifying
information. I, I can't wrap my
head around how operational
procedures and not disclosing
those.
Um, which strengthen the intent
of this bill, and so maybe if
you could speak to that, but
otherwise, um.
That's, that's all I have, Madam
Cha. Thank you.
chair, I'll let the, the state
vet speak to that.
Madam Madam Chair, Senator
Charlie, operational protocols
in this respect, um, really
focused on biosecurity.
And by releasing biosecurity
plans for a producer or their
facility, we divulged weaknesses
in in their facility and thereby
make them uh you know, a
potential target.
And so that I mean that
certainly can be further
elucidated.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Senator, I have an idea.
Since, uh
Senator Cervantes is gonna poo
poo on your party, I would, uh,
I would suggest you roll it
instead of lose it today because
this is an important deal.
And it needs to and
I was hopeful that he would
Continue his effort to work on
bills as he has in the past and
and carry it forward so it could
get fixed, but
Instead of voting it down today.
Let's try to, if if you might
consider rolling it.
Working with them, trying to get
it fixed and bring it back. Um,
because it is important and
needs to occur. Thank you,
Senator Townsend for that good
idea. I had a couple of
suggestions, but I think it'd be
more important to work with the
chair of judiciary, but my
suggestion, um, and I know one
of them he'd hate is um to
write, to encourage.
To encourage cooperation in the
production of information so
that the, the whole thing is
interpreted, um, so as to
encourage people to come forward
because I think it's an
important bill, and then I was
confused also by May and I, and
then I got to, um, if that
access to information, I believe
you should say is granted.
Um, then, then you shall redact.
Um, it does give a lot of
discretion, so I personally.
Um
I think that they, they should
redact it if it's gonna harm
somebody, they should redact it,
and I was thinking that you
might want to scale down what
is, what is uh redacted or what
is prepared. I totally agree
that financial information
should not be shared. I totally
agree that maybe ownership
numbers specific locations and
movements of livestock maybe
shouldn't uh be shared the
purchase and sale of livestock.
I don't see how that's relevant
to the
To um
To this issue and, and it could
harm people, so it shouldn't be
shared, um, the operational
details I I appreciate that
explanation. I think it might be
better to be more clear about
about it cause I was like
operational details, what is it?
And then when you explain that's
biosecurity.
Then why don't you, um, put that
in, but, you know, the
biosecurity details of the
operation, um, and then, um,
So I, so what I would suggest
is, is, uh, slimming this down
the list of things that may well
consider.
Putting a shell in there and
having the things that you
really want protected, listed,
and then maybe the things that
you want discretion to list
listed separately.
Um, and then the redaction
provision would be, would be
next. Those are just suggestions
for for making it clear, but I
would suggest you work with the
Senate Judiciary chair, um,
since that, that's where you go
next.
Um, but I support the idea of
this bill. I'm gonna vote for
this bill because I want it to
move forward unless you want to.
Bring it back to this committee
and save judiciary chair, uh,
time in judiciary.
It's, it's up to you, but I'm
prepared to vote for the bill
and, and let you move on to I'm
not counting very good because
uh I think they've got enough
votes to kill it is what I see
so uh what I would suggest is to
roll the bill and see if I could
bring it back, Madam Chair.
And to a point that uh.
You know, I can flash it to you
guys.
And see if this is close to what
you have and uh what you desire
or more in the line and, you
know, we can do this offline and
and and stood uh taking the
committees.
Uh, we can, we can actually.
Run it by you guys to see if
this is is something that you
might go for and then uh instead
of trying to take up a lot of
committee time, uh, but if you
would kind of reserve me a spot
with maybe I could get back in
here.
I'd appreciate it. Would you
prefer Thursday or Saturday?
Let's try, let's try Saturday.
OK, we will roll this bill over
until Saturday.
OK.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your
consideration.
We are meeting Saturday for
certain.
So members um we are so far
behind we have booked this room
for uh a few Saturdays. We are
planning this next Saturday, the
15th, and we are planning
Saturday the 22nd to see if we
can catch up.
Once house bills come to this
committee.
We probably won't be hearing
Senate bills.
And regardless of party, they go
to the bottom of the list.
So, um, we are trying to respect
our Senate colleagues and get as
many done as possible.
So we are planning on meeting
this Saturday, this past
Saturday, we met for 5 hours.
And I thank the committee for
their attendance and we will.
How on today and get his money
done, but we are meeting
Saturday morning.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, um,
the next one is prohibit certain
solar covenants, Senate Bill 98.
Yeah
Good morning again, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
this bill is brought to
Uh, address some of the issues
that
Homeowners have within homeowner
associations.
And whether they are allowed to
participate in renewable energy
projects. So,
This bill, Senate Bill 98 amends
the existing statute.
Section 3-18-32 that states a
county municipality or covenant
restriction or condition and a
deed contract, or other
instrument affecting the
transfer or sale of property
that prohibits the installation
or use of a solar collector is
void and unenforceable.
Senate bill of 98 would include
a condition and example about
unenforceability of prohibiting
the installation of a solar
collector.
Where covenants, conditions, and
restrictions that number one
increase the cost to the
consumer of purchasing and
installing a solar collector by
more than 10% or a total of
$1500.
Or 2, reduce the efficiency of
operating a solar collector by
more than 10%.
Additionally, Senate Bill 98
provides attorney fees to a
prevailing party in an action to
enforce compliance, Madam Chair
members of the committee, I have
constituents and a couple
different areas of my district
that have issues with their HOAs
in terms of where they are
allowed to, um, place their
solar and with me today I have
Miss Susan Martin, who requested
that I investigate this and
bring this forward.
Susan.
on the
Thank you Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um, my
name is Susan March and I live
in Santa Fe County outside the
city limits and um and I'm in a
neighborhood with a homeowners
association and architectural
control committee, um, 2 years
ago my husband and I started the
process of, of installing solar
panels and uh we, we uh
contacted a a contractor who
determined that uh because we
were on a north facing um a
North.
Northwest lot, uh, and then we
had a north facing roof, we
could not do a roof
installation, we would have to
do a land mount. The only
possible place was on the um.
On the section of our land that
is right on the corner, our
corner lot, so there were our uh
in our covenant says that um
solar panels have to be
invisible and inaudible from the
street, so because we have a
driveway there was about 5 5 ft
different places where people
could actually see him through
the trees and and see the.
Solar collectors, uh, we met
with the um with the
architectural control committee,
that was our first step.
Who told us that they would have
to deny that because we, we, um,
Those who who walk by our street
would be able to see it. They
said the only possibility was um
a variance in order to do this,
um,
We understood that that because
this was our only option we took
that but we requested from our
homeowners association to amend
the covenant in the next annual
meeting of the
Of the Homeowners Association,
which is the only time one can
change the covenants. We were
denied that, um, and, uh, so we
accepted the variances, but
continued to um continue to say
that we thought that the the um.
The invisibility and
inaudibility was actually a um a
violation of the um New Mexico
Solar Rights Act because we
could not
um we we could not meet that.
There's a second area in our
Santa Fe County, El Dorado is a
community that had um a solar
covenant, uh, for their
homeowners, and it was it.
Uh, resulted in a lot of
litigation and contention and
and additional expense for
homeowners. They removed their
solar covenant and uh were then
sued by a homeowner who said
that reduced their property
value, uh, uh, judge denied that
but um that was overturned and
uh it, it was shown in court
that actually having solar
panels can increase property
value.
So, um, I think that we can
recognize that climate warming
is real. Um, we looked at other
states, uh, that, um, uh, that
have had clarifying language in
their solar Rights Act and
states that set a 10% or higher
limit uh to additional
expenditures over the cost of uh
stalling a PV system or Colorado
at 10%.
California at 10% with a $1000
limit. Hawaii at 15% and New
York at 10%, um, there's also a
a requirement on the, the, um,
the HOA restrictions cannot
reduce the efficiency of solar
and uh states with a 10%
reduction in efficiency clause
include Illinois, Nevada,
Michigan, Virginia, and
California and Hawaii permits a
25% reduction in.
So Madam Chair, in conclusion
before we go to the audience,
um, this is an issue that um.
You know, pervades homeowners
associations and today I'm only
addressing solar. I'm not
addressing all issues for um
homeowners associations, so I'd
be happy to hear comments.
Thank you Madam Chair. Is there
anyone in the audience in
support of this bill? Is there
anyone in the audience opposed
to this bill?
Not seeing any opponents will
just have the supporters come
and uh speak briefly.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Desjardin. I'm the
executive director of the
renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico.
We are blessed with having the
2nd best solar access.
In the country. And we've also
been blessed with the fortitude
of the New Mexico state
legislature to pass the Solar
Rights Act that makes most
restrictions on insulation of
solar panels unenforceable.
However, there are some
ambiguities as to what is a
reasonable request by a
homeowners association or a
government body requiring
modifications of of a solar
system based on aesthetic or
other concerns.
This bill defines what is
reasonable by putting in place
limits on what can be requested
by a homeowners association or
government body on additional
cost or degradation of energy
production that such changes
could cause. We believe that the
clarity of this bill provides
help for HOAs, municipalities,
solar owners and contractors.
Thank you and thank you to the
sponsor for bringing this
forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Camilla
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter, a fair
number of our 35,000 members and
supporters around the state have
faced some of these types of
restrictions in their HOAs and
have been asked to make
unreasonable changes either to
their systems or to their
properties to facilitate um
something that's simply a
consumer choice, good looking
solar panels that we all need to
make sure that our state doesn't
continue.
to feel the deep effects of
climate change. We need to be
able to see those early signs of
climate change to take further
action and our members want to
help with that, but HOAs can be
a little difficult.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee, uh,
this is uh Jim McKenzie. I'm um
co-coordinator of 350 New Mexico
Environmental Organization. I'm
based in Central New Mexico, uh,
with somewhere between 600 and
7000 members. Uh, thank you for
this opportunity. I just want to
be very brief. Um, my experience
with the HOAs in general is they
tend to overreach.
Um, and be very restrictive on
their members in
Name of
protecting property values. I
think this bill.
Illustrates an important
instance where there are things
maybe more important.
Um, then, then the
Sole criteria of restricting.
A property values and we've
heard testimony that that isn't
even really the case. So we just
wanna unambiguously stand in
support of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, and I understand
there's uh someone, one person
online, Barbara Calif.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Cale and I'm
speaking for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. The league
supports policies to promote the
development of clean renewable
energy sources, prohibiting
covenants that increased costs
of solar installations will help
keep down the cost of installing
solar collectors and encourage
more such installations. I urge
you to vote for this bill. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, Ms. Calif.
So that's all we have from the
public. Um, I will turn it over.
To the committee.
Senator Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, I'm not a member of a
homeowners association, so.
Don't guess I know quite.
How they work.
Were these covenants that were
entered into.
Some sort of surprise or were
they?
Developed with the original
subdivision.
And with an opportunity.
For the homeowners or
perspective.
purchasers to review the
covenants.
And sign off
As being appropriate.
Before they purchased the home.
So, um, Madam Chair and Senator,
before I turn to my advocate,
um, some homeowners associations
are established before people
even buy their homes.
And uh they, those homeowners
associations don't even turn
over the governance of those
HOAs until a certain percentage
of the homes might be purchased
and I'm speaking in uh respect
to an area south of Santa Fe
called Rancho Viejo.
So there are 3 homeowners
associations down there, but
they couldn't take over their
own governance from the owners
of the land until they sold out
10 number of properties, but
I'll turn this back to my
advocate on this particular
question.
So the covenants were adopted as
they uh usually are, they were
at the request of the board and
they were adopted at the annual
homeowner's meeting, yes, so
they were.
We, we were certainly aware of
it, yes, but.
But um we became a lot more
aware of it when we
Became a potential consumer of
solar panels.
So madam
Senator an expert.
In these covenants were no
surprise.
Prior to the purchase of the
home, they were.
Readily available to.
Anybody that wanted to look.
Well, in our case the.
So
Covenants uh came much later
than uh than when we purchased
our home but yes we were aware
of them there was public notice
to the to the homeowners that
they were in existence, they
were.
And they were um they were
proposed by the
The um
The board of the um.
Of the homeowners. So Madam
Senator, I am a member of a
homeowners association that is
comprised of 5 properties.
And um after I purchased my
home, I had no idea that we even
had any HOA because we're in a
rural area.
And it wasn't until somebody
wanted to move in a um.
A prefab or
a trailer that it came to my
attention that that was not
permissible.
But again, uh, there are.
We tell people in the country.
Buyers beware because you don't
know what you're getting into
and homeowners associations
covenants are one of those
things. So you might say that
everyone should educate
themselves, but that's not
always the situation.
And in some cases, uh, for
example, in El Dorado, when that
case came up, there were people
who did not have enough they
were prohibited from using
rooftop solar.
And there are many people who
didn't have enough property.
To put solar on the land.
Because of the size of the
locks, so, um, I think that.
You're correct in some
situations, people know and in
other situations people don't
know.
And
Madam Chair, Senator, I
I thought that would have been.
The disclosure item on a real
estate.
Purchase and sale.
Document
That's not the case.
Not always, uh, Madam Chair,
senator, and in fact in Santa Fe
County when I was a county
commissioner, we actually, uh,
passed a non-binding resolution
that was uh a buyer beware, uh,
situation.
And it had to do with water. It
had to do with property lines.
It had to do with many things.
And
Madam Chainstrom particularly
interested in this case because
Levers representing testimony
that
There was no north facing roof.
What we need, I think is a
south.
Facing roof.
more pal,
I'm sorry, Madam Chair and
senator, and my apologies. Um,
we were prohibited we were
precluded from, from, uh, aroma
because our roof, uh, slopes
north, so I, I misspoke. Our,
our roof slopes north, so that
was not a possibility and we
had, uh, we had other um
problems with the construction
that we couldn't put it on the
roof, which left us only a land
mound as a possible.
OK, so, Madam Chair and Experis
was a mechanical problem or
increased cost.
Problem that precluded.
That
Installation
On the top of the building.
Is that accurate?
Madam Chair and and senator,
that is correct.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for your answers.
Thank you. I have Senator
Cervantes and then Senator
Townsend.
Thank you. uh, this bill goes to
Senate Judiciary, where I think
it belongs, um, if it gets
through this committee, of
course, I, I approach um.
Subjects like this, Senator,
with my background in
architecture, you know, I've got
a license as an architect and
background, and one of the
things that I love about being
an architect is the beauty of
New Mexico, and particularly
here in Santa Fe, the commitment
to natural colors, to natural
materials, to
Adobes and browns and woods and
so forth and, and I, I
understand that.
And, and I'm, I'm one of those
people that architecturally
solar panels are inconsistent
with that aesthetic, and, and
aesthetics are important to me
as an architect, you might
expect.
And so I choose to live uh in a,
in a couple of places where
there are covenants.
That limit and restrict what
people can and cannot do with
their property.
Because I want to be part of
that kind of a neighborhood and
that environment where there's a
consistency to the appearance.
Uh, the, the questions of
Senator Scott and you um I've
represented a lot of developers
and developments what typically
does is a developer when they do
a new subdivision, maybe like
your experience, they imposed
the covenants at the inception
when they do the subdivision,
you know that as a county
commissioner when they, when
they get the county to approve
the subdivision of property,
they uh set forth the covenants,
and the covenants become a
matter of record. They're
recorded with the county clerk
and they become objects of title
and so when you purchase a
property, there's a reference to
the covenants and typically the
or even part of the closing
documents. Usually they're
provided at closing, and I see
your, your expert nodding your
head affirmatively. She knows
that too. So when you've got cos
your property, you typically get
that when you go to closing out,
at the closing, you're gonna get
a stack of documents that are 1
inch thick, and so you're told
to sign here and sign here and
sign here. You may not be paying
quite attention to everything,
but you're gonna get the
covenants probably at closing if
if the company is doing their
job well and they don't want to
get sued for not disclosing the
covenants to you as the buyer,
um, so they're, they're
typically known.
Um, if you're, if you're taking
the time to do so, but, but back
to the architectural part of
things, um, I can understand
where a neighborhood might want
to see solar panels in a place
like El Dorado or Santa Fe and
so forth and and may have
conditions and this is not
uncommon in in covenants where
in my, in my situation, we often
see things like air
conditioners, air conditioners
can't be um on uh unconcealed.
You have to have a fence around
them. You have to have a wall
around them, you have to kind of
hide them somehow um that and
other.
and other things, um, garage,
RVs, uh, tool sheds, things like
that, we oftentimes see
covenants and say you got it,
you're gonna do those things,
you gotta hide them or else
they're prohibited entirely
again to try and create that.
That uniformity and, and I, I
respect um the roles of
homeowners associations to do
that. I really do. To me, that's
a democratic process. And so I
appreciate your, your um.
Your proponent for the bill
owing to the HOA, that was a
good thing to do.
Um, and ask them to maybe modify
those covenants and they have
the authority to do that, but
they declined to do so.
And to me that's the democratic
process. They, that's kind of
like what we're doing here, if
you get to your homeowners, you
say I want to be able to,
there's a, there's a house here
in Santa Fe. We have a second
home here and there's a house
here in Santa Fe that's just a
senator, you may, you may be
aware of this, uh, because you
represent part of Santa Fe.
There's a garishly painted
house, the pink house now you
may know about it or hear about
it. Everybody's kind of smiling
about it, everybody in town kind
of knows about this this.
Well, well, it's not like this
one. I mean, this one's in the,
this one's on the front page of
the Santa Fe, New Mexican and so
it's just horrible. It's, it's
terribly garish and, and, you
know, they're appealing to the
city of Santa Fe and so forth
and eventually they'll get sued
by the homeowners who comply
with the covenants. And again,
that's the idea that the
mountainside here in Santa Fe
wants to look brown in Pueblo
looking, um, and, and that's
kind of a, uh, a decision I
think by the community and and
those who want to live in it and
I, again, I respect.
That right too, so I support uh
the the idea behind the existing
law which says we shouldn't do
anything in covenants to
prohibit solar. I think that's
good. We all support solar, but
I also respect the right of
folks do not expect to have to
look at it, um, from their
windows and, and I have that
situation in, in my house in Las
Cruces, my backyard looks up to
a house above me and they put a
bunch of solar panels out back
and it was horrible because we
had a beautiful view of the
Oregon mountains before, and now
I have a view of the
with solar panels in front of
it. Now, the homeowner was nice
enough to work with me and talk
to, talk to me, and we planted
some landscaping and, and some
various things around there, so
I don't look at the Oregon
mountains with solar panels, uh,
but, but I'm sure most folks
could understand that when I
bought the house, I thought I'd
have a beautiful view of the
Oregon mountains and to say that
and the and the covenant said
you couldn't do that, you
couldn't put solar panels, but
then we passed a law that says
the covenants are superseded by
us, so they were able to do
that, um, but we worked
together, so I, I, I do, um.
I do hope you can work with your
neighbors, ma'am. I mean, I
think that ultimately, what's
the, the old expression good
fences make good neighbors, um.
You, you know, uh, forcing your
solar panels on folks that that
don't wanna see them um and and
are voting by their, by their
action in the homeowners
Association is just gonna lead
to I think bad feelings and so I
I hope that there's a better
solution than this. I also don't
think that it's a good idea to
do what this bill does, which is
put a fixed dollar amount. In
other words, this says that uh
you can't expect anybody to
spend more than $1500 to do
this, to conceal this anytime
you put a fixed dollar amount
you ignore the fact we're making
laws here for pre
leave all time and so uh what
$1500 is today may not be
$1500.05 years or 10 years from
now, we can't be coming here
every few years, upping the
dollar amount for the cost of
doing this and, and I don't know
$1500 to conceal a solar panels
in Santa Fe is not gonna be
$1500 in uh in Las Cruces we, we
were talking about a bill of
judiciary yesterday there's that
little bridge next to the
Supreme Court. You'll know that
little bridge you pass by in on
Alameda. It's been under
construction for about 3 years,
right? Um, and
And uh, so a few of us on the
committee last night
volunteered, we, we'll come and
get it done in a week, uh, and,
and, uh, Senator Worth
volunteered that the cost in
Santa Fe to fix that little
bridge is about a $1.2 million
which
Senator Kerry Hamlin and I can
go get some of our friends down
the valley, come up and do it in
a week and probably do it for
about $10,000 but, but, but, but
yeah, but the prices in Santa Fe
are not the prices everywhere
else, so I just think it's a uh
not a good idea to put a fixed
dollar amount on what you can
do, so, um, I, I, I won't
support the bill, Senator, but I
appreciate the problem. It is a
it is a concern legitimately so.
If it proceeds, we'll see it in
the judiciary.
Oh, I'm sorry, just one last
thing I want to share. The other
thing that I would caution you
on too, it's just uh um an
opportunity for the non-lawyers.
Your bill also includes a an
attorney's fee provision.
Uh, you can consider that gone
if you get to the judiciary, um,
just an opportunity that we
follow the American rule, not
the English rule, so we don't
award attorneys' fees to the
prevailing party in most cases,
there's some exceptions for
civil rights and, and a certain
subjects where we decided that
that big guy versus the little
guy means the little guy's got
to get attorney's fees to have
have an incentive to do that,
but generally we don't award
attorneys fees to the prevailing
party. That's the old English
rule and and that was designed
designed by the king to make
sure that people wouldn't sue
the king, right?
Uh, so if you, if you lost to
the king and the king could get
their attorney's fees from you,
you'd be destitute in no time
but also nobody sued the king,
uh, the American rule, we call
the American rule is meant to
even the playing field quite a
bit more. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Senator Townsend.
Uh, thank you, man. Uh,
many members of
Madam Chair,
Senator Townsend, um, there are
99 lots in the in the
subdivision, so there.
Um, and I,
I think there's perhaps 2 that
are.
Yeah, 99 lots of 9.
And by chance, Madam chair and,
and.
and do we have any idea whether
you have, do we know that?
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Senator Townsend at the um.
At the homeowner's meeting, um,
right after this occurred, um,
we were denied and, you know,
and an ability to amend the
covenant there, but we were able
to speak in um in the public
comment section and we, uh,
stated our position and um
I, I cannot definitely say but
but a majority of people who
attended that meeting were in
support of us and we did, uh, we
actually had gone around to all
of our neighbors and they, they
had all written emails to the
homeowners association and the
architectural control committee
that they had no problems with
the installation at that point,
so we.
Uh, we, we did make attempts,
uh.
I appreciate it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else, Madam Secretary,
will you call the?
Always their emotions, yeah.
Madam chair, would you like to
make a motion? Uh, Madam Chair,
I'll move with Dupes on Senate
Bill 98.
Madam
Sinner Cervantes.
I want to know, Senator Charlie.
Charlie, yes, Senator.
Saint Joel? No. Senator Hamlin.
And Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope.
Yes. Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Senator Scott, no, Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, no, Sansa Lopez,
Senator Lopez, Senator
Stephonics, yes.
Mad and chaired by a vote of 5
to 4, you have a due pass.
Thank you both very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, everyone. We're now
on to
And Bill 99. No fuel less than
zero carbon intensity.
Senators Dia Lopez, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, I was sort of hoping this
bill would kind of slide through
quickly, only because, um, no
one is relying on it, the
regulations about this, um,
under the the clean
transportation fuel standard
program have not been um
preferred there's not been a
regulation, uh, or I believe the
process may be.
Scheduled, but they, there are
no regulations in place, and
this is to um.
Basically it's to fill it, fill
a hole or or fill a.
A problem with the clean
transportation fuel standard
program because carbon
intensity, uh, can be, um.
is valued in a program that
would be set up by the
rulemaking process, and right
now, if there is a um farm and
and that actually doesn't exist.
They don't have the technology
in New Mexico either right now
that wanted to mitigate its uh
biogas emissions, they could
theoretically under the and I
hope they don't do this in
rulemaking, but in under in the
rulemaking process, the way the
statute is, um, these
individuals could get a negative
credit.
And if they got this negative
credit, they could sell it to an
industry this and and.
They they would be the industry
would use the credit and also.
The farm would um would have an
incentive to use to to do this,
but that methane that would be
withheld would be burnt.
would go into the atmosphere, so
this is not really a solution. I
wanted to quote when I liked one
of the the in in the fur.
Abner analysis notes that
opponents of assigning negative
carbon intensity to fuels.
Believe that the assignment can
encourage complacency in the
larger effort of emissions
reduction and could create
delays in the transition to
cleaner energy sources. That's
exactly why we are bringing this
bill forward we want energy we
want reductions in the emissions
to be real and not just on paper
and with that, um, I have Alexa
Reynard, who is my expert, and
Madam Chair, we also have Tyler
Lobdell, an attorney, um, who is
on the Zoom, I believe.
that the secretary got, I
believe you got notice of that
and he's, is he on?
Tyler, uh, Tyler Libdell.
OK.
So, uh, but I would like to turn
it over to uh Ms. Reynard to say
a few words. So, um,
Miss Reynard, instead of Emily
Tucker.
Reynard, OK, please go ahead.
Yes.
Can you hear me?
Yes
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, my
name is Alexa Renaud. I'm an
organizer with Food and Water
Watch, but I'm also a born and
raised New Mexican. Um, Food and
Water Watch fights for
sustainable food, clean water,
and a livable climate for all of
us. The clean, um, we currently
represent over 26,000 members,
um, and volunteers across the
state of New Mexico.
The clean transportation fuel
standard um program as it
currently stands, could
negatively transform the
character of farming and
ranching in New Mexico.
This is because it prioritizes
factory farm biogas. Um, this is
a gas that is created by putting
cattle manure into a digester
for bacteria to break down into
gasses for subsequent capture.
This is also um an emergency um
an emerging sector. Thank you.
Um, that is heavily industrial
and bears no resemblance to
traditional farming and
ranching.
But factory farms also pollute
our water and air, um, emissions
from these facilities contain
toxic pollutants that cause
nearby residents to experience
health issues, including
headaches, fatigue, and asthma.
Additionally, these facilities
harm our water resources, excess
nutrients run off into surface
and groundwater polluting them
while the factory farms
themselves also require an
exorbitant amount of water to
actually operate. This is 32
million gallons of water per
day.
Factory farms also harm our
small and medium sized family
scale farmers, according to the
United States Department of
Agriculture's census of
Agriculture between the years of
2017 and 2022, New Mexico lost
44% of our small scale dairy
farms, while the average herd
size at factory farms increased
an average of 600 head of
cattle.
The clean transportation fuel
standard proposes to award
negative carbon intensity values
to factory farm biofuels based
off of a policy called avoided
methane crediting.
Because of this, there is a
greater incentive with this
program to deploy a fleet of 3
diesel trucks and one compressed
natural gas truck running on
factory farm gas than there is
to deploy 4 fully electric
trucks with no tailpipe
emissions.
This bill would ensure that the
clean transportation fuel
standard does not create
perverse incentives for factory
farms to actually increase their
pollution to make a profit off
of the ensuing methane capture.
Unfortunately this concern is
not unfounded. Similar programs
in other states are already
resulting in this bill SB 99.
Um, for example, between 2012
and 2017, her sizes in this in
California San Joaquin Valley
grew by 12%, but after avoided
methane crediting was added to
the low carbon fuel standard.
Hertz sizes grew by an alarming
42%.
This shows how quickly factory
farms have expanded as a. This
bill is our opportunity to stop
similar entrenchment from
happening in New Mexico and
instead would create a a
critical guardrail to the
program to ensure global
transportation fuels. Madam
Chair, thank you.
Uh, Tyler Lipdell, I believe
he's here for answering
questions. I don't believe he
has a statement.
Oh, so he's on Zoom to answer
questions in in case we need uh
he has been involved in this uh
nationally and he's available to
answer any technical questions
that and who is his, his name is
Tyler Libdell.
He's an attorney.
He is with
You watch
food and water watch,
OK, food and water watch. Yes,
OK.
Thank you. We will now go to the
audience by show of hands who
supports this bill?
OK, 6 dozen. How many people
oppose this bill.
Got a 6.
Um, online.
One supporting.
Supporting or opposed 3
supporting.
And he opposed one opposing. OK,
so we have enough time if it's
very brief.
All the supporters, please come
up.
And let's start very briefly,
like a minute apiece.
And then we'll go to the
opponents.
Please somebody start.
The clock is ticking.
For this opportunity, um, so
again, I'm uh Jim McKenzie at
350, New Mexico. Uh, we stand in
support of this bill, um.
So carbon offsets.
Or an interesting concept that's
been introduced into legislation
in this state and other states,
uh, it is in our view, somewhat
of a counting gimmick.
Um
It had
Uh, supposed benefits to the
environment.
In terms of reducing methane, I
am familiar with some other ways
that methane is used in this
state. So just briefly want to
enumerate that.
One of the things that's called
out in this bill is landfills.
Of which produce
Uh, methane
Uh
Emissions from from landfills
are regulated by the EPA?
And I personally visited.
The pollution control at the
Albuquerque landfill.
Uh, and what they use methane
for in that situation, they use
methane to incinerate the VOCs,
which are controlled by statute
as well. So there are already
using methane. My point is that
this bill does not
Prohibit
The burning of methane.
Uh, it just prohibits the use
and credits in the
transportation sector. The
second example you're, you're
going on a little too long for
the rest of this real quick
point of farmers currently are
using methane in their
operations, oftentimes dairy
farmers use it to heat water.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Uh, Madam Chair, senators, uh,
my name is Emily Tucker. I am a
New Mexico organizer with Food
and Water Watch. Um, I live in
Albuquerque. Um, I am speaking
in support of this bill. Um, I,
um, I want to highlight a little
bit about how this bill would
address some of the
environmental justice concerns
that could arise from the clean
transportation fuel standard as
it stands now. Uh, most of the
communities on the front lines
of factory farms in New Mexico
are low income or communities of
color, not only are these
communities subject to air
pollution that
Impacts health, uh, but there's
also the impact in reduced
property values, as well as
contaminated drinking water, um,
a dry wells as well is an issue.
Um, factory farm biogas requires
massive amounts of manure to be
profitable, which means that
larger dairy herds, uh, which
means larger dairy herds to
produce more manure and larger
herds means more direct impacts
to the neighbors of these
facilities that are already
struggling under the burden. Um,
it also means that the largest
facilities will continue to have
a leg up over small and medium
family farms in a time where it
is harder than ever to, uh, keep
up, um, if you're a small or
medium sized family.
farmer, which is extremely
worrying when we know that our
family farmers have been good
stewards of the land for
generations, um, and we don't
have food without family farms.
OK, thank you, we're gonna go
on. Thank you.
Madam Chair, vice chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Anneli Lopez, and I'm here on
behalf of Yaca. We are strongly
supporting Senate Bill 99
because it ensures that New
Mexico's climate policies are
not undermined by industry
greenwashing.
Fossil fuel companies and
certain biofuel producers have
attempted to claim that their
fuels have a negative carbon
intensity, suggesting that they
are actively removing more
carbon from the atmosphere than
they emit. But this is
misleading and dangerous,
allowing such claims would
distort our emissions data,
weaken our climate policies, and
provide unjustified financial
incentives to polluters rather
than investing in real carbon
reduction strategies.
Senate Bill 99 is a common sense
measure that ensure its carbon
intensity calculations remain
transparent, accurate, and
reflective of real world impact.
By preventing fossil fuel
companies from manipulating
carbon accounting data, we can
protect public trust in climate
policy and ensure that
incentives are directed towards
legitimate emission reductions.
New Mexico is already facing
devastating consequences of
climate change from extreme
drought to wildfires. We cannot
afford policies that give
polluters a free pass under the
illusion of negative carbon
intensity. Instead, we must hold
industries accountable and
prioritize real science,
science-based solutions that
move us towards a just and
equitable transition. For these
reasons, we urge you to vote in
favor.
Thank you. Next, please.
Thank you, Chair committee. Uh
my name is Colin Cox from the
Center for Biological Diversity,
uh, the center supports SB 99
because it will help New Mexico
avoid the mistakes that other
other states have recently made.
It will help prevent the abuse
of emissions credits. It will
help prevent polluting
industries from gaming and
undermining our clean
transportation fuel standard.
Um
And if New Mexico wants to be a
climate leader, we must
demonstrate that leadership by
actually reducing greenhouse
gasses from the our most
polluting industries.
Um, not with creative math that
incentivizes dirty.
Thank you. Uh, would the
opponents in the room start
lining up who wish to speak
online, do we have anybody, any
supporters who wanted to speak.
OK, so online we're gonna go
first to Yanni Sainarius.
Who is opposing
But he's go, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Yanni Perez. I'm the state
legislative affairs manager with
the Coalition for Renewable
Natural Gas, speaking in
opposition to SB 99, uh, this
bill ignores the science and
would cripple New Mexico's
ability to address its severe
methane problems, including the
largest concentration of
elevated methane ever measured
in the United States. Uh, the
legislative finance Committee's
analysis exposes major issues.
Multiple state agencies warned
that this bill would harm
methane capture projects, as
well as limit limit alternative
fuel.
participation. The analysis
directly states that negative
carbon intensity values are
significantly valid when a
fuel's production removes more
potent greenhouse greenhouse
gasses than it emits. The
science is clear, methane is 20
times more potent than CO2 when
RNG projects capture methane
from existing waste streams,
they achieved genuine negative
carbon emissions, turning a
major climate liability into an
asset. This isn't theoretical,
it's proven science, recognized
by the EPA and states that lead
on this issues like California,
Oregon and Washington.
The bill also rests on
thoroughly debunked assumptions.
Critics claim that RNG drives
farm consolidation, but the
California Air Resources Board's
extensive research found zero
differences in growth rates
between dairies with and without
digesters. And with that, I, we
urge the committee to reject
this bill. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, Patrick Killen online and
then Larry Sontag, and then
we'll go to Thank you, Madam
Chair. Can you hear me OK?
Yes
Great. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Patrick Kellen,
registered lobbyist for Chevron.
Last year, Chevron supported
passage of the Clean Fuel
Standard, but we strongly oppose
SB 99. SB 99 will ban clean
fuels program credits for
negative carbon intensity fuels
like renewable natural gas, or
RNG and biogas. These fuels are
produced from organic waste,
which would otherwise contribute
to greenhouse gas emissions by
capturing and utilizing methane
emissions, RNG and bio
gas projects significantly
reduced carbon footprint and
provide a valuable source of
transportation fuel. Banning
credits for these fuels will
actually hinder progress towards
climate goals and impact rural
economies in New Mexico. RNG and
biogas projects create jobs,
support local farmers, dairies,
and other bio waste producers
and provide new revenue and
energy sources for rural areas.
SB 99 will eliminate beneficial
energy options for New Mexicans,
and we urge you to vote no.
Thank you.
Thank you and Larry Sante.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Larry
Sontag here on behalf of the New
Mexico Business Coalition in
opposition to SB 99 because of
the economic repercussions of
banning credits for renewable
natural gas, biogas, and
renewable hydrogen. First, let's
consider the job losses. These
projects are more than just
numbers, they're jobs in
construction operation and
maintenance of sustained many
communities in our state.
Eliminating these incentives
goes beyond jobs though. We're
talking about undermining the
economic foundation of new
innovations and developing
energy sectors. I also ask you
to consider the broader
implications for our energy
sector, banning these credits
would reduce energy diversity.
This contradicts the
legislatively mandated push
towards renewable energy
adoption and would create a
regulatory environment that's
confusing and likely to
discourage investment.
We're sending the wrong signals
to the market at a time when we
should be an encouraging
innovation and economic growth.
For these reasons and others
previously stated, we encourage
the committee to vote no on SB
99. Thank you.
Thank you. And now to the room,
please go ahead.
My name is Mike Miller, Premium
Basin Petroleum Association, one
of the most concerning aspects
of SB 99 is its prohibition on
assigning a carbon intensity, a
carbon intensity value below
zero for transportation fuels.
This restriction eliminates
insemities for carbon negative
technologies such as biofuel and
emerging carbon capture
innovations that would otherwise
play a critical role in reducing
emissions by discouraging
innovation in this sector, we
risk stifling the very prog
progress needed to achieve.
long-term environmental.
While the Bill Armark's earmarks
revenue credit from credit sales
for underserved communities.
This does not offset the broader
financial burden SB 99 were
placed on low income and rural
residents increased fuel prices
will hit these populations the
hardest as they have they often
have fewer transportation
alternatives and longer
commutes. Any policy addressing
carbon emissions must take into
account the real life impact on
those least able to bear the
additional cost for these and
reasons stated, we oppose this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Hi, good morning, madam chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director with New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce here to here
to post in Bill 99. This bill
would eliminate critical
financial incentives for
renewable natural gas and
biogas. These projects create
high paying jobs, particularly
in rural areas where economic
opportunities are scarce.
Banning credits for carbon fuels
or negative carbon fuels will
discourage private investment
and harm agriculture producers
who rely on these projects for
additional revenue. At a time
when we should be encouraging
market-driven innovation, Senate
Bill 99 sends the wrong message,
and I urge you to vote now.
Thank you very much. Next,
please.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Beverly Itzino with dairy
Producers of Mexico. I would
like to start by saying that we
have about 90 dairies in New
Mexico, all of them are family
owned and operated. Our
producers live on the dairies
with their families. They drink
the water, they breathe the air,
and, um, they pass it down to
the next generation. So of
course, we're always looking for
ways to improve their facilities
to make sure it's better for
their kids and their grandkids.
Um, we respectfully oppose
Senate Bill 99, which would
exclude the dairy industry from
participating in last session,
sponsor
and experts on the Clean Fuel
Standard bill toted how good the
opportunity would be for
dairies. So you can imagine my
surprise when I saw this
legislation. Day in New Mexico
has been attempting biomass
projects for over 20 years that
will work for New Mexico.
Senator Isel probably remembers
the Pecos Valley, but biomass Co
op that is running for a long
time and still trying to get a
major project going down south
of Dexter.
We're still working on several
projects to reduce renewable
energy from digesters to
vermiculture and other
opportunities. The dairy
industry has a pledge, the US
dairy industry has a pledge to
be net zero by 2050 and
continues to work with experts
on greenhouse gas reductions. So
to not be able to participate in
a program that just last year
was passed using dairy as an
example is kind of, and I don't
mean this in any disrespect and
pun intended, it's BS.
Next, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Rebecca Hammer, registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico Oil
and Gas Association. We
represent over 180 member
companies. Nomoga opposes SB 99
because it could discourage
innovation in the energy sector.
Market-based solutions and
innovation are preferred over
regulatory mandate banning
credits for renewable gas,
biogas, and renewable hydrogen
will discourage economic
investment and innovation across
the state's energy sector.
Renewable natural gas and
renewable hydrogen can be
integrated into existing natural
gas.
Infrastructure, making the
transition to additional sources
of energy more feasible and cost
effective.
Standing credits for these fuels
could underutilize existing
natural gas infrastructure, the
underutilization of
infrastructure could also have
economic implications.
Investments and upgrades to
existing infrastructure could
not be fully realized and
potential job creation and
associated economic growth could
be hindered. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now to
questions, comments from
committee members. I have
senator
then Senator Scott.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, Senator, thank you for
being here today, but I do have
a problem with this spill. I
would like to ask your expert
witness how many factory farms
are there in New Mexico?
That's a great question, and I'm
actually going to pass that to
Tyler, my colleague.
So,
uh I'm sorry there is an expert,
uh, there is an expert online
and she would like to pass it to
uh Mr. uh Lobdell.
Tyler Loddell, are you online?
You've been asked a question.
Madam Chair, senators, I am. Are
you able to hear me OK? Yes.
OK, thank you. Uh thank you for
the question, Senator. I don't
have that number at my
fingertips. Um, we do have a
report which I believe has that
number. So if you would indulge
me, I could attempt to pull up
the number, um, or of course we
could follow up afterwards with
the exact figure, but I don't
have that at my fingertips, and
madam chair, Senator, thank you
very much, uh, Mr. Labelle. I
would like that answer during
this committee meeting. I think
the room would also like to know
how many factory farms there are
in in New Mexico.
And Madame cheer its senator and
expert witness.
I would also like the definition
of a factory farm. Can you uh
respond to that, please?
Um, my recollection, Madam
Chair, is that there aren't very
many, um, and I will turn to my
expert about how factory farm is
defined.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um,
senators also the way that we
define a factory farm is we use
the United States, um,
Department of Agriculture's
definition. And so this is any
facility with over 500 head of
cattle confined in a small area
where the feed is brought to
them. Madam.
With your mask on, I'm having a
hard time and you're talking
extremely fast, slow down and
talk clearly, please.
the United States Department of
Agriculture, um, definition and
so this is any, uh, this is 500
head of cattle or more on a
confined area, um, in a small
confined area where the food is
brought to them, the feed is
brought to them, and they're not
able to go graze on range.
Well, Madam chair, I'm kind of
confused over that definition of
a factory farm and you're taking
this information from USDA,
Madam Chair, senator expert
witness, I guess my question
here is, why are you not getting
this information from the New
Mexican.
Um
Oh, Madam Chair, that is a
definition that we're familiar
with. I don't know that the
Department of Agriculture has
defined it.
Well, Madam Chair, I think that
they might have uh.
A reply of yes, they do have a
definition of it, so you might
need to check that out, madam
chair.
I'm uh.
I'm really bothered by this
madam chair and uh.
I know I take great offense to
this.
I do farm and I do ranch and I'm
proud of that profession that
I'm in, and I thank everybody
out here that's involved in
farming and ranching, we'll say
the same thing if we don't take
care of our land, guess what? We
don't make a living.
And uh the restraints that are
being put on because I wrote
down one other thing and I can't
seem to, oh, here it is, you,
uh, madam chair.
You said that in California.
Was it California or New Mexico
that y'all are wanting to.
Mandate the use of clean fuel
trucks for delivering fee on a
confined area such as the dairy.
That is not in our bill, madam
Chair,
so your expert witness
referenced that in her talk
whenever she was introducing
herself and going into the
particulars on the bill, there
is a problem there unless
somebody's gonna jump up from
the government and again I don't
trust government very much, but
whenever they're saying mandate
the use of to me that means that
they're also gonna step up and.
Obtained these vehicles and pay
for them for these people to
use. There's a big problem
there. I can get all wound up
about farming and ranching, you
know what our cows.
Do
Help with the methane problem as
far as alleviating it and the
carbon aspect of it as well.
And I think if you do a little
more research, you would see
that that is, and I do have the
documentation here if you would
like to read it, Madam Cheer.
I, uh
I'm also
One of the generation that.
We don't have anybody coming up
behind us to take our place.
And I'm kind of wondering what.
According to what I'm seeing out
here, everybody that's in this
room, they do like to eat.
And if you are willing to.
Have your food source come from
other countries where there is
no regulation where there are no
rules out there where they can
spray harmful pesticides on
these fruits and vegetables and
send them into the United States
to be consumed by our citizens
here, there's a problem there.
I too want clean water and clean
air for not only me and my
family, but for everybody else
in this state and I think that
what we have got going on here,
especially in my area of the
state, the southeastern corner
of the state that does fund.
Right at half of the state's
budget right now.
And we are trying to do away
with it by some of the silly
bills that we have seen
introduced this session.
How are we going to provide for
everything that we need to get
done to help our kids get
educated to make sure that they
have nutritious lunches and
meals, how we are going to have
daycare providers for them, how
we are going to have safety
personnel that's looking out for
all of our citizens. I mean, the
list goes on and on and on.
But let me tell you what, the
oil and gas industry and
agriculture are doing everything
they can to ensure that our
state is safe?
They are making great stride as
far as.
Making
Changes to the amount of methane
that is released.
And I think that we need to take
that into consideration because
that is.
The one industry that is working
the hardest.
As far as our factory farms.
On our farm we're pretty lucky
if it's me and my 3 brothers and
1 extra hired hand that are
getting the job done.
If you will notice my thumb, I
don't have a thumbnail right
there. I've been out rebuilding
fences before I came up here
because of a flood issue.
OK? There is nobody that wants
to work on ranches anymore.
We've made Americans lazy.
Yet we still are providing food
for you.
Madam Cheer, I am proud of the
calluses I have on my hands, and
I know that everybody out here
that's involved in agriculture
or the oil and gas industry?
Probably has calluses just like
I do.
And I'll be damned if I'm gonna
let either one of those
industries go away.
Madam Chair, thank you for
allowing me this time.
Thank you very much, and I can
see it's very personal to you.
Yes, ma'am, it is. Um, next I
have Senator Scott, then Senator
Cervantes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, if.
Would be the current public
policy of this state to have
Net zero emissions.
By the year 2050.
I think we just passed.
A Senate Bill 4.
To that effect
So without
The ability
To generate carbon credits.
Or negative carbon intensity
fuels, if you will.
You have any idea?
How we might be able.
To achieve
That goal, Madam Chair, the
reason I brought this bill is
because it's a uh.
This uh credits are on.
They're not. I forgot about the
P um these credits are on paper.
They're not real because that
methane that is captured is then
burned.
So it's not it it's a fiction
and I personally don't like
legal fictions all that much.
And no one has relied on it, um,
I have enormous respect for
farmers. I come from a farming
family in Valencia County, um,
but right now the reason it's
important to do this this year
is because the regulation
setting up this, this scheme
where people will get negative
carbon credits based on their
capture of methane.
We don't even have biodigesters
in this state, so nobody has
relied on this regulation.
And so now is the time to close
this biogas loophole, which
would be
Maybe helping to achieve the
goal on paper.
But it would not actually
achieve the goal goal of
reducing real emissions.
Yeah, Madam Chair and senator, I
I agree with you.
These credits or
Are generated as a consequence
of
Processes that
That absorb
more CO2 from the atmosphere
that they.
And they generate.
But if we eliminate
Carbon credits or clean fuel
credits.
From the transportation fuel
mix.
How do we achieve?
Net 0
How do you envision achieving
net zero by 2050.
Given that, Madam Chair.
And senator
That every mechanical or
industrial process that we
engage in.
As a positive emissions.
Carbon footprint.
If we'd have no negatives to
offset that with.
How do we achieve?
See
Uh, Madam Chair.
We achieve 0 by all of the other
tools that we have available. We
have the, we have wind, we have
solar, we have battery
development, um, there are many
other ways of achieving net zero
and I do believe that the
industry, um, the farming
industry.
does have an incentive to reduce
emissions anyway because exactly
of what Senator Gazel said, we
live on our farms.
We don't want this, this, uh,
biogas, and I don't know if
you've ever.
Seeing what it is, I'm sure you
have, um, it's, it's.
It's really bad.
And so the idea is to not give
negative credit, negative credit
for reducing the biogas, but by
giving them credit.
Just not negative credit, which
they would then sell to um.
Other industries that want to
emit.
And or to emit pollutants, um,
and so.
Thus creating a false solution.
Because we won't, we'll only if
we use this, we will only
achieve zero emissions on paper.
We won't actually have zero
emissions. And so this is to try
to make an accurate count of
what the emissions indeed are.
And
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
you are making my point.
But let me
Let me see if I can elaborate a
little bit.
There are about.
600,000.
Automobiles
In the state
Today
If all of those vehicles.
Every last one.
Is running on.
Battery
Oh
What is the carbon emissions
footprint.
Of those 600,000 vehicles.
The carbon emissions foot
footprint for burning fuel would
be 0.
I don't know what the carbon
emission footprint for creating
the vehicle is, I don't know
what the, the, I don't have that
handy about what the carbon
footprint print would be for
transporting the vehicle.
Um
Oh
Madam Chan, Senator, all you're
discussing now is the combustion
footprint.
But there is in fact a carbon
emissions footprint.
Or
Ranging much for a ranging than
the combustion footprint or both
gas gasoline powered vehicles.
And electric vehicles, so.
If we're going to emit.
Corbon
As a consequence of constructing
and utilizing electric vehicles.
That's a positive carbon
emissions footprint.
What do we use for negative
emissions.
To balance that to 0.
If we don't have a negative
opportunity anywhere in the
system.
We can never get to see, madam.
Um, as my, as I understand it,
you get credits for reducing
emissions, and those credits
would still be there.
Um, we're just saying no credits
for no false credits for
negative.
Um, or no, how do I put this? No
counting these credits as
negative, in other words,
putting a minus sign, um, when
the emissions are still there.
The, the
Um, biogas will be harvested and
burned, so there still will be
emissions.
Madam Chair, Senator, I
certainly do appreciate that
that
Mechanical process will
continue.
To do its thing.
What I don't understand is.
If we have no opportunity.
To develop
A negative emission or carbon
credit.
With any industrial process.
Let's not.
Single out farming.
Let's use any industrial process
if we don't have negatives, we
can never get to 0.
Because everything else we do.
Has a positive emissions
footprint.
OK, I think I understand, Madam
Chair, what is being asked here,
um, this bill only talks about
transportation fuels not being
signed a, a carbon intensity
value of less than 0. Other
technologies.
Could be. This is a this is a
small bill to close.
A small loophole
Uh, or a loophole for biogas.
So you're asking me about all of
All potential ways of reducing
emissions. This only this little
change only applies to
transportation fuel, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and senator.
I am trying to accommodate with
some sort.
Of coherent process, the ability
to get.
To our stated goal.
Of net zero.
I do not see how this.
piece of the legislation
advances.
That objective
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes,
then Senator Townsend.
I am
I was curious. I, I'm sorry I
had to step out of the room a
little bit. Did we, did we have
anybody speak on the bill from
the PRC today?
No, no one came. Do we have
anybody from NMED Environment
department?
No, they're the ones that
informed me that the rulemaking,
Madam Chair, is not, uh, begun.
It's not what not begun. They
haven't or they haven't, I don't
know what they've done in terms
of preparing for it, but they
have not completed the
rulemaking and this would alter
their rulemaking if we pass this
bill, it would alter their
rulemaking so they wouldn't
design 0 credits.
For transportation fuel.
Or less than.
Less.
OK. I, I asked because I'm
looking at the analysis.
We have the uh the fiscal impact
report and and significant
issues and so I'm just gonna er
phrase it says from the PRCD
analysis notes this bill a court
says could impact projects
timing, I'm sorry, could impact
projects aiming to prevent.
Significant carbon emissions
such as methane capture.
Uh, I'm reading that.
And it sounds like the PRC is
doing a beautiful job of taking
no position at all, uh, because
they say that this bill could
impact.
Significant carbon emissions,
but I don't, they don't say
whether that could significantly
impact it for the good or the
bad. They just say it
significantly impacted, so, you
know, I, I, I believe that's
probably true. This could
significantly impact this bill
could significantly impact.
Um, carbon and, uh, preventing
carbon emissions, but it doesn't
say whether good or bad, so
that's disappointing.
To see again folks taking no uh
position at all, then, then we
have an analysis from Mexico
Environment Department, which
evidently again, couldn't find
anybody to show up today either.
Um, their analysis says that.
Um, the negative valuation of
RNG.
Could be considered an effective
way to fight atmospheric warming
effects of methane.
By establishing a market
incentive for abatement. So, uh,
I'm I'm sorry, that's uh
Yeah, uh, EMNRD.
That's their analysis.
So
They're saying um.
Mm
Trying again, I'm trying to
understand their analysis here.
Um
Uh, Madam Chair, if you look
further, their analysis was that
if um.
If you allow negative credits
like this, it could allow us to
be complacent about meeting real
goals.
Well, I'm reading the part that
says this says quote the
heightened incentive to capture.
Methane provided by negative.
Arbo intensity valuation, so
that's, that's, they're, they're
saying that the negative carbon
intensity evaluation.
Incentive could facilitate
greater emissions abatement.
Among the state's methane
intensive industries. To me, I'm
reading that to mean to say
that.
That the negative.
Value, which I think you're
trying to attack. There's
they're saying the negative
carbon intensity valuation would
facilitate.
Uh, emissions abatement, um,
and, and I'm just reading what
they, what they wrote here.
So I'm again I'm disappointed
they're not here to answer my
questions or explain, cause
again, this is not an area that
I have any.
Um, expertise or knowledge. I've
heard the proponents and
opponents.
Back and forth, they all have
interests that I think are are
legitimate and and honorable,
but, but I'm looking to the
experts, which you think would
be the energy department of the
state and um if I'm reading
since they're not here.
What they wrote, and there're
they're suggesting to me that
this that this negative.
Uh, valuation.
It is actually useful to to to
lessen emissions, which I know
is your goal, Senator, and so
I'm, I'm concerned about asking
a, a bill that works to the
contrary of what the energy
department seems to be saying is
a good thing to abate um and I I
I I'd want to do the right thing
here. So I, I, I'm, I'm puzzled.
How do I, how do I reconcile
this without the people who are
telling me not to do this bill,
uh at the energy department.
Or, are saying, how do I resolve
that?
Uh, Madam Chair, I think that
you, um, the important thing to
me is that these are false.
credits. Their credits for no
reason and we're just talking
about transportation fuel, so
other incentives to reduce, um,
to reduce emissions would still
be.
Aloud they could build it into
the rulemaking, um.
It's pretty important that we do
it this year if we're gonna do
it at all, because once the
rules are established and
negative carbon credits are
available, it would be very hard
to undo it.
Um, but what this does, it
allows us to meet the goal on
paper.
Just on paper because of these
paper credits, but the fuel will
still be burned, but it won't be
counted. And thank you,
ma'am
respect, uh, Senator. I just, I.
don't know that answers my
question at all. I'm really
trying to figure out.
Why the the experts in the field
and and
I, I'll be more blunt. I've
served with 4 governors.
Sometimes you have an energy
department that is more leaning
toward a, a more conservative
uh.
Um
Agenda or philosophy and
sometimes you have a, a governor
an administration that leans
more toward a progressive
agenda and this administration
leans toward a progressive
agenda. I don't think anybody
can disagree with that. So we've
got an energy department that I
assume, uh, would lean toward
the progressive.
And and their heads and that
they're not here today.
Um
And, and being heard on this
means I've, I've got to rely
upon what they wrote in their
analysis and their their
analysis suggests that this bill
would, would not facilitate
emissions abatement, which I
think is the goal of this
administration and this, this
department, so I, and I think
that's a paramount goal of this
administration, which I support
and agree with.
So, I, I don't want to do harm
to, to that goal and, and this
bill read the analysis this bill
would do harm to what this this
administration's energy
department says they're trying
to do, which is to reduce
greenhouse emissions. Um, Madam
Chair, I got, I want to again
point out they said assigning
negative carbon intensity to
fuels believe the assignment can
encourage complacency in the
larger effort, um, so they gave
both sides, um, and I think the
truth is, well, I'll go ahead
and um I would like
expert to answer this and then
also the attorney, uh,
online asphalt and then I have
another thought.
Yes, and actually I'm gonna pass
that right to Tyler. OK.
Mr. Lobell
I'm sorry, I just received, and
are you all able to hear me now?
And there was a question.
Yes, Madam Chair, Senators, um,
excellent question. So I think
the critical point to make.
Um
This is Tyler Lobdell, who is
the attorney for
Food and wildlife food and
water, food and water watch.
Yeah, I don't think he's gonna
be able to answer my question,
which is directed to the energy
department.
was
He can speak with authority, but
my, my question, Madam is really
directed to the Energy
department and I, I don't want
to turn this into a free for
all. You, you're trying to keep
control of your committee. Thank
you, Senator Cervantes. OK, so
is there anybody here from the
um NMED.
OK, I think that uh the analysis
indicates that M nerd and NMED
are uh not happy with Bill, and
I think that they have chosen
not to come to speak, so.
We'll have to move on.
Thank you, Madam Tre. Yeah, I
just like, I, I don't know how
things work around here anymore.
I really don't, you know,
they're, you're telling me
they're opposed to this bill,
but they, they're too busy to
send anybody in this building to
come down and speak
intelligently or answer
questions, and I, I just said
don't, I don't understand how,
how things work around here
anymore, but um I'll just note,
I'm sure that I'm looking at the
analysis too. It says the
analysis.
Uh, points out that Senate Bill
4 which this committee bill this
committee heard.
And I know it has a lot of
attention right now.
Uh, PRC analysis says Senate
Bill 4 would conflict with this
bill.
Um, and that passage of both
bills would create a conflict.
Again, I'm just reading on the
Page 2 of the analysis, so
Senator, I want to do the right
thing. I think you and I have
the same goal. We want to
recognize that there's a serious
problem with climate, um, and we
want to do everything to combat
that possible, and I'm, I'm
puzzled here because I know
that's your goal by this bill at
the same time, I'm listening to
the agencies, which I think
right now I kind of align myself
with these two agencies in this
administration and they're
telling me this is not uh.
supportive of their goals of, of
greenhouse emissions. So I, I'm,
I'm puzzled, man. I'm sure I
wish we had those people here.
Who would uh come and answer
questions and provide that
guidance.
For those of us who really could
use it, but thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I think
that, um, first it's not a
conflict because these
regulations have not been
drafted.
So it is, it, it might be a
conflict if the regulations were
to be in conflict with um.
With uh SB4, but I am pretty
sure that the drafters of the
regulations would be very
careful not to conflict with it,
um, so I, I didn't see that when
I looked at it as, as an actual
conflict, possibly a potential
conflict, but I, I can't imagine
that they would draft the
regulations and I believe that
they decided, well, I don't know
exactly why they decided to say
anything, but I discussed it
with them and what became clear
to me is they
They are very, um,
Very oriented to meet the goals.
My problem is I don't want to
see those goals met only on
paper.
If, if we are still burning the
fuel that we're giving credit
for, then that just doesn't make
sense to me. I know that around
the country there's a lot of
carbon capture programs that do
the same thing.
Give credit for things that
aren't real.
Um, and that's how the goals are
met and so to me it's very
important that this be based on
actual emissions and not just
paper.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anything else,
Senator Cervantes?
Thank you. Uh,
Senator Townsend and then
perhaps we can.
see where this lands.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Um
Is there a reason?
That you're
You
Specific target.
Of this bill is, is so
prescriptive.
To negative
credits. I mean, I'm trying to,
I'm trying to figure out.
I mean, I hear you and, and I
believe you that what you, you,
you wanna get a cleaner
environment.
I don't think there's anybody
here that disagrees with that.
But these negative credits for
this.
Uh
are as real as a.
Tax deduction on my.
On my income tax.
I mean, that's a negative if you
want.
Turn it like that. It has value.
And it causes the investment of
Of capital.
Or a or a
Purpose. If I looked on the
internet right now and
And look at how good
agricultural
Um, industry has done at
reducing greenhouse gasses.
They
They're the leader. I mean,
they, they have done a
significant
Um
Job between
19
90s and 2022, they lead.
Um
I listened to the definitions of
on the farms, 500 cattle, which
Kind of brings me to think
you're after.
feed lava.
But file operations, whether we
Uh, efficient way.
produce meat
For the public.
So if we're not real careful,
And some of these initiatives.
We're gonna significantly drive.
I, we probably will increase
the.
And neither of those are what's
good public policy.
I um
I want to make
I want to make
Yeah.
When we
Determine
And that bill
Iner
Environment department are not
here. In fact,
Right and propose.
language that it is considered
by the proponent.
And have you tried to meet with
them to get to understand what
their opposition was, so you
could have a bill that they
could support. Um, yes, Madam
Chair, um.
Not, I would like to meet with
them more.
However, what I was told is the
regulation process, um, has not
been completed, so this bill
would impact the regulation
process they would have to
design this differently if this
bill were to pass, um, with
regard to MNARD, they put both
sides on it.
They said if we don't, if we
were to allow these credits, we
may be complacent about meeting
the standards.
But then they also said that
this, that this is an incentive.
Um, and in my view, maybe a
perverse incentive for family
for uh uh not family farms for,
um, industrial farms.
Factory farms to build up in
order to sell their credits
that's in fact what happened in
California and we could avoid
that problem that happened in
California now.
By not having people relying on
these credits and not having
this false solution in place.
I chair and senator but I think
we're missing is
That you want people to deploy
capital to reduce
Emissions
Is that correct or not?
I think that's what the
original, the, the clean
transportation fuels Act was an
attempt to get people to deploy
capital to reduce emission.
Unfortunately in this regard, it
fails and Senator, I disagreed
with you, and I, and I, and I
would tell you that there has
been
Millions of dollars for this
conversation can go places,
neither one of us want to go,
because
Um
Whether it's whether it's right
or or or wrong.
Capital has been deployed and
has been planned to be deployed.
to reduce
Carbon footprint in our world.
And in order to for that to
occur.
Rules and regulations had to be
Um, construed.
That
Allowed the incentive to do that
because
Without the incentive to do it.
I mean, what, what opportunity
do we have to reduce
Our, our carbon footprint in the
world.
Other than by the deployment of
capital.
I mean we can
Eliminate half of this, the
people in this room, and we'll
eliminate some carbon footprint.
But we, I mean, that's not
logical.
I mean
You have to have the ability
To cause the deployment of
capital. If you're going to
Oh
Meet a goal.
There's no other, other than
that, you just gotta reduce the
amount of people breathing in
this world and, and
And that's just not gonna work
out for everybody, um.
So I would, I would tell you
just to think about. I, I think
I hear you. I mean, you, you
don't like the idea of a
negative credit because
You think it, you think it's
false.
But I bet you I bet you money
that you take credits on your
income tax, just like I do,
because they have value.
And some of those are real.
And they cause you to do things,
so
I, I can't support it because I,
I don't think what you're doing.
Meets the end goal.
And it, and it will cause
Things to be worse, and I think
by
The Environment department not
being here and PRC and the rest
of them, I think they see that
and uh someplace.
There hasn't been though.
A good communication between you
guys, but
I
I think I have to
acknowledge that
Oil and gas has significantly
agriculture, a lot of that is
because of the rules we passed
in here.
Some of them are innovative and
cause return on investment.
But
I don't think what you're this
bill will do anything except
harm the environment, so for
that reason, I can't support it,
but I appreciate it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And Madam Chair, I
would agree if they, if, if we
were talking about real
reductions.
In emissions. Unfortunately,
these credits are these negative
credits are being given for
something that's not a real
reduction.
When you on your tax form, the
reason you can take a deduction
is because you actually spent
the money to get the.
To get the deduction.
Here there's not a real
reduction in admissions, so
we're giving a negative credit
for something that is not real.
And that is why I brought the
bill. I understand that, uh,
people believe it will provide
some incentives, um, so far,
nobody is relying on those
incentives in New Mexico, nobody
has a digester, um, no, no farm
has that kind of.
Big biogas, um.
Uh
Production, uh, that they need
to reduce right now, and that's
why it's important if we're
gonna do this now is the time
because once the regulations
come out it's gonna be too late.
OK, so committee, we are ready
for
An action. This bill, if it
moves on, would go to um.
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee.
Madam, Madam chair, I move with
do pass.
A
for a table.
OK, a tabling motion is
non-debatable, so
Uh, could the secretary please
call the roll on a tabling.
Sarah Cervantes.
Cervantes, yes, Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, no. Senator.
Yes.
Senator, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Yes
I don't have, yes, Senator Pope.
No
Pope? No, Senator Scott.
Yes
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
And Townsend, yes.
Senatoria Lopez noted table.
And the Lopez, Senhonics.
No.
So Stephanic snow.
So the tape like motion did pass
5 to 4.
So, um, it will remain here.
Thank you very much.
Oh, I'm sorry. I shouldn't have,
uh, I talked about that's right,
I'm, uh, again, I appreciate the
sponsor. I think you're trying
to do a good thing. I think most
of us all agree with that.
Excusing.
I'm just, I'm looking at, we
have 3 analysis, one from the
New Mexico Environment
Department. We really don't tell
us anything about the bill. All
they say is it's gonna cost them
some more money to have more
personnel to implement it. Well,
that's of no help to me
whatsoever, and of the and then
uh energy mineral natural
resources, uh, says this is a
problem for them and PRC, uh, I
hope they didn't pay for this
analysis. It just says this bill
could impact.
Uh, things, well, of course it
could impact things and that
doesn't really tell me anything
at all. We really need better
help Adam Cheer on these complex
environmental issues, and I
welcome it. I hope I'm, my
comments will invite.
Those who should be here today
to show up. Thanks.
Thank you.
Senator Stephanic, Madam chair,
if I may. Mine, mine, but I
think there's a couple more
conversations that need to take
place.
But I do think it has a lot of.
Um
That
Around.
Yeah
OK, so committee members, um,
And Senator Cervantes, this
relates to you.
Senator Savantes this relates to
you as well. Apparently, um, the
floor went to the joint session,
then they're going to the
Hispano luncheon.
And they're not going back to
the floor.
So,
uh, Senator Hamlin's committee
would probably not start until
Typically.
So it depends on what time
people are getting back.
I can check in with my vice
chair and see if there's an
estimate.
OK, so the reason I'm bringing
this up, uh, committee members,
is we could take a break.
And come back and continue work.
Unless this is a disturbing
anybody's plans.
And uh we could try to knock a
few of these off. Uh, I know
Senator Tobiasson and others
have been waiting, or we could
just do hers.
Uh, right away and then break
and have.
More bills stacking up. What is
the pleasure? And I'll turn to
the ranking member.
And
Uh, a very structured.
OK, so it's been recommended
that this committee take a um
let's go to.
Come back by 5 minutes to 1, and
we will keep rolling and uh we
have snacks in our office. We're
happy to share. Uh, we'll see if
we can find some protein like
protein bars and everybody
please come back. Thank you.
So we're in recess, Madam Chair,
thank you very much. Thank you.
