And addressing the
disproportionately high utility
costs faced by far too many New
Mexicans, especially rural
indigenous urban core
underserved communities. This
bill allows the PRC to consider.
Approving rates or programs that
aim to reduce energy burden on
our most vulnerable populations.
So these rates or programs would
be proposed in a rape case or
other application by an investor
owned utility.
El Paso Electric SPS New Mexico
Gas Company.
If this passes, the PRC would be
able for the first time to
evaluate whether these rates or
programs should be considered
just and reasonable and
improved.
Right now the PRC cannot even
consider such an approach.
So on average, New Mexico's
living below the poverty line
spent 20% of their income on
energy bills alone. Um, I think
you have this handout that shows
where these areas in our state,
we've got uh.
Those living in Socorro
Debacamora Tario Ripa counties
are paying an average of 26% or
more poses to empower our PRC.
To approve these rate proposals,
this is voluntary.
Uh, it enables but does not
require our utilities to propose
low income rates, and it
supports utilities in addressing
energy burdens while ensuring
that rates meet regulatory
standards for fairness and
Reasonableness. So I do have an
expert today, this is Doctor
Anna Linda Weller, Senior Clean
Energy Policy advisor at Western
Resources Advocates and Madam
Chair, that's brief, but we are
happy to answer questions or
hear from our
Numerous supporters of the bill.
Great. Thank you very much. So
would you
Your expert witness, uh,
reintroduce herself and so for
the record.
And also, do you have a
statement you'd like to make?
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
think the pro tem pretty much
covered what the bill does and.
What it's about, uh, my name is
Anna Linden Weller. Um, I am the
senior policy advisor for clean
energy for Western resource
advocates. And I don't have a
particular statement to make the
prote covered it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Uh, how many in the audience are
here to support this bill?
Is there any opposition there
is, OK. Online, are there
supporters?
One online, OK.
So we're gonna start, uh, we
have a a prepared list of
speakers, and if you'd stand up
and just line up in this order,
TNM Representative New Mexico
Gas, uh, representative El Paso
Electric, Victoria Macias.
Mike D'Antonio and then online
we have Alexis Mina and we'll
see how the time goes.
Please go ahead, Carlos.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the public service
company in New Mexico.
HB 91 gives the New Mexico PRC
authority to prove rates for
low-income customers and rates
that that address arrears,
affordability, and service
continuity. A large portion of
our customers are low income and
living on a fixed income and
able to improve their financial
situation.
Offering a low income rate will
help customers ensure they can
manage and afford.
Their bill while maintaining a
continuation of service.
We thank the sponsors and their
experts for bringing this bill
to our attention and working on
the, the initial amendments.
For these reasons we support
House Bill 91. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Amy
Verabby, I'm the registered
lobbyist for New Mexico Gas
Company. I've had the privilege
of working with Representative
Ortiz and the collaborative
group that has been assembled by
the NGOs and the utilities over
the past 3 years.
Low income is a priority for New
Mexico Gas Company. We
appreciate that Protem did an
excellent job of explaining that
this is an enabling legislation
so that the PRC could work with
us to provide service for those
customers, so we are in support
of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jared Najar on
behalf of El Paso Electric, um,
I don't want to be repetitive,
so for the reasons previously
stated, we support this bill and
we thank the sponsors for
bringing.
Next, please. Good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mike D'Antonio with
Xcel Energy Reserve electricity
to the eastern part of the
state. Uh, we stand in support
of this bill, uh, we really like
the flexibility of it, it's
optional. Uh, we can provide
either rates or programs or
both, and then uh it goes to the
commission, the commission to
make the decision on how to
fairly uh divide up the cost and
maybe subsidized from uh from
additional uh low income rates
so we fully support the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. And next,
please?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Lacon Macias,
and I'm with the Samia Project.
I stand before you today in
strong support of House Bill 91.
This legislation will create a
pathway to make energy more
affordable for families
struggling with high utility
bills. Many low income and rural
households in New Mexico are
paying a disproportionate share
of their income just to keep the
lights on.
House Bill 91 empowers a public
regulation commission to ensure
fair utility rates, reducing the
weight on those who need relief
the most. More than 20 other
states, including our neighbors
in Arizona and Colorado have
already adopted similar programs
that help families will
While strengthening local
economies,
New Mexic New Mexico should not
be left behind by voting in
favor of HB 91, you will be
taking a critical step towards
ensuring that all families have
access to affordable essential
services without having to make
impossible choices between
paying their utility bills and
putting food on their table.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you. Uh, now we're going to
online who are supporters.
Uh, Alexis Mina.
Hermen
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alexis Mena. I'm an
attorney and policy director
with the Natural Resources
Defense Council, but most
importantly, I'm a lifelong New
Mexican who grew up in a low
income household. The decision
between utility bills and
groceries was a normal
conversation in my household.
From an early age, I was well
aware of the one-time relief
programs that my family relied
on, and how vital they were. HB
91 is not a one-time relief.
Instead, it provides consistent
and necessary assistance.
HB 91 puts New Mexicans first
and is far overdue. NRDC Eagly
asks that you support HB 91.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, now, we
will go to the opposition in the
room if you'd like to make a
comment, please line up.
We only really spent about 6
minutes on support, so we're
doing well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We stand in respectful
opposition to this bill. Now,
according to the world
populationvie, New Mexico is one
of the poorest states. And I
understand the need to help our
people. We don't want anyone to
suffer from not having energy
bills taken care of.
But here's the problem.
When you do that, when you set a
rate, you go to the PRC and you
ask them to set a rate and let's
say they choose 200% of the
poverty level and everybody
below that's gonna be subsidized
by those above it.
Well, the people, what about
that single mom?
That has 4 children, and she's
at 201% of the poverty level and
she doesn't qualify for those
lower rates.
This is where this creates
hardship on New Mexico. I
believe it's going to drive up
our poverty instead of helping
the very people we want to help.
We have a mechanism to help
these people, and it's called
LIHIP, low-income home energy
assistance program.
When we fund that, that assures
that their bills can be paid,
but they are not.
Burdening the people that don't
qualify for the rates. I urge
you to please consider that
what's gonna happen in the long
run to the people in New Mexico
that were trying to help and not
hurt, and I urge you to vote no
on this. Thank you. Thank you.
Next, please, Madam Chair,
members of the conservation
committee. I am Ramona Goolsbee,
and I am a retired New Mexican
who worked very hard and lived
frugally to earn my financial
security. I give to charities
because I can.
and choose to, not because I'm
forced.
Bill 991 could unfairly shift
utility costs on to people like
me on a fixed income.
And countless others to
subsidize low income.
Customers who already have a
robust support lie he helps
200,000 households who
Here offers 14,000 in upgrades
and programs like P&M Good
Neighbor, and he provide energy
aid.
All without raising my rates.
What about those just above the
low income line, struggling and
ineligible. They will pay more
too. I worked 5 jobs at one time
during my early life, providing
for my family. I didn't get
assistance. How is shifting the
burden fair and standing up
against large corporations that
just spoke before me should be
telling. Thank you. Next,
please? Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name
is Beth Dowling. I'm a resident
of Sandoval County, and I am
retired.
House Bill 91 is a bad bill.
Unlike Robin Hood, who took from
the rich to give to the poor.
House Bill 91 won't just affect
the wealthy, it will affect all
working-class families and
retired citizens that are just
the slightest above the poverty
or the low income level.
And just take a look at the
fiscal impact report for this
bill.
This is from that fiscal impact
report.
Both New Mexico Attorney General
and PRC have raised concerns
over the expected redistribution
of costs among customers because
of the rate structure in House
Bill 91.
House Bill 91 expands PRC's
authority to approve rate design
that does not adhere to
regulatory principles. Options
currently exist that have
already been discussed both
federal and state programs. In
fact,
TNM has the Good Neighbor Fund,
which is there for this specific
purpose to help low-income
families.
House Bill 91 lacks a definition
of participating customers.
Or low income.
And the question for the Senate
Conservation Committee is this
Why is there no definition in
the bill? Is this arbitrary or
on purpose?
This bad bill ignores existing
programs set forth by the
legislature.
And utility companies, thus
creating a hardship on working
hard, hardworking families and
senior citizens. Show your
constituents that you are
looking out for their best
interests, and please vote no on
House Bill 91.
Thank you. Now we go to online
opposition, uh, we'll first hear
from Nicky McCarty.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Nicky McCarty, and I'm a
resident of Taos County, a
community where many families
already struggle to make ends
meet. House Bill 91 would have
devastating and lasting
consequences for our county,
placing an unfair financial
burden on hardworking lower
middle class families who don't
qualify for government
assistance. Many in Taos County
are already living paycheck to
paycheck, forcing them to show
the costs of these mandates
would push them further into
financial distress, making it
even harder for them to provide
for their families. Well, I
fully support helping those in
need. This bill unfairly targets
the very people who are working
tirelessly to stay afloat. I
strongly urge you to vote no on
House Bill 91, and stand up for
New Mexico's working families.
They deserve policies that
support their livelihoods, not
ones that threaten their
financial stability. Thank you.
Thank you very much and uh last
online is Angie Smith.
In opposition.
Good morning. Thank you. Um,
Committee chairwoman and the
committee. My name is Angie
Smith and I am concerned citizen
here in New Mexico, and I just
wanted to share with you that we
have an organization in our
community called the Ministerial
Alliance, and every Christmas
season, we do the red kettle
campaign here that raises money
specifically to help or to help
people in our community with
their utility bills the rest of
the year, uh, through. The
Alliance does a great job
vetting those seeking help and
even helps them come up with
budgets and ways to help them
get back on their feet so they
don't need.
need help in the future. It's
neighbors helping neighbors, and
it works really well. Wanting to
help people is a good and right
thing. However, taking from
others to give to a designate a
few is not truly helping. I
realize this is voluntary right
now, but I'll be honest, my
concern is that one day, it'll
become an amendment to make it
required. Wouldn't it be better
to find a way to empower and
assist organizations like our
local ministerial alliance and
others like Lahib.
Who are already doing this
important work, so that one part
of the population is not being
hurt financially, and the other
is being truly helped. Please
say no to HB 91. Thank you for
your time and your service.
Thank you very much. Now we're
going to go to comments and
questions from committee
members. I first have Senator
Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
trying to understand the
amendment, um.
Madam Chair, so.
Instead of D.
Which actually specifies
programs.
On page 2
Um, that's because line 6
through.
11 were eliminated.
See how inserted and programs,
so my interpretation of this is
it gives maximum flexibility.
Or whatever programs there are
and doesn't and and doesn't
specify any kind of program, is
that correct, manager?
Um, Madam Chair, senator, yes.
So, so those programs, um, when
the rulemaking occurs in the
PRC.
All of the arguments that we
just heard opposed can be made
at that time.
Uh man chair yes and. Yeah, OK,
that I just wanted to clarify
because I was trying to figure
out the amendment because that's
how I understood the amendments.
I wanted to make sure that was
true and to say.
Um, we don't know how they're
going to be structured and
everybody talking about the
impact or the cliff effect.
I'm sure the PRC would be very
worried about the cliff effect
as well, um, and I'm sure the
PRC would be worried about
having this spread to middle
income people, um, and there are
lots and lots, the programs
could also include nothing about
rates, it could be something
about a reducing energy costs
and and whatever. I think this
is a great bill. I'm very
impressed with um the.
Diversity of support for it and
I'm gonna be very happy to vote
for it. Thank you, ma'am sure.
Uh, other questions, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you.
This
I want to understand this, um,
This is probably good news for
all ratepayers in New Mexico to
know that.
Utilities have the headspace.
Do
Offer some people reduced rates.
Which
Because you maybe they're
charging too much.
Um, can you?
Explained to me the impact on.
The rate structure when you
start these reduced rates.
What happens to the
What happens to everybody else.
So ma'am Char start, but then I
want to turn to my experts so.
There's nothing in this bill
that says rates, it's only
rates.
So remember that the the
utilities will propose to the
PRC voluntarily if they want to
a plan.
Uh, so adjusting rates is only
one portion of it that she heard
from Cenerity Lopez, they've got
programs that they could offer.
And we do have light, but.
My he is just a one time amount
to help at a certain time.
This would be programs that
would help all the time.
So if I can start Wellard
answered.
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend.
So what the pro tem said is the
fundamental principle of the
bill.
That the utility will in the
course of their regular rate
making, so the next time a
utility brings a rape case, can,
if they desire to propose a
particular rate class for low
income customers and they would
have to define what they meant
by low income.
And they would have to argue the
same way they argue for any
rate.
Before the PRC and all the
interveners who come to
intervene in those cases that
the rate they had proposed would
be effective at helping reduce
energy burden and would be just
and reasonable and not produce
an undue burden on any other.
Um, Madam Chair, and uh
Expert.
What was it?
Weller, Doctor Weller. Doctor
Weller, I apologize.
Um
And the
In the formulation, I, I suspect
you're pretty familiar with how
right cases are.
And rape cases are justified
based on
The investment
Of a utility.
Number of customers, the amount
of gas or electricity, and, and,
and agreed upon margin for right
now.
It would appear to me.
Yeah
The simple math would show.
That anytime you reduce your
income or or
A specific group that
The other groups will be
Raised
Although very little because it
depending on what the volumes of
of those two people are.
But mathematically,
Unless the stockholders of these
utilities.
have changed their MO and they
now have um
They're not worried about the
rate of return.
That
They would be forced.
To raise one group at the at the
benefit of another. Am I missing
something?
Madam Chair, Senator Townsend,
in a general sense, no, you're
not missing something. Um, so
ratemaking is based on cost
causation.
Uh, fundamentally, so utility
has to acquire fuel, they have
to build plants, um, and they
have a.
Litigated rate of return that
they received back.
Um, and yes, the whole point of
having rape cases is to decide
how those little.
Who gets
This much increase, who is
responsible for what cost plays
out.
Um, Senator Stewart mentioned
that low income rates exist in
20 other states in the union and
they do, um, our nearest
neighbors all have them.
The one I'd love to briefly
mention to you is Colorado's
program, which went into effect
in 2021.
Um, Colorado's program caps
utility bills and this could be
a proposal that a utility could
bring, like, I'm not going to
get into super detail. The point
is, Madam Chair.
Senator
The resultant movement of costs
from one customer class to
another, turned out to be about
50 cents a month.
Which
Yeah, that isn't a a small
increase, I'm not gonna deny
your math because.
I'm not going to deny how math
works. But the principles of
ratemaking, Madam Chair,
Senator.
Are about balancing and making
sure that the benefits given to
one customer class don't unduly
burden another.
Um, and that's why we have great
hair advocates who intervene in
rape cases.
I'm sure
A new madam chair and and Madam
Chair down here, OK, all right,
Madam Chair.
Um
Miss Weller.
I, I, I understand and if your
bills,
had or
Open to the amendment.
To
protect
The
The other
ratepayers.
And said that if
A utility wanted to provide
You'll
At a lower cost, um.
That comes out of
The profit margin.
And not at the cost of the other
ratepayers.
I'll sign on.
But
That's what I
think we have to do is to
protect.
Everyone. And so,
I hear you loud and clear. I
think Chelsea stood up for this,
so.
We have a reckoning the next
time they go to uh
ERC and say they need more
money, I would, first thing I
would say is,
You tried to give part of your
Profit margin away the other
day, why would I increase it
today?
That just doesn't seem logical,
but I, uh,
I don't believe that.
I do not believe.
Uh, sitting here today that I am
doing my job representing all of
my constituents fairly.
When I
agree to a burden.
On some and not protect.
So,
I um
I can't support your, your bill,
but I understand what you're
trying to do, and, uh, again,
I'm,
stopped it, so.
process because I just don't
think it's there. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator Hamlin
Oh
sit around and then I move for a
due pass.
So here's
OK, I do pass um from Senator
Hamlin is second from Senator
Charlie, and um.
Uh, Senator Cervantes, OK, and
Scott.
I saw you for.
I know you, you mentioned this
earlier, Madam Chair, the
amendment that was put on the
house that strikes all of
subsection B.
And then it also does something
else, it adds the words and
programs at subsection C of the
word rates.
With that amendment which great
because it cuts the bill down
to.
Half a sentence, really. Um.
The you could really strike an
existing law subsection E.
Because since you've added
programs, rates and programs.
really subsection E now has no
meaning too, so we're trying to
Get this down and we could
really probably make a lot of
progress by doing that. That's a
suggestion.
And then I just want to
understand this, like I'm, I'm,
I'm kind of amused by all the
comments. And since this is
voluntary and
So forth, everybody smiling,
yes, and it's, um, and it's
something uh.
Again, a private utility can do
this kind of strikes me because
I'm thinking about this kind of
like passing a bill that says I
could put more money in the
collection plate on Sundays, uh,
which I can always do, right? I
can always give up money and
give it to charity and so, um,
and I know Madam Chair, Madam
chair, you're not the primary
sponsor of this. I'm just, so
I'm not gonna put you on the
spot, but I
Will you? OK, good. Well, yeah,
please do, cause I'm, I'm trying
to figure out we passed a law
that says that the utilities can
provide preferential rates in in
the interest of low income New
Mexicans.
Why do we need a law to do that?
Can't they can't they do that?
And and I heard, I heard the
argument that says they can't do
that. So Madam Chair and Senator
Cervantes, um, the PRC needs the
authority to do this.
Peary has come to me several
times and said we cannot do
certain things and rate setting
unless you tell us that we can
do that.
So they're not allowed to
consider uh separate classes of
people,
uh, separate circumstances
unless we bring this to them, so
consider it enabling
legislation.
And, and I appreciate that, man.
I'm sure accept that and again,
so here's the trick if you look
at the first page of the bill
which is all existing language,
I get why the PRC would tell you
that is that here we're saying
the PRC can't make unreasonable
preferences.
Advantage a person.
Or demonstrate any kind of
unreasonable unreasonable again
here's the words always
unreasonable, right? So they
can't, they can't provide an
unreasonable preference. Well,
That's probably poorly worded,
but we did that long ago. So
somebody would say, well, that's
not an unreasonable preference
cause we're giving a preference
to uh somebody on the basis of
income demands.
And it says in existing law we
can't do rates based on an
unreasonable.
Um
Class of service.
In localities, but
Of course that's all existing,
but then if you look at E, which
is existing law too, says, says
the PRC can do this. They're
saying they can't, but it says
PRC can adopt energy efficient
programs designed to reduce the
burden of energy costs on
low-income customers. So that
language was suggest to me the
PRC can.
Uh, adopt programs designed to
reduce and I guess maybe the,
the difference here is just
rates, right? Is that just the
issues?
Cause, cause now we're adding
the word programs by the
amendment. We're adding rates,
just seems to me a P you can do
this now and they're telling you
they can't and
I'm used to state government,
people in state government
always saying we can't do stuff
and I always ask, well, why?
Show me where in the law you
can't do this, and they usually
have a hard time at that point,
because I think they're
generally looking for.
Was to not have to do.
More than they're already doing
is is where it's at, but, but
help me to see where is, is the,
when you say PRC can't do this,
is that based on this, this
existing language?
So Madam Chair, Senator, I'm
gonna have Doctor Weller uh
respond to your.
Questions and concerns.
Madam Chair, Senator Cervantes,
so.
First, turning to section E.
The reason that Section E is
insufficient is the last few
words of it as pursuant to the
efficient use of Energy Act. Um,
the efficient use of Energy Act
governs utility, energy
efficiency programs. Um, it
doesn't allow for ratemaking at
all, and it has a fairly narrow
band of ways in which a utility
can propose programs and I
understand that, so let me just
interrupt you because I know
where you, I I see where you're
at, and I agree with you. But if
I'm suggesting you to strike
subsection E from the law now,
haven't we covered it with the
amendments that are made in the
House?
And we just isn't is superfluous
now.
we're saying that you can
utilities can adopt rates and
programs.
Uh, to reduce the burden of
energy on low income customers.
Done.
Senator, I am not entire, madam,
thank you, Madam Chair, senator,
um, I think that's a possibly
valid argument given this, but
I'd want to talk to all of the
utilities and the PRC before I
suggested to talk again.
Yeah, I know, I, I would expect
as much because I know the way
these things work is that
there's a everybody, so many
looking in the eyes, but yeah,
with, with the amendments put in
the house, you don't need
anymore.
That eliminating E, probably a
good thing because that limits.
Programs to energy as you just
said, energy, uh, efficient use
of Energy Act, and we've already
said by the amendment that we're
now allowing for rates and
programs.
Uh, to reduce the burden of
energy, so what you really
should do is you should uh.
Probably again just ended at C,
put a period there and strike
all of you and you'd have.
very elegant solution to, I
think what you're trying to
accomplish, but I understand
this is gonna take a groupthink
effort, so.
I would just encourage you all
to do that, Madam Chair and.
I, I, normally I'd make the
amendment here and, and get the
committee to refer to it, but I
appreciate and respect the fact
that seems like there's a whole
bunch of people who
want to weigh in and
Of their lawyers.
Or it up so
I, I won't, I won't push you to
do that now, but.
Appreciate the consideration.
Senator Azel.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Miss Weller.
I agree with what has sent it
away with thee, and I don't know
why we don't go ahead and do it
here.
Where is this bill going next,
Madam Chair and Madam Madam
Chair, I don't have my locator,
but I believe it's going to the
floor.
Mm. No.
Oh, it's going to uh send uh tax
and business.
OK, well, madam, cheer, I guess
I would like to propose a
written amendment removing
section E.
of House Bill 91 as amended.
Um, Senator, if you're, uh,
before we go to the trouble of
making a written amendment, why
don't we vote on your proposed
amendment and see if you have
support for, um, Madam Chair.
Oh, Madam Chair, you do have a
number one, we have a form that
has to be filled out. We've
gotten in trouble before with
the drafters about this, and
number 2, Madam Chair, this is
an unfriendly amendment until
there is consultation. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, is
that a friendly amendment?
OK, since it's not a friendly
amendment, um, I still suggest
before cause I.
When you do these amendments, it
takes a little while, um, I
just, I'm wondering if you have
support for that amendment.
Madam chair, madam chair,
whenever we're talking about
this is an unfriendly amendment
until there's consultation, I
guess I need to know who the
consultation would be with Madam
Chair, I'll defer to Doctor
Wheeler on that.
Madam Chair, Senator, the
sponsor of the bill first of
all, uh, Representative Ortez,
um, the PRC to see if removing
that would have unintended
consequences elsewhere in the
law.
Um, probably the utilities who
have supported us, the other
groups that are interested in
having the bill passed. I just
wouldn't feel comfortable doing
that on the fly.
Without talking to the group of
people who brought us to this
point.
Madam Chair, madam chair, and
Miss Weller, I disagree with you
if you're gonna be the expert
witness, you should know if this
is going to harm or improve the
bill so I do have a problem
there. Whenever you're talking
about consultation, are you?
Going to take into consideration
the people that it will affect
by raising their rates.
Madam Chair, Senator, I don't
think that the amendment
proposed has much to do with
that.
Well, madam, cheer whenever
we're talking about uh.
Rights designed to reduce the
burden of energy costs on low
income customers, which has not
been defined or I cannot find it
in here that is going to
increase the burden on other
utility users in my opinion, you
disagree with that, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, Miss Weller.
Madam Chair,
Senator
I
Agree that low income is not
defined in this very
specifically and for the reason
that the utilities over the
process of working on this bill
over several years, it hasn't
gotten this far before. So maybe
the first time that you've
gotten to see it.
Um
They want the flexibility to
define low income as appropriate
to their customer base, because
the El Paso Electric customer
base is different than the PNM
customer base is different than
the New Mexico gas customer
base.
And they want the flexibility to
be able to say, all right, so.
El Paso Electric is going to
define low income in this way
and propose that to the PRC.
PNM is going to define it in
this other way and propose it to
the PRC and the PRC has the
authority to decide whether
they've done a decent job,
Madam, madam chair.
And Miss Wheeler.
I guess what my concern here is.
Until we get the definition of
low income customers.
There still is a problem with
this bill in my opinion.
I do want a definition of what
that is, and it is not spelled
out here.
And whenever you are talking in
section one, madam chair, uh,
line 22, shall establish and
maintain any unreasonable
differences as to rates of
service.
That includes uh between
localities or between classes of
service.
So Madam Cheer, then it goes on
down to state the economic
development rates, rates
designed to retain load and
rates designed to reduce the
burden of energy costs on.
Low income customers.
So madam chair, I do feel like
that does need to be.
Defined in this particular bill.
I understand what lie he does.
I've dealt with light heat for
quite a, quite, well, all 21
years that I've been up here, so
if I haven't heard it yet.
You know, it is something new.
The Madame cheer.
I'm also concerned about, let me
see if it did take that away.
Unless
Madam Chair, madam chair, Miss
Willer.
If
Section E is not.
Taken out
I guess programs would probably
need to be defined as well.
Programs is plural in this, so I
want to know what other programs
might be proposed that would
fall under the guise of the PRC,
can you help me out with that?
Madam Chair, Senator,
absolutely.
Um, so there are programs that
one could imagine. Now none of
these exist yet, so all of this
is going to be hypothetical.
Madam Chair, Senator,
so you could imagine a program
that offers low or zero
interconnection fees to new low
income housing.
That would reduce the amount of
cost that.
The
would be likely to reduce the
amount of.
Costs that the low income people
who would live in that housing
would be paying for their
electricity.
They would not have that bill
impact passed on to them.
That's just a possibility,
another possibility could be a
program that offers whole
building energy efficiency
upgrades to multi-family housing
that is in a low income area.
Now that's not a program as
defined in the end the efficient
use of Energy Act, but it is a
program that you could propose
under.
The auspices of this bill. I
could also imagine many others,
um, this bill is.
Creates the flexibility or
utility to put a low income
program in their general rape
case to put a low income program
in their transportation
electrification plan to put a
low income program or a
preference for electrifying, um,
or improving the grid in a grid
modernization application. It is
meant to be flexible so that the
utility can precisely design it
for their customers.
That was pretty long
explanation, Madam Chair, madam
chair, Miss Wheeler.
But I'm gonna let that one drop,
um.
This is the new this new
exception is just for low.
So Madam Chair, Madam chair,
Miss Weller.
How is that gonna benefit the
entire.
Madam Chair
Senator Azel.
So when low income customers
currently are unable to pay
their utility bills and they go
into arrears. The utility
acquires bad debt.
Um, and that bad debt is
socialized to everyone across
the utility.
Um
We pay for.
Because as I was talking to
Senator Townsend and talking
about cost causation. The
utility still has to pay for the
fuel they bought and the plant
they built and the electricity
they deliver. So that bad debt
becomes paid for by everybody
else.
The idea of having a low income
rate or a low income program in
addition to something like Ly
heap, Madam Chair, Senator A is
to prevent that from happening.
So that a low income customer
pays their bills. They might be
lower than they were before, but
they pay them.
And that cost of paying for
electricity is not spread across
the entire system.
Right now, Madam chair, madam.
and Miss Weller.
Whenever you're talking about
that bad debt accumulated.
Um, even though.
Even if
The PRC goes along with this.
It will be a burden on those
ratepayers that are already in
the program that do not qualify
as a.
Low income customers since it
has not been defined.
So, uh, there's a problem right
there in my opinion.
Madam Chair and Madame Chair.
Madam chair, whenever we are.
You see, no, I'm not.
Oh,
I'm looking back in one of the
analysis here, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair.
And this is coming from the PRC
itself and I'm assuming you have
a copy of that.
Under significant issues, and
there's quite a few significant
issues that the PRC has put out
there.
I don't know if the audiences.
But whenever we're looking at.
Under the words program, it is
not defined, but it implies.
Implies that programs offered by
utilities would be permitted.
To low income to favor low
income customers. Would you
agree with that, madam chair,
madam chair, and Miss Weller.
Senator, Madam Chair, within the
confines of just and reasonable
rates and.
Yes.
Madam Cheer once again looks to
me like the.
person that does not.
Uh, qualified to be called.
A participating customer under
this particular bill is going to
bear that burden.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator Ael. Senator
Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, I know.
This doesn't apply to co-ops.
Manicure center, it does not.
Coops not to have.
In a low income customers, Madam
Chairman.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, senator,
they do.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, the
PRC doesn't regulate co op
rates, so this bill would be not
the right way to.
Cause or require.
A co op to do anything, co-ops
can at this very moment offer
low income rates and, Madam
Chair.
And Miss Weller.
This would be an abandonment of
the
Basic principles that ERC uses.
To determine rates now.
Which is
Cost causation.
Is that
Accurate
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, I
would respectfully disagree with
you, I think that it it allows
for a policy option.
That the PRC could use while
respecting the principles of
cost causation to help a portion
of their customer base.
Um, we see the PRC do this now
with economic development rates,
which are in the same section of
law.
many different ways, economic
development rates is real broad.
We can design them in a lot of
ways. Um, and we've made that
policy choice to allow the PRC
to consider whether economic
development rates would be
useful.
And
That
Distorts
False causation, somewhat. We
also distort cause causation or
Um
Load management in order to pay.
To pay to keep the lights on, we
can.
Pay more or less for different
kinds of load, and that too is
in the section of law.
So this puts another tool in
that toolbox, but cost causation
remains at the heart of great
design in my opinion.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
It
is just what we decide to do
about it.
That becomes a little wider,
madam, Miss Weller, would it be
fair to say though?
That the operating cost.
Of that system.
Would not be affected.
By this
Legislation
All that would be affected is
Who pays.
For the
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, in
the context of a new rape case,
yes.
And Madam Chair, Senator.
We have attempt in this
legislature.
To help
folks pay their utility bills.
With
Several programs.
Are those programs fully
subscribed?
Uh, Madam chair.
Uh, Senator, we never
appropriate enough money for
like. There is always a waiting
list.
It is a one time payment to um.
The utility, the low income
customer and oftentimes it can
be used towards a down payment
towards um their.
Fees for a company, it could be
used for wood, it could be used
for uh propane.
It's a one time allotment for
the entire year.
And I used to be in the
department that ran this program
and we never had enough money,
we always had people on a
waiting list for low income.
Madam Chair looking at the
But 2024 budget.
Like he had about 20.
3 $24 million in it.
So when there is insufficient.
There is insufficient dollars.
To cover all of the requests.
Are the requests pro rated.
Madam Chair Center, I couldn't
tell you what they do today.
But I can tell you that the
customer doesn't receive the
money directly. It goes to the
company.
So that ensures a clean line.
Of uh
Madam Chair, madam chair
wouldn't the net effect be the
same though.
The folks supplying the
electricity or the natural gas
or
Whatever
Would be compensated rather than
not having their bills paid. I
believe Madam, Senator, I
understand your question. So I,
the company would be receiving
the funds. I don't know to your
original question whether or not
they are pro rating.
Because some people apply later
than others.
And I know that they want to
move the funds out at certain
times of years like in the fall
before the winter hits, uh, in
the spring before the air
cooling uh hits for the because
it it didn't used to cover air
conditioning, and now it does.
I couldn't, I couldn't respond.
We'd have to have somebody from
that department which is under
the healthcare authority now.
Oh, Madam Chair.
And senator
We have any estimates?
As to what cost shift we might
be discussing.
With this legislation.
Uh, Madam Chair Center, I'm
gonna defer to Doctor Weller.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
We have some examples from other
states.
I mentioned earlier.
The example from Colorado.
Which
Tapped utility bills for certain
low income customers at a
percentage of their income, that
ended up costing about 50 cents
a month for other customers.
Um, in
Arizona, I believe that the
impact is about 2%.
Um, there are other examples.
All of them are pretty minor.
And Madam Chair, Miss Weller.
Do you have gross dollars to go
with 50 cents a month.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, I'm
not sure I understand your
question. Well, that's 50 cents
a month over
5 million customers.
Um, I can get you that Senator
Scott, Madam Chair, um, but I am
not an expert in Colorado.
So
Uh, I would have to go and find
the number of of subscribed
customers.
OK, so Madam Chair.
And Senator, we know that
apparently $24 million is not
enough money.
But what we don't know is.
How much more money will be
required.
If this legislation
is enacted.
From
Not the state this time.
But from customers.
That are on the wrong side.
Of this new classification.
Is that
Pretty much where we are.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
It is entirely possible that
absolutely nothing will happen
if we pass this legislation. If
a utility decides not to bring a
rate or program to the PRC.
Um
Conversely, Madam Chair, Senator
Scott, a utility could bring 3
different low income rates, um,
and a program.
So
That is why I cannot give you a
precise.
Monetary impact because of the
flexibility built into this,
however,
Madam Chair, Senator Scott.
One of the reasons we have a
public regulation commission.
Is that rape cases are public
and the documents that a utility
provides that say we're going to
require this much of an increase
on this customer class.
Our public documents.
And can be argued against and
often are.
Successfully
That Senator.
But manure, Miss Weller.
May the
The public utilities.
Or interested in getting their
bills paid.
So
I'm going to
That it would not be long.
Before something similar.
Came before the PRC and I'm
gonna further speculate.
That
Given our experience up here.
With advocacy groups.
There would be a clamor.
Or
This new rate classification or
several new classifications.
That would
Positively impact.
Some unknown.
As yet undefined low income
population.
While at the same time
negatively impacting.
Folks that are paying their
bills.
I'm gonna have to listen to more
of the conversation, but I
I have some reservations about
that.
Uh, thank you, Senator.
Miss Weller, thank you, Madam
Chair. That's all I have for
now.
Senator Azel and she didn't make
the formal motion, and they can
go ahead and make that motion
since they have another
committee to go to, um, I.
Madam Chair, I guess because I'm
on the wrong side, I guess I
will. Thank you very much.
Um, thank you, Senator Yazel. So
we have a motion, um, uh, do
pass motion and a 2nd, so Madam
Secretary, will you call the
roll?
Senator Cervantes.
Thereon, yes, Senator Charlie.
Sanna Charlie, yes, Sanel.
No,
no, Senator Hamblin, Senator
Hamblin, yes, Senator Pope. Yes.
Senator Pope, yes, Senator
Scott.
Senator Scott? No. Senator
Townsend.
Townsend, no,
Senator
Townsend, no center to
Lopez, yes, San Stephonics.
And to explain my vote.
OK. 3 explanations of votes,
Senator Yel.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman. The reason I voted no
on this bill. There's some
language in here that I did want
to find, which includes
low-income customers since other
customers will be paying the
bills for them. I also would
like to see that last.
Uh, section E of this bill
removed and there's no guarantee
that whenever it goes to the
next committee that will happen.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Ezel, um.
Senator Cervantes?
I, I do want to have an
understanding perhaps we'll do
it after the bill's completed
about the idea that we have to
have something in writing to do
an amendment. I I wasn't aware
or clear about that. Um, we
don't, I'm not used to doing
that in judicial. We make
amendments on the fly all the
time, but if, if that's the
policy that I just want to
understand that better and then
the Senator Eel, uh, you were
gonna make an amendment and then
you thought you're on the wrong
side, and I'll just tell you
something, Senator, my dad used
to say, which is, uh, if you
don't step up to the plate and
swing away, you're never gonna
get a home run Mr. Chairman, I
do want to respond to that
senator.
Monte's, we have stepped up to
the plate many times and it
always seems like we get hit by
the ball. Thank you very much.
I'm with you sometimes there,
Senator.
So uh.
Uh
But Senator Stefaniks, I'm
sorry, I almost started
laughing.
Thank you, um.
I will pass along all the
comments to both sponsors,
Senator Stewart and
Representative Ortez so that
they could take into account
before it goes on to uh Senator
Hamlin's committee and uh
secondly, um, we have had an
issue with an amendment not
being prepared properly, uh, by
led council, so there is a pad
of blue forms and perhaps
Mikaela could actually just
distribute one on every place to
start with for the day so that
Everybody has it available if
they want to make an amendment
to anything and besides that.
Page, we also have another page
to send upstairs.
So, uh, we have had an example
of something getting to the
floor that had the wrong
amendment on it.
And so that's the purpose of
What they're requesting.
And that's all, but thank you
everybody for the discussion on
this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
She go in and like.
So is the next one the stock uh
Uh
I believe the next one is Senate
Bill 470 stock water
applications to state engineer
that's Senator Townsend.
Were you going in order?
Senator Thompson
We're prepared for you. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, over the last decade I've
presented a lot of bills, but I
don't think I've ever presented
a bill that had one word change
in it, and that's what I have
today.
This bill
House Senate Bill 470.
is a constituent bill, um,
brought by a rancher in Otero
County, Mr. Lee.
Do, um, believes that.
The protection of
Of uh stock water.
Uh, and New Mexico is
I would be enhanced.
By changing one word, and that
is in section one A.
Changing any.
Who only
And the purpose is to is to
provide protection to cattle
ranchers.
Or
The ability to impound water.
Uh for stock watering.
Um
Pretty simple. There's been uh
2,
FIRs there there's one FIR that
I think it's just
They were
Didn't understand what we were
doing, um.
I was like $350,000.
Annual.
Impact and I.
life of me. I can't figure that
one out, but, um.
I'm sure that's
the Senate Bill 4.
Thank you very much. Is there
anybody in the audience here to
support this bill.
If you'd come line up, uh, and
then anybody in the audience to
oppose this bill. OK, is there
anybody online to support?
Anybody to oppose.
OK, so it looks like we only
have supporters, so let's hear
from the supporters, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Senators
My name is Tom Patterson. I'm
president-elect of the New
Mexico cattle grower.
Uh, so association.
A rancher in Karon County.
We have, uh, we impound water
for stock.
Uh, we appreciate the sponsor
bringing forth this bill to
clarify something, so it's
abundantly uh.
Obvious.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
I'm Harold Trujillo Association.
And I worked on this legislation
in the early 2000s, and I think
this is an improvement to that
legislation.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. I'm Monica
Rodriguez. I'm a paid lobbyist
for the New Mexicoe Association,
and we had NMAA stand in support
of Senate Bill 470. This small
change in the language of the
law makes an important
distinguishment in who can
impound surface water. This
change is important as we
continue to feel the impacts of
severe drought in our region.
And when even the smallest drop
of water count.
Everybody else.
OK, and seeing no opposition
were to the committee. Uh, I
will say it goes to judiciary.
So Senator Cervantes first.
I appreciate that.
Uh, Senator, you said you're
only adding one word that should
be simple. I heard folks say
this adds clarity, actually does
the opposite, um, the way it's
worded right now with the way
you've added the word only when
it says only stockmen or stock
owners desiring to a pound any
of the surface water for water
shall apply to state engineers.
So I understand you're trying to
say that they're the only ones
who should be able to impound
but when you say they're the
only when you say only stockmen
and stock owners desiring to do
this shall apply to state
engineer, which you're what
you're also saying is that
anybody else doesn't have to
apply.
Uh, in other words, when you say
only stockmen and stock owners
have to apply to state engineer.
That, that could be read to say
everybody else doesn't have to
apply. Um, and so instead of
clarity, you've actually created
an ambiguity in a different
construction altogether and if I
was somebody who's not a
stockman or stock owners, you
know, I want to impound service
water, I just say the access
only only stockmen and stock
owners have to impound and I
think, I think I'm understanding
right, so that's not what you
want, you want to have happen.
You want to make sure only
stockmen and stock owners can
can do can do this.
But what you're saying is only
they're the only ones who have
to apply, which would mean to me
anybody else I'd say, I don't, I
don't have to apply. Um, if I'm
not a stock owner stock owner,
so you may be adding lack of
clarity for uh for the point or
goal of clarity. So just a
thought, but if it comes
judiciary, we'll maybe clean it
up.
Or try and get what you want.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Senator is uh
Cervantes Senator Cio Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
trying to figure out, um,
Is it that you want the, the, um
Doman
To
Uh, to be
I put this
Um
I guess I'm, I guess I'll just
ask, what is it exactly that you
want, you want this only for
starts then because of the 10
acre feet exemption or what
exactly is the goal here,
manager?
valid question, uh.
Senator, um.
Madam Chair, what?
The intent of the protect.
Um
The ability to impound water on.
On ranches, whether they're
where a person has a lease to
run cattle.
Yeah.
Water that may.
be able to be collected would be
used for stock watering and
stock water. OK.
Um
There's no trick to it. It's
just trying to protect ranchers.
And cattle owners for water.
So maybe something that says um
Well, maybe you should work on
this all the way to Judiciary. I
was actually playing with a with
with how to do it, and I think
it's
I, I really agree with the chair
of judiciary that adding only
makes it really confusing.
About um
About the intent, cause I, I
really.
Couldn't figure it out, but I
think that if you could.
Rewrite it to be clear.
About your intent that you
really want only.
Maybe it could be an eligibility
criteria or maybe it could be.
An exemption for them that is
clear.
Um, but I appreciate what you're
trying to do to.
To do with this bill, I'd be
more comfortable if it was.
It was out crystal clear what
you were trying to do with the
bill because I support the idea.
That
Only, only they that they that
the water should be used only
for livestock and not
commercialized, and if that's
the intent of the bill, I, I
support the intent of the bill.
I just don't think this bill
accomplishes it.
Um, right now.
And that makes me uncomfortable.
Are you finished? I'm finished.
Thank you. Thank you. uh,
Senator Scott, I see a
half-raised hand. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The rest of that sentence,
though, says.
Or watering of livestock.
So I'm not.
Sure that there's a lot of
ambiguity.
Because that's all.
That
Impoundment
Could be utilized for.
Madam Chair and senator is that
accurate?
I
I, it was to me, Madam Chair,
uh, senator.
But I um
You always sitting in
Here in front of a comedian,
you, you listen to other
People's perspective, and you
start reading it with a little
different eye.
I, I heard Senator Cervantes,
uh, loud and clear.
And, and I, um.
I will look him up when this is
over one way to get it, um,
where there are no questions
from anyone.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So Senator Townsend, do you want
to try to uh uh.
Collaborate with one of the
senators to uh amend to fix this
and bring it back, or do you
wanna just take a vote on it.
To go to the next committee. I'm
happy to take a vote on it if
you trust to help me out.
She's looking at you with gilded
eyes.
I mean, I guess then, um, the
question is still left with us
as a policy question, which is
the goal here to allow only
stockmen and stockholders
compound service water. That
really is the question and and
that's what you're saying you
want to accomplish and that's,
that's a policy question that I
think we have to have some
understanding about if if
there's agreement that that's
what you want to have happen and
everyone agrees that's what
should happen.
And then I'd be happy to help
you do that, but it's still kind
of begs the question.
Which is, should, should this
and, and I, I don't hear anybody
here in opposition, so I'm
guessing that.
Nobody else wants to impound
surface waters for watering
livestock other than stockmen
and stock owners, but I, I don't
know what that means. What if
I've got a couple of
Cheap, uh, and I want to pound
some water though.
To have a place for my sheep to.
Water, does that make me a
stockman or stock owner? I don't
know.
I'm
Madam Chair, and
Senator
I believe it would, but
We
may be stocker.
Maybe there's some term there
that catches it, but my intent
is.
Um, and I know Mr. Lee's intent
was.
protect the water that
That
very little water that that a
rancher may have for stock that,
that it is protected for the
livestock on the range, yeah, so
you, uh, we used to ranch over
on Under Cook's Peak and Deming
and.
Of course, you all have heard
this many times before in the in
the family, we were fond of
saying all hat no cattle, right?
So, uh, so I don't know.
We, we talk about our neighbors
that way, which we shouldn't be
over a few beers, but, uh, the
question is at what point in
time how many heads do you have
to be running to be a stockman.
Uh, I don't know, you know, and,
and how many head of cattle make
me a stockman.
How, how many
Many of any
thought
Whether it's
Sheep, lambs, goats.
I'll, when am I in stockman?
As opposed to a hobbyist, I
guess is what we would have
called it back. I'm right too,
so I don't know, but when you're
saying only stock men, probably
a little gender bias there, we
may want to play with but only
stockmen or stock owners and
impound to uh water their
livestock. I don't know how many
head I've got.
And, and so if we don't, if we
don't know the answer to that,
then.
What does the bill really do,
right? Uh, when you say that I'm
gonna, I'm gonna impound. I got.
2 head of cattle. I'm a
stockman.
To impound. I don't know.
And I, I think uh Madam Chair
and senator.
The changes is from any.
Only, and it's trying to protect
that.
That stockman.
That has that lease or owns that
property.
Yeah, madam chair, it's
interesting because it's, it's
fun for the committee, I hope
folks home change the one word
makes a big difference, right
the existing language says any.
So I would say any stock or
stock owners who want to impound
have to apply to state engineer.
And so that means anybody who
wants to do this, got to apply,
your change from any to only
said you, you're telling me that
you want only a stockman and
stock owners to apply for this
and whole different, whole
different meaning by the change
of the one word, think.
And
If it ever came down to a fight.
I imagine there'd probably be a
whole bunch of questions about
what the legislature intended by
that change.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, uh, Senator Dio Lopez
just provided the uh sponsor uh
copy of an amendment.
To see if that was amenable. If
so, we'll get a copy for
everybody to look at. Senator
Townsend.
Yes, ma'am, I think it's a
friendly amendment. I mean, her
amendment is on page 24.
OK, so we need to take it to go
get copied and I have another uh
person to talk while we're
getting it copied.
We need to get it copied or.
Either one of you.
But we're not waiting, it's
gotta go fast, Sam.
Um, OK, so Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Who else is?
Coming in to get this water.
You know,
I have heard that there are
construction companies and
others that have have.
Thought about it. I don't know
that anyone has actually done
it.
But just the threat of it was
something that.
Um, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. It is this not something
that's currently protected by
the lease rights or the property
right.
Evidently not to Madam Chair
and.
Senator of I, I think the
intent.
And I will tell you that the
practice of the of the state
engineer.
has been to do exactly what.
We're proposing this is just
tries to clarify.
And protect that water, but
I can't tell you of a case where
it has happened. I can.
you that
been
thought of
And the thought
people.
Excuse me a second. Is there
anybody here from the state
engineer's office.
OK, please proceed
OK, um, thank you for that,
Madam Chair and senator.
Um
The last, I just, I want to pose
a scenario to you, so.
Um,
I, my grandmother lives in.
Lived in Pablo Pintado, which
is.
Highly checkerboard area.
And when I was a little girl, I
would go with her to get
groundwater surface water for
her, um.
Little garden and to water her
livestock, her sheep.
I couldn't tell you if we were
on tribal land or non-tribal
land, um, because.
Of the nature of how
checkerboard that area is in
particular.
And I just think about some
unintended consequences with
this here for, um, especially
folks in Navajo country who um
This is a primary water source
for um their livestock, and I'd
like to have more information
about.
Um, what that looks like.
Maybe more conversations before.
The port, but I, I do support
the intent of this, I just worry
about.
That
That scenario, you know.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you.
Thank you. OK, Senator Sadiaa
Lopez to explain your amendment.
That the senator that the
sponsor has reviewed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
trying to figure out the intent,
and, and I tried to uh.
Just add, um, what I understand
is the intent, water impounded,
and this would be on page 2 line
4, insert water impounded has
stopped water may be.
May only be used to water
livestock, although.
But what I just heard from
Senator Charlie maybe water
livestock and garden, I don't
know, um, I really was just
trying to implement and I just
offered that up as for
consideration.
So are you moving the amendment
I'll move the amendment for
discussion purposes. I moved
the.
And
I'm, I'm moving the amendment,
but there's still discussion but
I'm and I'm gonna see if Senator
Townsend wants to second or not.
Unfortunately, I, I don't think
it's friendly, and I hadn't
thought of this. There are times
that.
That water may be used for like
watering alfalfa and doing
things that are supportive to.
So I hadn't thought about that.
Absolutely, I withdraw the
amendment.
You. Is there any other
discussion on the bill?
What is the pleasure on the
bill?
There's a motion for a do pass.
Is there a second?
There is a 2nd
So with the secretary please
call the boat on this bill which
is
Senate Bill 470.
Center Cervantes, excuse.
Senator Charlie
And Charlie Pa Satel.
And, yes, Senator Hamblin.
Sarah Hamlin pass. Senator Pope.
Yes, and explain my vote.
Yes, Senator Scott.
Nurse Scott, yes. Senator
Townsend.
Senator Townsend, yes, Senator
Lopez.
No.
I see Lopez, no.
Senator Charlie.
Yes. So try to, yes, San
Stephonics.
Did
Oh, I'm sorry, Senator Hamblin.
Yes.
Or Halin, yes, so thehonics, the
phonics, yes.
Senator Pope to explain his
vote, then Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
I'm just not familiar with this
issue specifically and want to
understand a little more.
Senator Cervantes was
mentioning.
You know, I think a person like
me is no hat and no cattle, so I
want to end this but.
I
Also, this will give time for
that might change going forward,
but
get this right.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Senator Charlie, then
Senator Seil Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um.
I, I don't want to stop this
from going forward, but I do
want to check in on those
unintended consequences, and
I'll check back within with you
about it and.
If we get to the floor I I.
Thank you, Senator Cedillo
Lopez, and I just couldn't vote
for it because it's too
confusing right now, but if it,
if it gets clarified, this is um
the concept is something I
support and will support on the
floor. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Townsend, you
have a due pass a 7 to 1 vote.
Thank you very much.
Going on to the next item on the
agenda is the Mount Taylor
cultural and Environmental
Integrity, Senator Charlie.
The floor is at 11:30. I think
we'll get through everything
today.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
I'm honored to present this
memorial affirming New Mexico's
commitment to protecting and
preserving Mount Taylor. You've
heard me talk about Mount Taylor
several times in this committee,
um, but really this is the site
of immense cultural historical
and environmental significance.
This memorial calls on state and
federal agencies to safeguard
Mount Taylor, a traditional
cultural property and oppose
uranium mining projects that
threaten.
ecological and sacred integrity.
This memorial aligns with our
state's long-standing commitment
and cultural preservation, um,
environmental protection and
responsible resource management.
Uh, Mount Taylor, which is known
to indigenous people throughout
the Southwest by several
traditional names, spina in my
language, Laguna and um
Kawashima in Akama where I live.
Um, it's a sacred place that has
been central to the cultural,
spiritual and historical
integrity of many tribes for
countless generations
generations. In 2009, after
significant advocacy from the
publics of Achema, Laguna, and
Zuni.
as well as the Hopi tribe in
Arizona and the Navajo Nation,
which Mount Taylor is one of
their four sacred mountains, um,
Mount Taylor was officially
designated a traditional
cultural property or a TCP.
And it's now listed on New
Mexico register of cultural
properties.
In 2014, the New Mexico Supreme
Court upheld this designation,
reaffirming the mountain's
designation as a TCP.
Affirming the cultural
significance of Mount Taylor as
an eligible property to the
state register.
Mount Taylor continues to serve
as a place of ceremony of
pilgrimage, and of prayer for
tribal people.
And its preservation is
essential to maintaining
indigenous cultural identity.
Mount Taylor now faces a renewed
threat from proposed uranium
mining projects that would
devastate the landscape.
deplete vital water resources
and pose significant
environmental and health
hazards.
One of the biggest concerns is.
The impact or potential impact
on aquifers.
Which serve as the primary water
source for the pueblos of Aama,
the Pueblo of Laguna, and
surrounding land grant
communities.
These aquifers are often the
primary source of springs and
water.
Uh, surface flows that serve as
primary drinking water and
irrigation resources for my
district's communities.
Mining operations could
contaminate an irreversibly
deplete this already over
appropriated water source,
further exacerbating water
insecurity in issues in the
region.
We've seen the consequences of
uranium mining in New Mexico,
um, and we know how this story
goes.
This memorial urges state and
federal agencies.
Including the New Mexico, um,
mining and mineral division to
deny permits for uranium mining
within the Mount Taylor TCP
property uh boundaries.
It also calls upon Congress to
reform an outdated act, the
General Mining Act of 1872,
which prioritizes mineral
extraction over cultural
preservation and environmental
stewardship and fails to
require.
Meaningful tribal consultation.
New Mexico has long been a
leader in protecting cultural
and natural resources, and this
memorial simply asks for us to
continue that legacy.
This has been supported uh by
the all public council of
Governors representing 2
sovereign.
Puebloss unanimously passed, um.
Calling for the protection of
Mount Taylor and opposing
uranium mining.
Um, and I just, I.
In closing, I, I, you know, I've
I've shared with the um.
With the committee before that
my father worked at a uranium
mine. And it's now sick.
Um, there isn't a person in our
community that hasn't been
touched by the legacy of
uranium.
My father worked there, uh, my
father-in-law worked there. My
husband's grandfathers were both
uh mine mine workers, it's what
you did.
Um, for economic stability.
But
Despite, um.
You know, us needing that
resource. It is left our land
and our families.
Um
With a legacy that has lasted
for generations, which has been
negative and harmful, um.
And I truly believe that what
happens to the land happens when
we take from the land when we.
Desecrate the land when we harm
the land, so too will we hurt
the people that are from that
land.
And so, um, I asked for your
support in reaffirming.
Uh, the protection of Mount
Taylor.
And I'm gonna have my expert
witness introduce himself as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator. My name is
Aaron Sims. Uh, I'm from the
Pueblo of Akima. I'm also an
attorney at the Chestnut Law
Offices, uh, our offices
represented the public of Akima
as its general counsel for close
to 40, probably going on 50
years, uh, our office uh
assisted the public of Achema in
the nomination of the Mount
Taylor TCP and also litigated
that case before the New Mexico
Supreme Court. Um, I'm happy to,
uh,
Um, um, answer any questions and
support the senator in
presenting this memorial. I'll
note that um Mount Taylor as a
traditional cultural property,
um, has immense cultural
significance, not just Akima but
a number of the tribes that uh
that were part of nominating the
mountain, but also many other
tribes that um also find
significance and connections to
Mount Taylor. Mount Taylor is
also uh historically important.
Um, many of the beams that were
used at Chaco Canyon where we're
harvested there on Mount Taylor.
Beams at the church in Akima,
the sign of Stevan Del Rey
mission, which is, which was
built in the mid 1600s were
carried and never touched the
ground, uh, in coming from Mount
Taylor to Ama. So it's
important, uh, uh, in that
significance is is very
significant. So, um, I'll stand
for, for questions and assist
the the senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. How many people in
the audience are here to support
this bill.
How many are here to oppose this
bill.
How many people online? No. OK,
so there's only support, so
let's have about 5 or 6 people
speak, not the entire room.
If we have any governors, any uh
pueblo or tribal
representatives, those should
come first.
Good morning, Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Terre Beer and I am from the
public. I'm actually here
speaking on behalf of Governor
Shendo and the public of Amos in
strong support here of Senate
Memorial 14. Uh, it's the, the
public of famous holds a Mount
Taylor, also known to the Hamous
people as Zoepe as a important
spiritual and ceremonial
sanctuary. Mount Taylor is
revered as a rere place for the
public of Heus and many
indigenous nations. It is deeply
embedded in our spiritual
practices.
serving as a site for prayer,
ceremony, and cultural
continuity. The traditional
cultural property designation is
essential to ensuring that this
sacred landscape remains
protected for future
generations.
The bubble of Hemus has been
impacted by the legacy of
uranium mining at Mount Taylor
and its adjacent um areas.
We urge the this committee to
support Senate Memorial 14,
which reaffirms the Mexico's
recognition of Mount Taylor as a
place of profound cultural and
spiritual significance to many
the Mexicans as well. In
closing, uh, by supporting uh
Senate Memorial 14, uh, you also
support the ongoing cultural
continuity of New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next.
Good morning Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is.
Conroy
And uh we are in strong for a
number of reasons.
The relationship and the
connection between the public of
Acoma.
In the Acoma language is not
just spiritual evidentiary.
Archaeology pit house and
farmlands in the work yard of
the mine.
And
That evidence really in support
of the time that was spent there
in the area, and settled for
quite some time before.
Which is Ama in Akama.
Um, but, uh, more than anything
that was conducted back in 2010
and 2011.
Uh, did not include many of the
spiritual values that are.
Um, we will eat an inaccurate.
Uh property designation.
included in the inventory.
So ask the state to honor its
commitment in designating Mount
Taylor as a traditional cultural
problem.
next, please.
Behopa.
My name is uh Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Asa Chavez
from NM Native Vote. I'm a proud
member of the Navajo Nation and
Qua Pueblo and M native vote is
in strong support of this
memorial as an organization
working on behalf of indigenous
people. Mount Taylor is a sacred
space for for our people, both
the Dinette and Pablo community
that I am, that I come from. It
is a sacred mountain. The legacy
of uranium contamination has
Devastated our communities, and
it is too raw to allow any
further uranium mining in the
state. Please support this
memorial and preserve the
cultural heritage and sacredness
of this space, a yeah.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Committee members, um, my name
is Anna Hanson. I am the
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Puake. I am honored to
represent them. The governor of
Poake, uh, sends her greetings.
Uh, she is the only woman
governor in our state of Pueblo
and she triumphs and strong
support along with the entire
Pueblo. I'm honored to represent
them. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Senator Charlie, for
bringing this forward. Thank
you. Uh, 2 more in the, in the
room and then one online. Please
go ahead.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, I'm Harold
Trujillo, president of New
Mexico Association, Ase
Association, and I'm pleased to
support this memorial. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Adela Duran.
As you all know, I represent 3
uranium mining companies.
I'd like to first say that my
clients appreciate the heartfelt
sentiment that Senator Charlie
has about this subject, um, even
though my clients have never
operated in New Mexico.
They have an understanding to
the extent that they can.
Of the frustration felt
primarily by our Native American
communities.
Over the uranium mining
practices of the past and not.
I'd like to share with the
committee that the safety
measures, the safety standards.
Technology has changed
drastically over the 50, over
the last 50 or 60 years Charlie
mentioned the Supreme Court of
the TCP. We can't get any
stronger than that, at least at
the that the that the supreme,
the Supreme Court struck a
balance between the need and the
desire for every.
tribe and Pueblo in the state
companies with the recognition
also that it's are the
equivalent of property rights,
Madame Cheret can be a fine
balance. I, I want to the
committee that my clients honor.
Uh, that
Thank you very much. Online, we
have 2 supporters, but only 1
wants to speak.
Melania Ortiz or Mala.
Melania, let's try.
Uh, Melena Ortiz.
Good morning, Chair and
committee members. Thank you for
the opportunity to comment. My
name is Malena Ortiz and I am
the registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Zuni, and for the
reasons stated previously, the
Pueblo of Zuni supports Senate
Memorial 14, and urges your
support, and we thank the
sponsor, Senator Charlie, for
bringing it forth. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now we go
to committee, uh, comments,
questions.
Senator Scott.
Senator Charlie, I see in
My legislative analysis here
that
There have been mining
activities.
Uh, night, well, actually about
30 years.
Of mining activities in the
Mount Taylor area already.
Um
Are those all now inactive?
Madam Chair and Senator Scott,
I'm actually gonna hand that
over to.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
senator, um, not all of those uh
activities are active. There's a
number of pending applications,
some of which have been sitting
before the New Mexico mining
division for about 30 years. Um,
so there has been a long legacy
of historic mining in that
grants Mineral belt district,
um, but there are a number of
proposed mines um in uh I should
say on and around Mount Taylor.
Thank you, man.
Yeah
Yeah, Madam Chair.
Expert
So there's never been mining on
Mount Taylor.
To date
All those
flames had just been that.
But not
Active mind sights.
Um
Madam Charan Senator, no, there
has been mining on Mount Taylor,
um, the mine that I referenced
where all of my family has
worked is at the base of Mount
Taylor, Jack Pyle mind.
Um, in Powati, which um.
Is semi-active today. Um, so, so
there are some active minds,
yes.
Madam Chair.
Oh, OK.
So, so, I mean, given the
advances in
That technology over the, since
we started doing this in the
40s.
I guess I'm, I'm wondering
about.
Oh
The impact this might have.
With respect to
Private property rights in the
area.
And
How those folks
Might consider this.
Did you address those concerns?
Absolutely, Madam Chair and the
Senator Scott this in no way
would impede on private
property.
You want it, OK.
Um, Madam Chair, and Senator,
um, this is a memorial.
Um, it doesn't have any binding
effect.
Uh, and then expresses the uh
legislative intent no different
than than any other memorial. So
it's impact on um being a
taking, it would not be a
taking, it will not impact any
private property rights as well
and a point of clarification for
the Mount Taylor traditional
cultural property, Mount Taylor
traditional cultural property as
a designation does not include
private property and it does not
include a land grant lands. Uh,
it's, it's designation if you
can envision the mountain.
Taylor goes from the sides of
the mesas that make up the
mountain all the way to the
peak.
Those Swiss cheese holes carved
out for those private
inholdings.
Oh.
Mad, Madam Chair and senator,
this would include
A private property.
being
Mine claims is that
Accurate
Madam Chair, um, this memorial
will not, again, it wouldn't
impact any private property
rights, um, to the extent that
the uh numerous impending
applications, their location is
dependent on, uh, certainly the
project types, um, some of those
projects and I should say many
of those projects are on uh
national forest land, um, they
may have uh portions of the
projects that occur on private
property, but as an
example, the um Laramite mine
which has a a pending
application before the New
Mexico mining and minerals
division, it will be impacting
state forest lands.
I mean, excuse me, Sela National
Forest.
OK.
Thank, thank you for your
answers. Thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
I'm
I'm not, you've heard, but I, as
I did a little research after
I heard this feel.
Is it possible?
I mean
Is it possible that you're
uranium mining
Might be able to be done in a
manner that
Yeah
The tribal communities could
support, and it would also, I
mean, I'm just trying to figure
out because I have heard
testimony about the lack of jobs
in in some areas, and I'm
thinking is there, is there a
way that we could make it to
where it was.
It
was
Met
The cultural.
Um, protections that that you
feel strongly about, and also
provided jobs to your community
that
The benefit. I'm just, is there,
is there a way in the middle
someplace that it could work.
Senator Townsend, thank you for
that question.
Um, so first and foremost, I am
not authorized to speak on
behalf of the 23 sovereign
nations um in our state.
Um, and further, there's just
been a lack of tribal
consultation when it comes to
any of this, right? And so we're
posing questions right now, but
there's been several pieces of
legislation that have come
before our committee in this
body that didn't have proper
tribal consultation, the cloud
seeding, for instance, that that
we talked about and so the, the
practice has been.
Um, excluding.
Tribal voices and perspectives
in this, so I know that's a big
nonanswer.
Madam Chair and senator.
Um
Thank you for the question and I
appreciate um your consideration
about the cultural impacts which
are significant, and I think
many of the tribes including the
Pablo of Akima would assert that
um impacts to Mount Taylor, uh,
as a cultural embodiment, um,
those can't be um avoided or
those can't be rehabilitated.
But the, the other reality is
that um
there's not only just concerns
uh the cultural aspects. There
are a number of environmental
and water concerns that are
attached to these uh activities,
uh, some of the proposed mines
and they're dependent on the
mine type, uh, are, are um
include the dewatering of
aquifers, uh, the Rio San Jose
Basin is considered one of the
uh probably one of the driest
basins uh in the state.
Uh, across the street from um
one of the proposed mine sites
is the Homesteak mine, which is
a super fun site that has an
underground contamination plume.
I think uh I believe at this
point, maybe 2 years ago, um,
the, the company applied for a a
waiver for clean up because they
were considering it technically
infeasible. Clean up of that uh
underground plume was gonna
take, uh, probably 2 centuries,
2 to 3 centuries.
The community is like Ama around
those areas have no place else
to go.
So this is, this isn't just a
cultural issue, but it concerns
the impacts to water in an
overly dry basin in concerns
that impacts the environment and
concerns impact to the wildlife.
Uh, that many surrounding
communities, not just uh the
tribes around that community uh
rely on and harvest from Mount
Taylor.
Well, Madam Chair and uh
Senator, I, I, um, I, I
completely understand the uh
The fact that
There are legacy issues.
And they're huge.
I mean, that's
I
hate to
Um
I hate to prohibit.
Maybe one mechanism that might
be able to finance cleaning up
that mess that you
Many of you are living with. If
there's
If there was a way to.
To cause a developer, and if the
economics were
were to support it.
To
To develop
A specific area, but under the
understanding that all these
other historical things.
You got help in cleaning up so
that you provided more
protections for the people out
there, and that, I mean, I've
seen that done in the oil and
gas industry on numerous
occasions, uh, and I was just
It's not my
Not in my backyard. I and I
completely understand that. I
was just trying to figure out is
there a way to provide jobs.
And the ability for you to clean
up a mess that you're living
with other than just
Walking away, so I'll hush
there. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there further
discussion?
And I move a pass.
Is there a second
Good, the secretary please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes, excuses
Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator
Zel.
Cenel passed, Senator Hamblin,
Senator Hamblin, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes, my book.
Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
No, Scott, no, Senator Townsend.
Senator Town's an excuse.
Senator Lopez.
Yes
Sana Lopez, Senator.
No, no, San Stephonics.
Yes. So the Phonics, yes. OK, so
before the vote is called, uh,
Senator Pope to explain his
vote, then Senator.
Thank you, Madam chair and thank
you, Senator Charlie for
bringing forward.
You know,
I just think the impacts which
you're talking about um.
The environmental issues and
then also the health, you know,
we're bringing up the cost.
Talking about jobs, but we're
not.
Of having those types of.
And I think people need to
understand.
tell people this all the time.
Oh, money isn't good money. And
at the end, sometimes what you
get.
With this
In the long term and it ends up
costing more.
Thank you for bringing in at the
end of the day, I still think.
We're not going to be doing this
mining and we're protecting this
area.
But what's happened in the past
still needs to be erected.
will
Thank you, man.
Thank you, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I'm not against this bill.
But I think some of the language
in it in it is pretty ambiguous
whenever you're talking on page
2 about the proposals.
Mount Taylor
Uranium minings it goes on down.
Until you get to line 19 and
then it's just talking about
uranium mining internal and does
the same thing online 24, it's
not specific to Mount Taylor.
And I think that that might.
Cos a problem to a person's.
Private property rights, the
Bill T be able to explore their
property rights.
Um, I do believe in the
prioritization of the.
sacred cultural sites. I really
do. I think that's most
importance.
But on page 3 on line 20.
Are you wanting this to be
senator, we're at the vote
count, OK, I know that, but I
just want to be, I think that
the senator needs to be specific
on saying this is.
In particular to Mount Taylor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and I'm sure that
Senator Charlie would uh meet
with you to get all those
recommendations.
OK, the vote was 5, yes, 2 no,
and 2 excused. You have a due
pass on this. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee.
Thank you. Now we're up to
Senator Woods.
And there is uh a handout and an
amendment coming around for
Senator Wood's Memorial.
Thank you.
And Senator Woods, is this your,
uh, amendment.
Yes, madam Chair, this is my
amendment. OK, so committee
members, the amendments that you
have.
is from Senator Woods.
So Senator Woods, would you like
to explain the memorial or the
amendment first.
Let me put the amendment in the
context for you, Madam Cherry,
and then I'll explain the
memorial. Thank you. Thank you.
Go ahead.
On the
Mhm
The amendment is a 231637.1.
And it shows on page.
To
94
Mark out the word dangerous.
And so that will read.
Battery storage instead of
dangerous battery storage.
Online 2 on on page 2 line 14.
We mark out the word.
See
And in Lou put in the word
acquire.
15.
After consent, we
We insert um.
And sent rather than.
Negotiated agreements with
owners to acquire more limited
lands or rights for.
Designated corridor.
And Madam Chair, this
This
Takes some uh
I mean, I guess you would say
so.
Angry language out of the bill.
And it tries to put more
Of the thought that
We want them to negotiate.
Not just go out in and condemn.
land
So that's the intent of the
Amendment, Madam Chair, OK, so
can I have a motion to adopt the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Madam Chair, I move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Is there any discussion on the
amendment.
OK, Senator, uh, motion.
I move the amendment.
Is there a second
I
There's a motion and a second on
the amendment. Is there any?
Opposition.
OK, your amendment has been
adopted unanimously, and the
secretary will note that.
We're now on the full memorial,
please. OK, Madam Chair, on the,
this is uh.
Senate Memorial 16.
And as you know, the US
Department of Energy has
In considering plans to
establish a national interest.
Electric corridor.
Transmission corridor in eastern
New Mexico.
While we're certainly not
opposed to the establishment of
transmission lines, many of our
constituents are justifiably
concerned about the seizure of
private property to make this
project possible.
Um
The
Plans describe a corridor
between 3 miles wide and 15
miles wide running through.
Private farms and ranches that
are owned by agricultural
producing families for
generations.
Now, Senator Boone and I have
both served on electric.
co op boards and we understand
the need for transmission lines
to carry the electricity between
suppliers and consumers.
But we can't stand for the
possible use of imminent domain
over a stretch of land up to 15
miles wide, trampling on private
property right.
Owners and letting some family
and farms in jeopardy.
public comment appeared on these
proposed plans was extended to
April 15th.
And we were like very much to
send this approved memorial.
To the US Department of Energy,
showing that in Mexico state
standards stands with farmers
and ranchers across eastern New
Mexico.
And with that, I would like to
turn it over to Senator Boone
for his explanation of the bill.
Thank you. Welcome to the
committee, Senator Boone. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
As Senator Wood, uh, would
stated uh.
You and I both have served on
electric co op boards and we're,
we're well aware of the need for
eminent domain. We're well aware
of, of the need for transmission
lines, uh, uh.
Several years ago, I, I
negotiated a transmission line
across our ranch and so uh it's
not that we're not familiar with
that and familiar with certainly
with the need of it it's just
that we have been uh.
Approached by so many of our
constituents across the southern
part of New Mexico and up up the
state line that are in great
concern because this had been
announced and and then.
No
They couldn't get any answers
the landowners couldn't get any
answers from anybody and, and
rightfully so they were just
upset and were coming to us and
asking us for answers, so we
decided to bring this memorial
in order to show them some
support for from our way towards
them and it, it.
It is a
Uh, a difficult thing for these
people to think about land
that's been in their families
for generations that is possibly
being threatened by this and,
and it's, it's hard for us to
give definite answers back to
him without something coming
from uh the official the DOE
that that is has made the
announcement and so we we were
just concerned with that and
wanted to bring this memorial in
order to try to, to give them
some peace and, and, and hope to
show some support from our
Senate.
Here, uh, in support of our
farmers and ranchers.
In eastern New Mexico primarily.
And with that I will, I will
rest and, and we'll stand for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you so much. How many in
the audience are here to support
this.
Is there anybody in the audience
to oppose it.
No one is there.
And there's 2 people online
supporting. So if um
Oh, let's have 4 or 5 people in
that room come to speak no more
than 5.
Please go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Vince
Martinez with the New Mexico
Rural Electric and we do have
concerns that the possible
effect with this how big this
project is, it could affect our
operations and maintenance as
well as any future expansion we
might have.
In rural New Mexico, thank you.
Um, good morning, out of the
committee. I'm Sally Harris
Werner. I'm a 4th generation
owner operator of the Mary
Harris Ranch in I'm in
northeastern New Mexico, where
40 miles northeast of Clayton.
And um
We're right off New Mexico 406
and this beautiful ranch has fed
and clothed my family for 98
years.
Excuse me. My neighbors and I
first learned about this
project, um.
By reading an email that was
sent by our county.
Um, extension agent on January
27th, 2025, and the period for
comment, closure was February
14th. That was two weeks. Our
county agent learned of the
project from the New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association. The
cattle growers learned of the
project in early January from
the notice in the Federal
register dated December 16th.
We are in phase 3 of a 4-phase
project, and the DOE has sent no
information to the landowners
that will be affected. Our union
County commissioners learned of
the project in December from a
relative that works for a
Wyoming law firm. The DOE has
had no contact with the county
commissioners or the local
government. County commissioners
from union, Harding and Colfax
have contacted the DOE asking
for information and face.
to face meetings. These repeated
requests have had no response.
If this corridor is 5 miles
wide, it will end 50 to 100
yards from my home.
If it's 15 miles wide, it will
put my family ranch out of
business in the 40 mile stretch
from Clayton up to the Colorado
border, I think that there might
be two operations that could
survive a 15 mile land seizure,
and that's because they own
property in other states, other
counties.
Um, it's shocking to think that
the federal energy regulation
commission can cede the power of
eminent domain seizure of
private lands to private
for-profit companies.
Last Thursday I was in Clayton,
which is the county seat. I went
to the tire shop and talked to
this young couple that have
scraped together money to buy
the tire shop. They are very
worried that they will lose the
tire shop if the farmers and
ranchers are put out of business
by this corridor. Then I went
across the street to the feed
store and heard the exact same
fears being expressed by that
owner as he talked to two
ranchers. I went to the cafe for
supper, and that's.
small business owner said the
same thing.
Now Clayton was hard hit by the
mandatory shutdowns during
COVID, and this power corridor
will destroy Clayton.
Yes, I will in summary, the DOE
and the FERC are proposing to
take our land, our homes, our
assets, our livelihoods, our
dignity, and even our town
surreptitiously and without
recourse. This is not right.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair, members
of the committee, Howard
Hutchinson with the Coalition of
Arizona New Mexico counties.
I'm not going to repeat what was
just previously, uh,
articulately displayed to the
committee.
Our counties have passed
resolutions.
Requested
The Department of Energy to come
to the counties.
And give them answers.
With no reply.
We think that a
Federal agencies should be
responsive to the people and we
wholeheartedly support.
The memorial. Thank you.
Madam Chairman and members of
the committee. My name is
Michelle Frost Maynard, and I'm
a 3rd generation rancher from
Quy County.
Our ranch has been in Qua County
for over 60 years.
During that time, we have built
infrastructure of water fence
and facilities.
We've also negotiated with the
energy companies for wind
turbines.
If the proposed Southwest grid
corridor goes 5 miles wide. It
goes directly right through the
middle of our ranch.
If it goes the full 15 miles
wide.
It will totally take over our
operation.
With either scenario, it leaves
us with the wondering of how we
continue to operate, or how do
we hand down our ranch to the
next generation.
We're now in phase 3 of this
project.
Which the Department of Energy
deems as public engagement.
This is not happening.
DOE and FERC.
are not working with local
governments or the citizens of
the state.
I have personally invited them
several times to the town halls
that we have held on the east
side of New Mexico.
I've not had no response. We
have not seen them or heard from
them.
The situation is actually even
worse than that.
The comment period has been
extended.
The problem is they have not
uploaded the link for people to
be able to make comments.
I have also put a federal ticket
in with the federal desk and
have no response from them
either.
DOE and FERC are leaving our
local governments in our New
Mexico citizens out the process.
We support the memorial.
Please do it for New Mexico
because we deserve much more
than what's happening to us now.
Thank you. Online, uh, we'll
hear from Amber Watson briefly
and then Cliff Copeland.
Uh, good morning and thank you
for the opportunity, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Amber Watson from Bard, New
Mexico in Wake County. My
husband and I
Um, as well as our two daughters
and and their children own land
within the proposed corridor.
Um, I'm in full support of this
memorial for reasons that have
already been presented and with
respect for time, um.
Many of my concerns have been
addressed. I, I do want to just
add that in this day and age,
are we really incapable of
sitting down and having a
discussion with those that stand
to lose the most. My family is
generations deep proud to be
part of agriculture.
I'm proud to support New Mexico
through agriculture.
But Madam Chair and committee
members respectfully. I will not
willingly give up my land, and
especially not without
discussion and agreed upon
concrete plan that doesn't
threaten it.
Madam Chair and committee, I
respectfully ask that you stand
with us and agree with memorial.
The memorial that's been
presented today. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Cliff
Copeland.
Yes, Madam Chair, committee
members. My name is Cliff
Copeland. I'm a rancher from
Union County as well as the
Northeast Regional Vice
President for New Mexico Cattle
Growers Association. I am very
much in favor of SM 16.
The southwest grid connector
corridor is 5 to 15 miles wide
and comes with a venomous power
of venomous domain.
And, and the option of expanding
the corridor up to 100 more
miles.
The corridor covers one half of
our ranch, my granddaughters are
the 5th generations to be on the
ranch. This corridor could wipe
out generations of improvements
to the land and livestock. This
corridor could potentially put
my family completely out of
business, decrease our land
values and put obtaining
operational loans at risk.
The same story will be repeated
all the way down the entire
length of eastern New Mexico,
and it encompasses 1.8 million
acres of prime grazing and
farmland used to grow food for
New Mexico and the world.
New Mexico renewable Energy
Transmission Authority, Rita.
They have 7 designated renewable
power lines that have been built
or are going to be built.
And not one of those, not one
has a gigantic eminent domain
corridor associated with it.
This is totally unnecessary and
unwanted.
There has never been a
successful nitsy corridor
completed by the DOE.
That free enterprise determine
power lines and narrow
footprints. Thank you.
Thank you very much. So we are
now going to committee members.
I first have Senator Cia Lopez
and Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
interesting how being in the
legislature your whole life kind
of passes before you. My very
first case ever that I ever had
at the Mondra law firm when I
joined that law firm.
embarrassing 40 years ago.
Was a pipeline and I represented
a rancher.
And we were successful because
of the flexibility on the other
side, the rancher knew cause you
can't really stop this if they
decide they're gonna go forward,
we kind of have that
disadvantage, but he also knew
what the sighting of the
pipeline was going to do to his
ranch operations. We were able
to move it.
And able to get it in a place
that the rancher could live with
it, and that was because of
negotiation, and it seems to me
that that's what you're asking
for.
His alternatives, and I love the
way the memorial.
Talks about um
Work with impacted communities
to develop solutions that
respect landowners, right,
collaborative, non-invasive
means that do not jeopardize
local livelihoods or cultural
heritage, that to me is the key
of this, um, and I think that
the statement by the
legislature, a strong statement,
um.
Can only be helpful in
negotiating with um
With whoever it is, I mean, it's
really sad to hear that you
can't even.
Find a person to communicate
with. You can't, there's not
even a a link uploaded, that's
just really disturbing, um, but
I strongly support this
memorial, um.
And I'm glad you kind of solved
it a little bit, but yeah, I
don't know if it'll make a
difference. I think what's
important is the strong support
by the state or
A reasonable way of
accomplishing this task. It
doesn't just, it, you know, that
doesn't disturb it, cause I
know, and I think it's
unfortunate once they decide
that, you know, they're gonna go
forward with this.
It's gonna happen and it's very
difficult to stop the federal
government.
Um
Believe me, I know, um, but I'm
really proud to be a part of the
communication with them saying,
You're gonna do this, do it in
the right way and respect
people's rights.
So, Madam Chair, I'm happy to
support this memorial. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next is Senator
Townsend. Uh, thank you.
I'm sure.
Senators
The deal is, do you remember who
the case was against your first.
It was 40 years ago, it was,
were you, were you on the other
side?
I was wondering if it was
against me. I was just
wondering,
you know what it might have
been, it was 40 years ago. I
think I would have remembered,
so.
I, I certainly would have
remembered if I won, so, um.
No, I appreciate your amendment.
I think you're on the right
track now.
I, I was responsible for
Protext, not
Not uh overhead, but I
Built a few pipelines in my
career.
And
I told somebody.
If you were really gonna screw
up a good project, the way they
laid this one out to begin with
is a perfect.
Um
A perfect way to. I, I still
can't figure out what's going
on. I, I have a son that
Runs projects like this today.
And he can't figure out, and,
and he does it for a living. I
mean, he, and he said, that,
that's
That's crazy. He said, I've
never seen anything like that
before in my life, so.
I think uh you have every right
to be alarmed.
Um, the way they've rolled it
out has caused a lot of concern,
and it should.
Um
I, I just can't imagine what
I've read about it, and I cannot
imagine.
The inability and the complete
um
Disdain that they've had for the
public coming back and trying to
explain or sending somebody out
and then this is really what's
going on. I mean,
I, I totally support your
memorial. I um
I think this
I just wondered if somebody's
purposely doing it this way to
undermine it. I don't know
what's going on, but it's, it's,
uh, it does.
It needs to be
stopped and realigned. So, thank
you.
And I do want to know who it
was. Thank you, um, Senator
Townsend. Senator Riel.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
whenever
senator Sidia Lopez brought that
up I immediately turned to
Senator Townsend, he was just
grinning back.
Madam Chair and
Senators
1.8 million acres will be
affected by this transmission.
1.8 million acres.
Will that land go off the tax
rolls of that particular, those
particular counties where this
transmission line will go.
That's the part that we don't
know. We don't, we're not, you
know, DOT is not talking to us
at all.
Uh, one of the biggest problems
that I
I see
As has been brought up here if
you have a mortgage.
On this land will it affect that
banker's security.
You know, all of a sudden you've
got a property that a marketable
is it?
Because now it's under a
a threat of.
Taking
It's, it's
You know, a high line or
transmission line or pipeline.
It's a set with.
And what we're talking about
here is a, a corridor.
5 miles away.
And
you know,
There's, there's been no
discussion.
And that's the biggest part of
it. There's been no discussion
from DOE.
As to why they need this much
property this wide and why it is
located if it was from going
from load center to load center.
Adam chair
Probably wouldn't be in Eastern
Mexico.
It would probably be
Mourn line from Denver to
Albuquerque to.
To El Paso
It wouldn't be an eastern New
Mexico.
So
Why, why is it situated here
we're told that Kansas.
Got it out of Kansas. We're told
that Oklahoma got it out of
Oklahoma.
So
Hawaii, New Mexico.
But that's
Not answering your question.
apologize.
Madam chair and senators.
Along those same lines, she said
that DOE is not responding to
anybody's questions.
Did they really have any
authority over this uh as far as
land condemnation,
This is all up in the air.
They're designated an area.
And it's in the phase 3 of phase
4.
Madam Chair
And so
Mm
What part of this
They want us to comment on it.
But what part are we supposed to
even comment on? Are they gonna
say this is the area we're
talking about.
And now the banker's going to
look at us, the, the realtor's
gonna look at us, the, the
county is gonna look at us.
Exactly what is it, you know,
someone come forward and explain
to us what we're getting into
and they want us to if we don't
comment on it.
What does that mean?
We don't care.
What kind of, what kind of big
flag can we wave here in front
of them, and that's what we're
trying to do with this.
This
or
memorial.
Madam Chair and send to woods, I
agree with you totally, uh.
Whenever people's lives are
going to be uprooted by this
project that nobody seems to
know any thing about and the
department won't answer any
questions and they won't take
comments because they haven't
updated their site. There's a
problem.
I appreciate what uh Senator
Charlie has done to protect her
area. We have heard the comments
from people out here wanting to
protect their.
Livelihood there.
has predecessors that have been
through here. I do have a farm
that's fixing to be my family
100 years next year.
And if I saw something about
this coming through, I would be
writing every congressional
delegation I have.
Expressing my concern and why
aren't they doing something to
stop it whenever I'm hearing a
swath 15 miles wide.
That is ridiculous.
15 miles wide.
How
Whenever you say it's going
from.
Along the eastern side, can you
give me more specific on where
it will start and the route it
will take.
And the reason I want, and the
reason I want that brought up is
the people that are online
listening to this and we do have
members of the cattle growers
association that somehow got
kicked off online because they
were listening to another
committee. It's not our
committee.
Man's fault, but they are
supporting this bill as well. I
just wanted that pointed out
because this will affect a lot
of the dairymen too.
So
If you would mind, Senator
Boone.
Madam Chair, members committee
and Senator Ezel, um.
It begins at some point in South
Central New Mexico and and it.
So it follows along the southern
border.
Or maybe not the border but the
southern part of New Mexico and
then it turns up.
The state line.
But it starts basically in Otero
County or its southern Eddy
County. Is that correct? Right.
That's great.
Did it get travels north, it
will go up through the eastern
side of our state. It looks like
it goes the majority through Lee
Otero County, Eddy County Lee
County, Roosevelt Creek Way,
Union all the way up, and it, it
does pick up then it.
In Colorado Colorado
nearly Tillajana or Tulajana,
Colorado so can anybody tell me
what the length of that corridor
would be.
Madam Chair, no, OK.
Madam chair, I hope that this
committee understands the
importance of what we're trying
to do here.
We want answers. I don't like
the threat ever of imminent
domain.
That is just the government's
overreach.
Because they want it for a
specific reason and especially
whenever that reason is unclear.
And what we're seeing here, that
reason is definitely unclear.
As I'm reading this, the
Department of Energy does not
have the authority.
To grin in imminent domain.
Madam chair.
They're calling this the
southwestern grid.
Is this investment going to be a
private entity that is coming
into our state.
So that they can
Have this land 15 miles wide
and.
I'm gonna say by the time he had
in the Otero County aspect of it
and the Eddy County aspect of
it.
Would it be fair to say close to
400 miles miles by 15 miles. So
am I on the right track here is
saying that.
Uh
This is not a good thing for New
Mexico to be considered part of
this whenever there is no input
from those stakeholders that are
currently in our state.
I think Madame Chair and
senators, the biggest thing that
I'd like to say is.
The, the private land holdings
in New Mexico is in eastern.
They've got plenty of federal
lands in the state of New
Mexico. Why didn't they take
them through the federal lands.
They want to say we want to cut
a swath through.
already own the lands. Why don't
Why don't they just run this
through on federal lands. I
mean, that should just be a.
No, no, nothing.
They own it already.
But why would they put it over
where all the private land is in
New Mexico.
There's a real question to me.
So that's
That's some of the things I'd
like to ask the DOE.
Madam Chair
Madam Chainator Woods sinned
very much.
I'm just really concerned that
our congressional delegation may
not be.
Aware of the situation that is
going to affect so many private
land owners.
And if they have been notified,
what are they doing to help the
citizens that they are supposed
to represent.
Madam
Thank you. I have Senator
Charlie and then Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward.
You want to talk about eminent
domain.
Or manifest destiny.
I mean, I was just sitting in
that seat.
Trying to, I'm, I might cry.
Um, trying to protect Mount
Taylor.
Because it was taken.
By eminent domain.
And manifest SD.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator, do
you know what they tell native
people, you know what Indians
get told when we talk about our
land.
And how it was taken from us.
No, but I think you will. I
absolutely have been told it.
Madam Chair and senator, get
over it.
That already happened.
And so I'm angry, Madam Chair,
for you and for the ranchers who
are experiencing it.
Cause I don't want this.
For other communities.
Um
You know, native people have a
long history of standing and the
fact that I'm sitting here right
now is the testament.
To that whisper, to, to, to
pushing back against that
Western expansion and erasure of
my people.
Um
I can't help but think about the
in the Dakotas that was
proposed.
And how native nations from all
over came together.
To stop that.
Trusting
That company billions of dollars
in losses.
Because they would not stand.
Um
The place that we're we're we're
gathered right now.
Santa Fe.
OK OK
OK.
And
My Tire, um, this was a place
of.
But we have these buildings here
now.
Because what happens is people
with more power.
Or resources or privilege.
Come in and kick us out. So it's
I, I just have to name that in
the context of what I just tried
to do.
I'm gonna support this bill.
Cause I know what it's like.
To not have
Land
The pass down to your
I know it's like
I know what it's like to deal
with.
All of the historic trauma that
comes from being removed from
your land.
Madam Chair
Thank you, Senator Scott.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
don't have any questions, but it
must be noted.
That the reason why
These massive transmission line
projects.
Are currently being considered.
Is that we have to take out.
From the windy areas.
Where it's generated.
In
Central and eastern New Mexico.
Oklahoma
The Dakotas.
Eastern Colorado.
We have to take that power from
where it's being generated.
Where it's actually
And utilized
If we had the ability.
To generate that power.
Closer
Where it was actually needed.
We would need.
The transmission lines.
To get it across the country.
Everything has a consequence.
And this is a consequence.
For public policy.
Currently
Emphasize renewable energy.
Thank you, ma'am.
It's all
Thank you, uh, Senator Monte,
show you to comment.
Um, thank you, ma'am Chair. I,
uh, just I want to learn a
little bit about this senator.
We, uh, we have very large
transmission lines across our
farm.
We've had against across our
ranch, we have it today, and,
and it doesn't preclude us from
farming.
Underneath and around the
transmission lines, I'm trying
to understand here when we talk
about this. I just, out of
curiosity, what is your
understanding when we say
there's a 15 wide mile 15 mile
wide.
Whatever quarter
It is, is the quarter gonna
preclude running livestock
underneath the transmission
lines or around the lines is
going to preclude people from
farming.
I is it, is it a
Is it a license? Is it an
easement, or is it actually
going to be a transfer of we
don't, we don't know that.
We don't know that and, and
you're right, uh, Senator,
you're right, you can.
Run tractors under one of these
lines.
You can
But, uh, let me ask you this.
And a return question and just
for you to think about I don't,
I shouldn't ask you questions,
Senator, but, but what I'm
trying to say is.
How much does that lower the
value of that land.
If you want to transfer that to
another project.
You know
Yeah, you, you get a, a payment
for that land in today's value.
And I'm running across this in
the present pipeline.
Uh, eastern New Mexico pipeline
right now.
the state land office set a
price.
For, for an easement.
You know, not complimented or
not, you're gonna.
He
All of my farmers and ranchers
in eastern New Mexico by setting
this.
This amount
With that easement
Guess what happened?
Madam Chan, Senator.
That authority that has the
right of eminent domain.
Did not use her figure.
They used a lesser figure.
Or that
And you know why, of course.
Because the only way an imminent
domain if you don't agree with
what they are, you go to court.
And you get your appraisals.
And you go to court.
The wine in the world would you
have to do that if
Its state land
Has has set.
The value
It should be easy enough to use
at. We're getting off subject,
sir, but you see some of my, my
problems.
With eminent domain
you have to have imminent domain
to bring parties.
To the negotiating table.
Understand that
But
The, the project here.
Is the scope
Of the size of the
nation and of the.
Lost revenue and how can you
tell the lost revenue?
How do you determine lost
revenue and and I'm getting
carried away and I apologize to
sir, sir, uh, uh, Madam Chair,
I'm gonna be quiet.
Well, no, but I'm gonna, I'm
gonna make sure I get you a
photographs, Senator, uh.
Our family home that was built
by my grandfather and I grew up
in with my parents and all that,
um.
T20, 30 years ago, I had a very
large transmission line that
runs right alongside it, maybe,
I don't know, maybe.
On her feet alongside it and we
weren't happy about it. We don't
like the hum and we worried
about all my chromosomes getting
rearranged, that probably
explains why you all have so
many problems with me, um, and,
and, um, you know, it's, it's an
unsightly thing. We didn't like
it. But, but you're right, we
farm underneath it and we farm
around it and I just wanted to
know that whether it's something
in here was, was clearly going
to preclude continuing ranching,
farming, and I guess that's a
question to remain.
For me, I've done eminent domain
cases. Nobody ever likes them. I
usually represent the property
owners in Las Cruces. I
represented the mining company
where the Centennial High School
is located, right? They.
Losers schools want to build a
brand new big high school campus
and
A private land to do it, uh, to
make it all work, so nobody's
ever too happy about it.
Um
I've got to believe, but I'm,
I'm, I'm gonna, I'm making notes
to go back and learn history
because my guess is the building
we're in was probably a product
of eminent domain would be my
guess.
And, and I appreciate Senator
Charlie's history and concerns.
Uh, most of the, most of the
things that government resides
on is there's highways and in
our case down in our part of the
state Senator Hamlin and I, uh,
Elephant Butte irrigation ditch,
uh, uh, Alpha Butte Reservoir.
all federal projects that relied
on eminent domain to acquire.
Reservoir, the bayo elephant
Butte, all of the.
Laterals and canals.
Bar castles over there, she may
know the answer to these things
too, but my guess is that didn't
happen without the federal
government to do it.
And, and I'm sure it was very
unpopular at the time. The, the
concern, the couple of concerns
I have that are we're talking
about. I don't see it in the
bill is one of the things that
you worry about a lot when
you're in my situation or, or
our family situation is when the
government requires you to sell.
tax consequences.
That's one of the questions I,
I'd be interested to learn more
about. Is there, is there a
Capital gain associated with the
purchase of the land by the
property owner all of a sudden
they've got a tax obligation.
Large tax obligation from
acquiring the proceeds of the
sale they didn't want, they
didn't want the sale talk about
insult to injury, right? They
force you to sell.
Some of your land or acquire
some of your land and then tax
you for, for the uh proceeds
haven't acquired it, so you know
I'd be interested in knowing
what, what we can do there too,
whether the state should
Of perhaps provide some sort of
forgiveness from tax
consequences of an eminent
domain proceedings, uh, either
capital gains tax or eliminating
that or eliminating the rate of
that or otherwise providing uh
some recognition that the
property owners are requiring
proceeds they didn't want, they
didn't want, they didn't ask for
it in the first place.
And they're getting taxed on it,
so I'll ask you to to visit with
me a little bit more about that.
I, I do have a concerns about.
Principally the language on
paragraph 5, which says that uh
that by this memorial, the
Senate strongly opposes.
The uh Southwestern grid
connector.
National interest transmission
corridor.
Um
I don't know enough about that.
I went to Senator Scott's point.
Oh, this is about, as I
understand it, getting energy
from where it's needed to where
it's being generated and this is
gonna go on somebody's property,
somebody's.
And, and I don't know how we do
that as a as a society, I don't
know how we get energy from
where it's needed just like I
don't know how we get water
from.
Where it exists, uh, Colorado,
mostly.
Uh, coming down the, the Rio
Grande is a product of the snow
in Colorado and we're moving it
across.
The trauma uh pipelines and
through any number of different
Projects that we move the water
from where it's where it's at
and where we need to get it
going and.
Electricity to me, much the
same, so I, I, I'm gonna maybe
you, you one of the few
descending voices here because I
don't feel strong enough that I
can say that that that I as a
senator.
oppose the the grid uh interest
line transmission. I don't know
what to say.
I oppose that transmission.
I'll have to respectfully
Os your room.
I just,
you know, Senator, I'll let you
close before we take a vote, OK.
Uh, I'm gonna make a comment,
and one of my first years in
this committee, I brought
forward I wanted to do away with
eminent domain for the farmers
and ranchers for
From the utilities.
In our state
And it was shut down
immediately.
And it was identified as being
necessary.
For the good of the people of
the state of New Mexico.
So, I reflect back on my my
experience in trying to move
forward to protect the people in
my district.
And the
Emphasis on why there is eminent
domain.
And
I totally empathize.
With what is going on.
I support the farmers and the
ranchers and in rules, Senate
rules that Senator Townsend and
I sit on.
Indicated that the 15 mile swath
would never be used.
He indicated that they would
identify.
The track that it would go, but
it would never be 15 miles wide.
And from his past position doing
this type of work.
So
I do think
There's some um.
Wrong in terms of public
information, public
participation, etc.
But if we're gonna shoot down
eminent domain here.
At the state
Because we want to protect our
utilities.
And we need to think about what
eminent domain is OK.
So I'm very conflicted and I
don't think we're very
standardized in our perspective
about this.
So I think uh
Before we go to emotion, you
wanted to make some closing
comments.
Actually, it was pretty off
subject.
So
To tell you the truth, the, the
subject was that I had a friend
one time that had a federal
loan.
And it got real bad and
They actually forgave part of
that loan.
But what he didn't rethink of.
Was there's tact consequences on
that forgiven loan. It was now
income.
To him.
He then had a uh.
A tax problem.
He couldn't pay the loan off.
Because he couldn't make any
money.
And then he had to lose the
place anyway because he had to.
The tax consequences of it.
But
Off subject altogether I
apologize about.
Thank you. We're ready for a
motion.
There's a motion for Du passes
through a second 2nd.
OK, there is a motion and a
second for a due pass, would you
please call the both.
As amended.
And a memorial 16 as amended.
Senator Charlie, Cervantes, I'm
sorry, Sanno Cervantes, eno
Cervantes, no. Senator Charlie.
Senator Charlie, yes, Senator.
Sanel, yes, Senator Hamblin.
And its have passed the Senator
Pope.
No,
no. Senator Scott.
And Scott, yes, Senator
Townsend.
His excuse, Senator Di Lopez.
Yes, Sanaa Lopez, yes.
Senator Hamblin.
And Hamblin, yes, and
Stephonics, there's the Phonic
snow.
Senator Charlie to explain her
vote.
Well, I will, thank you, Madam
Chair. I wasn't keeping up with
the count, so, um.
I don't know how this went, but
Senator, I just wanted to say
like.
I, um,
I hope that you and some of my
colleagues can see we have
struggle in.
And that you can see my point of
view sometimes.
Because I can absolutely.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. Bye, uh a vote of 5
in the affirmative.
Oh, I'm sorry, Senator Pope, I
didn't have you down.
Madam Chair, Senator, you know,
I, I support everything in here
except that I'm just against
Southwest.
I don't
want
happening, I grouped everything
there.
out there. I, I think this is.
It happened, but they're just
the
This can
Oh yes. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you very much, Senator
sponsors, uh, you have a 5 in
the affirmative, 3 in the uh
negative, so you have a due pass
on your uh memorial as amended.
Thank you very much.
Committee members, uh, we are in
recess. We will be hearing house
