Maybe we can start.
Would you please take the role.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos.
President Senator Hamblen here.
Senator Neville I'm here Senator
pope.
Senator present as part thank
you Senator committee.
Senator souls there.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
And Senator Stefanics.
Good morning everyone this is
Senate conservation and this is
to see of the last week.
I understand we might have
another bill coming after today
so committee members we might
try to meet Wednesday morning or
Thursday morning for a very
short period of time and of
course it would be a public
meeting so
but today we are here to deal
with Committee substitute for
house bill one seventy seven as
amended Representative Cook and
Representative Matthews and
Representative Matthews is with
us would you please go ahead and
present.
I thank you madam chair and I am
happy to present
this is a when I called a sweet
deal I think this with this bill
this session H. B. one seventy
seven is a yes is called the
home made to feel.
What it does.
Allows.
Shown stable homemade goods like
cookies so for consent that that
meet the standards of the New
Mexico environment department
for food safety could be sold
throughout the state hello all
right now limits the sale of
homemade foods to
of farmers markets or roadside
stands and in Albuquerque it
actually prohibits them totally
so the goal is to really
encourage this cottage industry
make it possible for these these
wonderful cooks and bakers to be
able to sell their food to their
neighbor it's our this is all
within the state
to be able to mail the items or
whatever but anyway to expand
this is a great economic
opportunity for many people who
are for whatever reason down
aren't working outside the home
And
Also provides all of us to enjoy
the wonderful treats and foods
that are made the homemade
homemade foods that are made by
these marvelous clerks and so
forth so
that's the basic the basic plan
I probably should add one other
thing this this bill started in
the act agriculture committee in
the house which I'm a member and
it was tabled because it there
were some issues with that with
the food safety issues on the
I used to teach entrepreneurship
at CNM I worked with a lot of
students to.
We're in the committee program I
wanted to create their own
businesses well
I know their passion and a love
for what they do.
I also was aware of how
difficult it is if you're if the
requirement is everybody has to
use a commercial kitchen how
possible it is for many of those
B. would precede so as we were
discussing the bill I talked
about that now I really at all
to be able to vote for the bill
but but couldn't because of the
situation but those safety
standards and after that I was
contacted by some of the folks
who were trying to trying to get
this passed and said would you
be willing to to come in as a
sponsor if if we can fix these
problems and I said if you could
please problems I would love to
sponsor this bill because I
think it's a great bill it's a
great opportunity on the other
line they went out Erica Wright
and I'm sorry Erica Smith is our
expert and expert food lawyer
with me today
that with the environment
department got it worked out
limited just to our show stable
food so there's no truth to it
Meeder anything like that in a
the needs refrigeration on this
bill has since we on tabled it
it passed both house committees
unanimously and passed the house
floor the other day with one
vote against it everybody else
unanimous.
And we just say it's a great
opportunity and really trying to
get it through and
really.
How about that group of folks
that don't get much attention
but also to provide some added
diversity and
great homemade food to our diets
so now with that I'll be quiet
to questions.
So Representative Matthews you
get it you have an expert
witness.
Madam chair yes to expert
witnesses here Erica Smith.
Okay would you like to say
anything.
Yes thank you of thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and Representative Matthews my
name is Erica Smith and I'm a
senior attorney at the institute
for justice for national
nonprofit and we try to make it
easier for people to earn an
honest living and start small
businesses without having to
deal with burdensome or
unnecessary regulations I'm also
an expert in homemade food long
and I think I legislature's
across the nation on how to
reform their homemade food lots
also known as cottage food laws
so selling homemade foods is a
great way for people to support
themselves their families and
their farms but the problem is
is that New Mexico has one of
the most restrictive laws in the
entire country and there's three
reasons for that first right now
people are not allowed to sell
to their neighbors they're only
allowed to sell at farmers
markets and roadside stands and
maybe some community events so
that means that home Baker can
make sourdough for for instance
our home kitchen she to bring it
to the farmers market and sun
all day wait for customer but
she can't sell that same exact
read to her neighbor down the
street that is extremely
restrictive and very very few
states have that type of
restriction it's very burdensome
the second problem with the law
is right now if you want to sell
even one cookie at the farmers
market you need to get a permit
from the environment department
this permit is very burdensome
it requires filling out thank
staff of paperwork and sometimes
even paying for thousands of
dollars in upgrades to your
personal home kitchen so are
really overwhelming process and
put out of reach for a lot of
people the final problem with
the law is it doesn't apply
across the state it only applies
to places that the environment
department has jurisdiction so
they don't have jurisdiction
over Albuquerque and as a result
our.
Albuquerque has a complete ban
on selling homemade foods one of
the only cities in the country
to do so we've been contacted by
dozens of women who want to
start selling Albuquerque and
they can't so this bill fixes
all those problems it allows
sells direct to consumers
including out of the home in
online exactly what most states
are already doing it gets rid of
the burdensome permit
requirement and it also makes
sales legal across the state
including in Albuquerque there's
no safety concerns with the bill
it only by a shelf stable food.
Food borne illness from these
types of foods is virtually
unheard of in the forty nine
other states that allow their
sale sellers under this bill
will also need to get food
handler's certificate and abide
by HB sixty requirements so to
close up.
This bill will go a long way to
helping people support their
families especially now during
the pandemic our research and
the research from the USDA shows
that these businesses especially
help women and low income rural
areas really lack other economic
opportunities so I really hope
this bill bill gets passed thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Well now go to the opponents and
the proponents is there L. we
don't have anybody signed up to
be an opponent is there anybody
on the soon who is an opponent
to this bill.
Okay so let's go to the
proponents.
We have K. to come.
I thank you madam chair and
committee members for letting me
speak and thank you to
representatives Cookson Matthews
response in this and Kathleen's
Act then and I am here today
because I'd like other bakers in
Albuquerque like Erica mentioned
have been shut out from this
opportunity that's provide to
others across our state so when
I first look into starting my
home bakery I was disappointed
to find the state's laws didn't
apply to me and I contacted
people in the city the more I
was told by everyone we're just
not interested in changing those
laws and so it's been three
years now that I have been
missing out on growing my
business because Albuquerque has
these restrictions
I have a three year old daughter
and renting a commercial kitchen
or launching their brick and
mortar store is not feasible for
me at this point so this bill
would allow me to spell my
business in a way that that's my
family's current phase of life
and it would also additions
initial cost which will reduce
reduce a lot of financial risk
and it would allow me to raise
my daughter in the home we love
all creating a business that
adds value to our community so
I'm not the only one I know that
there are others who have been
waiting longer for this change I
have a friend to rent a
commercial kitchen and discover
that just wasn't feasible for
the business that you want to do
and another who has chronic
health issues and just wants to
help support her family but she
can't because you can't do that
out of her house so I just would
hope that you would help us to
us support this bill and pass it
so that others that like me can
join others in our state and
around the country who are
creating home make foods so
thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members for your
time and thank you for serving
our state.
Thank you I was just called to
another committee so Senator
Sedillo Lopez would you continue
and I of course I'm very
supportive of this but I'm very
sorry to leave
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam chair do we have
another component I don't I
don't have a list before me so
if you could just raise raise
your hand
The last we do have okay thank
you Trevor you.
Mr.
Good morning madam chair.
Representative Matthews
Representative Cook.
Thank you for this opportunity
to speak to you in favor of
house bill one seventy seven my
name is Tricia ray and I for
example the Pueblo for three
years I have been on the path of
trying to legitimize a home
based bakery business and have
not been successful I've
explored different avenues
reached out to various resource
and no one can seem to tell me
how a person who resides on
tribal land can get will permit
license to legally sell to the
public this bill is keen.
Without this my only option
would be to approve my family to
an area that the New Mexico
environment has jurisdiction
over or resort to a commercial
kitchen which is very costly.
Currently I am looking to
supplement my income to stave up
college tuition for my son an
additionally I retire in three
years and will like to make a
seamless transition to a would
legitimize home based bakery
I'm asking you to support this
bill and help pass it there are
many people in the Bacon
community who are in the same
situation especially third we
have a lot of Baker's out of
Albuquerque who have no path
so this would be really great
and I appreciate your time today
thank you.
Thank you thank you miss right.
Do we have anyone else on the
zoom call who wants to speak
about this bill.
Okay thank you do you would you
like to conclude.
Sanchez is that Representative
Matthews.
I Senator and madam madam I I.
Madam vice chair madam chair I
guess you madam chair for the
moment aren't you for the
moment.
With that
madam chair yes
we would ask for I do pass on H.
B. one seventy seven as amended
committee substitute for H. B.
one seventy seven as amended
so that we can go to the Senate
floor and hopefully open up a
whole world for entrepreneurs
and and.
people who love good food.
Thank you actually I didn't
notice whose hand went up first
of all just go ahead you Senator
Gallegos were you first.
Madam chair I actually was not
as last as wanting additional
apples with food in the mood to
do past when when it's
part.
Okay I will call on you when it
when appropriate is handling
what I need Representative a
Senator lead.
Senator Hamblen it's too early
in the morning
when we're unit where you first
actually now senator Neville was
was listening so I have a
feeling we're all on the same
page but I just wanted to make a
committee but all that Senator
the bills go first okay senator
Neville I apologize I didn't see
the hands go up at all.
Representative everybody else
did so no big deal.
I grew up on a cattle ranch so
I'm not too queasy about what I.
My career was.
Which form we had all kinds of
are you on the we went and all
kinds of properties and some of
the houses we went into I
certainly wouldn't want to be
necessarily eating what they
sold how are you going to make
sure that
What comes out of the product is
is actually I know you say you
have it's it the stuff that
doesn't spoil confusion that
kind of thing but how to how we
can make sure that the the
public has some degree of safety
would take but just one one bad
apple out there because of the
problem.
Madam chair as senator
The section
Section.
Three of the bill.
I includes maybe she sections.
Erica which your.
I'm looking at the the the part
that talks about requirement for
clean clean kitchens they have
to take a food certificate food
handling class and so forth and
Erica may be quicker doing this
and I am so I'm going to defer
to her.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative
Matthews Representative Matthews
you are correct that is in
section three at the bottom of
page three running into page for
our sellers are required to have
a.
Food handler certification
that's a one day online courses
about eight hours and you're
also required to keep a sanitary
kitchen any transportation
you're doing of the food yes it
you have to keep it safe this is
actually more protections that
exist in a lot of other states
and I have to have to state of
the this is legal in forty nine
states and problems are almost
on to people understand that
this is their name and their
reputation at stake these are
very tiny businesses and they
want to do right by their
customers that labeling also
requires full disclosure every
customer is going to know these
are homemade foods that are not
inspected not licensed so we
feel very good about the safety
protections in this bill.
And madam chair Senator if I
could just add it also the
labeling requirements also
require that the name and
address and contact information
of the of the cook of the person
is selling the items is on there
there's a lot of accountability
here and the last thing I would
say is having worked with.
The number of of
people are likely to go into
this kind of thing the success
depends upon the food being good
are clean safe
of it you know it's it's
capitalism and the if you if you
don't get it right people are
going to buy your product or
gonna steer clear and there's
gonna be problems of if you do
it right here you have a chance
to be successful and and make
and make a few dollars for your
family this doesn't legalize
Just a one time person who says
I need a few Bucks to pay the
rent this month someone make a
batch of cookies or something
that would necessarily qualify
because they would have food
handler and that kind of thing.
It madam chair and senator that
is absolutely correct okay thank
you SO professionals and
managers.
Thank you senator Neville
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Matthews we
had an opportunity to talk about
this when we presented the
healthy food financing act in
your committee the other day and
I really like this this is so
it's more of a committee not
questions because I've heard
about it and
and also Kathleen and I just
started emailing each other
because I think it's a brilliant
idea and I think you know when
we and we talk about Albuquerque
but we also talk about southern
New Mexico we have a very large
farmers market in southern New
Mexico but we also have this
wonderful
at this wonderful project it's
called kids can Los crucis and
it's about youth entrepreneurs
and they are able to make their
goods and sell them under a big
broad license through this this
organization but this isn't
Senators souls you probably know
about this because you probably
seen with farmers market that
the junior vendors and that it's
with so many solopreneurs that
are going to come out of the
pandemic like this like Tricia
and like Katie
this is an incredible
opportunity to not only provide
them with the resources that
they need and remove the
roadblocks that are there a
commercial kitchen is incredibly
expensive to start up and there
are so many businesses matter
fact there's a cake business
that had to go out of business
because of the pandemic and now
she is having to spend thousands
of dollars to renovate her
kitchen so that she can continue
to make these incredible cakes
and cupcakes and if this bill
passes representative I believe
this would allow her to do this
in my correct.
Madam chair Senator at bay so
what would you describe I think
that's absolutely correct yes
she takes the class the food
certification class yet and
she's already certified it but
it's just her or her work
opportunities because of the
overhead of hold of having our
own store so now she's going to
be working out of our home and
but she's like I'm gonna have to
spend several thousand dollars
renovating my kitchen so that
the health department will
consider it food state and and I
recognize Senator new bills
concerns about that I mean I
used to buy burritos from a
woman at the farmers market that
she sold them out of a I guess
yes and they were the best
readers I have ever had and I
miss them terribly but I think
this is a great opportunity and
and I'm so glad Representative
that you've brought it forward
and I really hope that it goes
all the way through so that we
can get this going.
When is it going to affect.
It has it that it madam chair
Senator it's that you would go
into effect July one okay and
and and I would madam chair just
as Senator that would mean in my
mind that when we reconvene for
redistricting that we might be
able to have a a table full of
homemade food available to for
us to by and support this
wonderful industry.
Those are all my questions madam
chair representative thank you
so much thank you thank you
Senator Hamblen I was slated to
my mind when I was reading this
bill was we're a couple of
stories one is an ex extremely
expensive racial story.
it's it about
a group of women who are victims
of domestic violence who got
together out of it less likely
that it would started okay it is
an excellent excellent and
actually with the whole
commercial route and find
homemade tamales or I guess you
can't come home maybe since they
went to commercial route to a
lot of the food co ops and it is
a really exciting exciting
development has they got
together and with the commercial
route and another another woman
that I that I know quite well
became a kind of a loss after
the she was.
Abused by her husband in Las
Cruces crucis and what she did
was she saved money by selling
tamales in the street and but he
does in the street and got
enough money to get her in her
head children to Albuquerque to
announce a committee that you
and into a shelter.
I hope that there are that
individuals can continue to
emergency do that that kind of
thing under this bill and I
would expect that's true when
that.
How with the when times when off
sales like maybe the.
How would they be treated
Representative.
Under this bill I'm.
Share
It it it just a clarification
that it you mean somebody just
decides one day to bake
something and go out and sell it
versus somebody who has gone
through the food certification
process and so forth that would
still be about would not be.
rise under this act.
Well hopefully
women in desperate situation
could still continue to do that
I'm sure they they will but I
think that this act is is really
fantastic for helping women for
helping individuals who are now
in the shadows really selling
the food come out of the shadows
and get some training and and
also I like the labeling
requirement that you can label
something as as that has
homemade probably make it more
attractive to me but thank you
thank you for bringing this bill
forward
I think it was senator guy it
goes do you have a motion.
And I do I will do passed.
Thank you senator guys do I have
a second.
I'll second madam chair for the
quickest bill discussion
however.
Certainly this committee.
Thank thank you Senator Hamblen
so with the first and second
will
Will the clerk called the roll
please.
Senator wanted.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator smitteez.
Senator souls yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Canister fenics.
It's sixty three.
What but.
Six yes three excuse.
Thank
you
the I appreciate that I will now
turn it over to the chair who is
that excuse me did you want to
vote on the Senator.
Loosely I didn't realize I was
on mute so yes I am yes okay.
And that it looks like
Representative Matthews you have
a unanimous do pass and please
share that with Representative
Cook as well and we'll see your
bill on the floor state does and
madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
doing this so quickly and really
look forward to your continued
support when we hit the Senate
floor thank you so much
Representative Matthews who is
your Senate sponsored you know
madam chair yes are we this is a
bipartisan bill and so
Senator Ingle and senator
McKenna are going to be R.
Sanchez on the floor thank you
so much thank you appreciate it.
Thank you committee now we're
finished for today have a great
day and as I said there might be
one more bill that comes our way
and we'll keep you posted thank
you bye thank you.
