kind of watershed boards.
Welcome.
The both of you.
I
of our
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
haven't been in front of you
this, this year, like you said,
we haven't run any bills
together, so the sign might be
madam chair to not hit that
gavel so hard.
She didn't hear me. Don't hit
the gavel so hard and maybe it
would break, so.
Thank you for having me. Thank
you for meeting to at least hear
this one bill. House Bill 4314
uh is a bill where um boards and
rural communities are having
difficulty making quorums and
getting important watershed
decision decisions made with
projects, uh, with projects with
short timelines, uh, due to
logistical and others.
Um, this
This bill would allow boards to
get more work done without the
parameters of current laws
within the parameters of.
Current laws around elected
boards, especially regarding
making a quorum with me I have
um the uh Debbie Hughes, who's
the New Mexico Association of
Water Conservation Districts,
um, executive director, and with
that.
stand for questions.
Thank you, Miss Hughes, do you
want to say anything?
And I'm sure members of the
committee, I mainly want to say
thank you for our meeting this
morning. We really appreciate
it. Um, this is a very small,
easy bill, but it is important
to to voters in the state
because uh what's happened with
the new local election law, um,
the watershed districts that
were formed about 60 years ago
for the flood protection dams,
that's what they were formed
for. They are actually
subdistricts of the soil and
water districts. So when they
did these boards and made them
to run for the elections, what
happened is
We don't have enough landowners
with some of the watersheds to
even make up a board, and in
other cases, um, the people who
pay the taxes live right outside
of the watershed district, so
they can't serve on the board,
they can't vote, but they have
to pay the taxes. So this would
expand it where the local
alwater districts would be able
to appoint uh boards within the
soil and water districts for
these watersheds and in a lot of
cases they are working well, so
they're just appoint the same
people in some cases.
I have to recruit some more
folks, but yeah, it's just
created some problems to do with
our elections, so we appreciate
you hearing this.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience supporting?
people, anybody online?
No opposition. OK, so let's hear
from the audience.
Kind of interesting to have
people come from outside the
district, but go ahead. Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, Jim Berle,
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association of Soil and
Water Conservation Districts and
for the reasons stated, we
support this it's just gonna
make it a lot easier for the
boards to function and have,
well, maybe not half, several of
these places have this problem
and this bill clear that up.
appreciate your consideration,
urge your support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Eddie B. Hill, also a
registered lobbyist from New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, like she
said, you know,
Debby spelled it out all.
All the right reasons to support
this bill, so we urge you to
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. 00 sorry.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Jillian Joyce, representing
myself today. Uh, I do believe
this bill will allow these
boards to be more accountable,
more functionable, and more
workable, uh, within their
communities and allow for better
oversight from marshal and water
conservation districts and lead
to better results in the long
term. Thank you very much for
considering this.
Thank you. And uh before we go
to questions, comments from
committee members, uh, I'd like
to thank, uh, our sponsors of
our breakfast this morning. Make
sure you grab one. It is Dan
Najar and Dan Weeks.
And they rarely come in front of
this committee, but they offered
to step up.
They can come more often, OK.
So questions, comments.
Uh, Senator.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
On page 2 of your bill down at
the bottom where all that
language is in it states on line
23, a watershed district shall
be governed by a board of
directors appointed by the Board
of Supervisors for the soil and
water conservation district in
which the watershed district
located.
Help me, walk me through that,
please.
Because I think I understand
what you're doing, but I just
want to make sure.
Ma'am, um, Madam Chairman,
Senator Ezel, so, um, soil and
water district boards that are
elected are called supervisors
in law. Our law is about 90
years old, um, to differentiate
they in law called the Watershed
District's Board of Directors. I
had a really hard time getting
um
the counsel to even understand
that, but that's, that's
actually why he even added more
in here than he needed to
because he was trying to make
sure people understood that.
And so, Madam Chair and
Representative Miss Hughes
Winter we're talking about.
The entire watershed district.
Evidently there are some areas
of our state where it actually
these watershed districts.
They're not
Within the entire, let me see.
And within the soil and water
conservation district and where
the watershed District is
located.
That's really confusing here,
but I understand where we're
going with this. If there's a
damn here.
The conservation district might
be up here, but the watershed
district might be down here. Is
that correct?
So they need to be included with
all of that.
That's what I need.
Yes, Madam Chair and uh Senator,
excuse me.
It's, it's a hard habit to
break. Thank you very much for
that response.
I would like to ask you a
question uh before that seeing
anybody jump right in. Uh, can
you describe for me
I'm having a hard
Understanding an area.
That might not have enough
people to be in that watershed
district. So can you describe
one or two areas of the state.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. So Hatch is a perfect
example. Um, there was a
watershed district or watershed
dam built there. These dams were
originally built to protect
agriculture. Um, the issues we
have now is planning and zoning
in a lot of cases has let people
build the trailer parks and
subdivisions down below them, so
now they're high hazard dams. So
now we have more responsibility,
but Hatch for for whatever
reason in this one watershed, it
is owned by one family, all the
land.
In this watershed. So there's
not enough people to make up
for.
That's, that's one of the
examples.
OK. Thank you.
Any other questions or comments?
Lopez and then Senator Thompson.
And I apologize for being late.
I long story. Um, but I, um,
just wanted to understand the
reason for this? What is this
problem we're trying to solve?
Madam Chair, Senator Sadia
Lopez, um, a few problems, um,
in some areas, we have uh a
watershed area which is where it
drains, and so the people that
own that land are paying taxes,
but they live outside of that
and so they can't serve on the
board. They don't have any say
so, but they're so basically
taxation without representation,
so we're trying to fix that. So
they could now be appointed
because as long as they live
within that soil and water
district.
they could be appointed to serve
on that board that they're being
taxed for.
On the soil and water
conservation Board.
Or what the difference is what
was confusing to me is it
creates a kind of a new board,
right?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Sadia
Lopez, it actually doesn't.
There is a new definition, and
that's because of legislative
council service that the law,
the bill itself talks about a
minority jurisdiction district,
which we don't have any, but
let's say there was a big
watershed district and it fell
within 2 or 3 salt water
districts.
what this law is saying is, um,
those other districts, so a lot
of districts have a right to
have a board member on there as
well because they're lands. We
don't have that situation, but
it is a law.
On the soil and water
conservation district.
Or the watershed districts.
OK, and then it says if the
territory embraced within a
Watershed district lies within
more than one soil and water
conservation district.
Each minority jurisdiction
district.
shall be entitled to appoint 3
additional directors.
How is that gonna work?
Madam Chasson and civia Lopez,
um, like I said, we don't have
that situation, but if we did,
it would be more than a 5 person
board, they would be able to add
additional people so that, so
that the landowners uh within
the other soil and water
districts would also be
represented.
But it has to be a really big
watershed to do that because our
watershed, our salt water
district boundaries are pretty
large.
Yeah, I, um,
Yeah, I, I, I'm gonna listen to
the debate. It doesn't affect me
in Albuquerque, so I really want
to understand uh what it's doing
and make sure that it meets the
needs of people who actually
live in these areas. Thank you.
Oh, they are really.
Thank you. I'm done.
Cervantes is excused Senator
Charlie. Senator Charlie, yes,
Senatorelenzel, yes, Senator
Hamblin.
His excuse, Senator Pope. Yes.
And a Pope, yes, Senator Scott.
And it's got, yes, Senator
Townsend.
The Townsend, yes, Senator Via
Lopez, yes, the Lous, yes,
Stephonics, yes,
yes.
You have a unanimous due pass.
Thanks for coming this morning.
Thank you, and we are proud to
be able to bring a bipartisan
bill to your committee. Thank
you, great,
great.
Um,
Committee members, I would like
to take this moment to thank all
of the endless.
The Zoom operators.
The attendance of the analysts
and the majority parties, the
minority party are committee
analysts.
Thank you all committee members
for coming. I session.
And um
We are adjourned.
For this session.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for your
leadership.
Yeah
And Madam Chair from the
minority side, we do appreciate
the way you ran this committee
this.
Thank you
