Senator Senator Gallegos try
again.
Senator Gallegos.
I see his name up I need to do
is not connected or something.
He's in the office next to me
and I am hearing talking to you
but is not getting through I
guess I he Senator Gallegos
you're on mute.
Three.
For.
We need one more act yes I know
that Madam chair Senator Hamblen
log.
I'm sorry what did you say Santo
poco Madam chair Senator Hamblen
just walked in and she's about
to log in from a okay Senator
Gallegos are you on.
Is still trying yeah we can hear
you we can hear you that's great
okay here are fifth members so
we can proceed the first bill
we're hearing today is the
committee substitute for US
Senate bill four thirty one
Senator higher meal committee
members we are going to try who
knows we're gonna try to do I
built in two hours.
And whatever we don't accomplish
in that order we will roll over
to thirsty.
So Senator Hermio.
Morning madam chairwoman of good
morning committee members thank
you for taking the time to
listen to Senate bill four
thirty one this morning it's the
youth conservation corps
employment and in the man's the
YCC Act to clarify the process
that the YCC Commission use as
template young people and public
projects now the bill specifies
that YCC will issue a request
for applications at least
annually adopt a competitive
evaluation process to select
proposals for funding and and
printed remains with the select
projects Sanchez now this
process will increase the
program accessibility to smaller
eligible entities particularly
in tribes and rural areas now
YCC has been big in Rio Arriba
county and helping us and
pueblos and in rural areas of
Rio Arriba now it will also
reduce the rejection rate of
proposals due to small errors
and YCC will gain the capacity
to serve more projects the
result is a greater number of
New Mexico used who will be
employed and will be improving
not only their communities but
learning valuable skills in
their careers now with me today
madam chair women are a few
expert witnesses Cheryl bata
they do M. and R. D. general
counsel Mandall Amanda Getchell
YCC commissioner more kind of
the the state purchasing
division director and Senator
Woods who's the YCC executive
director Madam chairwoman I'm
gonna pass it over to Senator
Woods for some brief comments if
you don't mind please go ahead
with.
Well good morning madam chair
and members of the committee and
yes thank you for taking the
time to hear this bill and thank
you senator Hart meal for that
introduction so this bill gives
us stability and consistency on
how to structure our program and
as senator higher meal stated
will have the flexibility to use
technology that will reduce
those small technical errors
that result in disqualification
will also be able to offer more
than one R. F. P. a year which
will enable us to disperse and
unused funds YCC programs hire
about six hundred to eight
hundred use every year and
seventy percent of every
projects funds must go to court
member wages and every project
must spend ten percent of the
time training corps members in a
variety of life career job and
conservation skills use are
leaving the state we need to
give them the training and
programs that encourage them to
stay in their communities or the
state YCC skills can translate
to careers and outdoor
recreation economy parks
forestry wildland firefighting
thank you and that's management
livestock inspection.
Outfitting and so on it helps
prepared New Mexico's workforce
for the future.
And that concludes my my
comments thank you madam
chairwoman we can do we can
actually take public comment on
the other expert witnesses will
be on standby for any questions
the committee might have and
which I can answer.
Okay so that's the only expert
witness you want to speak.
Miss what madam chairman miss
what are the others ready to do
a brief statement or can we move
on and then have them on stand
by for questions.
I think that we can move on and
have them on stand by for
questions.
Thank you senator Hermio.
let's go to any opponents on a
committee substitute for Senate
bill four thirty one.
You signed up for opposition
okay at by show of hands is
there anybody here to oppose
this bill.
Okay let's go on to the
proponents Trevor.
Okay we have Robert bought.
Body or by.
Let's go on next game best ones.
I see Mr Vasquez is a picture.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the time to speak this morning I
miss what and and center how to
me thank you so much for your
leadership I was one of the co
creators at the New Mexico
outdoor equity fund and have
been working with youth in Los
crucis for many years and part
of the idea of the concept
behind the outdoor equity fund
really came directly from YCC
having seen first hand are the
types of experiences that youth
can have on on and the impact
they have on our lands really
creates a strong work ethic in
our youth the creates discipline
it gives them a paid opportunity
to do important summer work I'm
in a state where we have a very
high are you right and so this
helps of both take care of our
land take care of our youth and
I believe making it easier for
young people in the state to
access these programs you to
benefit to both our ecosystems
our communities and certainly
our young our our families and
our young people so I fully
support this thank you chairman
thank you members of the
committee and thank you miss
what.
Thank you next.
Next we have Peters.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
Greg Peters public lands
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
here stand in support of SB four
thirty one.
YCC is been funding youth
centered projects in communities
and our public lands across New
Mexico and every year since
nineteen ninety two hundred
views engaging meaningful work
experiences that improve the
state's natural cultural
historical an agricultural
resources while developing
African environmental
stewardship and civic
responsibility.
Members of bill trails improve
wildfire resiliency controlled
region created and installed
Public ARC group senior
community centers preserve
cultural resources and
beautified natural areas parks I
see see projects are visible
tangible meaningful.
The educational aspects are
environmentally sound into fill
an unmet need in these parts
four thirty one will reduce the
administrative burden of the YCC
by decreasing the amount of time
and resources are currently
required to prepare issue in
process and R. P. for the state
purchasing division this will
increase access to the program
is built by the cease operating
efficiency so more money goes
into hiring and training use
improving New Mexico's natural
cultural and recreational
resources the students will pass
on the YCC projects funding more
youth employment this bill is a
win for all New Mexicans it does
not have a price tag makes our
government more efficient it
helps more use the hired and
trained contributing to New
Mexico's economic recovery in
future workforce we respectfully
request passage just before
thirty one madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
your time thank you extrovert.
Next we have Christy deployable.
And I'm chair members of the
committee I'm Christy to point
out I'm the director of New
Mexico state parks I stand in
support of this bill as YCC has
been a very important part of
New Mexico state parks it's it's
history we've accomplished a lot
of really important projects
through YCC and in fact I know
that a number of our staff
NYCC projects and that how to
prepare them for a career in New
Mexico state parks so I stand in
support of this bill and thank
you for your time.
Thank you and in case we don't
see agency deployed again I
understand that she's retiring
she's been a great asset to our
state parks and thank you very
much for your service after all
these years thank you
However is there anyone else.
You signed up to speak at DC
characters long Clawson has
embraced.
Yeah good morning madam chair
members committee care about a
cost Mexico wild I just can't
overstate how important these
programs are and how many kids
who wouldn't have an opportunity
to get into the outdoors
This just creates that
opportunity and then they become
you know HSD eight and work with
NGOs so this is a great program
and a great opportunity and we
is yes if we support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you I Trevor I just heard
from Senator Sedillo Lopez she's
having trouble with the link
could you resend her a link she
she's she's admitted in the room
okay she can thank you very much
is there anyone else to speak in
opposition or support of this
bill.
Committee members questions
discussion Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator had a meal I am so
jealous that you got to bring
endorsed this bill because it is
such a great idea you know
working with Mister Vasquez and
then question and and all these
wonderful folks who are working
on getting your out into our
community and so mine is more of
just a committee of thank you
for bringing forth this this
bill I think it's going to be
good for our doors it's going to
be good for our young people
it's going to be good for
communities of color and I'm
really grateful that you're
doing this and I can't wait to
support it so thank you madam
chair and thank you senator how
to meal thank you Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you madam chair and of
course I share everyone's good
thoughts for purposes behind
this I'm troubled by a number of
things so Senator you have
Senate bill one twenty this bill
as a urgency bills we solve them
built Senate bill one twenty
also like this bill would exempt
these contracts procedures and
all from the procurement hello
and remind me we heard that bill
previously and it's in the
Judiciary Committee not remember
what was the first Canadian
referral on Senate bill one
twenty.
I'm chairman Senator thank you
so the first time it went
through Indian rural and
cultural affairs and then went
to Judiciary but I made a
freshman air in the introduction
of the bill so this is more
about hiring verses what the
other bill debt which was
procurement.
Well if you look at this bill
Senator this one does do the
procurement what what happened
was we had a hearing in
Judiciary on Senate bill one
twenty we had a hearing and I'm
sure you recall there were a
great many concerns about
exempting these contracts from
the procurement code the members
generally were not receptive to
it so we rolled over the bill.
And then to now see this coming
back as a dummy bill
with the the same exemption from
the procurement code.
Without a referral to the
Judiciary Committee I I hope you
understand this is not a
reflection of you center because
I know this is your first
session but it really does look
like somebody's misled you into
trying in and around.
From the fact that the judiciary
committee did not approve the
exemption from the procurement
code.
In Senate bill one twenty and so
they're using up an emergency
bill and they've got either
centrally run the same bill with
the same exemption from the
procurement code but but
avoiding a referral to the
judiciary.
So so I'm not you know Senator I
I don't I don't think they'll
reflection on you whatsoever.
but I think somebody is Rep
manipulating the process and
maybe even manipulating you on
I'm concerned by that by the
people that have the experience
that may be doing that so I'm
I'm not gonna vote for exempting
these contracts and procurement
go for all the reasons you know
we're discussing the Judiciary
Committee and I would give very
serious thought to whether this
is something that you'll want to
present it get through this
committee but you'll want to
present on the floor because I I
presume the Judiciary Committee
members will probably have the
same opinions of it on the floor
that they did in the in the
committee the first time around.
So again I hope I I mean that
with all respect you know I have
a great deal of admiration for
the job you're doing Senator
it's good to sit next to on the
floor and she working so hard
but but I really do think this
is a.
Very very of I have I have a lot
of questions about what's really
going on here.
I can't support the bill for all
the reasons you know thank you
madam.
Madam chairwoman senator thank
you for those for your comments
thank you.
Thank you
so Senator von case
I think that between the
department talking to myself and
talking to senator Wirth this
how this emergency bill came up
but I don't have anything to do
with the assignments of the
bills
Senator Gallegos next.
Madam chair and senator I
appreciate.
Senator what this answer to one
of my questions or at least
for front.
Understand so
so how to me I've worked with
the correct order cheese for a
few years on changing
procurement codes can you tell
me what this does to
procurement.
Madam chairman.
Madam chairman Senator thank you
for that so this bill focuses on
hiring but I wanted to for to my
expert witness Senator to help
answer that question.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
am going to request that state
purchasing division director
marks he even addressed that
question.
Yes thank you chair woman and
Senator helmet and miss would.
YCC is a grant distribution
program it doesn't fit under the
procurement code a request for
proposal used for YCC selection
of of of proposals as a complex
procurement method that has
resulted in the disqualification
proposals from YCC every year
the programs but administered
but because the applicants are
not sophisticated in the skills
of procurement nor should they
just be for thirty one is a
better method for grant
distribution rather than the
procurement code the loss of
grant awards is is painful to
watch because a poor alignment
under the statutory scheme
that's really not designed for
this purpose.
Thank you.
You madam chair and chair how to
me and I worked with marketing a
lot and I like the way he
answered that
madam chair and senator and so
would it be easier to saying
that in grant procurement
The current system doesn't have
all the check boxes that are
needed for people to be able to
apply for the grants is that
what this will simplify madam
chair and senator.
Madam chairman Senator that's
what I believe it will do.
Okay well thank you for that my
next question has to do with
software madam chair and senator
on the procurement of purchase
software how will it benefit why
C. C. C..
Madam chairwoman Senator I'm
gonna defer to agency would for
that.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
senator all right yes so we will
be able to use software to take
the requests from application
through to project tracking and
right now because there is a
disconnect between the
application with state
procurement and then got going
into our system it's it it just
seems like we're just kind of
stuck in the nineties
There's technology out there
grant application technology
that can allow for much finer
grained tracking of projects
expenses and progress
and right now it seems like we
spend an inordinate amount of
time manually transferring
everything
software will also enable us to
craft an application that
manages the applicant's along
you know doesn't let them
progress so for instance a lot
of applications are disqualified
because they forget to check a
box on the letter of transmittal
well if we have that in a
software package in the
application they will be able to
do that I'll have to check the
box in order to be able to move
on.
Thank you for that answer madam
chair and senator.
In in that I like to process
their but my final question
madam chair and senator is the
issues that you're having
Judiciary to to give you just a
little background I ran for the
Senate because I like the
process
the.
Senator about this a student and
around.
Even for a great deal.
Concerns me I like to build I
want to be able to vote for it
can you explain to me what the
Dow falling Judiciary was and
why it could not progress and
turn center madam chairman
Senator so it was with the
procurement code and and one of
the references of the
procurement code was no longer
in the statute and so then when
we really looked at what this
would be and aligning policies
and procedures for hiring is
when this new bill surfaced on
how we could make that process
easier.
So madam chair and senator David
in the new bill.
Is it a direct reflection of the
original bill or did you change
it enough to just target the
hiring piece of procurement.
Chairman Senator we changed the
enough to talk more about hiring
process and what was needed for
those grant.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator up gives me a little
bit more comfort but like I say
I listen to the rest of debate
because I just wanna make sure
that our process is kept the
integrity of process is kept up
for the future so what that'll
yield madam chair and senator
thank you.
Thank you I see let's see.
Senator Cervantes for second
time in center have on for a
second time.
Senator.
Thank you madam chairman
chairman asked the sponsor to
consider reproach insured on
this bill of the issue and
judiciary was that the bill was
exempting these contracts and
procedures from the procurement
code this bill does exactly the
same thing and so while there
may have been some tweaks in
other areas of little
consequence the fundamental
issue is the first bill Senate
bill one twenty exempted this
program of these contracts from
having to follow procurement
code that was the issue and
Judiciary were hesitant to give
exemptions from procurement code
and that was the committee's
concern this bill does exactly
the same thing I would ask the
sponsor of a favorably consider.
And supported referrals
Judiciary enjoyed meeting with
the leader in advocating for
that referral.
Senator meal any comment.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Senator about this that's
something I could look at.
Thank you we have Senator
Hamblen for a second time.
It and then Senator Gallegos for
second time thank you madam
chair my comments will be brief
I do appreciate the efforts that
all of us here on the committee
and what I've seen in all of our
committee process these to try
to make sure the bills are good
built in that they do what
they're supposed to do and at
the can't be challenged you know
and so I appreciate that process
I do want to remind the
committee that this bill is
really about equity in it is
about kids I do know that small
entities cannot apply for this I
know that the city of Los crucis
can't even apply for this and
and the soil and water
conservation district has been
using the youth conservation
corps for years so as we go
through this process and as the
Senator considers you know the
next steps in this to really
keep that in mind is that we are
wanting to give you the
opportunity to do some
incredible work and and I and I
hope that is what is driving
moving this bill forward thank
you madam chair and again thank
you Senator how to meal.
Thank you Senator Gallegos deny
your hand is down.
Yes just not taking it out on
the first run so thank you for
your sorry about that thank you
Senator Montes.
Okay thank you what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair so thank you okay
centers also made a do pass
motion Senator Sedillo Lopez
seconded it.
Brannigan would you please call
the vote.
Senator Cervantes no.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes but I'd like to explain my
vote Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator okay.
Yes Senate committee.
Yes I'd like to explain.
Senator so yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes explain my vote.
In terms to fenics.
Yes.
Yes and one no okay thank you I
think Senator Gallegos Senator
Schmedes in center city Lopez
wanted to explain the vote.
Thank you madam chair I really
like to bill elect promised
bills and I would really ask the
sponsor to consider etcetera
etcetera about this
visiting with him make sure gets
Judiciary I'd love to see center
so I just put it to the front of
the list once he gets there
because I think this is an
important bill for our state but
I just want to make sure that we
are
protecting our process so with
that I think you meant.
Thank you Senate committees.
I just did what Center guy says
thank you thank you Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
You know except I'm not sure
needs a referral to Judiciary
but I think addressing the issue
would be important
I read this bill and I I guess
I'm just I'm not clear exactly
what.
What the problem is is whether
these these
contracts are are appropriate
for the the.
The process or not in so maybe
some guidance from Legislative
Council Service and and and
senators about this and others
to kind of work this problem
would be really important thank
you.
Thank you very much so Senator
of our meal you have a due pass
from this committee thank you
very much we're going to thank
you madam chair.
Thank you we're going under the
house bill two hundred
you Senator Stewart here.
I know Representative McQueen is
running a committee and the bill
there and here.
I think we will come back then
yes madam chair Senator
Cunningham Bill is out down for
the count with food poisoning
and I do have a statement from
her
well okay when we need we need a
presenter so we're gonna wait on
house bill two hundred.
Okay we're going on to house
bill two thirty nine as amended
create W. mine inspector
position Representative Gail
Armstrong welcome.
Thank you madam chair and good
to see all the new faces can't
wait to meet you all in person
thank you madam chair what
House bill two thirty nine as
amended does is creates a
position of a deputy mine
inspector assigns the positions
to New Mexico state of New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology and assigns duties to
the position the W. mine
inspector would be required to
assume.
the responsibilities if the
state mine inspector if there
was a vacancy and right now at
New Mexico tech there is an
associates my associate mine
inspector and it would be a
title change and with no
additional money why expert
witnesses madam chair R. state
mine inspector Chris chapter and
Dr Cleve McDaniels from New
Mexico tech
and I if it's okay with you
madam chair they could make a
brief statement.
Absolutely thank you
Representative so.
I'm sorry you said Mr Hefner and
this and Dr McDaniel yes ma'am
yes madam chair okay thank you
so let's hear from your experts.
Mr Hefner.
You're on mute yes.
my name is Chris Haffner and
this needed arises because we
invest that state mine
inspector's are to pass away and
retire but it creates a real
hazard and real problem within
the money community in that only
the state mine inspector at this
time signed Coles certificates.
Those certificates required by
the federal government for.
Coalmines to continue their
operations so it's pretty
created the real burden for the
industry.
The other things that are
affected accident investigations
by law the state mine inspector
has to investigate any accident
that occurs within the state
that is that the Taliban or
could lead to a fidelity.
Those things going to dressed.
So those are the two biggest
ones but we also get hazard
complaints from the mining
industry just miners themselves
that have to be investigated to
make sure that the safety of the
miners
continues in an uninterrupted
fashion.
Senator portent and without
somebody there.
Then they go unaddressed so it's
a hardship not only on the
mining community the industry is
a hardship on the miners and
does affect their safety this
would address that by allowing
the deputy state mine inspector
to fulfill those duties in the
absence of the state mine
inspector report to the governor
could appoint but a new state
money expected.
Want so I believe this would
fill a gap that needs to be
filled.
And for the economy and the
safety of the miners.
Thank you after McDaniel yes
good morning madam chair and
committee members I'm the big
Daniel and it's a vice president
for administration finance at
New Mexico tech I supervise the
operations of the state bureau
of mine safety at the campus
just a brief timeline of this
Randy launched and with the
state mine inspector prior Chris
Heffley resigned in January two
thousand nineteen with a change
of in the office of the governor
Mr Hefner was appointed state
mine inspector in September two
thousand nineteen.
So I can truly attest that there
were significant challenges
between January and September
that year due to the limited
authority of the associate the
money inspector carry out a
number of significant actions
that the Chris is already
identified so these actions you
went unaddressed or redress with
limitations into Mr Hefner was
appointed and became the state
mine inspector and as as you
mentioned this created problems
within the mining industry in
the state as well as with agency
reporting requirements.
So we strongly feel that the
proposed legislation as amended
would rectify the situations and
issues we face in those eight
plus months in two thousand
nineteen therefore we strongly
support the minute version of
the bill thank you.
Thank you very much.
I believe that there might be
some people to speak on this
bill are there any opponents
Trevor.
There's no there's no point that
we do have my phone the only one
percent of.
Support of this bill.
How might are you here.
Yes ma'am madam chair.
My name is Mike Boeing on the
executive director of the New
Mexico mining association and as
the previous a speakers were
telling you one of the things
with our industry is especially
for coal miners they have to get
a series of training classes and
then certified in with those
certifications then they they
move up and Hey is expected and
signed and when we have a
vacancy that long as a doctor
McDaniel was referring to almost
nine months we had a number of
workers weren't able to.
Advances as well as they should
and what this bill is trying to
do this protect that protect
those thank you.
Thank you very much.
Im to questions comments from
committee members Senator
Gallegos David Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Madam chair and representative I
am eager to meet you also
but I wanted to ask I.
I as you know Senator
Representative I'm playing third
also we've got to both ground
mines I remember when Hector
left but I asked you I did not
know this affected I know that
it takes some but how it
affected the potash mines in
Eddy and Lea counties to do we
have anything on a **** that
delay did to them.
Madam chairman and senator I
would like to see if Mister
Heppner Mr McDaniel a doctor
McDaniel could answer that
question.
Go ahead Mr Hefner.
Thank you senator.
All.
Certifications are not necessary
within the potash industry
however there have been a number
of accidents record our
investigation by this agency
departments money we.
But you Patala result years too
but I think ultimately that at
least one buyer does have to be
investigated by law by the state
mine inspector and his office so
had any of those occurred during
that options it would have been
critical during that nine months
old get a current thank goodness
so
It's not just critical to the
potash industry.
Fortunately there are excellent
safety record but it is critical
I'm really to the coal industry.
This that answer your question
Senator it does come Madam chair
representative in.
And I guess I just wanted
clarification on that because I
know your staff does that come
to both of our crushers on a
regular basis just make sure
that can I have things in place
of things running safely and I
appreciate that because as you
talk about the two fatalities
when that happens it's.
It's really bad I mean we've got
a lot of machinery the close in
areas to travel to work so we
just want to make sure our
employees our state and this
does that so I appreciate what
you do dollar down with
Representative to be able to
give us someone else to fall
back on at one time we don't
have.
In terms of the world so Madam I
students for this bill now you.
Thank you very much Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
This seems like a good deal I'm
just curious why don't we have a
W. W. mine inspector now isn't
it typical that the.
That there would be a W.
position and the the person in
the.
The inspector.
I would choose the W. and kind
of groom them up I I don't know
I just.
I'm just curious why we need
this process.
you madam chair and senator city
Lopez doctor McDaniel would you
like to answer that question.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair committee members
since Senator of.
This was of course created well
before I came in two thousand
sixteen but since that time
we've had that associate
position.
But it's never been either
within the station are are by
statute
Mexico bumped up as a deputy
position that's one thing this
bill does it does formally
created W. position we agree
with you that we think is needed
to back up the of mine sectors
is.
Thank you doctor Daniel and and
yes madam chair and and Senator
Sedillo Lopez that's exactly
what M. nerds states with the
creation of the steep mine
inspector position that will
allow the responsibilities of
the mine inspector to be carried
out without delay if they're as
ever is a vacancy.
That makes sense thank you.
Thank you Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam chair money as
it is mine is more of a
committee thank you
Representative Armstrong for
bringing this you know I've you
our position as legislators in
the state is kind of likes very
similar to a board of directors
our job is to make it so that
the people who are doing the
good work in our state you have
the tools and resources to do
what they need to do to protect
the residents who live here and
I'm looking at the FIR I feel
very comfortable that you know
it it doesn't cause delays you
know as as Mr Haffner talked
about you know we we cannot
continue to put up roadblocks
for people to do their job and
ensure safety so I do appreciate
this I look forward to
supporting this and thank you
representative Armstrong for
bringing this thank you madam
chair.
Thank you center your hand this
up.
The data and sorry you want to
make a motion.
We'll do the best.
Is there a second I'll second
madam chair Senator Hamblen okay
bipartisan very good bill thank
you very much Representative
Armstrong Veronica could you
please take the.
Brandon's.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator schmidti yes Senator
souls yes.
The Lopez yes.
Senator Cervantes.
Chairman Stefanics yes.
Okay APS and one excuse.
Thank you very much you have a
do pass Representative Armstrong
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee you
think you're now we're going
back to house bill two hundred
Representative amid Matthew
McQueen is with us and it is the
water trust board projects in
the New Mexico unit Fund
Representative McQueen to
explain your bill.
Thank you madam chair mentor can
you hear me OK yes we can hear
you just fine and we.
I am I'm zooming on my laptop
this is for some of done this
and I was here before I
apologize I was unable to turn
my camera on in time I could
hear you moving away from my
bill and I frantically tried to
turn on and was unsuccessful so
madam chair thank you for coming
back to me.
House bill two hundred.
Is a fiscal responsibility bill
it clears the way to invest
eighty million dollars into
southwest New Mexico and that
includes the counties of
catching grant Dogo in New.
It will create jobs will
stimulate the economy and help
will improve lives and in
particular it ends wasteful
government spending so in two
thousand for the federal
government passed the Arizona
water settlements Act in under
that act New Mexico got three
things first I got the right to
use fourteen thousand acre feet
of water from the the river.
And I think also the same Cisco
watershed.
But if we can divert it and I
want to note that it's the right
to use that water it's not
fourteen thousand acre feet of
water rights they're not owned
by the state of New Mexico.
Second we got money to build a
diversion project or and that
word is really important or
other water projects in that
southwest region.
In third but we got the promise
of more money if we build a
diversion the construction fund
if we had a record of decision
by the deadline the deadline was
December thirtieth I think of
twenty nineteen that deadline
has passed.
That additional fifty six
million dollars is gone that the
federal money that was promised
that promised has expired that
money's not coming back.
So madam chair members the
committee the state of New
Mexico through various entities
I'm sorry getting at at the.
These spent fifteen years and
fifteen million dollars.
Trying to figure out how to the
particular refer.
In.
Thank you and you know I.
It wasn't trying.
There was simply no viable
economically viable project to
divert the water it's.
So we didn't we didn't just
missed the deadline
because we're you know sitting
on our hands there are a number
of factors that play but we
missed the deadline because we
can come of the project and we
can come up with the project is
there really isn't one.
So it's time to move on.
So we have in the New Mexico
unit fund we have eighty million
dollars left after having spent
millions of dollars out of it
that money we have the right to
invest that money in southwest
New Mexico in this bill does
just that.
One last thing I want to tell
you they'll probably come up.
But the federal legislation says
we will the the Interstate
Stream Commission we'll consult
with industry the southwest
water study
Southwest water study group is
long since defunct there's
actually been a number of
different entities of late I see
with working with an
organization created pursuant to
a joint powers agreement called
the New Mexico cap entity cap
stands for central Arizona
project so as the New Mexico
central Arizona project and to
do that and to do was in charge
of the New Mexico units.
Which was the the diversion.
The version is not happening us
so the cap and to do.
Has no further role on that
project and they're not the
right entity to consult with the
IOC and spending money in these
forecast for County areas they
don't include it the company to
introduce does not include a
significant communities it has
given itself a veto power over
new members.
Is really not representative of
the different stakeholders in
networking area.
Madam I'm a little short handed
today my expert witness Kerry
brown the Grant County
commissioner
is at current county commission
meeting so you can attend in my
co sponsor of Center Hempel
has taken ill.
And so she's not here but I do
believe we have a statement from
Senator Hemphill.
If we could have someone read
that.
And I have one go ahead yes
madam chair thank you so much on
behalf of senator Siah Correa
him help as residents senator
representing Katrin Grant and
Sapporo counties where my family
has lived for generations I have
a deep reverence for the lower
river and its ability to sustain
communities and livelihoods in
my district I believe that I
healthy environmental ecosystem
is fundamental to every New
Mexicans well being rather than
continue continuing the pursuit
of a major Gilo river diversion
I support using funds from the
Arizona water settlements Act
for local water infrastructure
development and shovel ready
projects to provide water
security and jobs for southwest
New Mexico.
Eighty million dollars in the
New Mexico unit fund can go a
long way toward improving
municipal water systems helping
farmers improve efficiency of
irrigation systems and
protecting our natural
environment which is such a
tremendous asset and a key
economic driver for recreation
and outdoor tourism I believe
that H. B. two hundred
represents the most competent
and fair process for dispersal
of the remaining federal funds
available for water projects in
four counties this bill is a
balanced solution that provides
resilience in the face of
economic and climate uncertainty
and will allow our communities
to thrive for future generations
respectfully Senator Siah Correa
handle.
Thank you very much
anybody else Representative
McQueen before we go to the
public nope that's it thank you
Senator Hamblen I appreciate
that thank you madam chair thank
you Sir Trevor we have quite a
few opponents and proponents so
let's give of the everybody one
minute so let's start with the
opponents.
House bill two hundred.
Okay first we have to prepare.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee to be Rivera
district this with New Mexico
farm and livestock bureau I
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning I stand
before you respectfully
opposition to house bill two
hundred we have farm bureau
support the efforts of the
locally affected stakeholders
whose intention is to acquire
and put to use for the benefit
of the interested parties as
much of the remaining eighty
million dollars as available for
water related projects and
studies in southwest New Mexico
we believe that the CAP entity
is a true successor of the
original southwest New Mexico
study group and should be
directly involved in the
utilization of the remaining
funds for water projects in
southwest New Mexico the major
concern we have with the
legislation is the provision
which transfers the authority to
the water trust board of which
there are no members from
southwest New Mexico I
respectfully ask that you oppose
this bill this morning thank
you.
Thank you extrovert.
Pete Domenici.
I'm sorry I'm sorry about that
can you.
Go ahead
good good morning madam chair
and members and Representative
McQueen and I'll just follow the
prior witness my comments very
narrow in that looking at the
federal statutes it focuses on
these four counties are you the
reason we called out The New
Mexico our water study group or
its successors to have a
consulting role and this bill
eliminates any local involvement
which are I think a fair and and
a likely reading of the federal
statute is that local
requirement a local involved
involvement by local entity is
required to have a valid
consultation role with the
artists you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much next summer.
Then we.
Thank you madam chair.
And although County on the New
Mexico cap in a day I retained
that membership from southwest
New Mexico water study group.
To the southwest New Mexico
water planning group to the
healer San Francisco.
Water commission and finally to
the New Mexico CAP entity.
I can assure you the.
That the captain at the is this
successor cells with low water
stuck.
From the start to the K. J. did
not have relations documented.
It is my opinion that if the
Senate if senators Domenici and
being a month to just to the
eight yes state in Mexico.
And wanted to stay Stream
Commission to be in consultation
with water trust board in this
matter but have managed it was
stated as such and there is no
wonder that.
I feel strongly that the
senators fully intended for
there to be significant and but
southwest region of the state
regarding the implementation of
theirs on water settlements a.
The New Mexico cabinet is able
to Burt find this and but.
And the water trust board does
not do that and confederation of
these comments I just that you
do not passed house bill two
hundred thank you thank you very
much next.
Michelle foster.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Michelle frost Maynard and
I'm speaking on behalf of New
Mexico cattle growers in New
Mexico oil growers we stand
opposed to house bill two
hundred house bill two hundred
transfers decision making from
locally elected officials and
citizens to a state entity with
no representation from the
southwest for court counties
this change in the Tory could
place additional burdens on
rural communities by having to
meet criteria and policies of
the water transport we feel that
the decision should remain at
the local level for these
reasons and reasons previously
stated we stand opposed to house
bill two hundred thank you for
your time and consideration.
Thank you next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Howard
functions so I am chairman of
the San Francisco soil and water
conservation district.
We have had repeated the.
Use of fourteen to sixteen
million dollars over the
seventeen years on the capital
city.
That is a mess.
The majority of that fourteen to
sixteen million dollars was
spent long before there was any
less time Francisco water
commission or the the capital
city those funds were spent.
Investigating and vetting the
applications for non diversion
projects.
Nine million dollars was set
aside for those vetted projects.
Governor Richard St in two
thousand seven instituted a
moratorium on any planning for a
New Mexico unit.
Not moratorium continued through
the Interstate Stream Commission
under governor Martinez so any
plot.
Next we have Karen council.
A reminder that there is a one
minute and that he's been
instructed.
The time is that person here.
Karen count one.
Madam chair of the committee my
name is Karen Kallen and
speaking as a member of that
Grant County category that
protect Americans now and the
New Mexico federal land Campos
we stand in strong opposition to
the bill the captain is made up
of local elected official who
are in tune and in time with
their local areas and their
needs and moving next to a
statewide board doesn't make any
sense at all please vote no on
this measure thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
You can you get there the first.
Thank you madam chair.
Can you get us on the executive
director of the New Mexico CAP
entity.
And while this bill seems on the
face to find solutions for the
southern.
Region of New Mexico.
It does however
Mason questions why are there
not.
supporters from our local
entities that potentially may
benefit from this program
funding matter fact is out been
opposition from those local
governments in addition there
was no support from our local
legislators in the house for H.
B. two hundred.
Primarily in the lack of support
is because it bypasses or
actually total removes the
intent of the year eight W.
state regional participation.
And therefore I.
Completely and totally opposed
H. B. two hundred thank you
madam chair.
Thank you are we on do we have
any of their opponents.
To house bill two hundred before
we go to the proponents.
Any other opponents.
Okay seeing no hands let's try
let's go on to the proponents
and let's only hear about let's
see.
Ten.
That Mexicans.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee good to be here
with you again I am a city
council here in Los crucis and
also run a youth program in
which we take young people from
southern New Mexico up to the
healer every year other than
that I have actually been deeply
involved in the queue the cap
diversion entity process and
I've seen the contracts go out
to out of state corporations
offer failed diversion projects
time after time millions of
dollars have been squandered I'm
corporations entities not from
New Mexico attorneys attorneys
fees and and it's just one of
the most mismanaged water
project that I've ever seen I
think it's time that at that
eighty million dollars goes to
serve local communities if if
the cap and that you would have
listened to the voices of local
folks perhaps they would have
been in different places and
have already constructed other
local projects that communities
deeply need and we're asking for
with this A. WSA money ask you
to please support this the water
trust board I is the best entity
to make the decisions for this
money moving forward thank you
so much madam chair members of
the committee.
Next day and Representative.
Morning committee members Dan
over tried unlimited I'm half of
our members including our
members and southwest New Mexico
I just wanted to offer support
for house bill two hundred.
The region is a cherished
landscape for members whether
they live in a house in
Albuquerque or damning and
Silver City and it's especially
important New Mexico's hunters
and anglers and at the heart of
this region is a free flowing
healer river and ecosystem it
supports.
What makes this a good bill
however is water trust board we
think it be hard to find a
better and to do to advise the
I. S. C. on water projects in
southwest New Mexico the board
offers diverse perspectives has
experience and capacity to take
on this task it is a trusted
entity on both sides of the
aisle.
Important bills are members and
one we hope to see passed out of
this committee with bipartisan
support thank you.
Next Steve Harris.
Thank you madam chair I'm Steve
Hess and I'm a director of the
New Mexico river outfitters
association which has long been
in support of the free flowing
eagle river.
So on behalf of our three
hundred or so outdoor recreation
professionals and are nearly
three hundred thousand annual
deaths we are proud to support
house bill two hundred.
especially because it includes a
suite of locally generated
projects that have so far been
underfunded in the tendency of
trying to damn the low and these
include drinking water
conservation.
Of water here occasion and
watershed
the improvement projects
we think the I. S. C. in the
local communities do deserve a
more professional partner in
addressing real water solutions
in southwest New Mexico thank
you madam chair.
We have just sent.
Yes good morning committee
members on behalf of myself and
my business will force
outfitters
The owner operator and on behalf
of the chair co Apache nation
we are in support of house bill
two hundred.
our our efforts are to protect
the Lara as a cultural.
about cultural value and so we
support any efforts to protect
that river and any other
watersheds coming in from that
sacred country thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Allison
civic executive director of the
healer conservation coalition
based in Silver City.
I'm here to speak in support of
H. B. two hundred I have
actively participated in Arizona
water settlements Act planning
for more than fifteen years and
we now have an opportunity to
use the remaining eighty million
dollars in funding in the New
Mexico unit fund to build secure
water supplies for everyone in
southwest New Mexico.
While at the same time creating
jobs and ensuring our economic
future moving forward we need
good governance practice to
guide this process we believe
that the water trust board has
the technical expertise to
decades of experience reviewing
and recommending water projects
for funding from the water
projects fund and as well the
policies and procedures in place
to advise the I. S. C. and how
to quickly and adequately
reviewed funds to eligible
projects we're talking about
municipal and agricultural
conservation water
infrastructure improvements
water re use water restoration
thanks very much.
One possible.
Madam chair I'd like to give my
time to Joel Davis.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Joel Davis a
represent the Fort Sill Apache
tribe.
They're the descendants and that
so successors in interest when I
was trying to get your car warm
springs Apache that work
diligently in the past to work
to preserve historic significant
historical drill sites in the
area this bill would make sure
that the funds are distributed
in a manner that has tribal
oversight the water transport
has tribal entities included in
that board and we support this
bill thank you.
Sam and.
You madam chairman and members
of the thank you for allowing me
this time to speak with you
today R. I am here for support
house bill two hundred I am a
resident of Grant County
grassroots community organizing
Latino outreach coordinator with
New Mexico wild I come from a
family that is called the area
of Grant County home since the
eighteen thirties I recognize
that give them both the economic
crisis and climate crisis it is
important to get this money to
communities like mine asked to
help build critical water
infrastructure and create much
needed local jobs we've seen the
fiscal mismanagement of the New
Mexico unit provide as I think
that has prevented and delayed
this for moving forward yes fire
despite eighty million of unused
funding to move forward
responsibly for the people of
Grant County and the other three
counties that would this is what
I'm usually a fact.
Sorry we professional expert
content water trust that sorry
that confident what actions
boards to make recommendations
without risk of conflict of
interest in order to benefit all
four counties this is the right
thing to do for the counties
that would have been most
affected by this failed project
not just the ones of the jewel
interest thank you for your
time.
Okay.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee I
making fire chief at the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter on
behalf of our thirty thousand
members we fully support H. B.
two hundred this bill is about
turning a new leaf and
designating the water
trust fortify CISC New Mexico
unit funds does justice The New
Mexico captivity has wasted
fifteen years I'm pursuing a
hero diversion and H. B. two
hundred insurers at a qualified
and bias and diverse sixteen
member board recommends water
infrastructure projects that are
equitable creates jobs and
ensures water sustainability for
communities and the environment
southwest New Mexico we think
the bill sponsors for this
forward thinking legislation and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Greg Peters.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
Greg Peters with conservation
voters New Mexico here to stand
strong support H. P. two
hundred.
Local communities and
conservation groups fought for
many years to comparable for
community based alternatives
that would provide stable water
supply to the region without
diverting here one of the free
flowing rivers in the southwest
last remark was ensuring the
decisions about the New Mexico
unit from dollars to be made in
a venue that's more responsive
to community needs to be two
hundred does that by designating
the water transport the need to
advise the ISC on unit fund
allocation
invest over eighty million
dollars in southwest New Mexico
will achieving for funding
decisions this will provide real
immediate help by creating
several communities protecting
and restoring our limited water
supply getting more New Mexicans
outdoors and stopping the waste
of resources this bill makes
clear the field human diversion
is not going to happen and it
frees up money for local
communities we respectfully urge
do passcode HB two hundred to
ensure self reliant Water future
thank you madam chair members.
Judy Campbell.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee this is Judy
common The New Mexico policy
director for the Audubon society
I'll be very quick and just say
that the region is extremely
important to birds and to also
to R. thirteen thousand members
in New Mexico this bill will
help insure that scarce water
stays in the river and the
decisions about it are made
wisely and by the best available
science and we urge your support
thank you.
Thank you Trevor that was ten.
Yes madam chair thank you very
much so now we are and I want to
thank all the opponents and the
proponents who came we are now
going to the committee for
questions and discussion so if
you're not committee member
would you please lower your
hand.
Okay we're gonna go to Senator
Hamblen and then Senator
Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and
senator bill and then Senator
souls.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative McQueen and
Senators Craig Hemphill and
senator Stewart and your whole
crew of folks who have been
bringing this forward I've been
familiar with the healer river
diversion project up for quite
some time in my previous
occupation in radio I
interviewed miss civic and
learned about the process and
just the the background on that
and have been following that
ever since number of people who
have spoken here today I do
believe that the money is more
of a committee that question I
do believe the water trust board
is the best group to make the
timely information from a
professional recommendations I
like the opportunity for outdoor
recreation opportunities and I
do know through some of my work
that there are opportunities
there that are just waiting to
just go nuts on the scene and so
I think that will be very
exciting the thing that I do I
would like it just it just more
of a personal committee is to
strongly recommend to the
governor that local folks have a
presence and voice on the board
I know that that is more of a
government applaud governor
appointment but I I kind of
wanted on the record here that
we really should have some local
folks have a voice on that board
because they're the ones who are
living and experiencing that and
and and and enjoying it so I do
appreciate the bill I appreciate
you bringing it forward
Representative and look forward
to supporting him thank you
madam chair.
I'm sorry I was going to the
list we have center K. go
senator Neville Senator souls
and Senator tion von case
Senator Gallegos you of the
floor.
Thank you and Representative.
The discussion on this I go back
in your opening testimony you
talked about having a catching
County commissioner on board for
an expert witness
and I and I started looking up
and this goes back to two
thousand eleven well they've had
four or at least the county
commissions have resolutions to
try to keep.
the water discussion in their
county can you explain to me
what happened and how this can
commissioners and support them.
Representative.
Chair Center Garrigus if I
misspoke I apologize my expert
witness is typically Grant
County commissioner not a
captain thank you Mr.
Hello miss madam chair
Representative I made
confuse the subject matter but I
thought it from catching County
but
Madam chair representative have
you had any discussions with the
caption canning because I
understand that they here in
opposition to this just wondered
if you talked about their
relationship.
Madam chair Senator Gallegos I
did receive their resolution I
have not spoken to them
personally about it.
Chair and representative of it
looks like I said for the side
got back in and there's more
detail officers in twenty eleven
or this been nation but my next
question R. I guess my first
question madam chair is going
with Senator Hamblen
discussion about having local
people on this committee madam
chair Representative can you
tell me how many people are
water trust for now.
And where they're from.
You madam chair Senator Gallegos
would you like me to to read it
to you it's it's a fairly
lengthy list.
Madam chair and and
Representative is it in the V.
R. F. I. R. I didn't see if it
is madam chair Senator yes I I
don't know that it's in the fire
it is not in the bill we
reference the the water
transport as an existing entity
is made up of generally Lara the
state engineer cabinet
secretaries some pretty high
level people there are also some
appointed positions from the
public including environmental
Representative near cation and
Conservancy district in the
secular Water users
Representative in the soil and
water conservation district.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that helped me
but I guess what I was trying to
find out is that anyone from the
cap into the or from southwest
New Mexico are currently on that
and I would anticipate a no
answer because Senator Hamblen
and asked they be considered on
their but I was just wondering
if in the current.
The group that they had anyone
on transport from that secretary
of the state.
Chair Senator Gallegos I think
the answer I think you're
correct answers no I would note
well first what I think etcetera
hamlet's point is a very good
one and it's one that's already
occurred to us and secondly I
would note that the public
appointees largely have expired
terms so the governor is in a
position to make new
appointments and I certainly
would encourage the governor to
consider people from the
southwest region.
And madam chair and.
And Representative I know of
this will go forward and I'm
asking just as a favor if you
would be able to visit with the
governor to make sure that
Those appointments would have
southwest New Mexico
consideration in their just one
final question and and
Representative madam chair is
there reason to the.
To introduce a cap couldn't work
with the water transport
In cooperation together to to
resolve this we looked at that
Madam chair.
Representative.
Chair Senators under the Arizona
water supplements Act the
southwest water study group was
a consulting body and they were
never meant anything more that
consulting body so the final
decision maker on picking
projects is Interstate Stream
Commission that's been the case
for a long time that remains the
case under my bill my
expectation would be that it all
the local communities and local
governmental subdivisions and.
Irrigation district conservation
district whoever has water
projects can propose their water
projects to the water trust
board which will that them with
their expertise and even then
though that's just a
recommendation to their state
Stream Commission which retains
the final decision making
authority so I would I would
expect everyone to be able to be
present at the table including
those communities are not
currently members of the
captaincy.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that I just know in
Colorado where I and my property
a lot of the times the
landowners didn't have a voice
and I now understand their gates
districts and conservation
districts could think that time
and and the expertise but a lot
of times to smaller
organizations just did not have
the manpower to to help resolve
some of the larger issue so what
that this thank you listen the
rest of debate because if I can
get a a change of my mind to
vote yes but
I appreciate your time thank
you.
Thank you senator.
Thank you now we're on to
Senator renewable.
Thank you madam chair to just a
couple real simple questions
first of there's I think you
said fourteen thousand acre feet
of water
reclamation water so it's right
to use a understand the
difference but what happens to
those those water rights the
fed's Water Rights what happens
to.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair center the the water
most likely stays in the river
and flows downstream.
So it goes there's on is what
the ultimate.
Senator is one of them get to
use that water in some form or
fashion as a transfer.
Madam chair of the.
Senator Neville but I will allow
my expertise here and that's
where I would like one experts
but
there is only gets to use water
consistent with Arizona water
rights you know the daughter I
some get transferred in the end
they are owned by New Mexico to
be in with one of your federal
water rights right one of the
many factors that made a
diversion project usable was
ever for every acre for the
water we took out of the river
we had to pay the user and the
cost added to the cost of
constructing and operating in
the version was prohibited.
I I don't have any idea I'm not
to I mean I've been down there
but I'm not familiar with all
the details we'll take use water
for but to.
Our.
It it seems like there ought to
be a methodology where we could
retain those water rights for
New Mexico users in some form or
fashion and understand building
a big down across he those
probably not feasible.
There's an animal supplied a
project up in Farmington
actually pump water out of it
and this river and stored up for
for future use that's also
reclamation it's right to use
its a separate terminology than
water right so the the sentence
somewhere down here at all just
wondered if there could not be a
small.
Basically a retention dam and
some kind of pumping situation
where the water could be
utilized for Silvercity or for
something some other potential
use industrial or whatever and I
don't know if that service
that's one of the reasons why I
think a lot of people that are
opposed to it want to see more
local representation as opposed
to the water transport and us
observation I'm not sure that's
absolutely true or not but
Allowing the water that could be
utilized in New Mexico to go
downstream.
that that's a problem for a lot
of people and.
I don't know if you have any
comments or thoughts along those
lines but to.
Trying to resolve that.
Would go a long way toward
making a lot more people in
favor of your bill.
Madam chair center yeah I
appreciate the opportunity to
respond
the right to use the fourteen
thousand acre feet.
Has actually gone away and
doesn't go away if we could
figure out a way to do is it is
some point in the future that's
all option what has gone the way
it is the fifty six million for
construction and what we're
sitting on these eighty million
that we can use for those
communities so rather than can
to continue sitting on the
eighty million in spending on
lawyers and consultants and
engineers but the.
This bill is to take that money
invest that money in those
communities.
I think that's a laudable goal I
just a concern luck has been
mentioned that
We're allowing a Santa Fe board
chair of runs southwest New
Mexico water and that's that's
what's.
Distasteful to a lot of local
people that are writing me
letters and that's my.
that's my concern and I don't
know how we get around that but
to.
Water trust board is not a
southwestern New Mexico and.
Would be dictating to those
people will be using our water
and how they ought to be doing
whatever it is they do down
there that's just my thoughts
and concerns.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
We now have Senator souls
Senator Mondays and Senator
Schmedes Senator souls.
Madam chair and it may be
premature there other people on
the list but I'd like to make a
do pass motion whenever that the
program.
Thank you all come back to you
senator Sauls Senator Montes.
Thank you madam chair this is
such an important topic and
discussion.
You're gonna have to speak up or
get a little closer I'm sorry
madam chair of trying to better
that better and better I'm
barely wow I'm talking right
into my phone so okay well we'll
Cantley yeah this is not good
madam chair all reconnect so
just interrupt me if if the I'm
not getting through I'm in my
office here in the capital in on
my phone so we'll try something
else.
Madam chair the the comments on
the discussion we had a very
important and Representative
McQueen and I have variously
chair or vice chair the interim
committee on water natural
resources for many years.
There is on water settlement
project in the in the
consequence of what it was was
like watching a slow motion
train wreck for about ten years.
Every year that I chair the
interim committee I would take
the committee to Silvercity
precisely because of these
issues and we saw for probably
ten years what eventually
happened which was a tremendous
waste of tens and tens of
millions of dollars and hundreds
and hundreds of hours including
hundreds of public meetings all
for no really and result.
There's been an important point
that I want to make to emphasize
from the last several common.
Who is the water trust for there
was the question maybe who is
the water trust board for years
I've tried to change in statute
the composition of the water
trust board.
And the concern has been
expressed here is the water
transport is not perhaps have a
good representation for
southwestern New Mexico.
That's an important
consideration but I think
there's one that's more
important than that.
I've served under four governors
and realize that of the sixteen
members of the water trust board
ten of them are appointees of
the governor either as cabinet
secretaries for public members
ten of the sixteen.
And so what happens is that
water policy swings back and
forth depending on the
administration.
So much of the problem that we
ran into over the last several
years was very candidly a
product of the state engineer
the water trust board under the
Martinez administration for
eight years.
And then of course when the
Martinez administration was
replaced by the Lujan Grisham
administration of the policy
change early with regard to the
Arizona water sewer project the
captain of the and so forth and
in the policy change
dramatically in a completely
different direction a direction
that I supported and had opposed
right years with the Martinez
administration.
My point in all this is we need
to have a water policy that does
not swing
the year to year day to day
administration administration
but obviously looks decades into
the future and that that
fundamental is our problem.
So I'm going to support this
bill now because I don't think
there's a better place to put
this money in this
responsibility the water trust
where but I'll say it's not
that's not a good solution
either.
the captivity really squandered
a great opportunity a lot of
money over many years and we we
like I said Representative
McQueen and I am members as they
watched it happening in slow
motion for many many years and
we do every time we have a
meeting you're not going to make
your deadline you're taking too
long on on of course it all
turned out exactly as we
predicted it might be for
probably five or six years so
disappointing it's really one of
my greatest disappointment of
watching government function
very poorly over the last
several years but but I wanted
to fill in the blanks doctor who
is water trust were given this
authority it real fundamentally
really is the governor and the
governor's appointees and the
and that's that's sometimes a
good thing if you like to the
governor.
You like the governor's politics
and governance policies but we
need to be careful when we do
this because the pendulum has a
tendency to swing and we may
find ourselves water trust board
in the governor who we don't
like their attitudes and
policies toward the left and so
I would I would caution that the
committee to always be mindful
of that.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Thank you Senator von case okay
Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Well we're talking I looked up
this
Squatter settlement act.
And its first time I've read or
seen it but I was scrolling down
to the New Mexico section and I
just want to read this and if
you could please help me out
with your Attorney legal mind
kind of understand this
and some of the federal act it
says.
The New Mexico cap entity shall
own and holds the title to all
portions of the New Mexico
units.
Okay so New Mexico company owns
on the whole the title of the
New Mexico unit then when I get
to H. B. two hundred it says
money in the fund it shall not
be is to but I would plan to
construct New Mexico unit.
Could you help me understand
that it seems little conflicting
New me could you help me resolve
those that apparent discrepancy.
Thank you madam chair Senator
these so the New Mexico units is
federal legalese for the humor
of the version.
So if there was going to be he
the diversion The New Mexico
captaincy was going to plan
constructed and managed to hit
with the version.
There is not going to be a hit
with a virtual.
there was a deadline as as we
has been noted the end of twenty
nineteen three to record of
decision on the proposed
diversion plan that deadline was
missed because there was no
viable plan so the construction
funding the additional funding
is gonna.
Under there's water Selma's Act
itself The New Mexico unit fund
which is where they put the
currently eighty million dollars
can be used of for the purpose
of paying because of the New
Mexico unit which doesn't and
won't exist or other water
utilization alternatives to meet
water supply demands in the
southwest water planning region
of New Mexico.
And so what this bill is doing
is is picking that option the
war the we we spend enough
money.
Chasing a few of the virgin that
wasn't feasible so we're picking
the other alternative investing
in the community and stuff.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and Representative that makes
perfect sense
I don't know too much about this
project like like some of you do
I have been to Phoenix you know
it it just seems I don't know
what the.
I don't know what they what
we're missing out on I I just
want to say I I hopefully would
all agree on this you know we we
all talk about how water is so
limited in New Mexico and I.
I assume that one of the the the
distaste for healing version is
the fact that is this you know
it's really you know pretty
references groundwater
but gosh I wish we could come up
with with something to to use
more water for for people
But
you know a lot of that gets into
some partisanship and can high
see the environment.
And that's okay but you know you
go to Phoenix go Chandler mesa
and Phoenix proper I mean
there's all these canals
everywhere and you think wow
it's it's the desert but then
they really know how to use
their service water
so I don't know what the
difference is I know it's a
different geography I understand
that I'm not I'm not saying it's
the same things no misinterpret
what I'm saying but I I I just
you kind of look at at the
similar you know water sources
aware that he the rivers going
you know toward Phoenix and and
this bill would be a this is a
huge difference with with
pallets used this probably some
engineering reasoning for that I
I get it I get it but but really
wish we we would be
We can somehow use this fourteen
thousand fourteen thousand acre
feet leased a portion of it but
so as a single disappointing
that we have that opportunity
and yeah I I echo the of the the
concerns from for the the point
from Senator want us that it.
I think it's frustrating all
around for everybody that that
so much money has been
squandered here and and looking
at into an opportunity that that
didn't pan out but.
Representative appreciated.
Thank you very much Senator gate
guy it goes to do something
else.
This time I can even on mute
all.
Thank you so Senator so if you
were going to make a motion.
Thank you madam chair I move it
to pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center souls made the motion
Senator pope seconded it.
Running could could you please
call the vote.
And I want this.
Wanted.
Senator Gallegos yes.
Okay let's go back Senator
Montes was saying something did
you get that boat no I did not
center on K. yes okay thank you
Senator Gallegos and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Bill no.
Senator pope.
Just finished meeting now.
Senator so.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
In terms of annex yes.
Senator diet cokes Senator guy a
goes to explain as well please.
And I appreciate that I I voted
no I'm hoping that as we get
towards the floor session that
this bill would have some
discussion for the
Representative would on how
they're gonna include the
residents in that area the
secretary of state so they would
have an actual opinion on what
happens to their water what that
are you thank you.
Thank you very much so
Representative McQueen are you
in your Sanchez have a due pass
sixty three thank you thank you
madam chair.
Okay we are now on to committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three the livestock board needed
inspections Representative Dow
and representative Armstrong are
either of you here.
Yes Representative Rebecca Dow.
Or Representative Gail Armstrong
here.
Was on mute.
You made here okay
Representative.
State representative backed out
thank you so much.
Hi thank you guys so much for
the opportunity to present house
bill thirty three house thank
you for joining or your
legislators no house bill thirty
three is just reestablished.
In my excuse me somebody has to
go on in the match.
Is that better yes
that was me I was just doing
another interview at the same.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee and
house bill thirty three
reestablishes the New Mexico in
state inspection and this bill
establishes this with the New
Mexico livestock board who has
been tasked this through not
only to New Mexico livestock act
up but through their legacy of
of.
Controlling and promoting and
livestock development from
conception until processing and
so this bill does a couple of
things it reestablished in state
inspection it creates parity
with direct sales by eliminating
the G. R. T. from direct sales
of meats and it does give the
meat inspectors it'll limits
their law enforcement authority
at in the process of meetings
actions and I do have a Linda
Gardner director of Mexico
livestock board if we could
bring her in case our questions
from the committee members as
well as I am hoping that
secretary would be there I can't
see what else is there to answer
any questions but with that I I
will stand for questions.
Thank you so
director Belinda garland are you
here.
Yes ma'am I'm here.
Chair good morning good Hey at
least hear your voice is very is
there anything you want to add
to this bill.
So thank you madam chair members
of the committee I and speak on
behalf of the New Mexico
livestock board we stand ready
to reinstate the state then
inspection program we as a board
and as an agency believe that
this bill will bring economic
development opportunities not
only to the agricultural
industries throughout the state
as well overlapping into retail
we find we believe this will
provide home grown produce meat
inspection products for
consumers of the state we also
believe that it will provide
more oversight to the quality of
meat and poultry products thus
protecting the consumers of the
state and I do stand for
questions thank you thank you
very much is secretary would be
here.
Chair the one thing about this
bill.
Sure madam chair members of the
committee W. secretary of
agriculture this is a high
priority bill for the state we
we've had many discussions with
folks over the last couple years
in that wondering why the state
didn't have a state inspection
program it'll give us an
opportunity to really grow and
develop our army program it's
it's it's not the silver bullet
but it's a step in the right
direction and it's the as part
of the building blocks that we
need to really is
reestablish and and bring that
our our home grown beef to the
consumers in the state so we
support the bill.
Thank you very much however is
there any opposition.
My.
And this is there anybody here
that's opposing this bill.
Okay I know there are proponents
let's hear from I only one
minute each please.
Contact.
Are you here.
Yes ma'am.
Thank president of the New
Mexico.
Business coalition we strongly
support this bill we think it
would provide better safety for
consumers also opportunities
for.
People in our state four
economic development in the
rural areas.
There's a lot of reasons that we
need to be looking for jobs in
those areas and this is one good
way to do it while protecting
consumers thank you very much.
Next Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee to hear their
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we're extremely pleased to be
here to support representative
Rebecca Dow H. B. thirty three
this legislation would allow New
Mexico producers better access
to retail and wholesale their
meat cuts we're extremely
excited to see this effort start
last year with the feasibility
study with Representative small
a and M. DA according to and
then do a ninety nine percent of
New Mexicos Keller sent out of
the state for processing this
program will look to create
additional economic
opportunities for many of our
communities including Roland
this program will strengthen our
local food systems and it will
build stronger relationships
between producers and consumers
of the state began to diversify
its economy we ask that you
continue to support agriculture
specifically value added
component.
Last year the New Mexico value
added products reported seven
point six million dollars in
sales and we anticipate that
will continue to grow thank you
and please support the bill.
I already spoke.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's Beverly it's
saying go with dairy producers
of New Mexico we stand in strong
support of this bill house bill
thirty three as a tool to
increase value added agriculture
and will enhance New Mexico's
economy and create jobs so we
urge your support of this thank
you.
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm actually
Wagner director of public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support this bill
because it will provide economic
development opportunities in our
rural communities and help our
local producers we really
appreciate the Billsponsored
bringing this forward thank you
so much.
Next we have one Patterson.
Thank you chairs to Monex
members the committee warned
Patterson president elect New
Mexico cattle growers
association our membership
stands in strong support HB
thirty three we appreciate all
the work the Sanchez but into
this piece of legislation
Representative Representative
Dow brought concerns for
consumers and Ag industry
together on the bill presented
here today the pandemic shine
the spotlight on a problem
industry has been concerned with
for years the absence of in
state processing New Mexico
cattle growers members produce
some of the most wholesome great
tasting beat in the nation we
look forward to the increased
opportunity pride that protein
the consumers in New Mexico and
this bill provides that Avenue
ninety nine percent of the
product of our toil was sent out
of state and it is ridiculous
that consumers can access that
protein during the pandemic.
Thank you just about axing
Committee for hearing aids each
thirty three today New Mexico
cattle growers respectfully ask
for your support.
Thank you very much we're going
to move on to the committee of
this bill did originate out of
the economic rural development
interim committee it is a
committee sub committee members
Senator Hamblen.
You madam chair I am apparently
very talkative today but I'm
very excited about all the bills
that have come before our
committee this morning you know
I'm I'm grateful for the sponsor
for Representative Dow for
bringing this forward and many
of the folks on this call have
heard me talk about thank you
local first and it concerns me
that we don't have the
infrastructure to have meat
processing within our state you
know I can tell you learn when
you talk about locally process
protein I'm thinking of a
perfect marble reply that will
go really great on the grill and
and I I look forward to being
able to purchase that and it
bothers me that we are having
money and jobs go out of our
state so I do appreciate this
effort thank you Representative
Dow for bringing this forward
and I I like that we're trying
to think local first and
provided different ways thank
you madam chair.
Thank you next I have senator
Neville and then Senator
Gallegos Senator renewable madam
chair I was just going to move
to pass thank you we will come
back to Senator Gallegos.
I appreciate this and
Representative out I liked your
bill but I did have just a quick
question and I'm trying to
understand currently give me a
little bit of history units used
to have a locker plant
and as the parents passed on the
kids didn't want to continue it
so I know how hard it is to have
a processing in rural New Mexico
and and for that reason I really
like your bills but I'm
wondering what is the state with
the.
Federal inspectors would we
still need them I know that they
currently can only do eight
hours a day even if the plant is
open for sixteen hours desist
take the federal inspectors on
system.
Miss madam chair and senator guy
it goes that's the first I've
got to call you and committee it
does not this this state in
state inspection will parallel
the federal guidelines except we
will have flexibility and we
will have control over those
inspections the timeliness is
definitely and the adequacy they
they don't have enough
inspectors they're not willing
to place more inspectors in
order to cover those gaps and
that's why we see people who
even can you know buy a beat
that at at at a fair have to
process it out of state or wait
months you know it's it's very
complicated and that's due to
the lack of adequate federal
inspector so our our in state
inspection will parallel that
process that we will have
control over the number of in
state inspectors so that we can
have adequacy and timeliness and
inspections.
Thank you for that and chair and
representative if if we have an
in state inspector on our
facilities would that be with
that may be able to be sold out
of state.
Madam chair and senator yes this
will be FDIC equitable I mean it
will have to parallel that and
that's for two reasons we do
want to look this is this is a
multi year process there is some
money in the budget right now
but not enough to go full scale
so this is this year we will
start the rules the promulgation
of rules and the goal is to be
FDIC approved because at that
point the federal government
will come in and subsidized at
half the cost of our inspection
programs so that is important
for interstate commerce but it
also starts the direct sales is
much quicker.
Thank you for that and I just
wanna make sure because are in a
in a thong madam chair
representative is.
We might want to add money to to
support the federal inspection
but if we don't need them I
think this right process me
Madam chair representative of
all closed up with this thing
Representative you've known me
for quite a while you understand
I'm second generation vegetarian
and the hand that I this morning
was first generation budgetary
and so I appreciate your bill
thank you for doing what you do
are you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and I met at as I just
not at the idea are you.
Thank you very much anymore
copied we have a due pass motion
from Senator no bill and a
second from Senator souls.
Anybody else.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
You're on mute Senator.
I'm sorry I just have a very
quick question I I was racking
my brain I've seen this before
it was I get think it wasn't
**** isn't exactly like the bill
that's it that with that past
staff.
Senate bill one eighteen no it's
not.
This is the one that came out of
the interim economic rural
development committee and the
other one was actually came
through here as well Senator Pat
Woods it's a little bit
different.
Could you just briefly tell me
the differences because I
supported the other one and I'm
just wondering why I I I I think
I support this one too but I I
wonder what we have to do with
the both with of bills.
Madam chair and senator I'm not
familiar with that bill I'm I
can tell you that this is this
is the result of a lot of at
hundreds of hours of
conversations among Agrusa in
coordination with the livestock
board and The New Mexico AG
Department this has had multiple
changes in the said that you see
before you is a consensus on
that okay all right thank you.
Thank you.
Further before we go to a vote.
We have a due pass motion by
Senator renewable second by
Senators souls please call vote.
One yes yes.
Senator Gallegos
David.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
pope.
Yes Senator Smitty yes Senator
so both.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
In terms of annex yes unanimous
thank you Representative now you
have a unanimous do pass thank
you so much madam chair and
committee.
Thank you committee members were
gonna try and see what happens
with Committee substitute for
House Bill to forty one water
trust fund mutual domestic so
the side Representative Herrera
and Garrett Representative
Herrera Susan how are I see you
please proceed.
Thank you madam chair
I'm pleased to be before this
committee I appreciate all of
you hearing this bill
and I want to tell you I first
learned about mutual domestic
water systems when I campaigned
for office and and after I was
elected I called a meeting
together of all these people and
about thirty people showed up
what you should all know as
everybody was over sixty five
and they all did these jobs on a
volunteer basis.
Since then I've done my best to
learn about had several follow
up meetings done my best to
learn about this
the plate and see how we as a
legislature the system and I'm
very grateful to Senator
Cervantes said in a little bit
of a little bit humble to be
before him presenting on water
since I think he knows most of
that water in New Mexico that I
attended in interim hearing in
that two thousand nineteen Water
in truth or consequences and now
I think I learned the most at
that meeting in three days that
I could I could ever learn since
and I've tried to keep up and I
certainly appreciate his
leadership so just for those of
you who are not new limit let me
just explain a little about the
systems there
Mutual domestic water systems
are we're really created to
provide clean drinking water for
New Mexico they usually small
the usually in rural places and
they're authorized into the
cemetery projects act
the water trust fund was created
in two thousand one and they
charge the NMFA with the
administration of this that so
what you should know as they
receive it nine percent of the
seniors severance tax fund
annually this year will be fifty
three point three million
dollars they get another four
million down meant a total of
fifty seven point eight million
whether funds for water
infrastructure one is called the
las colonias infrastructure act
created in two thousand ten and
as of two thousand nineteen the
award in ninety eight million
two hundred ninety eight
thousand hundred fifty five
dollars to two hundred and
twelve projects within a hundred
and fifty miles of the border
Hey the southern border the
state tribal infrastructure fund
was created in two thousand
sixteen and as of two thousand
nineteen awarded forty million
two hundred sixty two dollars
eight sixty eight to seventy
design construction or planning
press.
What you should know is each
year each of these funds get
another four point five percent
the seniors senior severance tax
by so for those two
organizations they lost money is
funneled it twenty six point six
million this year the tribal
infrastructure fund would get
twenty six point six.
There are hundreds there
thousand forty seven water
systems in our state you know
summer big cities summer small
some of these really small
mutual domestic water systems of
those smaller mutual domestic
water systems.
there about three hundred of the
mutual domestic water systems
out of a thousand forty seven.
All but eight.
More than five hundred apps
of these the of these three
hundred systems a hundred ninety
two of them have less than three
hundred service connections
hooked up to a whole.
Okay so this legislation is
really aimed at serving our
smallest water systems they
really can't afford loans can't
pay for three years of financial
audits and can't tackle
I'm as Representative Ferrary
you have frozen.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Herrera could you
take off your picture and we
might be able to hear you.
When I just sent a text message
letting her know that.
And I don't think her co sponsor
is here.
Madam chairwoman I can step in
and help because I did work on
the Senate side with this and
what this does is it helps our
small mutual domestics by
getting back cap and ensuring
that we have projects that would
some of our communities in rural
New Mexico mutual domestics are
what keep them with clean safe
drinking water there's the
threat of groundwater
contamination with the number of
septic tanks and wells that are
in the area it's important to
know that the small mutual Water
domestics also covers small
schools in rural New Mexico by
providing children and staff
clean drinking water and so I'm
gonna send another text to
representative that I in case
she wants to wrap up for
comments and introduce any
expert witness that she may have
with her.
Okay thank you Senator let's
turn our while we're waiting for
the Representative let's go to
opponents are there any.
There is no point that signed up
we have three proponents.
Okay so let's hear from the
proponents then.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Paula Garcia executive director
of the New Mexico sic
association which represents
community ditches across the
state in the second and the
mutual domestics are like our
companion local governments in
water delivery in rural villages
throughout the state over here
to speak in strong support of
this legislation because several
address critical infrastructure
needs and some of our most
underserved rural villages
mutual domestic provide are
charged with providing safe
drinking water and they are
mostly run by volunteers I'm
also a former member of the
water trust board and what my
experience was as a member of
the water trust board was that
some of the smaller systems who
are most in need of funding had
major challenges in competing
with some of the larger entities
across the state I think this
bill provides a very good
solution to have a set aside for
the smaller entities so that
they they have a pool of funding
in which they do not have to
compete with a with cities or
larger water conveyance projects
I want to thank thank the spots
for bringing this bill forward
and of.
Recommend strongly that the
committee voted to pass thank
you for your consideration madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Herrerra let's go back to you
did you have a expert witness.
And you're on mute.
What.
I don't know what happened this
never happened before of course
it only happens when an.
In front of CENIC conservation
anyhow yes I have two expert
witnesses that bills Connor of
the New Mexico real water
association and Marquita Russel
CEO at the NMFA.
Okay Mister Connor let's hear
from you please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I'm a bill Connor and executive
director of New Mexico rural
water association.
We stand in in support of
Representative Ferrary.
Of bills she's worked.
Ever since becoming a a
uh representative for primarily
Rio Arriba County she's worked
very hard trying to do things
that will improve the lives of
these these small communities
throughout New Mexico.
What this bill does is it puts
approval of funds there and
which small rural communities
mutual domestic scan can compete
for funding on on a level field.
As as.
One of your your your folks said
earlier the.
The water trust board funding is
very competitive funding
many of the larger systems that
people on staff that did nothing
except except chase funding.
For for their communities and
for their system small rural
mutual the mistakes are
primarily volunteer boards they
don't have necessarily the
expertise to change this type of
funding to do grant writing that
type of thing.
And and nor do many of them have
the time to.
specialize in and looking for
funding and and knowing how to
approach it so.
They do an exemplary job of
providing safe clean drinking
water that is their communities
and and and this bill will give
them an opportunity to.
Chaves.
Funding to help maintain the
infrastructure so that so that
they will be able to operate
more efficiently.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much and miss
Russell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I'm here simply to answer any
technical questions about the
water trust board or the water
project fund or any of its
policies okay so let's go back
to the proponents I think we
have a couple more.
Next.
I'm a part.
Hi mate.
I don't see them on.
The last generous person.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the deputy executive
director New Mexico counties
many of the same reasons that
have been identified we think
that this legislation sets out a
special exception for those
smaller rural rural systems that
really do not have the type of
revenue base to compete with the
match and some of the other
processes that we have
established in the water
transport we think that these
kind of are indicative of our
more rural communities people
live out in the middle of no
where they need to find
different processes that are
outside of what we might
consider the Norman since we
have a president but both the
tribal and the steak you we
think that this is also special
needs that makes sense and with
that we stand in full support
thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else on the webcast that
wanted to speak for or against
this bill.
Okay
on to the committee.
Are there any questions
comments discussion from
committee members.
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair.
All it does I got a little bit
distracted permanent but of
center Representative Herrerra.
Find out it talks about ten
percent of would be added on to
this.
What is that ten percent come
from.
Sure ten percent the water
project funds.
Madam chair and I represent
Senator excuse me Senator I
think that's a the ten percent
would be a it would be set aside
in the money that's allocated
from the water trust fund to
water systems throughout the
state every year every year they
put out application process
people apply for this funding
it's a total of fifty seven
million this year so you have
big cities you have counties you
have lots of big water systems
competing for this money and the
small mutual domestics have to
compete for the same amount of
money so it the it.
Really is about four point seven
million set aside for a period
of three years to see if we
can't get the small mutual
domestic systems get their
infrastructure build up and and
ready to serve communities where
the hopefully a the the next the
next ten twenty years.
Thank you for that date madam
chair and representative then it
basically takes a pine
Commission and smaller pieces we
we wouldn't grow the amount
because of the water transport
we're actually adding as of four
point five to four point seven
reduction to the overall one
transport of funding is that
correct you're absolutely right
Senator.
Okay well thank you for that
Madam chair representative.
In the general area we do have
some colonus areas it receives
money for our water projects but
I'm gonna ask you just because I
do not know which is that
hundred fifty miles just from
the southern border is that
Representative statewide from
any of our borders.
It's just from the seven madam
chair and senator is just from
the southern border so you have
a set aside in the in the last
colonias fund of twenty six
point six million dollars this
year we're projects along the
southern border in the tribal
infrastructure fund you have a
set aside of twenty six point
six million and that's fun but
for the rural unincorporated
parts the state really they're
they're competing against major
cities and counties or funding
from the water trust fund.
Madam chair and representative I
appreciate that are done through
grant applications then turns
Senator.
Madam chair and senator they are
the NMFA's that's a great
process people have to go
through it you know these these
small mutual domestics I mean I
kind of have to let these guys
they're all over sixty five
seventy one is eight that I know
that.
They can fix in a car they can
you know.
Your public transit in your
house fix any plumbing problem
writing a grant application
little tough little tough for
them I mean will work with them
if this bill passes to try and
make sure that they get you know
the help they need to navigate
this process but at least
they've kind of given up in a
lease with the Senate side the
they know they have a chance
that's what I'm presenting this
bill Senate.
Madam chair
representative I'm pretty sure
we had your husband in Lee
County for a while doing grant
applications needed a great job
so I understand how hard it is
my last question madam chair and
Representative is I was told
that there are some problems
with the
smaller.
Water systems in northern New
Mexico and and I'm wondering if
this is going to help alleviate
that I understood that some of
the medical marijuana producers
tied on to some of these
small water systems with this
help resolve some of that I
understood it was more of a
capacity thing than what they
expected because the marijuana
takes a lot of waters with this
help in in solving that issue.
Madam chair and senator you know
I think that's another bill but
certainly would give them the
resources of the kind of tackle
and I'm even playing field so I
think it would help in the long
run but I know that other
legislation that says addressing
that and that is another problem
the small water systems jester
very fragile I guess that's what
I want to say but but we can't
improve then we can't keep them
safely can I help people find
safe drinking water and I and
it's not just northern New
Mexico when I first did this I
thought it was northern but it's
really rural New Mexico created
the
Parts of our state all of you
for that all over this state.
Madam chair representative and I
appreciate it I I had that
property in Colorado that I
recently sold and it was always
helpful hardship on the smaller
us Mitchell domestics but even
that and and this I promised my
last question do any of these
small mutual domestics have to
have the set aside for the our
water contact the Rio Grande
compact the reason I ask that is
I'd tried to sue the state New
Mexico over that shutting my
head gate which provided
domestic waters for the cattle
and.
Yes you for the Colorado Texas
water compact but I'm wondering
if these mutual domestics are
they all pipeline or can some of
it be a second.
You know I think it is that
Graham under but I'm going to
refer you to my experts bill
Connor on this thank you Senator
and madam chair.
Mr Connor.
Madam chair Senator of the
major L. of water produced and
and delivered by mutual domestic
says out of the ground it's it's
well water.
There are limited numbers and
and very centers of the state
the day's supply service water.
as I said that is very limited
you know we have had
some in the Alamogordo prior to
the.
Prior to the fire over there
does so that destroyed their
watershed.
The red zone areas on is on
surface water.
the only one that I'm aware of
that's actually drawing water
out of the river is the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water utility authority.
Thank you for that madam chair
and representative
When I had my issue in Colorado
between myself New Mexico the
corps engineers came in and did
a survey and did really good job
for free I might add and they
had some of the deep well
People are using water for
irrigation they had that put a
certain amount to two meters
about back into the river in
order to resolve some the
compact issues but that's just
my only my last question I
appreciate your time and look
forward to the rest of the
debate thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm sorry to interrupt
the discussion but
Representative Herrera was there
an amendment you were wanting to
have put on yes yes there is
three there's an amendment and
thank you eight it got so
confusing with the the
cancellation madam chair I
did you say three
and then when the man went with
three parts that I wanted to
explain okay let's try it.
It go out again yes so with
these amendments will do it well
it will create a sunset clause
so that we'll try this three
funding cycles and see how it
works if it doesn't work or it's
not effective then I will send
that will sunset the.
This fund to LA it grants
funding to the smallest users
those with less than three
hundred service connections and
any of the unused funds you know
over this period if they if
they're on use revert back to
the water project so those
that's basically with the
amendment is madam chair.
Okay is there a
A sponsor in the motion from
committee members since this is
coming from a non committee
member.
Senator Lopez you're on mute.
Hit the spacebar.
However can you help our.
Is there anyone else who would
like to sponsor the amendment.
I will.
Okay so in a motion made by
Senator pope on the amendment a
second by Senator Hamblen.
Is there any discussion from the
committee on the amendment.
Since I can't see the entire
committee Trevor are there any
hands up.
However.
I only see us under city of
sand.
Okay she saying no now so
there's no okay so there's no
hands up on the amendment
Veronica could you please call
the vote on the amendment.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes.
Hello yes.
Committee.
Senator souls.
Yes.
To do a little bit yes.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator smitteez.
In.
Yes okay so you have an amended
committee substitute we are back
on the amended committee
substitute for questions I
Senator hope do you have
anything that you wanted to
discuss before we go back to
Senator Gallegos.
madam chair I just wanted to
move it to pass on house bill
two forty one amended.
So we want all that a motion and
second Senator Gallegos.
Thank you and Representative
just of follow up question so
water conservation support
systems recycling water storage
watersheds might they get less
funding with this bill and if so
do we know how much the lose.
Senate madam chair Senator
If they get if they live news I
don't know how much they would
lose it it it depends how many
people apply for grants under
this and under this water
project fund and I guess I would
have to ask a Marquita Russel to
answer to that problem question
I know that it probably be about
force four point seven million
that would come out I don't know
how many how much would come
from that particular fund.
Thank you.
The.
Senator.
So madam chair Senator there's a
percentage that the water
transport sets aside each year
for different types water
conservation is usually the
second highest amount of funding
that's provided so the amount
that is deducted this ten
percent there'd be a pro rattus
impact to all of the various
parts of funds so there would be
an impact but my anticipation is
that would be a pro read impact
against the watershed's water
conservation flood prevention
and the other non earmarked of
water delivery storage projects.
So madam chair representative
and expert witness as we go
forward because I I hate as we
cut the pie up smaller
increments the we can't make the
others whole I'm wondering if
you could look through in to
know the future years if this is
actual benefit to the state if
there's not a way we could go
ahead and put the money is.
Back in the call by the four
point seven million because I
think what happens is we dilute
the amount that's currently in
the frontier and spread it out
the inner and we may not be able
to get all of our needs met with
conservation district so with
that all you'll just apart from
the process as we go forward
thank you madam chair
Representative.
We always appreciate putting
more money into the fund so
thank you.
Are any further discussion.
Okay we have a motion for a do
pass on an amended committee
substitute we have a second run
it could did you get that I
don't know who seconded.
I think it was Senator Sedillo
Lopez okay thank you.
So could you please call the
vote.
Senator sirventes yes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Neville yes Senator pope.
Just.
Communities.
Senator so yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes.
And US senators schmidti.
Thank you Mr Senator yes.
Yes Representative where are you
have a unanimous do pass on your
committee sub as amended thank
you very much for being here
today thank you members of the
committee and I'm so sorry that
my.
My computer what the wrong time
thank you all very much for
being patient.
Thank you members they are
calling to the floor we do have
some Bill assignments so we will
be meeting Thursday morning at
nine AM thank you very much.
