And I can
We have a quorum roll call is
closed.
Would you please? Would you
please stand for the invocation
provided by the gentle lady from
Berkeley? Oh County
Representative Janelle.
Anya nor New
Holy spirit. Give us the
Refused to make themselves
small.
Give us the eloquence that you
gave James Baldwin and Maya
Angelou.
Express their thoughts
forthrightly and with beauty.
Give us the courage that you
gave Martin Luther King Jr and
Mega Evers who gave their lives
being truth to power as they
work towards bringing equality
to the people.
Give us grace and make us
fearless as we confront
injustice.
Let us not make peace with
oppression.
Help us to employ our talents
and gifts in the service of our
communities and our state. Amen.
Thank you remain standing for
the pledge of allegiance being
led by the General lady from
McKinley and San Juan counties,
representative Wanda Johnson.
I pledge
Next. We'll have the New Mexico
pledge led by the gentle lady
from Citron, Catron, Sierra
Sacharow and Valencia counties,
representative Gail Armstrong.
Body. We are now on a motion to
suspend the rules to allow
guests in the chambers. I see no
objection. It is so hard.
It is absolutely great to have
everyone with us today in the
chamber as we celebrate African
American Day in the House of
Representatives in the state of
New Mexico, we will be looking
at the achievements. The
celebrations will be looking at
all of the sacrifices and the
and the building blocks that
African Americans have made and
brought forth.
To being a part of the history
of the state of New Mexico, and
in that regard we have with us
today, a woman who can sing like
no other and she's going to
bring to you a song that is a
renowned within the African
American community. Let's
welcome now Marissa Corley from
the Delta Sigma Theta sorority
as she sings Amazing Grace.
Days.
Love.
Not
There.
That's a
Me.
Okay?
Jones. Wow.
Cause
Most
Good night.
Oh, I'm fine.
World.
Mind, but
Good night.
Guys.
Mm hmm.
Changer.
And
ah
I have, um
Already.
I've already cut
Um
Says the
Want me
the
No.
Really?
Mm hmm.
Thank you.
Marissa Corley.
I would be remiss not to let you
know that she's also one of the
winners of Albuquerque Sunday
bears. So thank you very much
We do have some guests on the
rostrum that I'd like to
introduce to you right now.
We are extremely privileged and
honored to have the man who ran
for the New Mexico House of
Representatives and became New
Mexico's first African American
state representative.
Not only did he run once, but he
was elected for four terms. And
in addition, it says that he not
only brand and was successful in
the house. It's important for
you to know that he introduced
Bill number 3 60 1973, requiring
early childhood education
programs a bill that would bring
kindergarten to New Mexico.
Let's welcome, Dr Linton
Mallory.
And with Dr Mallory today is his
wonderful and beautiful wife,
Joy and what's important for you
to know we have some other
guests on our on our roster, but
she is one of the founding
members of Delta Sigma Theta
sorority when it was founded
right here in New Mexico in
1967, Let's welcome
Dr Joy Mallory.
And when we talk about growing
our own, Dr Mallory and his wife
had a son. His name is Linton,
Mallory junior, and he has
served as a deputy cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Workforce Solutions. Let's
welcome Linton Mallory Junior.
With us today as we're
continuing to look at first and
growing our own in the African
American community. Let's
welcome the coal. Rogers, the
first African American elected
to the City Council in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
And all of the ladies that you
see up here in red or members of
the Delta Sigma Theta sorority,
the Albuquerque alumni chapter
and, as indicated it was formed
in 1967, and they have been
engaged in community involvement
to help lift up the community
and every single aspect that you
can imagine. So let me introduce
them to you now.
Maryland, Pettis Hill.
Let's hold. Hold your applause
till I introduced them all,
Lonnie Hodge.
Marissa Corley.
Brenda Steel.
Jane K. Gates.
Gloria for DP.
And, of course,
Dr Joy Mallory.
Let's welcome the Delta Sigma
Theta sorority.
General lady from burning Leo.
Representative.
Onion are new.
To introduce our guest from
would you please Thank you,
Madam Speaker today we also have
as guests on the rostrum, the
black student union from
Albuquerque Academy, and I will
also ask you to hold your
applause until I have introduced
them all. We have senior Emma
Brundage.
Senior Jamal Witter.
Senior Maya Chandler.
Senior Kenny Oranje.
Senior Lucy lot.
Junior nori Little
And Junior Clinton Eastern.
Listen. Excuse me.
And we also have joining them
Their teacher, Mr Peter Gloy,
who's the director of diversity,
culture and belonging. Thank you
so much for being with us today.
General lady.
I understand that we have some
guests in the gallery. Please
stand to be recognize. Leonard
Weights, executive director of
Dr Martin Luther King Jr
Commission.
Barbara gains. The associate
director of the doctor, Martin
Luther King Commission.
Tony Johnson Parks City of
Albuquerque Parks Recreation
Commission.
We also have caddies, a bottom,
the founder and executive
director of Vision Cenkova.
Patrick Barrett from the office
of the Public defender.
Sonia Belafonte, the executive
director of New Mexico Legal
aid.
Brennan Bowman of Delta Sigma
Theta sorority.
Alvin Bustan, the dean of
students for the 8th and 9th
grade division of Albuquerque
Academy.
And Kyocera Miller, the track
and field coach at Albuquerque
Academy.
And we have some. We have some
guests seated in the Chamber of
And we have some. We have some
guests seated in the chamber
of Representatives. Roybal
Caballero, Bernalillo County.
Would you like to introduce your
guests?
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
I'm I'm always honored to have,
um, are young
Students and our young student
leaders who might consider all
students to be leaders.
And today I have with me.
Meow do pay a rental.
Her family roots are from
Nigeria.
And I'd like to just read
briefly, um, a little bit about
mode up.
She's in the ninth grade, and
Albuquerque Academy. She runs
track and field.
She's also in the theater
department.
And a goal of hers is to improve
her public speaking
And she hopes to achieve that.
By practicing on stage and
making presentations.
She's part of the ambassador's
club.
And hopes to keep meeting new
people.
And she is absolutely in the
right place being in the
ambassador's club.
Her, Um
She's in the ninth grade, but
she's already looking ahead.
And she's exploring.
Either entering into the medical
field or becoming a lawyer.
And my little tidbit to her.
Um, pardon those attorneys in
the room.
And those that are planning to
be attorneys. I suggested very
strongly that she followed
medicine.
Um because of our dire need in
our state of New Mexico. So with
that, will you please stand And
will we welcome, please
Arendelle.
Representative.
Onion or nude. You have a burn.
Leo County General Lady, you
have a guest to introduce you
have a guest. I would like to
introduce you to McKay Bradford.
He's an eighth grader at
Albuquerque Academy. And Man.
This kid does a lot. You should
see. I asked him for some
factoids about him and this
post. It is full. So he is a
gifted poet as we know he shared
with us his talents upstairs in
the rotunda. He also plays
guitar in the Albuquerque
Academy Mariachi band.
And next month will be traveling
to Atlanta to compete in the
National Society of Black
Engineers. Future Cities
Competition. Thank you for being
with us today.
The general lady from Bernie
Leo, representative Gail Chase
E.
Madam speaker. I move that we go
to that order of business
introduction of legislation.
This speaks
The clerk to read the
The bill. The legislation
House Memorial 57 Memorial,
declaring February 9th 2024
African American Day in the
House of Representatives,
whereas Africa,
Okay.
How's Memorial 57?
House Memorial 57, having been
read twice by title is ordered
and not printed and placed on
the speaker's table.
The gentle lady from Bernie Leo,
Madam speaker and when we go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business
Seeing no objections. It is so
ordered.
The general lady from Bruno Leo
representative Onion or New
Madam Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the House memorial
57 be removed from the speaker's
table and made the next order of
business.
Seeing the objection. It is so
ordered.
Madam Speaker, would you get me
to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Memorial 57 has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution dental lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
we've all already been
introduced to the amazing Maori
family and their incredible body
of work, which this memorial
does acknowledge and honor.
We had a ceremony in the rotunda
earlier today, where we honor
the work of Dr Maori as the
first African American
legislator in the state of New
Mexico. Channel seven also did a
piece on him, which I strongly
encourage everybody to go check
out, so I just want to thank you
again. Doctor. Mallory joined
Maori and
And sorry, and Dr Leonard Jr for
being here, Um
Thank you again. We are very
honored by your presence. And
will the Kirk, please please
read the memorial.
The clerk to read.
House Memorial 57 Memorial
declaring February 9th 2024
African American Day in the
House of Representatives,
whereas African American Day is
a celebration of the
achievements and contributions
of African Americans to the
history of both New Mexico and
the United States. And whereas
New Mexico recognizes the
importance of honoring African
Americans,
Having enacted section 12-5
Dash 12 NM say 1978, which
states the second Friday of
February of each year shall be
set apart and be known as
African American Day. And
whereas African American Day is
a day to reflect on the many
sacrifices that African
Americans have made toward the
democracy everyone enjoys today.
And whereas African American Day
shall be observed by the people
of New Mexico in recognition of
those efforts, and whereas
African American Day is
celebrated in tandem with black
history month and whereas the
celebration of African American
Day is also a time for people to
reflect upon the need for
diversity in thinking and
strategic planning, as laws and
policies are developed to ensure
that all voices are heard in
decisions that affect New Mexico
and new Mexicans.
And whereas African American Day
provides an opportunity to honor
the often forgotten
accomplishments of black
Americans to every important
outcome that makes up the
history of the state and the
country, and whereas
Black history month should be
not be treated as though it is
separate from the collective
American history. Or as the
black history month is merely a
compilation of greatest hits
ranging from badges and
incidents of slavery to some of
the most important Supreme Court
cases that have created
precedents inspired by African
American experiences, but rather
as a day that is focused on the
shared experiences of African
Americans blended into a recipe
that creates a unique flavor of
diversity with a multicultural
experience that everyone can
appreciate.
And whereas the African American
community in New Mexico has a
compelling legacy that dates
back to 1539 when Esteban, a
Spanish more from North Africa,
traveled to New Mexico seeking
gold, and whereas after the
Civil war, thousands of African
American soldiers also known as
the Buffalo soldiers were
garrisoned at 11 different forts
throughout the territory of New
Mexico.
And whereas today New Mexico has
a vibrant African American
community with a growing
population that is still not
fully embraced, as evident by
disproportionate health
outcomes, housing disparities
and high unemployment and
whereas efforts to advance
racial equality and civil
engagement continue to be urgent
priorities, and whereas the
great contributions that African
Americans have made to both the
history of New Mexico and the
history of the United States
should be celebrated and
acknowledge, while also
recognizing that the fight for
racial justice and the
Quality continues every day.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
February 9th 2024 designated
African American Day in the
House of Representatives and be
it further resolved that copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the governor, the executive
director of the office on
African American Affairs, the
president of the University of
New Mexico, the president of the
president of the New Mexico
Black Caucus and the president
of the New Mexico State
Conference of the National
Association for the Advancement
of Colored People.
Is there a debate on the on the
memorial?
Representative, the dental man
from Burnley. Oh County
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the General lady kindly yield?
Madam Speaker, I gladly yield to
Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. And
thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise
in support of this memorial and
for all of the reasons stated in
the memorial, but also because
the doctor more Mallory and I
have a special bond and let me
just explain your briefly. Um I
came up as a as a young
community organizer.
24 years ago this year and
Part of my beat, if you will
back then was to go to these
neighborhood association
meetings. And if you haven't
been to a neighborhood
association meeting in the South
Valley, you're missing out the
real party.
Um, you're dealing with all
kinds of issues right from
public safety to the neighbors
got too many weeks that he
hasn't mowed down to there's a
shady house on the corner to
let's Plan National night out
and I'll get sixth and celebrate
our community. And I remember
vividly being gosh, I don't
know. 2019 years old.
Walking into Mountain View
Community Center way down in the
South Valley and I show up
thinking I know what's up.
And sitting across the table is
at the time probably your fifth
or sixth career. At this point.
I'm not sure but he was the
coordinator of of of
Neighborhood programs are barely
a county and he's dressing
pickle be and just can speak and
capture a room like no one else,
and I sat there just in awe.
Of what this man was saying.
How this man was inspiring
community, a neighborhood
To organize and to rally around
a cause.
And that's the beginning of my
formation. Madam speaker and
General Lady.
As an organizer as an activist,
eventually as a public servant.
Then he goes back to people like
Dr Lentil Maori people like Dr
Charles Bicknell. People like Dr
Morris says Vanegas. People like
Bernadette Me era.
The wife of our former state
representative Rick Meta people
who I admired to this day.
People who have been part of my
development.
As a leader.
And people to whom I owe a great
debt of gratitude. You know you
oftentimes Madam speaker and
generally hear me talk about
People like us.
Walking on the shoulders of
Giants.
Well, there's one sitting right
up there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Berna Leo
representative de la Cruz. Madam
Speaker does a general lady
healed?
I gladly yield to my colleague
from Berna. Leo. Thank you so
much. First of all, I
wholeheartedly support African
American Day and I'm proud that
we're having it here in the
right in the roundhouse, But
like Speaker Martinez talked
about a minute ago, it would be
incredibly remiss of me, Madam
Speaker if I did not also
recognized Dr Mallory
I am proud to call him a friend.
I'm proud to have known many,
many years, particularly one
thing that was not mentioned
earlier is that Dr Mallory
actually ran for Congress.
And I am very proud to have gone
door to door for this man. While
he did not prevail, he received
lots of love in that campaign.
Ah, and I'm gonna put in a
shame. Shameless plug for you,
Dr Mallory.
He has a book. He wrote a book
and so
If you haven't bought it, it's a
great read.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Thank you. The gentle lady from
Berna Leo representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, I will
happily yield to my friend.
Thank you so much.
I. This is one of those very
special days. I have many
special days. But this in
particular
Because this is the day that I
am, um, always able to invoke
The names of my family members.
Many of you have been here for a
while. Have heard my story.
Of my first husband being
African American.
And my oldest son.
Ah!
Being the pride and joy of our
lives as well as our youngest
son.
And, um
The family is very significant
to me.
Because this family is
entrenched.
In the history of civil rights
in this country.
So I will invoke the name of
Percy Sutton.
Attorney
And defender of Malcolm X.
I will invoke the name of
Reverend Sutton.
And they end up Texas.
The name of Lillian Sutton
Taylor.
ACP Texas.
And I could go on their 14.
Sutton's that contributed
To the educational field.
In California.
And then other parts of the
country and also
Most importantly,
Oliver sudden.
The first African American
Supreme Court justice of the
state of New York.
This is the family.
Back in 1969 that I married into
They're entrenched.
In the history and I know
Dr Mallory and all of everyone
that seated there know this
history.
So in the name of my son,
Yussef.
Phenomenon. Sutton
I'm here to honor his family.
And all the contributions that
have been made in the fight for
social justice, and I will tell
you a quick story River and a
space see sudden was relentless.
Every single time I go to San
Antonio, Texas, to visit him.
He would grab me Take me.
And we go register voters.
Or we either go out to get the
vote out or we'd be going to his
Baptist church and listening to
his sermons.
We were constantly organizing.
Constantly whether it was from
the pulpit or whether it was in
the communities.
In, uh in San Antonio.
So I think it's important to
always recognize as I've
mentioned yesterday, and I am
mentioned frequently our
heritage, our ancestors, and
their fantastic contributions.
To who and where we are today.
We would not be here.
If it were not
For these
Courageous Trailblazers.
That set.
Things in motion for us to
follow and for us to believe in
Finally and another note.
I also have all of the men in
the family.
Alpha Phi Alpha.
And all the women in the family.
I'm sorry to say to our sisters
today. We're Alpha Kappa Alpha.
And so, um, I grew up in that
world. I had no idea.
About fraternities or
sororities.
But this is really important to
mention because when the end of
double a CP was formed
So was LULAC.
The League of United Latin
American citizens.
And together.
Mano a mano.
Arm and arm hand in hand.
They've set.
The foundation.
For fighting for civil rights on
behalf of all communities of
color.
In these United States, and we
must honor
And keep their names alive.
But more so than ever. We must
honor their traditions and fight
for fairness Fight for justice.
And ensure that there's equity
and access and opportunity for
all. Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and thank you all for
being here today.
Thank you, General Lady.
The general lady from McKinley
County. Representative
Lundstrom. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. You look good sitting
up there. Let me start with
that, and I appreciate a few
minutes to speak Madam speaker,
particularly about the young
lady who sang to us today.
Ah, Melissa Corley.
She doesn't know me, but I know
her family and
I would guess her roots start in
my home community, the village
of Milan. She's shaking her
head. Yes, I can tell
Uh, Madam Speaker, and if I'm
correct
Ah! She comes from the Corley
lineage.
It's a family that has had a
long history and business.
Community development, you
sports political leadership.
Her grandpa Eddie was on the
village council. Her uncle Eddie
was the former state
representative for House
District six. The seat currently
held by representative Alkon and
at one time because her her
aunt,
Certainly my best friend growing
up.
I was part of the family for a
long time because her
grandmother always included me
was one of the kids, so I want
to specifically thank her for
being here today. Beautiful
voice. Uh, I was just blew me
away.
And please say hello to the
family and again. Thank you,
Madam Speaker for allowing me a
few minutes. Thank you, General
Lady.
The general lady from Brennan,
Leo, representative.
Marengo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the General lady from Burnley Oh
yield.
I will happily yield to my
friend the generated from also
from Bern. Leo. Thank you and
Madam Speaker, I have to agree
with Representative Um Oh, my
God, Patricia.
Yeah. Lundstrom, Um
You do look good sitting up
there.
Um So, uh, Madam Speaker, I
would like to support this
memorial. Um, my dear friends,
um
Clinton Mallory, senior
Um, I want to tell you a quick
little story. Um, when I was a
junior planner, just starting my
career in Albuquerque. He had
already served at this in the
State house and he was going on
on his campaign to run for
county commissioner, one of the
first campaigns that I ever
worked on.
Was working on Dr Mallory's
campaign in the university area
and Nob Hill and I remember
being chased by a dog and just
write running for my life. Um,
later on, I came to work for him
as a city planner as a
Planet for Burnley. Oh county
and he was the chairman of the
Burn Leo County Commission. He
was a true mentor for me. I
later on met his wife, Joy and
just a lovely lovely lady and
little did I know that later on,
I would also work with his son.
London Mallory Jr. Who later
came to work in the city
Planning department, and was one
of my colleagues and a junior
planner at the time, he so I was
happy to mentor him. It's funny
how life does these things and
and goes in full circle. Um
Under his under Dr Mallory's
leadership, Um, later on, came
to work for the first city
planner of Albuquerque, Rex King
that one of the first black men
in Albuquerque that served as a
city planner and I was under his
leadership worked in South
Broadway and the Kirtland
edition.
And learned a lot of things that
I didn't know about the black
community and how they
influenced New Mexico. Um, I
also just want to recognize and
welcome my fellow city Councilor
Nicole Rogers, who?
Unfortunately I haven't had the
opportunity to work with her.
In planning, but hopefully
there's still time. Right? Um or
serve with you as a counselor.
Um, I recognize all of these
individuals, Madam Chair and
General lady because all of
these people have been fighting
for justice and for equality for
many, many years, and I was
proud to be a part of that, um
Upbringing and also, uh
The mentoring that they gave me
and they are very good friends
and I very much appreciate that
They're here today.
Thank you, gentle lady.
The general lady from Brennan,
Leo, representative Thompson.
Thank you, Matt.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the General lady from Burnley
Oh, yield, please.
I will happily yield to the
General lady. Thank you, Madam
Speaker in General Lady I'm so
thrilled about this day. Um, my
colleague talked about marrying
into a family. I married into
the power drill family, and I
think everyone in this building
knows who they are. Leo
Hollande's junior is my husband
of 37 years.
And I'm so I'm so happy that you
all are doing this that we are
being involved in it and
Yay! Thank you, madam. Madam
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady General
Lady from Bern, Leo
representative Paddle home.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I'm
rising today to really honor my
friend and my colleague Nicole
Rogers and having worked
alongside Nicole at the city of
Albuquerque on various projects
I've really witnessed her bold
leadership and her fearless
resolve. Nicole is so unafraid
to speak truth to not just truth
to power.
But power to power.
She takes that decisive action
for her community, and I believe
that she is really what we need
on our city Council right now to
propel our city into a future
that's equitable, Justin
prosperous.
I'm really proud to call Nicole
More than just a colleague. True
friend who has been there for
me and I know that she will be
sharing that same care, love and
thoughtfulness to the Dick
Street to the district that she
calls home. Madam Speaker.
Ah, when I was campaigning
In in Albuquerque.
And in the district that I call
home. I was shocked to learn
that in my district, there was
redlining and red zoning in the
in previously in previous years
that there were some houses that
still held racial covenants that
dictated who could and could not
own those properties. And
although most people gloss over
that little line that exists on
their home
Um, papers. The reality is that
we still live with a lot of that
and having worked in
homelessness alongside Nicole,
Um many years with the city. We
saw firsthand how our
communities are most affected by
poverty by homelessness. And I'm
so proud of Nicole because I do
believe that with this different
representation that we are going
to get on the City council that
we are going to have policies
that reflect and benefit
everyone.
In our communities, and I'm
really proud that Nicole is
joining us here today. Thank
you.
Thank you, gentle lady. The
gentle lady from brittle Leo
representative Chasity
Thank you, Madam Speaker and I'm
happy to celebrate this day with
you one of the things that
hasn't yet been mentioned about
Dr Mallory is that he
represented house District 18,
which is my district and he was
in line right away to give me
advice when I was a candidate.
For the for this seat, and he
lived in my district until
fairly recently. And, um, he's
here and his beautiful wife. Joy
have been such wonderful
neighbors and friends throughout
the years, but one of the things
I was just telling him is that
haven he told me
When I was running, he said.
Do not overlook precinct to 45.
It will turn out for you, and he
was so right? I don't know. They
just all come out to vote. So
whenever there are judges who
are running for they have to
run. We have this hybrid system
where there's an appointment,
and then they have to run in an
election. I always tell them
make sure you cover precinct
245.
And I tell the people who are
into 45 that you said that and
they're just like that's right.
We turn out. So that was great
advice and thank you for all of
your work and dedication and
counselor. Welcome to the City
Council, and I don't mean from
me but from the city itself and
look forward to your work there
to thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. The
general lady from Travis County
Representative Izale.
Madam Speaker. Thank you very
much.
I rise to recognize former
representative Jane Power drill
Culbert, one of our state's
longest serving representative
and a member of our Republican
caucus for 20 years.
Representative Jane Power drill
Culbert, former state
representative serving Sandoval
County since 2023
She served as chair of the House
Business and Employment
Committee from 2015 to 16. She
also sponsored the Nations
Nations first stay in program
legislation in 2023.
Which was legislating
legislation benefiting Miss nor
D students in the Mexico by
creating pathways in the medical
pharmacology and engineering
field representative power
drill, Culbert has been a
tireless advocate for Angel
investment legislation,
reciprocity for military spouses
to gain employment in the
Mexico.
And supported numerous legacy,
education and business
development programs.
Jane Power drill. Colbert also
served as the chairman for the
NCSL Women's legislative
program, and she is also one of
my dearest best friends. Madam
Speaker. She was a wonderful
asset to all know Mexicans.
Thank you very much was thank
you, gentle lady.
The
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative
Blue han. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. I just wanted to stand
in support of every
One of our leaders mentioned and
those that are are budding here
in front of us today, I think
that this is one of the most
important days that we celebrate
Madam speaker and I just want to
be respectful and and give a big
shout out to you, Madam Speaker
for all that you have done and
all the influence you've had.
For me and being a mentor and
speaking in in the places and
spaces and gaps and making sure
that that
That the words are said and you
speak to the power of what needs
to be said at all times and true
to your convictions and true to
the message you always bring and
the light you bring with you.
Thank you for your leadership
and
For everyone watching and
listening. She
My good friend and
representative from burner, Leo.
There are speaker this morning
is just an incredible
inspiration to me and
I think that's why one of the
reasons I'm here today is from
watching, listening and
following your leadership style.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
The generated from burning Leo.
Representative Figueroa.
Um, Madam Speaker introduce a
guest, Madam Speaker, Um
Representative has deferred to
me and I will go ahead and
introduce the two guests today
if they may stand
Um
We have with us today.
Shami.
A Denny.
Who is in the 11th grade at
Albuquerque Academy.
And it's pop part of the power
lifting team.
And as a future leader of the
black Student union at Academy
at Academy.
He wants to pursue the field of
engineering for his career. The
next student is Grant
Richardson.
And he's a junior at Albuquerque
Academy.
He's part of the track and field
team.
And power.
Kicking team.
And also a member of the
executive board.
Of the schools Black student
union.
He's interested in studying
genetics for his career
interests.
But I'd like to ask everyone to
please welcome them to the house
today.
Welcome, gentlemen.
General Lady from Brentwood, Leo
representative Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just
wanted to give a shout out to
both my guests and all of the
academy students here today on
behalf of their college guidance
Advisor.
Rafael Figueroa.
Thank you, gentle lady.
The gentleman from Otero County
representative Block. Thank you,
Madam Speaker with the kind
general lady from burning Leo,
please yield. I will gladly
yield to the gentleman from
Otero. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and thank you, General lady for
bringing forward this great
memorial. You know, a few months
ago, I had the opportunity to
meet representatives Mallory or
Doctor, Representative Mallory.
I should call him and we had
breakfast together and
Albuquerque.
And it was incredible to hear
his story and to hear about all
the things that he's done for
our great state and Madam
speaker. I don't know if I
should tell him this, but he
gave me some good advice to be a
good representative, and I hope
to live up to that potential. So
thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Doctor, Representative
Mallory and thank you to his
entire family for being here as
well as all the great guests
that we have. Thank you so much.
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
General Lady.
Thank you gentlemen, saying no
further debate. The general lady
too close.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I
really want to thank my
colleagues for their amazing
words this morning. I want to
thank all the guests that we
have today. Here in the rostrum
and in the gallery are amazing.
Hard working community leaders.
I want to thank the Mallory
family again for being here.
But I really want to thank the
students. We have so many young
people here today at the rostrum
on the floor in the gallery, and
I really want to thank you for
taking such active participation
and what we do here We do it for
you. You are the future of our
communities and our state. So
thank you for being here and
with that, madam Speaker. I move
that house Memorial 57 do now
pass.
And I ask unanimous consent of
the house for the records show
that the role has been called
and all members are present and
voted in the affirmative.
There has been a motion to show
all members of the house present
and voting in the affirmative.
Saying no objection. It is so
ordered.
We're now on final passage of
House Memorial 57. The vote is
now open.
The vote.
Is now closed by a vote of 70 in
the affirmative and zero in the
negative house memorial. 57 has
duly passed this house.
Thank you all for being here
today. Thank you. For all your
wonderful comments and for all
of our special guest as we
celebrated African American Day
in the Legislature, we look
forward to seeing you again next
year on the second Friday in
February as we continue the
celebration and it goes forward
and thank you.
Thank you members as we, um as
we transition to the rest of our
agenda, I'd like to recognize
the number of guests that we
have up with us here in the in
the gallery.
These are guests representative
Yanira Corolla. We've got the
New Mexico Association for
bilingual education. Check this
out. Spanish be Spanish Spelling
bee winners from 2023.
We've got. We've got Kehlani
Baca from Sienna was
international school who was the
first place winner.
We've got Andrea Garcia from the
Deming public schools who one
second, please.
We've got Natalia Yella, Brian's
from Las Cruces, Public schools
who want third place. Welcome to
the House.
Bienvenido Salah camera,
Diputados. Gracias system
is gonna Dorries.
They, uh they love it
Trio.
Trio Spanish spelling bee. Very
good. Also in the gallery. Good
good friends of mine. Great
great people in the South
Valley. We've gotta Centro
Sevilla. They're here for a day
of action. Central Sevilla is a
community organization.
Dedicated to providing
culturally and linguistically
appropriate mental health and
case management services. In
really a county with them today
or 15 years advocate's part of
their youth advocacy program, as
well as 10 direct service
providers.
To champion critical healthcare
initiatives. Welcome to the
House, Centro Sevilla and Dr
Bill Wagner.
Also in the gallery, guest of
the Lady from Towns present
about tests. We've got Nicole
Scott, a local business owner
and her daughters, Leyla and
Camilla. Welcome to the House.
And we've got a number of
shadows to introduce as well.
But maybe I'll allow the
Members who introduced their own
shadows, Gentlemen from Dona
Ana. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm
honored today to have sent 10
year olds Shammalah Archuletta,
He's 1/5 grader at Alaya
Elementary here in Santa Fe.
Samuel remains undecided with
this fine course. But he's made
a lot of attorneys today, so he
thinks he wants to be an
attorney as well.
When he gets older, but he's
hoping that together inspiration
from all the fine people serving
in the house.
Ah, in the House, Cemal enjoy
skiing taekwondo and hopes to
follow his father around this
coming hunting season. Please,
Mr Speaker, Help me. Welcome, Mr
Samuel Archuletta. Welcome to
hell similar to Letta.
And members. He has a little
bingo card down there with a lot
of the stuff that we oftentimes
see on this floor. So if you can
say, gentlemen, gentle lady
moved to close debate calling.
the houses on their couple of
other fun ones. So if you just
say it, but don't really mean
it. Just say it, and then he can
get his single card filled out.
Gentlemen from Quake curry. I'm
sorry, gentlemen from Korea
Tobacco Guadalupe Roosevelt, San
Miguel representative Samora
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I to rise
today to welcome some guests
here in the roundhouse.
Today we have from Clovis, New
Mexico by left for Folklorico.
From La Casita Elementary and
freshman academy. These
students, students are dedicated
and spend many hours practicing
and performing and closed and
surrounding communities There
are here in the capital today,
these students will be
performing in the rotunda from
12 to 2.
During the bilingual education
recognition day at the capital.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. You
welcome to the house all the way
from Clovis.
You get a chance, walk up there
and watch these young kids
dance.
Gentlemen, from Sam Again, and
Torres, Representative
Castellano. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I also rise to
introduce my shadow.
Tell the Hill is from my
speakers and his majoring in
political science and New Mexico
Highlands University, Martel
anticipated graduation date is
May 2026 his motivation for
participating in the Legislature
fellowship is to enhance his
knowledge of the inner workings
of government. He intends to
pursue a career within
government and law.
To becoming productive and
positive role model and member
of society and Mr Speaker, his
grandfather, Mr Matt
Sandoval was also our district
attorney and our district judge,
So he's following in some good
footsteps. Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Thank you, gentlemen.
Welcome to the house.
Gentleman gentlelady from Santa
Fair. I don't know if I'm
prepared to do this entirely, Mr
Speaker because I'm a bit sore.
From a winning the basketball
game for the house last night.
Ah!
General lady. Where's the
trophy? That's a great question,
Mr Speaker. I don't think we've
had it delivered yet.
Kids, two trophies and I stand
corrected. The chair will
appoint a committee of four
representative Andrea Romero,
representative Ambrose
Castelvetrano, representative
Lane and representative Vincent
To go get those trophies right
now.
Mr Speaker. I have a question.
General lady, wouldn't it be?
Advisable to have the Senate
bring the trophies over.
Well, it would be. But knowing
the Senate they probably want so
we're gonna have to go take it.
All right, Let's go. Take it.
Let's go.
Alright. Any other announcements
before we do a little
housekeeping generated from
Bentley or presented by the hon?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted
to introduce my two guests who
are on the floor today. Michelle
Sandoval from Los Alamos. She's
a new Mexican native Went to U.
N. M and is serving our state at
the lab. Welcome to the house.
My other guest is Diana Ramirez
And I would like to celebrate
her today because she recently
was one of 12 students from
across the state who was awarded
the prestigious U. N. M region
scholarship.
Wow. Congratulations. Welcome to
the house.
She's a high school senior in
Eldorado. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Eagles,
Naleo. Gracias, Mr Speaker.
Today we celebrate bilingual day
heating the roundhouse. That's
where we have these winners of
this Spanish building. B But you
know, the first time Mr Speaker
that I came to the roundhouse
was a bilingual day many years
ago.
And it's amazing for me to be
here now, and we have some
guests in the gallery also, will
And it's amazing for me to be
here now, and we have some
guests in the gallery. Also,
would you mind introducing this,
Uh, guest for bilingual day
today? We already did, gentle
lady.
Um
Yeah.
We have some high school
students to
Welcome to all the high school
students that are up there for
bilingual day
camera representantes.
Any other announcements. Gentle
lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order Business committee
reports.
I see no objection. It is so
ordered Mr Speaker. Your
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Bill 126
has had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker moved option. We are
an adoption of a favorable
community report on Senate Bill
126. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye supposed me.
Thank you.
Thank you guys have a committee
report Adopted Mr Speaker. Your
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Joint
Memorial two as amended has had
it into consideration reports.
Same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Do you wanna Johnson Chair? Mr
Speaker Move Adoption Adoption
about favorable committee report
on Senate Joint Memorial two as
amended also favors And I would
say nine
Supposed May the eyes have it
Committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred. Senate Rules Committee
Substitute for Senate Joint
Resolution one as amended has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Judiciary Committee
Respectfully submitted. Do you
want to Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker. Movement option
adoption of a favorite coming
report on the Senate Rules
Committee. Substitute percentage
Joint Resolution one as amended.
All those in favor signify by
saying nine.
I'm supposed to say.
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee has been referred
House Bill 142 has had it under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted Jeon
Dress tomorrow Chair. Ms.
Speaker move adoption of the
committee report. Adoption of
favorable community porting
husband 142 All those in favor
say, Nah, I
I was supposed to say.
The maybes heaven.
Yes, I have a community ported
opted. Mr Speaker Education
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial. 20 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted John
dressed remote chair.
Speaker move adoption of the
committee report Adoption of
Federal Community Porterhouse
Memorial $20 Every single thing
I
I suppose me?
The eyes. Have it coming report
adopted? Did he say Roll co
I didn't hear that. I didn't
hear that. Not enough hands.
Mr Speaker. Your Taxation and
Revenue Committee tomb has been
referred Senate tax, business
and Transportation Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 151,
as amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the
Appropriations of Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
directly in the chair.
Mr Speaker. Good morning. Please
move adoption.
Good afternoon.
We are an adoption will
favorable committee report on
Senate Tax and Business and
Transportation Committee 70% of
Bill 151 as amended. All those
in favor signify was saying, I
suppose nay,
Yes, I would. Committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker.
Now being 1159 am I move? We
adjourn until 1201 PM come to
order.
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended in the journal Show
All those present in this
morning session are present in
the afternoon session.
There is objection. It is
ordered Mr Speaker. I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and that the
records show that the journal
has been read in Poland approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
business committee. Objection.
It just ordered happy Saturday,
Everybody Super Bowl Sunday.
Today. It's today at four
o'clock.
We just roll the clock, it's
Sunday.
Can we just roll the clock till
next Thursday? Call it a day.
Gentle lady from Burr, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Disordered members.
We're gonna do a little third
reading now and then we'll break
for committees and come back
this evening to do a little bit
more third reading believe
everybody's got the list of
bills we're going to take today.
Um and we're going to start
with, um
We're gonna start right now,
unless somebody has
announcements.
Is there a trophy yet?
Mr Speaker. They are doing third
reading in the other side of the
chamber. Um
So we were unable to locate but
we did slay the dragon. Mr.
Speaker. We beat them by 12
points, okay?
I'm
Everyone played extremely well
with the utmost integrity, Mr
Speaker, and I really feel like
this victory is one that we can
continue throughout the years.
Excellent teamwork by our house
over here and excellent fans. We
couldn't have done it without
the fans. Mr. Speaker, Um
everything else was truly
amazing, including the
enchiladas after the dinner.
Very good, Good job house.
Although I'm about to send the
generator from Chavez to go get
those trophies.
I think she might just go get
him herself. Mr Speaker. I do
have my fence and players with
me so I can take care of
business over there. I might
need you to do that Gent Lady,
Mr Speaker and Lady from early
Oh, I wanted to congratulate the
team. Everybody was wonderful,
but I'll tell you. The first
goal was scored by
representative Andrea Romero.
She kind of broke open.
And, um, this not to diminish
the contributions of
representative under Estelle
Mato, who's not in the chamber
right now, or representative
Nathan Small, But when Christina
representative constrain them
part of Hong scored hurdle, it
broke the tie and it broke the
dam, and we just went on from
there and never got never got
behind again. I heard little
lane literally through a couple
of elbows at
A couple of senators.
Is that true?
He didn't get caught, Mr
Speaker. Good. That's the way to
do it.
A little blood.
All right.
Your lady from early. Oh,
There's a speaker, I will be
going to the second lady from
Chavez.
Well, Mr Speaker since he is out
of the room, and he told him not
to be a worse over on the Senate
side. That's uh, representative
Vincent. Thank you for sending
him over there, but he can be a
little wishy washy.
But I He wanted me to point out
these bags that are on
everybody's disk.
Ah, and it's Smokey Bear.
Unfortunately, we don't need
these bags, Mr Speaker.
These bags need to be presented
to the U. S. Forest Service.
Maybe they need to understand
what they have done to our
state. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady General
Lady from Berna, Leo.
We got to that order of
business. Mr Speaker, third
reading of legislation,
Objection is ordered is a gentle
lady from Burnley or instead of
hacking every year already an
item 23. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I am. Will you take me to that
point at the record reflect that
all actions surfer Police in
house Bill 141 as amended. Our
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. House
Bill 141 as amended, adjusts and
eliminates the previous
statutory judicial salary
formula and establishes new
salaries for most levels of the
New Mexico judiciary. And with
that we stand for questions I
would first like to, um
Um, introduce my expert to the
body, just Supreme Court of New
Mexico. Chief Justice Shannon
Bacon, you know, debating later
close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I now
move that house Bill 141 as
amended. Do now pass passage of
The
Love boat is now closed by a
vote of 5020 Affirmative zero in
the negative house. Bill 141, as
amended, has duly passed his
house.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana Ready an
item number 36. I am Mr Speaker.
Can you get me to that point at
the record reflect that election
necessary for placing house
Appropriations and finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 196 on final passage has
been taken. It is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Mr. Speaker has a house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
Bill 196.
The the expendable Trust and
fund is an innovative tool, Mr
Speaker and body that will allow
us to spread the surplus that
our state is receiving from oil
production through the rest of
this decade. Mr Speaker. It will
allow us as a legislature and
unprecedented opportunity.
To dedicate
Analyze track.
And hold accountable Our
investments in our different
executive agencies, Mr Speaker
for a time period of three
years in order to make sure that
we have the strongest possible
outcomes for New Mexico, Mr
Speaker and body. This is
A trust fund that with our
initial dedications, which
totaled $216 million, sped over
spread over three years into
really the most. Some of the
most important areas and hardest
to areas to make, Um
Meaningful investments. Mr
Speaker in body It is also Mr
Speaker in body the source of
the grow funds that each
district and each legislature
had the opportunity to
appropriate Mr Speaker body.
Sure, as we go through the
conversation today, the two year
cycle for these grow funds.
That each district received that
each legislator dedicated gives
us a better opportunity to
support evidence based targeted
investments in important areas
all across the state in each and
every district to improve the
lives of New Mexico's citizens,
Mr Speaker body That's roughly
about 108 Point Million $100.8
million. Excuse me.
Of which the executive has
participated.
Mr Speaker body In addition to
the $216 million that I
mentioned that is going into 16
focused program areas, which I'm
sure will get the chance to talk
about today. Um, there's also Mr
Speaker. Body over $500 million
set aside.
In the expendable trust, which
will gain interest gain
investment over the course of
the lifetime of this fund. Mr
Speaker and body giving us the
ability to do the same sort of
innovative pilots and work that
we've done recently or for the
first time this year.
Mr Speaker and body. Um
This is new.
Sometimes you know this is new,
and it is an innovative tool, a
tool that I think will get a lot
of chance to visit about today.
But Mr Speaker body I want to
emphasize a couple of quick
points first.
The legislature, dedicating
appropriations for a pilot
period in this manner gives us
the most ability we've ever had
to, uh, test those investments
to see how they're working to
choose whether or not to make
those investments recurring.
Second Mr Speaker body
Because this is new. Uh, we are
going to work through the
interim on the right set of
expanded accountability
measurements, the right set of
screening criteria to come into
these investments if you will,
because Mr Speaker body this was
an innovative tool that came out
of lfc.
And to be fair, there was not a
lot of time nor ability to
collaborate with a lot of other
partners and a lot of other
stakeholders. So this is a three
year time period for these first
investments for which this
summer will be a critical period
where we get to work on the
accountability in government
Act, the A G A.
To govern not only these
important investments in places
like early childhood education
and care
Office of Family Representation
C Y F D workforce Solutions and
others but to look at the
accountability in Government Act
and the update that for the rest
of our budget
It's been over.
I think it
Safely over 15 years, Mr Speaker
and body since there have been
updates to the accountability in
government act to my knowledge
As we know our budget has grown
substantially, so we think this
is a unique time and the house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute reflects
that opportunity for us to
update the accountability in
government Act and together,
take what is going to be, you
know, anywhere from, say, five.
To 10 Year surplus period of
unprecedented new revenue coming
into the state.
To translate that into a 1015,
perhaps longer period where we
can have steady recurring growth
anywhere in that 5 to 7 to 8%.
Make new targeted investments
every year.
And still say, financially sound
fiscally balanced and to, in
fact, do a better job for the
state of New Mexico. So, Mr
Speaker, I look forward to the
conversation with that and
Sanford questions there is
debate the gentle lady from
Katherine's chiaroscuro.
Valencia represent of Armstrong
and folks can remove their
coats.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman Rondonia no yield
Speaker, I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Catrin,
Socorro, Valencia and Sierra.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I loved
your introduction. I love that
we are. We have an influx of
money, particularly, we would
all say from oil and gas.
Um, we're in some of the best
times of our lives here in the
state of New Mexico, and and I
think we can all agree on that.
But the one thing you mentioned
in there is that this is for
pilot projects and which I know
the list. I've seen the list.
Um, But where? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Does that say this is
for pilot projects in this bill?
Mr Speaker, General Lady the
bill itself sets up. The trust
has a few mechanisms for money
to come into that we've we We've
removed some of that language
around pilot projects. Just the
description Mr Speaker, General
Lady, but in HB two where these
funds are dedicated
That's very clear that on a
three year time period, so for
FY, 2526 and 27
It's there in so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. The three year
period is in HB two.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind.
Gentlemen. For that, Um
Is it? I was questioning this
the other day, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, can we encumber
future legislatures or is or can
we do that? Because the fund is
set up and the money is there,
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Great
question because we've set the
fund up in the way that we are
because we have dedicated that
revenue set it aside for these
future fiscal years.
We can feel very comfortable
that we can do that. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, we can also trust
that the LFC will do a very
rigorous job of analysis. And,
um of course, it was very
strongly influenced by this
summer work on the what came in
this first round a lot of
accountability to come.
And we have the full ability to
do that. Mr. Speaker, General
lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Kind, gentle And I appreciate
that. Um, can you tell me why it
changed from 300 million
To 100 in the previous budget.
It was 300
the new bill. It's
100.
Now.
He Mr Speaker, General Lady.
It's still. Um We split it up by
those three years. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, so instead of a
bulk appropriation, um it's
split up by those years. Mr.
Speaker generally, thank you, Mr
Speaker. Kind gentleman. And how
is this, Uh, money distributed
And who can apply for this
money? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Gentle lady. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. The money
is distributed by through us
through the Legislature. Of
course, we're one of only a few
legislatures where we build our
own budget. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady. This takes that
legislative independence and
authority.
Ah, another sort of another
notch up by saying really after
looking when September when the
agency recurring budgets came
in, it looked at a lot of those
recurring investments and some
of the areas where a pilot and
where three year bulk
appropriation seemed most
appropriate. Um, that's how this
money is distributed so by us,
Mr Speaker, General Lady Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
and can you explain
The accountability in government
Act.
Hmm.
Mr Speaker, General lady, My
expert here and I'm joined, of
course by Charles Sully, the
director of our Legislative
Finance Committee. Also Amanda
Dick Petty. Uh, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. The Accountability
in Government Act sets up a
performance based budgeting
system wherein there is a
measurement on the outputs. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
There's generation of scorecards
and other accountability
measurements to see Mr Speaker,
General Lady if the investments
are accomplishing their purpose.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind,
gentlemen. So in our books that
we receive in in lfc and
appropriations, it shows a
scorecard mechanism is that part
of the Government Accountability
Act? Mr. Speaker, General Lady?
Yes. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Kind. Gentlemen. I am
I just I think everyone doesn't
need me to point this out. But I
think I have kind of
Ranted and raved about this that
there's a lot of entities with
red.
And we're still funding them
fully. And so I think it's our
job to take a closer look at
that and make sure that we are
holding them accountable. We are
the part of the government. We
are part of the process and I
think that we should really take
that too into consideration when
we're making these decisions,
And so I would
Just point out that some of the
pilot projects Mr Speaker Kind
gentleman that are funded.
Um, are all red
Um, I'll point out I'll just
call out one of them. C Y F D
majority of their their
In our books, their majority of
red. So now we have a lump of
funding and I know this. We're
not talking about the funding,
but we have a lump of funding
going into an entity that the
majority has red. So it's a It's
a problem area for me, and I
think for several others in this
body, and so I would hope, Mr
Speaker Kind gentleman that we
are really
Going to be watching that
closely and taking a close look
at that and hope that they come
out of the red and fixing it to
where are we really asking? Mr
Speaker? Kind gentleman. Are we
at really asking the good
questions and and holding them
accountable and the measurements
and I I'm
I think all of us in this body
Would um, would prefer that
measure. And so I appreciate
that We're going to take those
special measures. Um
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. I
wondered why the name change
from the first bill that we saw
to the appropriation, House
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for house
Bill 196. Why the name change?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um,
this again, It's a new This is a
new tool. A new concept. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, In fact,
sort of what I hear secondhand
in particularly the ability to
target and measure investments
over a short but still
substantial period of time.
Sort of nationally leading, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I
explained, I emphasize again
that it's new because I think,
um, that speaks to some of this
evolution the you know from an
accountability
Trust fund to now, the results
and Opportunity fund. There's
continued work to sort of we we
know we agree on the metrics and
we're working to make sure that
the description is as accurate
and points to Mr Speaker General
lady. Exactly what you were
talking about our hope for
improvement. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, we know that we have
A core responsibility of
oversight and that sometimes
that oversight has to be carried
out in a pretty tough manner.
But Mr Speaker, General Lady
taking many of our executive
agencies, perhaps and and one of
the most challenging one of the
most troubled C Y F D, Children,
youth and families
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I can
surmise it for all of us. We
want better results for New
Mexico's kids. We don't want to
exercise sort of thumbs up or
thumbs down. Do you get another
dollar? We want to improve those
outcomes. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, um, that the
opportunity piece of the new
Um
Name. I think really, to me,
sort of speaks to that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman.
I liked the old name better with
accountability. But I'll tell
you, I'll give you that one.
That's okay. Mr Speaker. Kind
gentleman. And so in this
Fund.
What part of this fund and what
part of going out of this fund?
How is that counted as that
counted in reserves is that
counted in recurring? How is
that counted as far as
tabulating House Bill two and
our dollars in the state of New
Mexico?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. General Lady, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, um, for in House
Bill 196, House Appropriations
of Finance Committee.
Substitute Mr Speaker, General
Lady, the corpus that large
amount over $500 million roughly
in that area, Mr Speaker,
General Lady that is counted as
a reserve this year
specifically Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
That is intentionally I think to
draw attention to the fact that
this is an excellent reserved
for the state of New Mexico. Mr.
Speaker, General lady, some of
our other reserve funds in
particular our rainy day fund.
Um
Require extraordinary action to
if there was an economic
downturn, some really negative
unforeseen events.
It would require declaration of
emergency two thirds vote to go
in and to utilize any of that
large and robust reserves, even
though they are counted as
reserves. Mr Speaker General
Lady. In contrast, this
expendable trust will be there
by much easier. So that's why Mr
Speaker, General Lady
The reserve portion. Why it's
counted there, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, um, it is not
counted as recurring spending.
Uh, simply because Mr Speaker,
General Lady, it's for a short
time period. It's to see how
this works to do pilot projects
for several years to focus on
hard to solve problems. Mr
Speaker, General Lady
In some cases, maybe to help
staff up licensor for social
workers. For example, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, That's
uh, that's sort of a
A feature not a bug of this
because, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, uh, we can't continue to
grow our budgets in the way that
we have the last several years.
Not this year. Of course, this
year. We're in that 6 to 7%
growth from recurring spending,
Mr Speaker, General lady, even
though our revenue continues to
come in
Well above our expenditures if
we were to grow recurring
budgets at that 10, plus percent
level, we and +234 years could
see ourselves in real danger of
having to sort of cap that
growth. Not again, for instance,
being able to say, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, we want to make
new investments in new places.
We want to
Ray do pay our early childhood
educators more. For instance, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. So
instead of putting the this
funding and recurring based
funding where a it is very
difficult to pull back be, it's
very hard to track to see where
that dollar went. What it did
the judge that outcome
Mr Speaker, General Lady. This
gives us the best of both of
those. It gives us funding for
several years to solve problems.
It gives us a quick ability to
analyze whether or not and how
that's working. And then Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
the strong sense is that the
investments that are performing
at the highest level doing the
best work
Those. Perhaps we can put into
recurring spending at a much
lower level, so you know we'll
see whether that's 10% of what
this is whether it's less than
that, whether it's slightly
more Mr Speaker, General Lady
will have to wait and see. But
Detailed answer to a great
question. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Kind, Gentlemen. So out of the
500, plus million that is going
into this expendable.
Trust.
How much have we encompassed or
encumbered in the pilot
projects?
If any of the 500 million Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Great
question None.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
Gentleman. So where
In in the pilot projects. Where
is that money sitting right now?
Hmm.
The money that we have, um,
allocated
To these pilot projects over the
next two years. I believe
That our in house bill two
Uh, where is that money sitting
now?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. It's
in a
It's a general fund transfer to
the program fund in the
expendable trust Mr Speaker,
General Lady similar to Land of
enchantment, Mr Speaker, General
Lady that has sort of the corpus
and then the program fund. The
program fund is where or the
different entities draw from.
That's the same mechanism here,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
General. I appreciate that,
because I wanted to make sure
We weren't counting
Recurring, even though it's not
Labeled recurring. It is going
to be for the next two or three
years into that pilot project. I
wanted to make sure we weren't
counting that as our reserves.
And we're not correct. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, you're
absolutely correct. We are not
counting that as our reserves.
Okay? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Kind Gentleman and surprise. I
have an amendment.
I said that last time Mr
Speaker, and my amendment
passed, so I was just hoping for
good luck.
We'll see if it pans out.
Give us a minute, lady. Well,
The gentle lady to read the 2 to
8 number, please.
Thank you, Speaker. Uh, thank
you, Mr Speaker. The number is 2
to 8 to 74.1 very well, gentle
lady that has been passed out.
Will you kindly explain the
amendment? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, what this amendment
does is puts everything back
into the bill.
The original bill that we saw it
puts all the guardrails back in
it. Names specifically says that
this is for pilot projects.
And ultimately, uh,
implementing, um
implementations.
Or action plans for the pilot
projects. They shall include all
the milestones, targeted dates
and full implementations so
basically puts it back the way
it was with all the guardrails.
Alright gentlemen from Dona Ana,
Is this a friendly amendment, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I fear
that it's not quite friendly. Mr
Speaker. Generally, I do want to
ask some questions, though. If I
might, Mr Speaker, please go
ahead. Great. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
um to your knowledge
Did any agencies have where they
part of developing what was in
the original bill, and what is
in your substitute?
Or in your amendment. Excuse me.
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. I'm
not sure because it was your
bill.
To begin with, So I have no
idea they must Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I guess a
different question. Did we have
any LFC hearings over the summer
prior to development of this
fund where we had agencies that
came before us and we said,
we're going to create a new
Expendable trust. We want your
input on what the what? What
goes? What goes in there? No, Mr
Speaker Kind. Gentlemen. Um, we
did not. This was an lfc
generated idea.
And, uh, but no, not that. I
remember. No, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker General
Lady II two. That's that's my
memory as well. And Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I think while this
is such an exciting, innovative
and positive tool that one
component, Mr Speaker, General
lady that there weren't agencies
that sort of had
The usual chance to sit at a
table and be part of that
process, mainly just because of
time is one reason it's not
friendly. Mr Speaker, General
Lady also Mr Speaker, General
Lady this year, we did some new
things, particularly with the
grow funds for each member
district that includes being
able for members to dedicate
funding.
To Akagi and local governments.
Would you agree, Mr Speaker?
Generally? Yes, Mr Speaker.
Kind, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
And so the fact that we're
working with cogs more building
on great work from others in
this chamber, they would be
subject to these same
requirements. Would you agree,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Yes, Mr Speaker. Kind,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
That's definitely one of my
readings as well. That's perhaps
one of the biggest challenges
and the biggest reasons that we
sort of need to sort of go back
and work together on all of the
accountability measures on the
output and also the the input
because Mr Speaker, General Lady
It's so great that we're funding
costs, making new ways to invest
in local communities, but they
definitely weren't at the table.
We've asked them to come to the
table, and I fear that they
They could not sort of work with
these guidelines as they are.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady.
They would definitely, um, sort
of not be able to go within the
valuation timelines. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Those are my two rain reasons
for for deeming this unfriendly.
Um, but I very much appreciate
And yeah, those are the two main
reasons Mr Speaker, General Lady
that funds that each member each
district has in many cases, I
think positively going to cogs
and to support local
communities.
Those contests. Those local
entities, along with our
agencies haven't had that chance
to sit at the table where we
will have that chance this
summer, and we don't want to
sort of do a big positive step
out of the gate that then ends
up really sort of hamstringing
folks and getting folks caught
up in noncompliance. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. Sounds
like we have an unfriendly
amendment debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Curry whether loop
Colfax hiding San Miguel and
Union.
Scratch the weather. Lupe
represented Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. That's
Jeremy pandering. I got lost
Guadalupe, but that's still
there's still my friend.
Um
There's a general lady. Hell
yes, I yield Mr Speaker.
So, uh,
Mr Speaker. I do still have some
of them quite a little bit.
The lady.
Is it 500,000 or when you add it
up is a little more than
500,000. That's in this fun.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman's 500
Million Plus 500,500 million. Is
it not a little closer to 800
million?
When you pull it all together.
Mr Speaker. Kind. Gentlemen. If
we add back in what we funded in
the the pilot projects that
would be
There you go.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
gentle lady. How much of that is
going to the cogs?
Mr Speaker Kind Gentleman. Zero
How much of that is going
through the cogs?
Mr Speaker Kind Gentleman. Zero
So the concern with oversight Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady wouldn't be
with the cogs.
Mr Speaker. Kind. Gentlemen. I
would agree with that statement
As far as I'm concerned the
original bill.
At which is my amendment,
Putting back together. The
original bill doesn't really
have anything to do with cogs.
Ah!
I'm not sure. I think that was
the grow money, but it doesn't
have to do with this.
Particular fund. So, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady that is also
That is also
My take on it.
Ah!
Mr Speaker.
General lady.
I like the bill when it had
oversight.
These are supposedly pilot
projects.
And I believe whenever you have
a pilot project
That you should have more
intense scrutiny.
Um
So
I saw the bill.
What? One day and then a few
days later, I saw it, and it had
most of the oversight scratched
out which
Kind of
I lost my
Enthusiasm.
Because just safer for the bill
because
If
I understand that maybe some of
the agencies weren't at the
table.
But I also understand that some
of the agencies that were intend
to help with us maybe have had
some problems in the past, and
maybe you might need a little
more intense scrutiny.
And, uh,
So oversight, I think is very
key to the success of some
Of a project like this, and I
appreciate your amendment that
puts that oversight back in.
And, uh,
I, That's mostly what I have to
say.
And Mr Speaker. Colfax, Curry,
Harding Quay, Sam McGill in
Union and, uh, not Guadalupe.
You're correct. I did. I did
lose brutality last time,
though.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen from Colfax,
sweetheart in Queensland, Miguel
and Union. I appreciate you and
formally send him again
generated from McKinley
Lindstrom on the amendment.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady you
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield. Thank
you, gentle lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, I'm trying to get
my, um brain around some of
this. I haven't been in any of
the hearings, but it does seem
incredibly strange to me that
almost $1 billion set aside for
pilot projects.
Purported to alleviate poor
performance with state agencies
doesn't have any directive.
Ah, that
Is unbelievable, but I may be
wrong. Maybe there are some
guidelines here. Could you
explain what is in the current
version? Since I don't have it
in front of me?
Mr Speaker, Kind lady in the
current version. It says that
certain agencies will get
together and entities will get
together and work on that. I
believe
You're talking. The current
bill. Is that correct? Madam's
Mr Speaker. Kind Lady. Mr
Speaker. That would be correct.
When I'm looking at your
amendment and discussing the
amendment.
I'm trying to figure out what
we're trying to amend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
lady. Um, what was in the
original bill is there was a lot
of oversight. There was a lot of
it actually specifically said
pilot projects in the new bill.
It doesn't specifically say that
it's for pilot projects. Mr
Speaker, Kind Lady. And then the
oversight in the new bill is in
Section four.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady. It
sounds like there was a couple
versions of this bill and the
bill bill that you are amending
is a revision to the original.
Yes, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady.
That's what my I'm trying to get
to Mr Speaker because I saw the
original, which had all these
things in it, which I thought
were incredibly important,
particularly with the kind of
money that's being allocated to
this. It seemed like it was
Fine.
I just don't understand, Um why
it would be taken out.
It seems to me, Mr Speaker and
General Lady that accountability
should be at the forefront.
I'm very familiar. Mr Speaker in
general Lady with what those
report cards look like
I'm very familiar with with what
performance based budgeting.
Does.
I'm very familiar with what it's
like to try to.
Coordinate with state agencies
and setting up their performance
measures.
But what I have found
consistently over 20 years, Mr
Speaker General Lady wants
agency does have a poor
performance. There's very little
that the Legislature can do.
So my question is on your
amendment. Would this strengthen
the ability for the Legislature
to actually take action?
Ah, if an agency is is poorly
performing.
Um, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady. I
believe that it could I believe
that it would be informative
with all the reporting that is
required, uh, in the original
bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I know from
personal experience, it's
incredibly difficult.
For a citizen Legislature to
have the continued oversight.
Ah, you might get committee
reports and that kind of thing,
but
What we're asking for in this
kind of accountability program
is
The oversight to come from the
agency that's actually
conducting the work.
And that is something once we
get into the bill unless the
sponsor a little bit more about
But at least if you are the
executive agency say it's DFA or
whoever that is responsible for
making sure that these things
happen.
Along with LFC.
At least you have some guide
guidance. So from my
perspective, Mr Speaker in
General Lady, I absolutely think
we need accountability measures.
I'm not. I have not been part of
any of the discussion for all of
these that are listed here, but
I do believe without question.
You need accountability
measures. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentle lady Debate.
The gentle lady from Bern, Elio,
Representative Dixon. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentle lady
from all of those counties
yield? Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
Thank you. Um, I I to really
appreciate, um, accountability
in government. I think it is
fundamental to what we do here
in the Legislature, particularly
on house appropriations. And,
you know, I think we've had some
some good leadership on that,
Um, question for you.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Oh, in when house built to comes
back from the Senate. Can you
tell me where all of the member
grow projects will be?
Mr Speaker. Kind Lady. I believe
it's section 1112 13.
I can't remember Mr Speaker,
General Lady. Actually, it's
Section nine.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady,
um, House, Bill? Uh, 196 if I'm
not mistaken, applies to Section
nine. Is that correct?
Um Madam, Mr. Speaker, Kind
Lady. Where does it say that it
applies to Section nine in the
bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady in house built
to Section nine is contingent on
house Bill 196.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
Lady. I believe this bill.
Um
Or in in in Section nine, where
those projects are
Um, this bill
That we're speaking about now
just creates that fund and
That's the way I understand it,
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. Um,
unfortunately, everything in
Section nine
Would be covered by the
contingency for house Bill 196,
Which means Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. All of the member projects
that are not going to agencies
or that are going to agencies
but also we're going to cogs.
Would need to, um, follow this
entire procedure as well.
Um, Madam, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, The Grow money is not a
pilot project. I'm referring to
just the pilot projects.
In Section nine.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, Um
We're pretty confident that the
contingency language does apply
to everything in Section nine.
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. I believe
my amendment only applies to
those pilot projects.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Your
amendment seems to me to simply
be putting back in what was
removed and Mr Speaker, General
Lady, it was removed because the
cogs cannot handle the
requirements that would be
instituted as a result of this.
Um, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady. I, um
Believe
That I'm really only putting
back in what I what was
originally in the bill.
To set guardrails for the
Pilot projects. I understand
what you're saying that Section
nine includes the grow money.
Uh huh. And possibly the cogs,
But Mr Speaker, Kind lady. We've
had information about the kind
of money that we might be
receiving, Uh, majority from oil
and gas, and we
Should have been making these
decisions way before four or
five days left and
Making sure that we can
implement something that is
going to be that has guardrails.
Even the you know the grow
money. I think, Mr Speaker, Kind
lady. The only reason that we're
talking about the grow money is
because it was taken. I don't I
really don't believe that This
is part of the pilot projects.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, Um
I think that that is correct
that when lfc um
Drafted this bill, um, and was
endorsed by Lfc. Um
Interesting. You know the grow
money or not, junior money was
not included.
Unfortunately, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady, the way that it is
put in house built to
It is included and
You know, there are many
wonderful member projects that
are running through our councils
of government. But
The, um
What would be required of them
is simply unmanageable.
And so
They had requested. You know, as
part of their being able to
manage the funds, they cannot
accommodate this.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind Lady
will I would suggest we go to
the Senate and move it to a
different section.
Thank you. Mr Spent Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Unfortunately, I am being told
that the Senate has already
passed their final drafting
instructions.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
Lady. I understand the concern,
but I'm I I also understand that
we need guardrails.
This is
In just the pilot projects
alone. It's $216 million.
And in my opinion, with no
guardrails were in Mr Speaker.
Kind Lady. We're saying we're
going to work together and I
have full confidence that we can
work together.
But why would we put this kind
of money out with no guardrails?
And Mr Speaker. Kind, lady. You
know, I wish that, um, for some
reason, I didn't understand that
when we were in our hearing
whenever it was all the days are
running together that
The Kagy money, the grow money
that has gone to cogs is part of
this bill. I did not understand
it to be that way when it was
presenting whether I missed it
or not, or or maybe it wasn't
revealed. I'm not sure.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, with reference
to the other monies that are
included in Section nine. The
House worked with the Senate to
incorporate guardrails in those
programs in those
appropriations.
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. I
appreciate that. But do you have
a copy?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I do not have
a copy. But when the bill comes
over from the Senate, we will be
able to see those. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Kind Lady. I I really
appreciate that. But we are
hearing this bill now.
And so we're passing legislation
and law.
Before we actually know what the
guardrails are, and it's just
concerning to me, Mr. Speaker,
Kind lady. I really do
appreciate that there to know
that that's in there.
Um
But I have not seen it. And
right now we're just talking
about
This bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Um, I I certainly um
I agree with you about the need
for guardrails and
accountability and one of the
things that I think are
Legislative Finance committee
staff does particularly well is
provide members with
Um regular updates and
information program evaluations.
We've talked about the report
cards, so that is members we can
monitor progress and you know in
one of the benefits, um
Of the bill, and I realize I'm
The
Speaking about the bill.
As
And how the amendment may be
affected. Um, is to provide us
with an opportunity to re assess
the effectiveness of programs.
Um So I do think that
You know it is important to
continue to have the opportunity
to work with our legislative
finance committee. But also this
is an opportunity for us to
really re evaluate the entire
way that we do accountability
measurements, um in in
government here, And so while I
do appreciate the amendment, I
think it is very well
intentioned. I don't think that
it is actually what we want to
do.
Today with this bill, and so, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Unfortunately, I cannot support
the amendment. Thank you.
Okay on the amendment debate,
the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the general
lady from CA Tron and
Several counties yield, please.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Miss Baker, General Lady.
When the transparency around
this piece of legislation
Hmm. Is
Fairly opaque.
I mean, what
Is on the actual Internet
website is five pages of nothing
more.
Then setting up the fund.
It was only after
I started making some inquiries
that I discovered.
That there were
A number of allocated
Projects.
That this fund was going to
support.
Over three year period.
And Mr Baker, General Lady.
Sort of you this without these
guardrails, not as
Government accountability
legislation.
But as an omnibus spending bill.
Is that an accurate
representation?
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman.
That's why I'd like to put the
guardrails back on.
So, yes, I believe so.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I'm
looking down through this list
that I have here.
And, uh,
We're looking at one of them
here.
Where we
I'm going to say absolutely
don't understand this one, and
that's differential response
statewide with years two through
three
Contingent upon approval of the
state.
Federal family first.
I have no idea what that is.
Can you could you explain?
Oy! This have not been
individually vetted. There's
some substantial numbers in
here. Some of these expenditures
toddle up $60 million
For if one for educator,
clinical practice programs what
it not have been appropriate to
have this programs individually
vetted.
Before we
Before we put them into a multi
$100 million piece of
legislation that
Really? Nobody is taking a look
at outside of appropriations. I
think
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. I
cannot speak to if these
Items on this list were vetted.
I'm sure that they were. I'm
assuming Mr Speaker kind in one
that they were asked from the
agency that
Uh, appropriation, leadership
and others and lfc decided to
put under the pilot project to
see if it would work to see if
it's a good idea. And Mr Speaker
Kind gentleman. That's why I
want to put the guardrails back
on so that we can see and hold
accountable and fix some of
these things that are on this
list.
Uh, if it's working, then we
want to put it in their
recurring budget If it's not
working, then
We don't want to do that.
Mr Speaker in general lady who's
Mr Speaker in general lady who
is primarily responsible for
executing the will of the
Legislature. Is that not
Are those administrative
functions within the purview of
the governor's office.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman. Lfc
is a big part of that is our
legislatures oversight?
But Mr Speaker and General Lady
only oversight, not the actual
execution of the program.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman.
Correct.
Okay?
Looks to me like guardrails.
Around hundreds of millions of
dollars of expenditures directed
toward programs that have proven
Failing.
In recent history looks like the
least we could do.
And I would very much prefer to
see these come out as individual
budget requests or pieces of
legislation that could be
vetted.
Rather than
Trying to
Except all of them.
At one at one pass. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you,
gentle lady. Gentlemen. There's
further debate on the amendment.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady from Sikora yield
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you.
Speaker and general Lady.
The process that this uh, the
underlying bill came through
through, um
Through Legislative Finance
Committee during the interim
Has some very specific
Parameters.
These seem to be a not the exact
same parameters in your
amendment.
Ah, Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman.
Uh, the it was. Ideas evolved
out of lfc and and the the
original bill is what
Came out of that what was
brought in the beginning. So
thank you, Mr Speaker In General
80. There's been a couple of
questions about
Whether this would harm the
cogs.
Ms Speaker, and generally there
was some question as to whether
or not the cogs would be able to
comply. Also, there was some
some questions as well on debate
on on this amendment that we
don't want to be prescriptive
and that the agencies haven't
had a chance.
To have any input, but I'm
reading your amendment on Page
two.
Item seven.
And let her be and it states
here. The committee
In consultation with the
division.
And the agency administering a
pilot program Shell developed
performance measures.
So, um, ms Speaker and gentle
lady that did appear to be the
reason that it was stated that
this was unfriendly because
there's not been an opportunity
for the agencies.
To be able to have input.
But I'm reading right here.
That we're not that you're not
being prescriptive.
The way that the original bill
that was endorsed by Lfc was
very prosperous, prescriptive.
As a matter of fact, it
mentioned all of the projects
and then it listed how they were
going to be.
How oversight would take place
over those particular, uh, pilot
projects.
But even if this
Even if now, this would apply to
cause I guess.
All I'm seeing here is that
you're stating that we need to
have
In place.
The very guardrails that that
are going to be
The very guardrails that are
going to be developed. All
you're doing here is saying
let's develop the guardrails.
You're not even saying what they
are yet.
But you're saying
That process would take place
that rather than just
Assuming that that's going to
happen. You're saying that it
will happen.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman? Yes,
And that only
Um, applies to the pilot
projects.
Yes, Mr Speaker in General lady.
I'm looking at that as well. I'm
reading all of this is referring
to the pilot projects.
And
Um, but even if, even if somehow
the cogs were to be wrapped up
in this
No, even if even if it were to
be decided by someone that the
cogs were wrapped up in this
It says here that
Whatever the in consultation
with whoever it is the division.
Or the agency.
That whatever those measures
would be. I cannot imagine that
we would be consulting with that
with the cost us to put a high
bar on just getting money out
the door to all the projects
that have already been vetted.
It's just a pass through of
money through the cogs, so I do
not. I don't believe that's a
valid
Argument here, but
Madam speaker, and generally I
am not going to belabor the
point, but, uh
I understand that
What was presented in Lfc this
year.
It was presented to us with very
specific guardrails.
And this
Amendment before us
Is not saying
Quite all of those guardrails
will be specifically but that
they will be developed.
And a timeline for doing so.
So let me let me repeat. I think
you were distracted there a bit.
No, That's fine. Miss Speaker
Gentlelady, Um
That what you put what is in
this amendment is less
prescriptive.
Less prescriptive than what was
in the original bill.
But it says that they will be
developed and that's rather than
Just assuming that these
guardrails will be developed.
You are stating that they will
be developed in consultation
with those
The department's Mr Speaker.
Kind gentleman? Yes. So, Mr
Speaker in General 80, based on
The sponsors initial
Discussion that they will be
developed.
I think all you're asking for us
to have that in writing.
And for that I will support your
amendment.
Right? Actually from Borloo, Mr
Speaker. I moved to table House
floor Amendment number one.
Okay. I please kindly members.
If you want to debate, please.
You've gotta I'm usually pretty
good about looking around the
room.
I did not see your raise your
microphone, but I'll go ahead
and allow more debate, please.
Gentlemen, generally from
Eddy and Lea represent Brown.
Yes. Thank you so much. Mr.
Speaker. I guess I need to be
more animated. Um, so, Mr
Speaker, I would ask that The
lady from Katherine Sierra,
Sakura and Valencia, please
Yield. Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the Lady from Eddy and Lea.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
Lady.
So, um, I believe I heard a few
minutes ago that if this bill
does not pass, there's some
concern that
Legislators will not have grown
money or junior money as we also
call it.
Um So, Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I have been reading House
Bill two and three. The
combination bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I see
no reference at all to grow
money in Section nine of the
bill.
So, um, I'm if someone would
like to point out to me where it
is, I would be open to that. But
I've scanned it a couple of
times and I don't see it there
so
I just want to, um
Ask you if you would agree with
me that, um as far as you know,
General Lady Mr Speaker that
grow money is not listed in
Section nine of House Bill.
Two and three.
Uh, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady. As
passed by the house. I would
agree with you. Okay. Thank you.
I just wanted to clarify that
point.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Gentle lady
for burning Leo.
Mr. Speaker. I moved to table
House floor Amendment number one
remembers. We're on the motion
to table House floor amendment
number one to House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
Bill 196. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye. Suppose
name.
The ice habit House. Remember
number one is tabled.
Gentle lady from Katherine
Supporter Valencian Sierra. You
still have the floor. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Um And I'd like to
thank the kind gentleman. Uh,
for all the work that he did
with this and trying to get all
of the ducks in a row, But I
believe this duck is swimming
out of control. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. There is further debate
The gentle lady from Bernard Leo
representative Dixon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Dona Ana Yield Mr
Speaker, I yield to the general
lady from burning Leo.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um
So one of the reasons Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, that this is
a novel approach is because
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we are
not simply adding new recurring
programs for executive agencies
into their base budgets based
recurring budgets. Is that
correct, Mr Speaker, General
Lady That's absolutely correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Why? Why is that so important,
Don't we? Don't we know how each
and every program performs
within an agency once it's put
in there
Mr Speaker, General Lady we want
to know to the best ability
possible. Mr Speaker, General
Lady with the most detailed
possible, But Mr Speaker,
General Lady, our performance
measures even when their program
by program it is very difficult
to decipher or two, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Even describe in all cases.
where that all of the dollars
are flowing much less. Mr
Speaker, General Lady to have
the accurate measurement of the
return on that investment, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
When we're in a time where we
have so so that is, in fact, it
is very difficult to decipher
exactly what you describe Mr
Speaker, General Lady,
especially Mr Speaker, General
Lady when we've seen the very
large, uh, you know,
historically increased
increases and investments that
we've recently had Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
These were necessary They've
been supported and abroad
Fashion. But Mr Speaker, General
lady getting down to the detail
of how those new dollars are
either solving problems in New
Mexico or not, is actually quite
difficult when we're just
looking at the recurring budget.
Thank you, Mr Madam Speaker and,
uh, gentlemen, so along those
lines, one of the
Reasons that I can seed
This approach being beneficial,
Mr Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
is because, um
Of how difficult it can be to
remove
Recurring funding from an
agency.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
would agree wholeheartedly with
you, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
um, going back to those
agencies, You know money, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it's
oftentimes either in personnel
or contracts, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and so removing
those dollars, particularly in
personnel means cutting
positions within agencies. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Um, And so it is quite difficult
when you have this sort of
overall aggregate that goes into
a recurring budget difficult at
times, although not impossible
to discern and to work to judge
impact, But Mr Speaker, general
Lady very difficult and very,
very hard to
Uh, pull back or even Mr
Speaker, General Lady to
rededicate funding within an
agency to say, Mr Speaker,
General lady instead of
personnel. We want to focus on
another area. Mr Speaker,
General Lady that can take years
and oftentimes there is not
agreement on rededicating funds
much less
Uh, dedicating funds from one
agency to another.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And could you
remind me? Um, if we are funding
these new pilot programs for how
many years Madam Speaker General
Lady from Benaglio, We're
funding these programs for three
years Madam Speaker and General
lady and for the grow
distributions.
The member those district
distributions, Madam Speaker,
General lady that are also part
of this trust what will come
back to us from the Senate.
Those are for two years and so
in each case, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, I think it's we're
taking a positive step forward,
having a not just a, you know,
one and done sort of approach.
But a focus targeted several
year investment and inability.
Madam Speaker General Lady for
us to Really, uh to the best,
probably better than we have
before determine the weather.
Those investments are working
and what way they are, etcetera.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, and so is three years
of fish in time. Will we be able
to gauge the effectiveness of
some of these programs? Will we
be able to monitor how they're
performing and if they are
achieving the outcomes that they
have set forth?
Madam Speaker, General Lady, You
know this is a new step. It's a
new concept. But Madam Speaker
General Lady the three year time
horizon gives us I think more
time than we have in other ways
to do this focused analysis.
Madam Speaker, General Lady All
of the measurement all of the
accountability
All of the program of valuation
that is essentially a one of the
two core functions of our
Legislative finance committee
will be applying to these, uh,
these investments. So Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I think
that it is. I think that we can
have confidence that we will
have measurable results.
And Trans Madam speaker, general
lady that do tell us with more
detailed than we've had before.
Whether our investments are
working, helping in the ways
that we intend them to help.
Madam Speaker, General Lady or
not.
Madam speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I really appreciate this
process. Um, you know, I'm sure
that there are many different
ways that we could you know,
Test pilot projects and and see
how how they're being done. But
given Madam Speaker and
gentlemen that we know
That we have been increasing our
recurring budgets and we want to
make sure that we are doing that
at a sustainable amount. And
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, we
also know that
Um, the state's revenue is
heavily dependent on oil and
gas. And so that may change in
coming years. I think that this
is an exceptionally responsible
step.
Um, that
You know, the Legislative
finance Committee developed, um
and has brought to you and is
being incorporated in our
budget. So thank you for that,
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
One other item I wanted to touch
on is the
The concept or the issue of
Having the time to reevaluate
the accountability in government
Act. Um, Madam speaker,
gentlemen. When is the last time
that we really had an overhaul
of how we do that?
Hmm.
Madam Speaker, General Lady from
Braulio here and with my expert,
Um, Madam Speaker, General Lady,
the core function the program of
valuation portion. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, the
report cards that we spoke about
earlier. Madam Speaker, General
Lady. Those haven't been
adjusted.
Ah, for over two decades is what
I'm being told. Madam Speaker,
General Lady. We have added some
components. But Madam speaker
general Lady think the question
that each of us In fact, every
new Mexican has particularly
Madam Speaker General lady when
we're able to make new
investments that have not been
possible in our past.
Whether and how that's working
the approach to that sort of
structurally for that
measurement hasn't been updated
in over two decades.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And I think that
the accountability in government
act is just it's so fundamental
and important to how the
Legislature appropriates money.
And so I appreciate the fact
that
This coming interim, both the
executive and the Legislature
will have time to really do a
deep dive and figure out how we
can improve the process.
So, um, Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen. Thank you very much
for answering some of those
questions and talking through
this bill with me. I appreciate
it.
Thank you Generally.
Next. We have the gentle lady
from
Eddy and Lea, representative
Brown.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentleman from Dona Ana,
please yield, Madam Speaker, I
gladly yield to the General lady
from Eddy and Lea.
Thank you so much, gentlemen. So
Madam speaker and gentlemen and
members
When I saw the original bill
again, the committee substitute
is is quite for a field from
that. I believe, But when I saw
the original bill, I was
actually kind of excited because
it looked to me like this was
truly an innovative step for the
Legislature.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Um, this is one of those times
where I thought somebody was
really thinking outside the box,
and the idea was to propose some
pilot projects for funding so we
could evaluate them their pilot
projects.
And Madam speaker. The idea
there was that instead of just
giving money to an agency and
building a bigger based budget
for that agency, What we would
be doing is
Specifying some pilot projects
in giving the funding with the
understanding that
The project would be evaluated
and would be subject to
identified criteria and I
thought, Well, that's that's
true accountability. Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
So, um
I think there's a lot of wisdom
and not growing a based budget.
Um and and doing this approach
instead.
But as has already been stated,
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
The committee substitute is not
a whole lot like the original
bill.
And I think we need to amplify a
little bit. Madam speaker what
the concerns are along that
those lines.
In the original bill, we we saw
things that really had merit.
And I believe the beauty and
charm of the original bill. I m
not the committee substitute.
Was that it really spelled out
some very reasonable criteria.
So we saw the word pilot
project, which implies it's kind
of a test case.
We saw that the person wanting
that do have one of these
projects would have to specify
with the purposes of it.
There would have to be a working
hypothesis or theory of change.
Or why else would we attempted?
Um Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
There would need to be a
justification expressed of need.
Describing the problem and the
proposed solution.
And so also in just a few more
things to mention here, Madame
Speaker Gentlemen, also that the
specific activities meant to be
achieved and the expected
outcomes and I think that's all
very valuable information that
really goes to oversight.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
There's also language here that
talks about evidence based
Research based there had to be
an action plan.
Laid out there had to be
milestones to measure by Madame
Speaker in General Lady I love
this phrase. It was supposed to
be a Fidelity plan.
Sticking to the original
purpose.
Of the project. Also, madam
speaker, Gentlemen, there's
reference to measurement and
evaluation plan.
And outcome measures truly need
to have those performance
measures again. The word
evaluation looking at baseline
data.
And then the original also
specified that
There would be audits. In
addition to evaluations of the
pilot project.
So, um
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I I
think the committee substitute
is a step away from goodness
because we really do want to
have strong oversight over these
pilot projects.
And has, as has been stated, Uh
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um
A lot of money is in view here.
It's a lot of money. I've heard
different numbers. It's kind of
vacillating a little bit, but
maybe upwards of
$700 million or something like
that. It seems like I said, it's
fluctuated a bit so
I think I think the people of
New Mexico Madam speaker,
gentlemen.
I would love to see this in its
original form.
Because of the accountability.
And the transparency and again
because it's innovative, so
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I'd
like to turn to page two of the
committee substitute.
Starting at line 12.
Hmm.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen,
It's kind of an interesting
section of the bill. In my
opinion.
And it basically says that on
July 1st of 2025, so not this
year, but the coming year
And July 1st of each year
thereafter it distribute
distribution shall be made from
the government results in
opportunity, Expendable Trust to
the government Results in
Opportunity Program fund.
In the first chunk of money that
would come out. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen is 25%.
And then, um, it says it
provided if the balance of the
trust is less than $100 million
The balance of the trust shall
be distributed.
And then it goes on to say,
Madam Speaker that for fiscal
year 25 any unexpended or
unencumbered balance?
Remaining after the distribution
is made, shall be included in
the calculation of state
reserves. So, Madam speaker
gentlemen, there's some thinking
there, but the point I would
really like to make here, Madame
Speaker and gentlemen.
This isn't really a trust.
This is a fund.
With a spending plan.
But as we all know, trust is a
financial term that is
universally accepted. It means
Madam Speaker There's a chunk of
money. There's a corpus.
And the idea of a trust is to
preserve the corpus and then use
interest income.
For spending purposes, however,
designated and so
In my opinion, this is a
misleading term.
And I do have a little something
to read out of our state
constitution.
Madam speaker.
And this is in article for
section 16. It says the subject
of every bill shall be clearly
expressed in its title.
And I believe Madam speaker
gentleman that clearly expressed
to also means accurately.
So because of that, madam
speaker and gentlemen, I would
like to propose an amendment.
And I will ask to have that
distributed. Please.
But I do ask for a roll call
vote on the amendment.
Give us one minute National lady
while we have the amendment
passed out
Madam speaker. Do we have a roll
call? Granted, you have a roll
call vote. Thank you.
Can you please read out the two?
Yes, Madam Speaker. The number
is 0.228287 0.1.
Generally need to explain the
amendment. Madam Speaker, I
believe it hasn't been passed
out fully yet. Apologies,
General lady will wait a little
longer.
We thought everyone had it.
Okay, General lady now to
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Um
Oh,
I guess we're still waiting.
Madam speaker, they're making
more copies.
Alright, General ladies to
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, So I hope
this is deemed a friendly
amendment because it is intended
to be one of those, and this is
just too
Place where it says trust.
Strike that word and insert and
Luther of the word fund, and it
happens several times throughout
the bill, and that's really what
this amendment does. Um, Madam
Speaker, I think we owe it to
The people we represent that we
We use terms of art like trust
correctly, And as I said
earlier, um Madam chair. This is
just clarifying what this really
is. So thank you, Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Is this
a friendly amendment? Madam
Speaker? It is not a friendly
amendment. I'd like to briefly
explain why if I might
Go ahead, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker General Lady in
the bill before us, uh, it
clearly says that it's creating
the government results an
opportunity. Expendable Trust,
Miss Madam Speaker, General
lady, Um and then it talks about
the program fund. Madam Speaker,
General Lady, the Expendable
Trust.
Is accurate and important. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, uh, the
expendable trust it will
generate more income, not as
much as a permanent trust fund.
But Madam Speaker, General Lady,
it will generate income and
Madam Speaker General Lady we
say expendable trust because
Were at a unique moment in time.
Madam Speaker, General lady
where we have these new revenues
coming in, we don't wish to
necessary in because we're
looking at some new programming.
Madam Speaker, General Lady
these pilot projects and Madam
Speaker General Lady attempts to
sort of
Over a short amount of time make
a whole lot of progress. Madam
Speaker General Lady It's not
intended to be forever the
current revenue situation we're
in now, Madam Speaker, General
Lady we know won't last forever
as in, but Madam Speaker,
General Lady, the expendable
trust, which is an accurate I
believe an accurate term.
It will generate interest on
that $500 million that's not
encumbered for either any of
these 16 pilot projects or the
the grow member and executive
distributions that last for two
years that is unencumbered
money. It will generate revenue
and income. And so I think,
Madam Speaker generally we very
much appreciate.
Your amendment and your reasons
why, but I don't think that it's
necessary. Madam speaker, gentle
lady. And in fact, um this is a
bit of a hybrid. A bit of a new
step forward. That is very
appropriate. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Is there any debate on the
amendment?
The representative from Lee.
Representative Scott. Thank you,
Madam Speaker Will the general
lady from Eddy and Lea. Yield,
please.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
yield to the gentleman who is my
neighbor.
Madam speaker, general Lady.
I just looked up the definition.
the legal definition of the word
trust I trust.
You can put do a better job
explaining that and I can would
you please do so
Madam speaker and gentlemen. So
trust is an amount of money
that's held.
Interest the ideas that the
corpus will be protected.
The idea is that it will be
invested and that we were there
will be. We hope return on that
investment in the way of
interest.
And then usually, the formula is
that a certain percentage
usually 5% is considered prudent
in most cases.
I would say 5% will be used for
the purposes of the trust. It's
a distribution essentially, but
the corpus is protected.
Madam speaker, gentlemen and
Madam Speaker, General Lady,
Would it be accurate to say that
there is a fiduciary
responsibility?
Of the trust.
To the beneficiaries.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
that is completely accurate. And
Madam Speaker, General Lady or
Wick creating in this
circumstance.
Mhm, a
A fund or trust if you will.
That has a fiduciary
responsibility to
A programs that will receive
these funds over three years.
Madam speaker and gentlemen. So
as I pointed out on Page two of
the bill, there's a paragraph
there that deals with the out go
from what's being called a
trust. But in my opinion, it's
truly a fund.
Funds are expendable. I think
you know the money is there for
a reason.
In this case, Madam speaker and
gentlemen, there's the
possibility here that this this
so called trust would even just
disappear if the amount of money
is not at the level specified
than it all just goes away.
So in terms of fiduciary duty,
Ah
Madam speaker and gentlemen, I
think there's always a fiduciary
duty and state government to use
money wisely.
And so I think that always
exists, and it's my
understanding. Also, Madam
speaker gentleman that state
agency funds there is an
investment component.
To believe most of them the
ideas. That's a lot of money
sitting in an account somewhere
and trying to get some interest
off of it. So in that respect, I
think that's true for most most
funds in government, Madam
Speaker
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Looks like a fund.
Works like a fund quacks like a
fund.
Perhaps we ought to in this
circumstance calling a fund.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
There is further debate on the
amendment representative
Gentlemen from Otero,
representative Block
Thank you so much. Madam
Chairman, Madam Speaker with the
general lady from Lee and Eddie,
please yield.
Madam Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Otero. Thank
you so much. Madam Speaker and
General Lady and I one of my
questions was answered before
with the previous gentleman. But
Madam Speaker General Lady I
heard during your debate you you
talked about this isn't a trust.
It's a fund with this spending
plan. Madam Speaker, General
Lady, would you please tell me
how your amendment would help to
get it into a better definition
category?
To fit what we're trying to
accomplish. Madam Chairman,
Madam Speaker, representative.
Thank you very much, gentlemen.
So, yeah, I don't mind just
talking a little bit more about
that. So again, my amendment
would strike the word trust,
which implies certain things
that are not
Not evidence and not applicable
to the committee substitute. So
this would simply take the word
trust out and used the word fund
in its place, which is, I
believe, accurate and consistent
with our constitutional duty and
how we fund bills and by the way
Madam speaker gentleman that's
also in our house rules. So
that's that's the reason Madam
Speaker. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and thank you, General
lady That does help me a lot,
And I believe in your previous
answer regarding
The gentleman from
I believe he's also from Lee. I
believe he talked about
The percentage
And I believe you. You mentioned
it was about 5% annually. So
Madam Speaker, General Lady I
see in the bill. It says 25%. So
is that pretty much the reason
why you want to call it a fund
instead of a trust because it
would not be as prudent as you
said to put 25%, but rather more
like a 5% figure.
Madam speaker generating
Thank you for that question,
gentlemen and Madam speaker, So
yeah, 25% is
I mean, a trust can be set up in
a certain way to specify what
the outgoing would be. But in
this case, it really is spending
that amount of money down by
25% the first year and then
basically, the corpus disappears
in pretty short order. So for
that reason, I think the
amendment is necessary.
Madam speaker, gentlemen. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you.
Generally, that really cleared
it up for me. I appreciate it
and I look forward to the rest
of the debate. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Is there any further debate on
the amendment?
So, madam speaker of Oh,
The general lady from Berna,
Leo, Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentle lady
Um, yield the floor.
Madam speaker and General lady.
I do. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady in the course of
the discussion basically over. I
want to see the last four months
about it Expendable trust funds.
I've learned a lot is an
expendable trust fund, a unique
concept.
In the United States.
Madam speaker and generally so
I'm I really would rather point
to the definition of the word
trust and what they're really
several components to a trust,
one of which is to keep the
corpus intact the ideas that it
would have longevity well into
the future, and then again, the
amount that would be spent would
be specified by the trust. But
It would never be so much as to
cause the corpus to disappear.
Madam Speaker, General Lady
Manners, Madam speaker in
general lady just in the course
of studying. I've discovered
that there's numeral states
numerous states. Besides his
proposal.
That have expendable trust
funds.
And it's defined as an
expendable trust fund is an
account for assets held by a
state.
In a trustee capacity.
Where the principal and income
may be expended in the course of
the funds designated operations.
So for that reason, I I
personally believe in support.
Um and don't support the
amendment because I feel an
expendable trust fund.
Is the appropriate title for its
use in hospital 196, So I just
wanted to share that. Um, and
it's why I'm not supporting the
amendment. Thank you. Thank you,
General Lady and Madam speaker,
So just I see it differently. I
believe we're really looking at
a fund in the true sense of the
word, Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Madam
Speaker. Oh,
I don't think I moved the
amendment yet specifically,
should I do that now?
Um, generally believe you. Did
you read the 202 number? And
then you did explain the
amendment.
And I have a speaker. I believe
this is floor Amendment number
two. I didn't mention that. I
believe. Thank you, Lenny. No,
You have not moved about
amendment. Please do
Madam Speaker. I move house for
Amendment number two
To House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
house Bill 196.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Madam Speaker. I moved to table
House for Amendment number two.
Okay. We are on a motion to
table house floor number to vote
in the affirmative is will table
and a vote in the negative will
keep the debate on the
amendment. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
By a vote of 39 in the
affirmative, 24 and the negative
House floor Amendment number two
to have a House House for
amendment to to
House appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for house
Bill 196 has been tabled.
We're back on the bill.
Madam Speaker. I'm sorry,
gentlemen. You still have the
floor. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
I appreciate that, Um, Madam
Speaker and members of the house
I'd like to point out something
that was lost in translation
from the original bill to the
committee substitute and so
Just continue asking the
gentleman from Dona Ana to yield
for a comment for me, Madam
Speaker. There's a Section four
of the bill. It's the last part
of the bill.
And it it really erodes the
concept. I believe of
transparency.
Following criteria
accountability and all it says
here in the committee sub is
that rather than evaluate
The projects by certain
criteria.
It's simply says that, um,
Legislative Finance Committee
and the state budget Division of
DFA will meet regularly to
examine and analyze the
provisions of the accountability
in Government Act. So the only
oversight there is really no
oversight at all. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen, In my opinion, it's
just saying they're going to
take a look at the this act.
And I guess talk about it, so I
don't see that as fulfilling.
What I believe is a proper
mission for true oversight and
accountability. So
Madam speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you very much
for the debate. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you. Generally.
We're back in the bill. Now we
go to the gentle lady from Dona
Ana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Hot a meal.
Thank you. Madam Speaker Does
the gentleman from Dona Ana
County Yield, Madam Speaker, I
gladly yield to the General lady
from Dona Ana Socorro in Sierra
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
I've often said that community
is judged by the way in which
they treat their Children, and I
don't think it's a surprise to
this body that I have concerns
with C Y F D.
So, um, I know that we all share
these similar concerns. And, um
one of my questions is that when
we look at the funding for this
department, how are we going to
ensure that those dollars are
well spent, and the department
is transparent and accountable.
So, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
can you please tell us, uh,
What The accountability measures
are for C y f D in this funding
and in this bill, Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
General Lady. Madam Speaker,
General Lady first Thank you for
your focus for on childhood.
Well being Madam Speaker,
General Lady, I think it's
something that we all share.
Madam Speaker, General Lady.
It's certainly an area where you
lead and so I'm not surprised.
Madam Speaker, General lady that
you're asking this
Madam Speaker, General lady when
we look at the 16 different
appropriations that are part of
this four of them, at least
Madam Speaker General lady are
dedicated to C Y F D two
Children, Youth and Families
Department, which I think very
much shows the prioritization
and the focus.
Madam Speaker, General lady I
want to go directly to some of
those here. Um, Madam Speaker
General Lady, one of the
challenges that we know And that
we've heard about is
specifically on
With when its treatment, foster
care and foster care providers
to support hard to place
Children. Madam Speaker General
Lady if we were just to put that
in the C Y F D based budget,
here is a particular challenge.
there would be little way to
specifically target new funding
for that specific purpose. But
Madam Speaker general Lady
I was reading the language here
because it is focused
specifically on that Madam
speaker General lady,
Additionally, as our Senate
colleagues and we have continued
to work following the passage of
HB two, I want to share
additional measures here. Madame
Speaker, General Lady, um
The Children, Youth and Families
Department shall report
quarterly on the number of
caseworkers with a master level
social work license and a child
protective services caseworker
position and of masters level
Social workers retain more than
12. Months in protective
services. Caseworker Rose, Madam
Speaker General Lady that's
going
That will be in HB two applying
here to one of our focuses,
which Madam Speaker General lady
is to incentivize attainment of
masters level social work
license or to develop and retain
caseworkers. So I think that
helps Madam Speaker General Lady
give a really clear illustration
of how one we're able to target
this money to specific areas.
To Madame Speaker general lady
then have additional measures
and focus to ensure that that
the reporting we're hearing
quarterly on what those funds
are doing. And Madam Speaker
General Lady we very much intend
for that to yield better results
than uh than going into a very
large agency budget.
Where it's very difficult for us
to keep track, much less to sort
of focus those investments.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Transparency is so important and
I'm glad that we're tracking
these, um these issues with C Y
F D and I hope that we're able
to do more in the future. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
Madam Speaker. I think that I
just want to expand a little bit
here because we heard about some
of the multi level response and
differential response. Madam
Speaker General Lady there again
Additional measures in all of
these areas that are part of our
HB two.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Next we go to the gentleman from
Lee representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Does the
gentleman for Dona Ana Yield,
Madam Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Thank you.
Madam chairman, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen want to start off
on a different avenue.
And
Ask your thoughts on on rules
and with respect to that, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, do you
feel like we should follow
rules?
Madam Speaker, general lady. Um
I I as it pertains to house Bill
196. And in general Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I think
we have a responsibility to
create clear guidelines, uh, and
to work within those madam
speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. You're
kind of jumping ahead of me. Let
me go through my commentary, No
seriously.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, can
you agree that
In house appropriations. We have
Rule.
That after a house bill two and
three leave the House
Appropriations Committee
substitute for HB two and three
leaves and we start Madam
Speaker.
And gentlemen.
Reviewing
Bills that have appropriations
on it.
That we have a sole purpose
within house appropriations,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Two.
Um
Pass or not pass a bill.
Based off of appropriation
within hospital two and three,
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, I
would agree that our primary and
core focus in the House
appropriations Madam Speaker
General Lady is that basic
question. Is this funding in the
budget? Should that funding be
in the budget? Madam speaker,
gentlemen, Then we do pass it,
Uh
Out of our committee. I would
agree with that.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
That's a concern of mine because
And let me ask you a different
question or that same question,
maybe with a different twist.
Would you agree, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen that
As the legislative body up here,
our constituents.
Hold us to a higher standard.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
think broadly speaking, we are
accountable to our constituents.
Madam Speaker Gentlemen, as it
relates to, um
On our committee and as you
know, discussing so called
policy issues, Madam speaker,
general lady think we and I've
certainly made it a practice
where our core focus is on
whether funding is in the
budget, Madam Speaker, General
Lady, but I think anyone who's
been to house appropriations
tuned in made public comments,
etcetera.
Knows that while that is our
primary and sort of core focus
that I think it is, we've gone
into policy considerations and
allowed. I think a pretty wide
range of questions debate,
etcetera. Certainly, I think in
that madam speaker, gentlemen, I
tend to agree that that is in
keeping with our responsibility
that we carry from the
districts. We come from.
Speaker and gentlemen, and I do
appreciate the fact that we are
given latitude within there to
talk about specific policies and
procedures.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I think you've noticed a change
in the way that I talked about
bills as they go through and I
share more about my concerns
About what? Maybe potentially
Madam Speaker and gentlemen in
the F i R or the agency
analysis.
Things that I would want to
approach on the House floor
instead of within the committee
because the primary focus is
about the appropriation.
Madam speaker and gentlemen, I
feel like over.
The last couple of weeks.
Since House Bill two and three
have left We've made it you,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen as
the committee chair.
His made it clear that that is
our focus is, does it have an
appropriation?
And with that that comes to my
concern on house Bill 196.
The evening that
Late afternoon early evening
that we discussed 196.
It was made very clear, Madam
speaker and gentlemen that there
was no appropriation for
hospital 196 inside.
Of the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute
For House Bill two and three in
that bill, that we were that
passed through the house and
that the Senate Madam Speaker
and gentlemen would be the one
making those adjustments. Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, I would
Madam Speaker Jet Well, Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen would
actually correct that Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, we did have
the fun transfer that went over
and House Bill two and three.
From from age from HFC. Madam
Speaker. Gentlemen, we did have
these projects. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, the 16 projects
that members have that did cross
over in Arbil, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, So, um, I would. I
would actually say that
The both the money. Uh, overall
and Madam speaker, Gentlemen,
the projects the pilots that
we're talking about here. Those
did travel over. Madam speaker.
Gentlemen, the one component
that his significant component
added in the Senate is the
delineation of the, uh
Member grow projects. Those two
year projects along with the
executives, that is roughly
$100.8 million. I believe of
this, but Madam speaker
Gentlemen yet did travel over
with the overall amount in a fun
transfer, and Madam speaker,
Gentlemen, it did have these 16
projects all for three years.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um
I do not feel like that was the
way it was described the night
that we went through hospital
196, and that was the purpose
for this.
This part of the discussion was
I
Until
This piece. I really truly felt
Madam Speaker and gentlemen that
house Bill 196 doesn't belong in
the House floor right now.
It should have come back. We
should have waited.
Until House Bill two.
Was was adjusted in whatever way
on the Senate side if the
funding came back that way, then
we could pull
The the bill out of committee.
With an appropriation and then
go through the normal process,
Irrespective of how much time we
have left in in in the session.
I do appreciate you clarifying
that for me.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
As we talk about
The funding inside of this right
here.
Would you agree, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen that the
performance volume which I think
is volume, one of the lfc books
that we all get.
Asked three basic questions from
every agency. Those questions,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, are
An action plan submitted by the
agency.
Timeline signed by the agency
and responsibility assigned.
Would you agree that those are
three questions that are asked
of every agency?
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
would agree that those three
sort of state are standard for
our report Cards. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen, So yeah, I would
agree you'd find them in
everywhere, Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, Those aren't the
extent of the report cards, but
they will be in the report
cards.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
would agree with your, uh
Explanation with that, but
inside of here inside the volume
on its very specific for each of
our major departments.
And the concerns me, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
On several different levels.
Would you agree, Madam speaker
and gentlemen that over half of
the agencies
Answered No to all of the
questions that we list.
Uh, Madam Speaker. General,
Gentlemen, I don't have sort of
that exact numbers in front of
me. But man speaker gentlemen, I
wouldn't be surprised overall
that I would say without knowing
the percentage of very large,
large proportion. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen, I would even say a
concerning proportion.
I don't feel coming. Gentlemen,
I would agree with you and I do
have the numbers if if you would
like to see him.
10 of the agencies.
Um, answered all questions with
the with with a yes, 10 of the
agency's answered no to one or a
majority of the questions and
several answered no to all of
the questions, which is highly
concerning to me.
Would you agree?
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
That every department inside the
Section nine as as as provided
today.
Um, answered no to one or more
of their action plan questions.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
would. I wouldn't disagree with
that statement. Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, although I don't have
every single one in front of me,
But Madam speaker, Gentlemen, I
wouldn't disagree with that.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
early childhood.
Which
On the report card.
Shows to be in the red and
several areas answered, noted
two of the questions.
C Y F D, which answered errors
and the red on several metrics.
Answered no to all the
questions.
Workforce Solutions answered No
to two of the questions.
Once again in the red on their
metrics ped in the red on their
metrics. Answer no to one of the
questions.
HDD higher, Ed
In the red.
Answer no to all the questions
and then aging in long term.
Travis. Several areas in the Red
answered no to one of the
questions.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Would you agree that
With House Bill 23, the
committee said for hospital two
and three that left this house
Each of those departments. We
increase their funds.
Their responsibilities and their
ability to hire additional
staff.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen.
We this year by at least really
in half. Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, we We grew our
recurring budget as it left
house, appropriations and
finance basically half of what
we did last year. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, and, um, the year
before was a very large
increase. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
The points that you're bringing
that show that we that that
there is a lot of work to do is
what one of the things that I
take away from that Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, I think,
show us that it is wise to have
a different tool beyond either
investing in recurring budgets
And in some cases, Madam
speaker, gentlemen.
We can do that with confidence,
You know? School meals. Madam
speaker, Gentlemen, hiring
teachers those sorts of things.
But Madam speaker, gentlemen.
uh, were as we have agreed on on
what you've the questions that
you've asked.
It really highlights the need
for an alternative. Madam
speaker gentleman in answer to
the question you just posed. We
did include smaller, recurring
budget increases. I would say
for areas that we have more
confidence in across these
different agencies and Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, it's that
area of need.
And perhaps uncertainty on or
madam speaker. Gentlemen, need
and challenge for, say a
department that address that
need that comes together very
elegantly. We think, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen in the
The government expendable Trust.
Madam speaker in gentlemen, I do
appreciate the answer, but try
and turn it and ask a different
way because we have two
different pieces with respect to
this. Yes, I am talking am
talking and getting to the point
of house Bill 196, but
With respect to that, Madam
speaker and gentlemen, would we
agree that each of the
departments that are listed on
the 16 items
Or in the road somewhere.
Felt to be able to give a
positive answer on the three
action plan Questions and
Um, we're all
All had an increased budget.
Always given the opportunity to
hire more people, and all were
given increased responsibilities
just inside the House Bill two.
Madam speaker, gentlemen in in
in these in the departments here
is we sort of looked through
those, Um
The there there were. There were
no budgetary cuts. I can confirm
that Madam speaker, Gentlemen
there the recurring budgets for
these entities were not reduced.
Madam speaker, gentlemen, Um
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen, I
think there have and there are
additional recurring
investments so I would not. I
think that is true. Madam
speaker, Gentlemen.
Um
The I think another.
Without house Bill 196 and that
without this expendable trust,
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
that would be every dollar or
far more dollars would have gone
into the recurring budgets, I
would say, surmises, sort of,
uh, agency needs new Mexicans
needs in these different areas.
Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, whether it's C y F D,
whether its workforce solutions
whether it's aging in long term
services, there would have just
been really two options. What?
Three Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
actually four
One do nothing. Madam Speaker
gentlemen to actually reduce and
cut funding Cut staff. Three.
Madam Speaker Gentleman Inc
Increase the recurring budget or
four do a special appropriation
This Madam speaker, gentlemen,
the expendable trust is again a
New, innovative way to focus for
a three year period. In this
case, Madam speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. I think
maybe there is 1/5 option.
That as a legislative body we
could and should.
Very strongly.
Pursue.
In
In a business environment.
If you have a department
That's underperforming.
Um, overspending in many cases.
Um
We sit down and we review their
metrics.
We redefine their new goals.
We watched them closely.
We trained them.
We We we see where the where the
strengths and weaknesses are we
capitalize on their strengths
and their weaknesses.
We turn around and we create
training so that we can
increases those weaknesses and
we can move them forward and get
them to a point where at some
point
We can continue to grow that
department.
And we can continue to reward
them in salary increases. We can
continue to reward the
department by growing the
department by hiring new people
and give them expanded
responsibilities.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
contend that
That's the opposite way. We're
working here.
With respect to that, Madam
speaker and gentlemen, we have
this and I can give you the last
three years. Books that say
pretty much the same thing.
And yet we refusing to give them
To hold them accountability
accountable. We have Madam
Speaker and gentlemen,
and Government Accountability
Act. We report on it. But then
we do nothing. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
And with respect to hospital,
9196.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
with respect to 196 and each of
these departments.
Um
We are
Increasing the responsibilities
in some form or fashion.
And I would say Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, we're very
limited guardrails.
It's any
This. The descriptions on here
don't really give us teeth to be
able to do anything and doesn't
really give us Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Clear direction. On what
Legislative finance may report
on after year one.
After year two, and after year
three.
To determine whether or not we
should continue that.
When we set
In business when we set a metric
and at the end of year one. It
doesn't work. We re evaluate the
metric We reevaluate the people
responsible for the metric
And we decided Mr Speaker or
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
whether or not we
Is it a good idea? Yeah. Is this
the right department to handle
it?
Maybe not.
And so that's that's Madam
speaker and gentlemen, at the
end of the day, that's where I'm
getting to within here.
We continue to grow these
departments.
We continue to give them
responsibilities, and we
continue to do it without
actually ever holding them
accountable for what they do.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I
I'd love to hear your thoughts
on that and how you think this
helps?
Fix that problem, plus the
problem that already exists
inside this book in the last
three years worth of books,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Absolutely. Thank you and Madame
speaker. Gentlemen, I really
appreciated your description of
some of the those, Uh, maybe
Remedia, eri and remediation
measures that you described.
Madam speaker, gentlemen.
Briefly, though I want to go
back. I was informed by my
experts reminded rather that in
one area that trial child
Protective services we did we
grew that budget. I think 1%
simply for information
technology. Madam speaker.
Gentlemen, I think that is a
good example essentially holding
flat while at the same time,
Madam Speaker. Gentlemen, we do
focus in the expendable trust
because we know
The child protective services
and the services they need to
provide or so vital. So I did
want to correct that. I think
that is one exception where it
was basically held flat. Madam
speaker Gentlemen to go back and
again. I'm really appreciate the
description of sort of when an
entity is underperforming. What
do we do? We don't cut him
loose, but you know that going
in
And as you described it, and I
really appreciate the
description. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen, it reminds me of
something that has come at lfc
over the past several years,
Legislate.
The the sort of Ah statistic a
way Madam speaker and gentlemen
to have continued feedback with
agencies that have challenges to
engage in basic questions. Madam
speaker Gentlemen that are very
much connected to
Ah, the challenges they're
facing. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen, also with a very
clear open hand and an effort to
help those agencies both
identify areas of growth and the
talk through that, Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, it's not
sort of what we often hear of
like a typical program
evaluation.
That takes a very deep dive,
interacts basically asking an
agency questions, then presents
the findings. Madam speaker
Gentlemen, this the legislative
process in particular is meant
to be a sustained series of
meetings, often with the
committee and agency leadership
where you can go through a
summer or perhaps a year.
Asking, Uh, what do we need to
improve? What? Madam Speaker
Gentlemen are the milestones As
you pointed out, which I very
much appreciated. What are the
milestones? It's not going from,
you know, 0 to 100.
One day tonight. It's K. Are we
going a little bit, and then a
little bit more? What our
metrics expectations. Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, what's
going to be different in two
months time when we meet and
talk again, Madam speaker,
gentlemen. So that is an
additional tool that has been
brought in with the LFC. Um
And Madam speaker Gentlemen for
areas like the Workforce
Solutions Department tourism,
which is not on this list. Madam
speaker, Gentlemen. Gentlemen.
Workforce Solutions Department
is I think it's very much C Y f
D has Madam Speaker Gentlemen
been part of the legislative
process that is
Uh, I think in keeping with your
fifth option a little bit, Madam
speaker, gentlemen, I would also
say that, um, the
Accountability in government
Act. The overall measure by
which you know are volume one
and our is is built upon. I
think it's a great opportunity
for us. Madam speaker Gentlemen.
To take a big look at that over
this upcoming interim process,
and when we have significant
time in a 60 day session to
likely consider updates, changes
and an evolution there. But
Madam speaker, gentlemen, that
would be my response. I think
your excellent questions and
some of the examples you pose.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. I think,
um I'm at the point where I'm
Ready to close this. I would
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um
Propose an approach to this
summer.
And interims for all of two
Madam speaker and gentlemen to
stop being stonewalled by our
agencies. We come in Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, and we
either schedule an hour or an
hour and a half.
Of of
Of hearing time.
Not really a hearing, but
For lack of another word right
now.
Where are agencies will come in,
and they will if they've got an
hour and a half talk for an hour
and 15 minutes and we have 15
minutes. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen to ask questions back.
We've got to hurry along because
we have so many stacked up.
Right? And so, madam speaker in
gentlemen.
I would propose that as we go
into the interim session this
year.
That
We hold our agencies more
accountable with getting us the
reports.
But we can advance we get Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
Those reports either in the
share file. If they're if
they're confidential or
On the Web page.
For everybody to be able to
review
And that we actually Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, start
having hearings.
Where if we didn't read the
documents, that's our fault.
But we walk in
A high
Introduce everybody, and we go
straight into questions from
that point on. This isn't a
presentation of Look at me how
good I'm doing. This is a set of
questions on blooding either US
acknowledge.
How good that departments doing
or to talk about, Okay, This
seems to be an issue, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
And, uh,
How do you plan on fixing that
And we approach it from that
standpoint matters, Madam
speaker and gentlemen, and then
we get to a true point when we
get to stuff like all the time
hospital 196 we actually start
getting to the debt into the
woods, and they're all the way
down.
And
Checking on this as we go
through
The implementation six months in
a year in and so on and so
forth, and that would be my
challenge, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
I if if this
Piece of legislation does pass.
That we truly start looking at
how we can improve. What are
true job is here.
Quit, quit sitting there
listening to our departments and
getting given a 10% time to ask
questions when it should
actually be reversed.
Madam speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Next we'll go to the gentle lady
from Berna, Leo, representative
Garrett
Thank you so much. Madam Speaker
will the gentleman yield Madam
Speaker I gladly yield to the
General lady from Bernie Leo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. One reason I'm
supporting when 96 is even with
thin the definitions of the
Section nine
Allocations There are I feel
some clear parameters and
And I'm looking specifically in
an area that I know this body is
very interested in its
appropriations and House Bill
two for initiatives and
workforce development and in
this section includes two pilot
projects for disengaged youth.
Once for the implementing
implementation of a trades
Career exploration pilot
program and an evaluation of the
employment outcomes for those
who participating and another is
to implement and evaluate you
three employment.
Um, for people that, um are
unemployed or at risk. Can you
talk about why those are in
Section nine? Madam Speaker
General Lady? Yes, Madam Speaker
General Lady. Those are in
Section nine because Madame
Speaker General Lady through the
previous conversation where we
started talking a little bit
about legislate.
And that process. Madam Speaker,
General Lady very clear Focus on
our workforce and workforce
Participation came up. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, this goes
back 2.5 years two meetings
where it became very clear that
our workforce participation rate
was low. Yes. Okay. Why? You
know, uh
What? And that was Madam
Speaker, General lady. Why are
there so many jobs that are
going unfilled? Well, that's
Madam Speaker, General lady
because our workforce
participation rate is low. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, Why is
our work face force
participation right so low
compared and Madam Speaker
General Lady. Some of the
answers came back that
disengaged youth that a lot of
some of this younger cohort
Was not in the workforce. Madam
speaker, general lady, whereas
in other states they would be in
the workforce.
So Madam Speaker, General lady
that legislate back and forth
process asking basic questions
asking what's going to be
different asking? What can we do
to help? Madam Speaker General
Lady led us to this point with
the expendable trust to focus in
on those particular areas? Madam
Speaker General lady that you
just spoke about
That our focus is where we can
put resources. Madame Speaker
General Lady with leadership at
the Workforce Solutions
Department and in partnership
with the other investments, like
the large, trust, expendable
Trust. In fact, Madam Speaker
General Lady for apprenticeships
that really, um sort of connect
and leverage greater
Benefit for for New Mexico.
Madam Speaker general lady when
it comes to some of these pre
apprenticeships or youth, summer
employment things of that
nature, those are very evidence
based to show not only benefits
from an economic perspective but
decrease from, uh and and and
higher.
Public safety outcomes, less
involvement in criminal activity
and within the judicial system
so that I think it's a great
example of how legislate
conversations about challenges
and sort of peeling back the
layers on those challenges.
Madam Speaker General Lady and
then in partnership with the
executive finding places
Where we can place investment
with confidence that are going
to say, Madam Speaker, General
Lady. They're going to be more
youth who are not employed who
will be employed more support.
Madam Speaker General Lady with
Workforce Solutions to go out to
find those folks to bring them
back into the workforce with
jobs and supports through
apprenticeships and others.
That will give them instead of
it's like, you know, go back,
suffer through more school or
what have you It's Madam
Speaker, General Lady come into
the workforce. Get paid! Help
your community. Help yourself.
And Madam speaker and just
gentlemen.
I was really pleased to see the
additional, um, higher Education
department getting money. Um and
I want to really give kudos to
representative Brown for
ensuring that we had the
language to address this.
Um, we've not. We've seen that
so many of our two year and four
year colleges have these
incredible deep dive programs
one week or two weeks, short
term programs that result in
solid high pain jobs. However,
they're not eligible for the
opportunity Scholarship because
they're non credit bearing.
Um so can can you talk about
that program that
It's going to allow us Madam
speaker and gentlemen to provide
funding.
Uh, to pay for these kind of
courses.
That haven't been eligible for
opportunity Money.
So far. Madam Speaker, General
Lady. I am so glad that you
brought this up. Madam Speaker,
General Lady we're going to find
and pull the full language. But
Madam Speaker, General Lady, I
think this goes through. I want
to just take a brief tour
through our house appropriations
and finance process this year,
Madam Speaker, General Lady
Um, you know this trust was
finalized in, um in December.
Madam Speaker, General lady. It
was discussed in the LFC budget
rollout as basically first
weekend in January. Madam
Speaker, General Lady. We, uh,
our very first HFC meeting.
In addition to our consensus
revenue update and some other
sort of standard presentations
that start the session
presentation of the executive in
the LFC budgets, Madam Speaker
General Lady we had a entire
presentation in directors, which
director silly lead about the
expendable trust and Madam
Speaker, General Lady. That's
where this focus on higher
education was.
But Madam speaker General lady
As you pointed out through a lot
of work of many different
colleagues and the general lady
from Eddie and Otero, the
gentleman from Quay
Harding, Roosevelt Union and
Colfax.
Um, but not Guadalupe and many
others yourself and many others.
Madam Speaker, General lady
pointing to these, uh, often
shorter and duration certificate
programs, as you say, non credit
bearing, but Madam Speaker,
General Lady immediate entries
into the workforce, perhaps new
starts or Madam speaker, General
Lady a step up in a certain area
of the workforce.
That those are vitally needed.
They're the most responsive,
Madam Speaker, General lady,
to, um industry needs in a
particular area. They can be
very sort of tuned and targeted.
Madam Speaker, General Lady The
General Lady from Eddie and
Otero. Um or excuse me. Eddy and
Lea proposed language working
with our lfc.
Analysts and with the team over
there
And Madam Speaker, General Lady
in a very, I think diligent,
thoughtful way we the language
was proposed. We looked at it.
There was a lot of conversation,
including with higher education
with so with our executive
partners.
Madam Speaker, General lady and
when it came time for us as part
of our process, where we
consider changes to the budget
and into the yet to the budget
that the LSC broad budget that
we start with. We looked at this
language and decided by
consensus. I think in a very
strong fashion and bipartisan
fashion
To adopt the General Lane Gentle
lady's proposed language into
this specific area members will
see it here online 13
In the budget. It's a bit
longer, Madam Speaker, General
lady um it's in, uh and it's, uh
for New Mexico.
Page 232. Amanda informs me of
members want to look at it. I
won't read all of it. Madam
Speaker, General lady, Um, but
it's focuses on, uh
This is funding.
A very significant amount of
funding. I might add. Madam
speaker in general Lady
For universities, community
colleges and regional
universities to pay up to the
forecast of student tuition and
fees for workforce training
courses not eligible for other
state financial aid, and that
result in an industry recognized
credential or endorsement. It
goes on from there, but Madam
Speaker General Lady I think
that's a good example where
You know, input work in the lfc
legislative process that focused
in on these areas, said This is
where some of the money needs to
flow.
On house appropriations and
finance a good open process for
folks to bring ideas to share
their thoughts to work closely
with experts, both in the
executive and in the LSC has
resulted in broadly adopted
language that will guide these
new investments over the next
three years.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen,
just to close my questions,
Wouldn't you say this kind of
funding will flow out?
To training programs that
benefit people throughout our
entire state Speaker General
lady Absolutely yes.
And it will flow to again all
the higher education
institutions all across the
state. They're in the northwest,
the Northeast there in the
southwest, the Southeast,
certainly up and down the
corridor. So, Madam Speaker
General Lady yes, if as long as
we adopt and passed the our
budget House Bill two and three
And Madam Speaker, General Lady
as long as we pass and adopt and
have signed house Bill 196, we
can look forward to these
investments flowing July 1 to
all parts of our state. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. I have no
further questions.
Next we go to the gentleman from
Lee County Representative Scott
Thank you. Benefit Will the
gentleman from Donna annual
yield?
Madam Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Speaker or Madam speaker. Pardon
me and gentlemen, I've looked
through.
And I'm going to just use
Public Education Department as a
For example.
Because they have
About $75 million of money.
Allocated for I presume the next
three years out of this trust
fund.
And
Looking over.
Her budgets for the last
Number of years. I note
That we have gone from spending.
$2.5 million to
Around four Berry in dollars on
public education.
Because
Of the dismal performance.
That our Children
Or seeing
From those services, so
What did that get us?
What did that
What improvements?
Did that effect.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Looking at the latest report
card.
It's red across the board.
So
You know, this legislature sees
a problem.
And all, Rui, we can really do.
Is providing appropriation. We
can spend money to solve the
problem, and that's what your
legislation does its spending
$216 million a year to solve
problems. Let me ask you this.
How many of these problems
Were
Identified by the agency's Madam
speaker and gentlemen, Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, I would say
there are a number of areas
where the agency's requested,
uh, additional based funding.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, I
would not say that's the case
for each agency. I think there's
Um
Madam speaker, Gentlemen.
In contrast to the typical
budget, the just the recurring
budget process. This is an area
where sort of new suggestions
and a more, um legislatively
driven suggestions are have our
were included from the outset. I
mean, the origination.
Is from the lfc from the
legislative sort of side of the
of the government if you will,
and as we just talked about with
regard to the support for non
credit bearing programs that
workforce certificates you'll
find a lot more legislative
initiative in these programs.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, though
there is overlap with, uh,
agency requests for additional
budget, um
In in many of these areas, you
know, the public Education
department. Um they are seeing a
lot of success with their
different teacher. Recruitment
efforts, including the, uh,
educator.
The Educator fellowship.
And other programs, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, and, um
uh, you know, you'll see here
that we're investing in some of
those areas, so it's a bit of a
mix. But Madam speaker,
gentlemen, I would emphasize
that there's more legislative
initiative.
Both in the overall concept in
its entirety and in specific
parts of these 1st 16
appropriations.
Yes, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
I would submit, sir, that if
The Public Act Occassion
department was having any
success.
Our kids would be able to read
and do math.
I believe the success is
evident.
So let me ask you this of these
16 initiatives.
Were any one of those
Added in a passive legislation a
stand alone bill.
By this legislature in this
session.
Madam speaker Gentlemen in this
session, which is, of course,
just a short budget session. Our
focus has been on the budget.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, so I'm
not sure that specific pieces of
legislation
Madam speaker. Gentlemen,
However, in many of these areas,
um there have been passed
legislative and budget efforts
that are reflected here, Madame
Speaker and gentlemen, this is
no different from any other
budget session where the our
constitutional responsibility.
And our focus are in the short
time were given to make sure
that our budget is balanced.
It's as effective as we think we
can get it, etcetera. So there's
I don't think there's any
difference there. But Madam
speaker, Gentlemen, I would
in many of these areas there are
passed legislative efforts some
successful
Some unsuccessful that I would
say are reflected in what the
appropriations are.
And we can if we, madam speaker,
gentlemen.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
once again.
If we were having any
significant success.
There, we would have shown
improvements.
Somewhere in the system with our
kids being able to read and do
math.
Now.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Accountability.
Is what's missing in state
government to death and
Government accountability
legislation.
In in
Well not likely due.
Anything.
To improve the report cards.
Because, as the other gentleman
from Lee
Mentioned in a debate.
Just a few minutes ago.
We know what's wrong.
I know that there is no success
in a number of these programs.
And we don't ever do. It's not
our responsibility to fix it.
Because all we can do
Is allocate resources to the
people that perform the
operations, and that's not
happening.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
Excuse me.
I don't see these additional
funds.
Making a difference.
Whether they are for one year or
Two years or three years.
They won't make a difference.
Absent.
Somebody looking at the data and
saying, Here's the change that
needs to be made.
And then the with the
responsibility to make it
And it's not us.
So given that this is a program
that is funded for three years.
If any of these 16 failed to
perform up to expectations in
the first year.
Or they
Going to continue to be funded,
or will those appropriations
need to be made?
Annually.
By this body out of the front.
Mm. Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, while we as a Legislature
certainly retain the ability to
change the year two and year
three. Fy 26 fy 27 Assuming as
we passed house, Bill 196 and
our budget, Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen, we retain that
ability.
Certainly, Madam speaker,
gentlemen.
I think fiscally, though. What
we've done is given ourselves
the ability to set aside
sufficient funding to do work
over a three year period to
analyze that to have, um,
clarity on the weather. How it's
working. Madam speaker
Gentlemen, one of the
Sort of flaws and just sort of
implicit challenges of this
annual budgeting process is that
they're Madam speaker. Gentlemen
is very little time to implement
and to, uh to sort of, uh,
account for judge Measure,
etcetera. It's every single
year. Madam speaker, Gentlemen.
And perhaps even with other
accountability Focuses
accountability Government Act
very rigorous program evaluation
component within the LFC the
time to sort of look, uh
decipher and decide is very
condensed. And so it ends up. I
think that time Madam speaker,
gentlemen.
Maybe one of the reasons that we
rarely but for sort of fiscal
capacity reasons. See any big
changes, much less cuts in
agency budgets. Madam speaker
Gentlemen so we can answer again
to the your question. There is
authority to change.
Adjust the dedications. But
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, I
think this is a very good and
strong tool to make sure there's
sufficient funding that does not
fluctuate year to year and then
to account for that to judge to
decipher and decide. I would
say, Madam speaker, Gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe what I heard in that.
Is that these programs will be
will continue.
To be funded.
That substantially these levels
for the next three years were
regardless.
Of what?
Kind of success, right? They
have
And that
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, is
exactly
Consistent.
It is exactly the root of the
problem.
Because
If we were going to do something
different
We would have done it with
The recurring budgets.
And the report cards that have
been given to us over the 10
year period that I've been here.
We don't hold
Administrations accountable for
performance.
And that's the problem. Thank
you.
Madam speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, gentlemen.
Next. We have the gentle lady
from Santa Fe representative
Luhan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentleman from Dona Ana
Yield, Madam Speaker, I gladly
yield to the General Lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, ma'am Speaker and
gentlemen.
We've had a lot of debate on
This bill and a lot of
Yeah.
Discussions during the interim
and figuring out
What we what we would like to
see and how we're going to use a
robust um, revenue income that
we've seen for our state, And I
think this is one of the
solutions that came forward and
was really developed.
And
I would say thought, well
thought through as far as what
we need to do and getting those
dollars into programs that in
pilots that we have been hearing
for from four years to make sure
that we're going to be doing an
adequate job as far as receiving
information and input from those
those agencies that needed the
most. I think that's really
what, um, got me and my
understanding of
Of how we're going to initiate,
Um
This type of policy.
Um, and one of the one of the
agencies that, um, I've been
working with Miss Madam Speaker.
gentlemen was aging in senior
care for aging A long term
services. So my question Um
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen, is
does the legislation provide any
supports for aging community
members through this?
Policy. Madam Speaker, General
lady. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady. In fact, it does
The in particular Madam Speaker
General Lady, our new Mexico.
Uh, program and studying a
randomized control of that
program. Madam Speaker General
Lady is included in
In this appropriation in one of
these 16 appropriations, Madam
speaker, General Lady That's a
really good example of something
where we know that we have an
aging population. Madam Speaker,
General Lady we know that we
have really close knit families,
families that want to continue
to support multiple generations.
Madam Speaker General Lady to
support elders as they age
Madam Speaker, General Lady, the
New Mexico program and finding
ways to financially allow those
into support those family
members who are doing this
important work one of the areas
with caregiving that we have
great need. Madam Speaker
General Lady think that was a
new program It's been brought.
It was brought under a previous
secretary. Now we have a new
secretary there at aging and
long term services.
Madam Speaker, General Lady.
That was something that has so
much promise. Evidence, both in
sort of
Implementation as well as just I
think our confidence in
ourselves as new Mexicans and
our close knit family structure
that this is something worth
funding, and Madam Speaker
General lady that we have to
have this very good, um,
randomized control, Uh, focus
and, um
What's the word? I'm looking
for? Randomized control study of
the program. We We think it
should work. We know that it can
work. We're going to fund it and
really study how it works, so
that if it does, and we think it
will, Madam Speaker General Lady
we can find tune the parameters
and ensure that there is
sufficient funding to support
our elders. Madam Speaker
General Lady
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So I guess when
my concern would be is, if we if
we don't move this legislation
piece of legislation through is
this going to affect those
Those line items and all the
funding that we put into HB two
for those seniors and their
caregivers and and those
communities, especially in our
rural areas. Mr. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen. Madam Speaker
generally. Yes, Madam Speaker,
General Lady that 3.1 or so
million dollars that would go
annually. The 9.375 million
That's budget in this item does
depend upon this expendable
trust moving forward.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think those are my
concerns. There's something that
we've
You know, I put my focus on
during the interim and during
the session this year and that
that part of our budget, so I
really appreciate that and I
don't want to.
Compromise what we need to have
accomplished HB two. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, General
Lady.
Next to the gentleman from San
Juan, representative of Want,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you. Madam Speaker Does
the gentleman from Dona Ana
Yield, Madam Speaker, I gladly
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Um
Just a couple of questions about
The substitute before us today.
Um, Mr Speaker or Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
Um
This.
Was a new concept. This this
Was a brand brand new concept
that was presented throughout
the interim, uh, in through the
LFC process.
And
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
What was appealing.
To me.
About it was
The higher level of
Ah scrutiny.
In particular, Madam speaker and
gentlemen.
Uh, program that had been
In C Y F. D.
But had not been move forward at
all had not been utilized by the
department.
Was
Pulled out of their base budget,
Madam speaker and it was placed
in this new program.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen,
the conversation and in Lfc
through the interim was
That if he the new secretary of
C Y F. D.
I wanted this to become a
permanent part of future
budgets.
Then some
Effort had to be shown by the
department that this was
actually something
That that the secretary thought
was valuable. And so we would
make it this pilot program.
Take it out of what had been
previously Madam speaker had
previously been put in the
budget. Now we're pulling it out
of the budget, and we're going
to say Okay, show me Show me
that.
That this is
Uh, useful and on top of that.
It has never been used. So let's
Of scrutiny.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen
that was somewhat appealing to
me. That was a selling point.
As a matter of fact, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
The
It was so much of a selling
point. It got committee
endorsement.
So, Madam speaker and gentlemen.
That was what it
Was all the way through.
Just a few days ago.
And then Madam speaker and
gentlemen. Then there was a
this the sub that came to the
committee.
That
All the metrics changed.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I know the dollar amounts
changed, which would have lost
the committee endorsement
anyway.
But Madam speaker and gentlemen
The language changed
dramatically. The oversight.
Was
As I read it now it's almost the
exact same oversight as before.
It's going to go through.
Madam speaker and gentlemen, the
same process which will be
A
Uh,
Green.
Yeah, I guess. Screen yellow and
red, which shows which
Whether or not the measures of
of
Judging the programs.
That is already currently in our
books for agencies and for
programs in the agency's now
we're applying that same measure
again. Versus what
I thought was going to be
further scrutiny.
Um, so first, could I ask
Why? Why?
Why? I guess this is too, that
my two questions.
Why was this decision made?
And secondarily, who made the
decision because it wasn't
The members of appropriations
that I sit on.
That was presented
This change.
As we're considering this, but
instead it was a committee
substitute.
And I have no idea how that
committee substitute came about.
And I don't know who decided to
make the changes. So those are
really my two questions If you
want to. You can take plenty of
time on
On both of them or how much time
you believe is necessary for
that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
We, You know, during the course
of this conversation today think
we've really highlighted the
some of the new areas. Madam
Speaker gentleman and I would
highlight the grow district
member of appropriations that
Madam Speaker general men in
contrast to past years instead
of just being for one year.
It's a two year process this
year. Madam Speaker Gentlemen
the focus because there's so
much interest from members to
support local communities in
their local areas, often times,
particularly rural areas. Madam
Speaker Gentleman the inclusion
of our cogs the councils of
government as recipients of the
funding that is a
Big part of the explanation for
change. Madam Speaker Gentlemen,
the numbers that we have
anywhere from a third to
Um 40% 40% of the grow
allocations are destined for
cogs for the councils of
government. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen and Madam speaker,
Gentlemen in the original bill,
there were there are reporting
timelines there are reporting
deadlines. There is
A good amount of additional
reporting that in our
estimation, Madam Speaker
gentlemen does apply to all of
the appropriations would apply
to those recipients, including
cogs, which would be sort of a,
you know one step forward,
perhaps 1.5 1.5 steps back.
We know we need more local
capacity. We know that there is
more that there are good
examples of where new investment
has helped them. But Madam
speaker general men if we gave
them more money and asked for
way more in return, and it ended
up
Hamstringing their ability to
either do that, or, um
Or or you know, the money didn't
flow at all that That would be
that one step forward. 1.5 steps
back.
Switch the thumbs. Madam speaker
Gentlemen in I think there is
it's important when we look at
the majority. You know, the $216
million that are going to our
different agencies that, um,
this first year that was really
substantially built in Lfc.
The Who it went to for what
purpose? It went to them. Madam
Speaker. Gentlemen, we added a
couple and sort of tweaked a
couple in the language we talked
about with higher education in
some new appropriations in HFC,
Madam speaker, gentlemen, but
that those were really built
prior to
And without the broader agency
and executive involvement, And
so, Madam speaker, gentlemen,
that's the second part of the
Why is we we've we feel good and
confident about the starting,
uh, this starting cohort if you
will.
And, um
It gives we we can step back.
Take the time for years two and
three to build collaboratively
Not only criteria for this, but
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, back
to the entire sort of
accountability in government act
that was built a while back.
It's been a useful evaluation
tool. Madam speaker, Gentlemen.
I think we've heard here today
and I wouldn't fully disagree
that it's not as useful a tool
now for, uh
Targeting sort of, uh,
predictor. It's not that tool
that says Okay, Here's our
information. What do we do now?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
There would be one rate to read
accountability in government Act
and say You have a certain
amount of red. You're not
performing. You have a certain
amount of your you didn't submit
an answer on something. Not only
do you keep your funding flat,
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen.
actually you use you lose that
funding there used to be
something like this. Madam
speaker, Gentlemen.
Base, redistribute
redistribution in our higher
education, where each year sort
of universities could lose
funding.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen. Um
That's not the path that we've
chosen. But if the A G A isn't
helping us and if there isn't
sort of that set of criteria
that says, uh, Here's why, and
sort of explains what's next. I
think it's fair and actually
really a good feature for us to
look at updating that this year
come back in the 60 Day session.
Likely with updates with
modifications with changes that
hopefully we can agree on in a
Broadway
So thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Speaker.
And, uh and representative
So I believe
Representative Armstrong's
amendment was an attempt to
To do that.
If
Madam speaker.
And gentlemen, if
That amendment had excluded the
language that would have been
the dollars going to the cogs.
And it would have just
Ben was Section nine.
And and not
If it were more targeted.
And it would have had
Those increased measures. Plus,
I believe language she had
already in her.
Amendment was
To come up with new measures
with the input of
The the, UM
Administrative departments.
Um would that have been an
acceptable amendment?
Miss Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen. Thank you for the
question, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen without seeing
something in front, I can't sort
of say to the specifics, but
Madam speaker, gentlemen.
I can speak to. I think the
process that we're going to look
at as we go into the summer,
which Madam Speaker Gentlemen, I
think will be a collaborative
process. One thing that has been
that was pointed out, Madam
speaker, Gentlemen, particularly
in areas that apply to public
education department also
somewhat Madam speaker,
Gentlemen with in regards to
higher Education Department.
Is to have our l S L E s C.
Legislative Education Study
Committee colleagues as a core
part of those building those
collaborative measurements.
Madam speaker, gentlemen.
In in regards to sort of how the
funding is structured.
I'm not sure and I I don't think
I'm not sure that we would be
able to sort of differentiate.
because Madame speaker gentlemen
were applying the funding for
the member allocations that grow
member allocations that went to
each district came from the
original overall.
Alan fund transfer that is
allowed by by HB 196, so I don't
think we can change them. Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, I do think
and agree that collaborative
process to build those measures
together in concert with
stakeholders, especially
particularly, but not
exclusively.
Within the executive and then
the appropriate legislative
areas. L E. S c L F C
I think that is the way that
that we should move forward, and
I'm very hopeful. And I think
one of the things Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, just
Final piece to that.
The executive
Asked for a far larger,
recurring appropriation
increases across many different
areas. And in some cases, Madam
Speaker gentlemen, as in the
case with C Y F D asked for
entire reorganizations within
sort of that base budget.
We chose not to do that. We've
gone a different route, while
still with a focus route, and I
think Madam speaker gentlemen
that there's if you know that
there's
I would say buy in across many
different executive agencies
that this is a useful and
worthwhile step. And so I think
that part I would just point to
That partnership is a positive
step that I see.
Well, thank you, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen.
I guess the the
I guess the real problem I have
with this
It is.
The collaborative effort.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
There was a collaborative effort
that took place in the interim
to come up with this.
Original bill.
But the
But the substitute
There was no collaboration
whatsoever.
As a matter of fact, we were
surprised with that. I believe
there was some of our members
that actually voted.
In lfc.
To move forward with this.
But when we got the substitute,
not a single member of the
minority
Voted for it, in part because
it's the same level of
collaboration that we get.
On the budget in general, Mr
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
And that level of collaboration
is were presented with
something.
Without much input on the front
end.
The as a matter of fact, the
entire body.
During the budgetary process has
little if no input whatsoever.
On the inputs.
In the budget. And as a matter
of fact, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, there are
Uh, a bunch of policy decisions
that are made in the interim
that go into what the budget is
going to be and what bills are
going to be passed and what
dollars are going to be
contained in that budget?
And there's from our standpoint.
No collaboration.
So, to whatever degree there is
a collaborative effort. It's
without the majority of both
parties in this chamber or and
in the other chamber.
But even within
Lfc and even within
H A. F C
There's little to no input other
than
Vote up.
Or down. Um, Madam Speaker. I
believe that's the problem.
It was very clear.
That we did not put enough money
into the road projects upfront.
And what were presented in the
end.
Was a small dollar amount to go
into infrastructure.
And then with very little to no
collaboration.
A decision that what we're going
to do is we're gonna do this
with bonding capacity.
And Madam speaker and gentlemen.
That's without any of us having
any input whatsoever, so
assurances of collaboration
Tell me the level of
collaboration that I've
experienced so far.
Throughout. This process is
inadequate. It is so much better
to have it defined.
In the budget specifically
Or when we pass a bill that it's
defined. What those
Attainable measures are
But as it is, I'm afraid Madam
speaker.
The entire budgeting process.
Locks out.
99%
Of the legislators.
And the very few
Collaborate with each other.
And then we have an up or down
vote.
And and I believe it is not in
the best interest of our
constituents.
To have
So little input by the people
who represent each district
across the state.
Um, I do appreciate that. This
is a new idea.
I like the fact that it is
something intriguing. How do we
not just automatically put money
in the budget?
But Madam speaker and gentlemen
The way the budget
Is is assembled.
It's just an inadequate process.
And the level of collaboration
that takes place is inadequate.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker. Gentlemen, I think in
response, certainly appreciating
the the recognition of an
innovative and strong tool.
Madam Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think we've actually discussed
here today and shown within, uh,
within our budget and
particularly within the section
that is authorized by this bill
by HB 196.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen that
there was it was through
Committee Dialogue Committee
Input Committee suggestion from
bipartisan members. Madam
Speaker gentleman that we see
new work in in HB and the fund
represented by HB 196 here,
Madame speaker, gentlemen.
I This would be another
conversation. I can absolutely
point in a robust fashion. Madam
speaker. Gentlemen to budget
investments, budget approaches
budget language, in fact that
reflect diverse and broad member
input. Madam Speaker Gentlemen
also madam speaker, gentlemen.
We've heard from community
members who have, you know,
given comment on HB 196 or been
allowed to, of course, Madam
Speaker Gentlemen also been part
of the public comment process as
we hear agency budgets that are,
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
believe reflected
In this work, Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
I would point to geothermal
resource development. Madam
speaker Gentlemen as ideas that
have originated in other parts
of this buddy body. Excuse me,
not on the finance Committee,
uh, in other parts of the of our
state are reflected here, Madame
Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, I would point to the
investments in Workforce
Solutions department that are
conversations that originated
with other members of this body,
not on the Finance Committee and
have been part of community
conversations all across the
state.
Gotta switch thumbs here that
are reflected in HB two and
three and Madam speaker,
Gentlemen are reflected here on
these projects. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
We can go or I would be happy to
go. I think it is important and
it is a challenge that we have
collectively taken on.
To be able to welcome in ideas
if they can't be funded. One
year, Madam speaker Gentlemen,
to begin a process with our
excellent staff now with the
committee. Also, of course with
the LFC, too.
Look for ways to implement those
perhaps the next year, Madam
speaker, Gentlemen, while we
have those resources and
sticking on the bill, just
sticking here on HB 196 we see
I would say.
Conservatively a quarter and
likely upwards, perhaps a half,
perhaps slightly more than that,
Madam speaker, gentlemen of
ideas that have originated
outside of the Finance
Committee. In many cases outside
of Lfc, this is an LSC developed
tool.
And lfc developed, uh, funding
mechanism. The ideas, Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen in here
again, Just looking at a few of
these, Um
I think it's it's a well it is
proven if if the first year it's
going to be a quarter to half of
these ideas that I feel
confident, saying have were
connected to an originated from
work.
Legislation ideas outside of the
Finance Committee. I think
that's a strong star and one
that probably stands us in
pretty strong instead to say
this is a place where new ideas
New ways of looking at things. A
new approaches Welcome and that
there could be very well be
funding for it. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. I think, uh,
In general. I like the idea of
the new tool.
But I
I think that if we were to poll
All of the legislators in both
chambers. The majority of the
legislators who have to vote on
this.
Believe that the governor's
office doesn't matter which
administration but the
governor's office has more
influence on the budget.
Then we, the members of the
Legislature.
And I think that's a fundamental
flaw in the way that we're doing
this
Once again to this 1196.
I liked it better.
In the interim. I like it much
less now. I probably can't vote
for it as it is now.
But the real issue
Is
This process that we went
through for 196 to get this to
the floor today is just a
microcosm.
Of how the whole budgeting
process takes place.
And how
Frankly,
The administration. Whichever
administration it is, has an
inordinate amount of influence
on the budget.
And what this budget is 90% of
this budget is administration.
Programs very little of it.
Is from
What our constituents are asking
us as representatives and
senators and the other chamber.
About what's important to them.
And I think
I think what we need to do,
Madam speaker over the interim.
Is do a real study.
And look into how we can change
the process.
Who are legislators can do the
job that they have come here to
do.
Without the
Without having
The the administration have so
much more power.
And we give it up.
We give up this power because we
don't fight back for what is
important to our constituents
instead.
What we get is, are we going to
end increase this department?
By 6% or 10%. Are we going to
create a new housing division
for the governor's office? Are
we going to do
All of these things.
That that none of us came in
here thinking that's what we
were going to do.
Instead.
Instead of doing roads instead
of doing projects back home.
What we decided to do.
Was completely give over
legislative oversight and then
even in a program where we were
talking about more legislative
oversight.
Instead, we're back to status
quo.
With the exception of the
funding source.
And I just I just don't think
that's acceptable. It's not
acceptable to me. I would dare
say it's not acceptable to most
of this. Most of the people in
this chamber.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Generally from brother Leo.
Madam speaker. This matter,
having been under consideration
for three hours, I moved to
close debate.
There's been a motion to close
debate after three hours. All
those in favor say, Aye.
All those not in favor, say nay.
Yeah, his habit.
Back to the gentleman to close.
Thank you, Madam Speaker body I
want to say a very big thank
you. I think we had a great
conversation today about the
tools that we have to spread Our
surplus now is a time where we
have more resources than the
state has ever had. Madam
speaker body with house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
Bill 196.
We have a new tool that will
support local communities
support innovative programs
across state government.
Help New Mexicans keep us
financially stable and allow us
to do this sort of work. I know
we came up here to do, which is
to make lives better for all new
Mexicans with that and move a do
pass on House appropriations of
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 196.
We're on final passage of house
Appropriations and finance
Committee substitute for house
Photos about to close.
On a vote of 39 in the
affirmative 28 in the negative
house appropriations fine House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 196 has duly passed the
house.
General lady from Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business Committee
reports section it is ordered.
First
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred. Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 14
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a favorite committee
report on Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 14 all those various
privacy night proposed name.
You guys have a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, your Health
and Human Services Committee to
has been referred Senate Bill
127, as amended has had it under
consideration and reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption adoption of
our favorite community report on
Centerville 127 as amended. All
those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
All the Bosnian E. The Civic
Committee adopted
Generally from early Oh,
Mr Speaker. It will be good to
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Announcements.
Generated from Los Alamos. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your House
Judiciary Committee will meet 15
minutes at the close of the
floor session and we also will
be meeting Saturday at 9 A.m.
both in room 309, Mr Speaker.
Members. Take note, Gentlemen
from Dona Ana, Mr Speaker, your
House Appropriations of Finance
Committee will be meeting at
345 in room 307 Remember signal.
Your lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
house Commerce will meet 15
minutes after the floor session.
Members take note any other
announcements? Lady from Berlin.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, the House
Health and Human Services
Committee will not be meeting
tomorrow morning. You're
welcome.
Yes.
Mm round of applause.
Any other announcements. Is
there a trophy somewhere?
Your Lady from Berlin. Er
I ask unanimous consent of the
house that celebrations are in
order.
We have a trophy.
Regulations to the 2024 hoops
for hope. Basketball champions
the House, Hagee's
Sentence.
Take that Senate
Mhm.
You better go get the second
one.
Go find the second trophy. Don't
come back without it.
Gentlemen from San Juan. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. I want to give
kudos to our amazing basketball
team contributions from many
Alright. I think we had a few
star players. We had Biggie
Smalls leading the way in the
paint.
Andre, the giant.
At the top of the key.
And I learned a hard lesson. Um
I will not be carrying a four
substitute for
The budget bill next year after
chair Smalls gave me a nice head
button broke one of my glasses
so
Lesson learned there. But no,
it's a great event for obviously
an important cause. And it's
nice to be able to just, you
know, sort of, let her hair
down. So to speak outside of
this building, So thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Remember, said no
Congratulations, Gentlemen from
civil McKinley.
Question any other
announcements.
Generally from early on before I
go to you, we are going to go to
committee. Now. We'll come back
for some more third reading
later this evening. Everybody's
got the list of what we're going
to take up later tonight.
Um, so don't go too far if you
don't have committee stay
nearby, real charmers just
across the street.
Great place to go relax
generated from a Leo.
Mr Speaker. I will go to that
order of business announcements
and is Linnaeus business
announcements.
Mr Speaker. I didn't even play
basketball last night. Yeah.
Mr Speaker of the House stand in
recess until six PM
