It made it through the process
and only a couple items made it
through the governor's veto pan
this was one that didn't
and what this does is we have an
existing rural health care tax
credit.
And it's designed to for for
some folks that meet the
definition of being in a row
area and being in this list of
providers they get a tax credit
of you know three thousand or
five thousand dollars and it.
The purpose is to help encourage
folks to practice medicine and
new mexico.
Okay so that's great except when
it was put together you could
tell it was put together by
folks who were not in the
profession
because the requirements to
qualify see that you essentially
have to work a forty hour work
week and not take vacation.
And because there's an hour
srash hold and so would this
build is it does two things it
takes care of that hour
threshold issue because we know
nurses work three twelve hour
shifts rate and we want doctors
be able to take vacation so this
corrects that dollar threshold
just like it did last year in
the tax package.
And the second thing it does is
it points to the definition of
rural to the federal definition
not the new mexico definition
and again that was in the tax
package last year to so really
the point here madam charity
meeting members as i'd like to
get this attacks so we can
consider again putting this in
the tax package this year and
with that i'll say for questions
thank you representative of
harbor we're going to go to the
audience for those in support of
the bill to raise your hand.
And go ahead.
The.
So we are trying hard to do this
is bill will help us recruit
providers in those areas and we
strongly support it again this
year
thank you mister anyone else
from the audience in support.
The metro zoom
chair we do have two people.
I'll go ahead and.
We have to be.
Good morning madame chair and
committee members i'm too long
with fall and with the better
albuquerque chamber of commerce
and I am pleased to be here
today in strong support of house
bill two one eight now when a
tax monk in a redistrict nurse
put their heads together you can
be sure that they have worked
out many of the angles needed to
give our health care providers a
fair and yet enticing financial
incentive to practice in our
states rural areas there's no
question that we need more of
these providers general
practitioners and specialist
pays r and l p n's lvn's medical
assistance you name it and some
of that answer is in two
eighteen which takes a more
realistic work at the **** these
professionals work and better
match their hours with the tax
credit.
Will they be working fewer hours
will sure and will part time was
be attempted to go full time to
get the bigger credit tax med
says absolutely and one more
health care professional to be
encouraged to go to rural areas
again tax and read says yeah
this promises to be a win wind
for providers and the
communities don't care for and
we urge you strongly to support
how still two eighteen thank
you.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
carry robin brunder and i'm the
registered lobbyist for the new
mexico medical society this
legislation actually originated
from conversations that we had
with representative jennifer
jones last intern in which we
identified the problem of the
hours the working three twelve
hour shift store needing to be
able to take vacation for burn
out so we are very appreciative
that that's in the bill we also
had conversations around this
definition of rural and it's
it's problematic in the current
statute because the department
of health just determines what's
rural on on a kind of on a year
to your basis and so by
switching the definition to the
federal
definition it really provides
consistency so that we know
exactly what is and what is not
rural and it also allows us to
make the tax credit eligibility
pass just the throney level so
for example there are very rural
areas of stand one county even
though farming ten is in san on
county and so by switching the
definition to the federal
definition we actually would
allow practitioners who are
practicing in stand one county
but outside of farming ten to
receive the tax credit where is
right now anyone who is
practising in san want county is
kind of excluded because stand
one county is not determined a
rural county as a horse so we
think it makes them really great
technical changes were very
appreciative to represent it
jones and representative harper
for bringing it forward and we
hope you move it to the tax
committee
thank you misbernder anyone else
in the audience in support
thank you enthusiasm
let us see go I represent
healthcare providers nurses
occupational therapists
psychologist doctors and.
We said it's support this the
rural tax credit is there is
another bill that adds a whole
bunch of their providers to the
list of people eligible for all
tax credits but these are so
important it's supporting people
to continue to be in a rural
area and you don't have to will
in the rural area you just have
to serve people in the rural
area because you can
have your clinic or whatever
you're your your professional
activity is young that rule mean
those patients so
yeah it's an intentive to help
people who perhaps live in the
close by urban area
and serve so we strongly support
this bill then how is
appreciated
thank you miss siegel is there
anyone in the audience in
opposition to this bill
seeing them in the audience any
on zoom
yeah great we're gonna go ahead
and go to committee for any
questions first up as
representative mason
thank you madam chair thank you
representative
statement the first all you know
it though I agree with what all
of the other said you know it
more of the statement more than
a question you know whatever we
can do to up our health care in
any sense of a rural
is a big problem with it and the
mexico
all health care is is is getting
that they are real problem.
Getting people to come to this
statement then we need to make
it more friendly for them to
come here only one point
what is
what determines rule by the
federal standard i've made I say
that in there but it there's no
definition of what rural is
so madam share represent me
that's a great question and III
looked it up but I don't have
the language I should approach
the language and brought it with
me.
Yeah i'm my apologies for that
but I know in the FIR the tax
department mentions that they
don't expect huge changes it's
just this kind of authorities
that we see at the state level
was the tweak that definition we
won't see that anymore the
federal definition is more
stable you don't
thank you represented madame
chair you don't know what size
the town is considered.
Still so madam chair and
represent mason I I don't recall
exactly and I don't want to miss
well thank you I just know an
artist of our hospital hazard.
The.
So then with the title of it
says rural health care facility
I don't know
qualified or not just wondering
but anyway standard strong
support thank you thank you
thank you mister mason I don't
think there are any other
questions from the committee but
I have a couple questions can
you clean walk me through what
happened with last year's I
sorry put me put this in the
package but perhaps we didn't
yeah so so many members great
questions so this was part of
the tax package last year the
tax package.
I'm had a little more than it
doesn't provisions in it.
And we fit within the one
billion dollar capacity that lfc
has appropriations and the
senate put together but
the governor decided that
that was too much
and I
clearly disagree with that we
have a three point five billion
dollars surplus right now and if
we pass that bill.
It would have still been at
least two point five billion
dollars surplus.
Um but she only
kept the rebates the child tax
credit film.
And
one health care provision which
what was a good one but
everything else got why not be
told and this is one of those
items
thank you representative harper
that's really that was the only
question I had because I it
seems so so familiar yes.
You have a follow up question
representative
very very.
Representative I don't think
that
I apologize
madame chairman because.
Great we have a due pass motion
on the table at brought by
representative at casting on a
secondary by representing me to
melt moya.
Representative lou hunt
representative mason
representative mirable moya.
Representative sanchez.
Representative terrorists are
survived cherk us do you know.
Yes congratulations
representative harper you have a
due pass a unanimous thinking
chair thank you thank you
so much
okay so we have a situation in
which the next bill sponsor is
not in the room so I can do one
of two things I can we could
take a break
until she's here or I can
go in present the bill
not on the bill but I can
president presented we can
you know explain it with I
pardon me with I guess I can't
well the next step is a house
bill two zero nine
one mass requirement I will be
presenting this bill.
Really would love to have the
witness.
Good morning rather shared
monica
you asking.
I think you mister chair members
of the committee i'm I am going
to turn over to my witness to
explain the details of house
bill to zero nine
one a bit thank you
representative or test and thank
you for co sponsoring the spell
um I monica be time the
executive director of the north
central new mexico economic
development districts are were
one of the
were referred to in various ways
in this language in the statute
regional councils of planning
and development also are
councils of government that's
how we're referred to their
seven of us in the state as you
know where regional
organizations that help the
local communities within our
districts are organization works
with santa fe los alamos reoriba
tales call facts mode and sammy
gold counties we also do some
work in rural sound of all
county as well a with this bill
aims to do and this was a
priority that came down from the
governor's office is it aims to
remove the matching requirement
in the base funding that we
receive from the state the base
funding we receive for from the
state is called the state
granting aid each of the
councils of government receives
an equivalent amount and as long
as i've been in this job we've
received a hundred thousand
dollars a year so it's a very
small allocation
and we use it basically to match
some of the federal grants that
we use to operate like for
example at north central we
receive a two planning grounds
from mdot that's actually
federal money to run the
transportation planning
organizations we also receive an
eda grant for operations and it
requires a match so we use this
money to match those federal
grants that are critical to our
operations this fund the state
granting aid has had also a
matching requirement over the
years and interestingly enough
the matching requirement is non
federal even though these are
state dollars it requires us to
match a hundred percent in non
federal dollars.
There has been interest and i'm
not sure if this will be in
house built who are not some
interest from the governor's
office in doubling our
allocation to two hundred
thousand dollars a year if that
happens a lot of the councils of
government cannot meet the one
hundred percent match
requirement and so that is why
the spill is being proposed
however I think that even if the
amount isn't required isn't
increased this would help a lot
of the councils of government
who struggle to meet that match
requirement
thank you very much i'm happy to
answer any questions thank you
monica
thank you mister chair you know
all of us are on this committee
many of us in in the house come
from rural areas and I know for
a fact that my in my district my
county my town the villages that
are in in my district really
struggle to find funding outside
of you know what they what they
get from from the state and so
you their further challenge from
getting in a working with the
cars I think because the cogs
are challenged and finding that
matches so it's not as if my
county can give that money to
the car it's necessarily I think
there have been a couple of
instances in which that was you
know we were able to do that
with our per funding but it's
it's just a continual challenge
and we want to be able to
leverage the resources of our
cogs all around the state and
with that we stand for questions
mister chair thank you thank
you.
Okay now we'll go to the
audience all in favor of this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay anybody on zoom.
All against.
Everybody answer
okay thank you we will go to
committee any questions from the
committee.
Thank you can you go over again
i'm looking at the fire i'm not
seeing it says see fiscal impact
and it just as general fund what
is the what is what are you
receiving again and sure I mean
mr.
The.
Mr john said that you're looking
to get the two hundred governor
executive budget is asking for
two hundred thousand dollars.
Thank you mister
do you know if you have that
mister
i'm so sorry mister chair
representative of the hon I do
not know if we have that so with
this language change and if you
were to get that two hundred
infusion this year.
What would you and how would you
have the language that you don't
need it is at what you are
proposing here mister chair and
mr chair I think this language
change would represent behind
this language change would help
us either way so it would just
eliminate the matching
requirement whether or not we
receive a hundred thousand
dollars or two hundred thousand
dollars it would be helpful a
lot of the other counts we don't
struggle with this as much in
north central but a lot of the
other cogs do struggle to come
up with that one hundred
thousand dollars a match on the
current amount of ground funding
it were doubled it would be
pretty impossible for the rest
of the ****.
An i'm trying to understand what
around this mister chair
as far as the dollars if we had
this language changed
then you would it need this
infusion from the state is that
correct mister chair.
You wouldn't have to have that
matching money out mister
representative
I think the challenge is to make
make the match regardless of the
amount of money that we get from
the state that the cars get from
the state the challenge is
always the match and trying to
get that funding from the match
funding from your local
governments or fill into be has
been really difficult for many
of the cogs all around the state
and so even and I think
especially if there were an
increase in the budget for the
for the cogs then the cards
would have to find an additional
two hundred thousand dollars to
raise which would make that
money that infusion of money I
think harder to bear in some
ways
that the match taking eliminated
the match requirement is is
really something I think that
we've been trying to look at in
many aspects you know it
ensuring the state can provide a
match for federal dollars and in
this case it's taking away the
match requirement which I think
is a move amongst
rural you at the federal level
they're looking at this in rural
areas I know that lots of
uniflanted with some foundations
are looking at that elimination
of match especially for our roll
cards and for rural communities
because it's just so hard to
come up with.
Mr terrible under I get that but
i'm asking specifically about
the i'm confused about the
language if we take out the
language for the matching fund
they don't need us to state to
infuse with the funding is that
correct mister chair
mr terry representative I don't
think that's I don't think
that's the case we need the
language to eliminate the match
requirement to go out and get to
get for non federal match I
think that asking the state for
more funding which is what
happened in the executive budget
I understand
it's sort of a separate it is a
separate issue
please
please mr chairman
representative that's correct
all this does is strike the
language that says we have to
come up with a match that's all
that that this does it takes the
statute and it strips that
language out and so the but if
you read the full taxed of the
statute every year DFA decides
how much they're going to give
the cogs in based funding it's a
total dollar amount they divide
it by seven councils of
government so as long as i've
been the director we've received
a hundred thousand dollars each
council of government and that's
what's called the state granting
aid that separate from like our
grant rating money that's
separate from the money that's
proposed under the growth
process this is money that I
think the cogs have been
receiving probably since they
were recognized in state statute
way back decades ago this is
like the base funding that we
get so all it does is eliminate
the match requirement but that
that dollar amount that we get
every year as determined by dfa
it's determined by the state
budget and it can move around
i'm i'm letting you know what it
has been recently a hundred
thousand dollars but it can
account fluctuate thank you
thank you mister chair I guess
i'm just
a little proplexed about why
we're giving you money for match
funding to back to the state of
what it sounds like
I I
am mrperiod chair representative
hand so the match that we have
to come up with it has to be non
federal.
It can be state dollars it can
be dollars from a local
government it can be
philiphropic dollars it can be
anything but it has to be a non
federal bouch and the message I
would you do with that matter in
what it why do you need that
matching fund and now you're
asking to have it removed.
Why did why is the state giving
you this match you fund this
match i'm confused with this
process can you explain please
because to me what it sounds
like is that we give state gives
the cards gets a set amount of
money and then just to visit to
our cars and then our cards
and then you need this matching
fund for federal grounds correct
representative mister chair
representative line it's not a
matching fund it's a match
requirement so can you
differentiate what amounts
requirement is to imagine from.
Mister mr chair representative
on a match requirement is when
we need to actually leverage the
money within equivalent amount
of money so here were being
required for the state's
contribution we're being
required to double the money
were asking to remove that
requirement but the state is not
necessarily giving us those ones
thank you so in that leverage
like we do we find these
leverage amounts required when
we're looking at.
Like our water settlements and
things like that and so it's an
indicator of the say that we
have and that we have we have
funds available to to show up
things is that correct mis.
A reference to a reference
amount of money so that wish i'm
just trying to understand this
because i'm not in disagreement
what's your asking for i'm just
saying what happens to that
money once we put this language
in place mister share mister
chair representative
I think the money that would be
required for match could be
potentially used for other
things but the real challenge is
actually just finding the match
for some of our rural cogs firm
i've sort of more under resource
codes and so you know I think
and then please monica pipe in
here but you know I think the
cogs are making up their budget
interferative ways some of the
money comes from this grant in
aid dollars from the state
directly which requires a match
you can you state money but you
can't use federal money to meet
that match which is the
requirement so what so so
eliminating that language would
allow the cogs especially who
are under resourced to you not
have to go ask for phone topic
dollars or for their local
governments to provide that
match I think that's the big
challenge is those local
governments.
And mr chairman representative
luhand the past two years dfa
has has become I mean this is
always how the statute has read
by now basically if we can not
show one to one match for the
sga funds we have to reduce our
sgia grant accordingly before
the end of the fiscal year so
let's say I only came up with
eighty thousand dollars this
year and match my grant would be
reduced back to eighty thousand
dollars so it just it just
eliminates a requirement for us
I think we are all pretty
committed to going out there and
leveraging funds I mean that's
kind of how we operate that's
how we do everything but this
just makes things a little
harder for us to have the
snatching requirement here is of
my question to still is would
take in this putting this
inacting this language and are
you going you then will that
money that gfa.
Has initially been given you go
away.
And mr chair representative I
know it will not that the the
base funding will remain there
there just will not be a
requirement for us to bring in
the leverage that's what i'm
asking because you're removing
language because you need
because of the read this
requirement that we put upon you
and so then that releases you
from using that money for this
requirement so then therefore
they're money is going to be
used how mister mister chair
mr chair representative behind
the way that we used the sgi a
funding now and I think pretty
much I speak for everybody
we operate primarily on federal
grants our state as you can see
this is historically been our
based funding hundred thousand
dollars isn't really much we use
this funding to match federal
grants that have a mouth
requirement so in our case we
care of up our one hundred
thousand dollars I think twenty
some thousand at forty some
thousand go to match dot u
grants that we have and then an
other thirty of this goes to
match our eday operating ground
then it's it's useful and into
those of the manager accession
of it yeah it's actually the
requirement port that's my
that's that was simply my
question thank you
and you know any other
questions.
Thank you mister chair thank you
so much i'm i'm I think you
answered some might on my
question anyway but I want to
i'm kind of like i'm trying to
rap my brain about around it
so basically you have to have if
you could only find sixty
thousand that is in kind of your
bank account right now you would
only get sixty thousand from
from the state correct mr chair
representative
my that is correct we have to
have a match one to one met one
to one and so I think basically
of mister chair and
representative I think this is
this is great because if by some
chance yeah you don't have to go
begging for the money you're
still going to try to find the
money because you still need
these third certain things but
you're not going to have you you
can still have the full amount
especially like I I can
definitely see if it becomes a
two hundred thousand type of
thing um that's a lot more
trying to figure this out and
and that's a lot of money that
the covers could definitely use
in order to better things and
won't have access to because
they could only barely get let's
say the sixty thousand so I
think this would be a great idea
I have a a really quick question
the when I was reading through
this is it all the current like
the the the get this because it
says if it's
a review applications and i'm on
page three
rebuild application for the
granting aid and it was
determined that the regional
council is qualified to receive
money
then then it tells you that it's
going to do it as there's some
that don't get it for whatever
reason or or is it.
Mr representative to my
knowledge we have all received
it so I would assume that that
provides some kind of provision
if
you have a council of
governments that's maybe not.
You know there's some concern
there right that would enable df
to say we need to intervene here
but to my knowledge we have
always all have received all
seven councils of government
have always received it
excellent thank you thank you
very much
thank you I just have a few
comments I think this is good
for our rule communities that
can afford that match especially
in my area like pet goes or in
all the city last figures the
county um I think it's something
that we eliminate to match and
it'll bring a lot more.
And thank you mister chair thank
you committee yeah I think I
just want to elaborate on that
if it means that our cogs can
use that funding to turn to
other things like hiring more
crowdwriters or project managers
which can help our rural areas
as well because that's sort of
the one of the biggest problems
we have in rural areas is that
there's money we can't access it
in the cogs play hugely
important role in bringing that
money to the districts thank you
mister chairman thank you it's
definitely a need
absolutely thank you
do pass has been made by
representative on just second by
miss middle almoya roll call
please
representative
representative mason
yes
representative mirable moya yes
representative sanchez sorry.
Vice casiano yes and sure or
tells yes
thank you we have a dupa house
bill to all night thank you mr
chair thank you committee.
All right think you're everyone
that concludes our house real
development langram and cultural
first committee we are now
adjourned thank you.
