Party last night.
Second best dressed man.
The first one was his son Brace.
Sir, Can you please wear your
coat on the floor?
To go.
You ready to go?
Ready to go
ready to go.
Are you wearing tennis shoes?
A reminder no jeans allowed on
Roll call is
Closed. We have a quorum.
Generally from Burnley, or
percentage of on your own are
new with today's invocation.
Oh God, the Fountain of wisdom
and justice.
Whose will is good and gracious
and whose last truth?
We beseech you so to guide and
bless our senators and
representatives in this
legislature of the state.
And in all places of public
trust that they may enact such
laws shall please. You bring us
into common life of justice,
equity and peace and to the
glory of your name and the
welfare of all creation.
Send your spirit to inspire
those entrusted with power and
authority to see us not with
human eyes, but the eyes of our
loving life giving and
liberating creator
And grant us all the grace to
have our eyes opened and her
heart and livened.
To the good news in the world.
Craving healing.
Through Christ, Our Lord.
Gentlemen from current backup of
the loupe Results on Miguel
Preserve Samara with a pledge of
allegiance.
And the general Lady from Sun.
And Sandoval already was Santa
Fe Towers, representing Barrera
with the Salutin in Mexico flag.
Play ball.
Generally the from Burnley or
representative Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is
ordered good afternoon members.
Happy Saturday to everybody
their announcements.
The gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie, no 10% talent.
Mr Speaker. I really I was just
looking at the board. Do we have
a committee in this morning?
Commerce is still meeting
We're checking on that, sir.
Yeah, I think going into third
reading this morning with that
many members won't go Matic.
We've got some ceremonial things
We've got to do and book Keep
housekeeping that we need to do.
The announcements, right members
just give you a run of show
today. We're going to do some
committee reports. We do have a
certificate.
Um, in honor of military and
veterans Day. As you know,
there's a celebration happening
upstairs. Um, and then we were
gonna We've got a couple of
bills. I believe a couple of
bills, maybe one bill that we're
going to remove from the rules
Committee pursuant to an
executive message.
Um, and then we'll give folks a
chance to get back in the room
before we go to third reading.
So we'll be good to go.
Any other announcements.
All right. Gentlemen, from
McKinley San Juan's, according
to Oh, and Valencia,
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I want to
thank everybody in this chamber
for remembering Veterans Day at
the Capitol. It's very important
and I was determined member. If
it wasn't for veterans, we would
not be here. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Certainly.
Universally accepted fact for
sure.
Any other announcements. Your
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Penske.
All right.
I'm going to go down to
The bill that will be removed
from the rules Committee
pursuant to an executive
message. I'll go real slow so
everybody can follow along.
House Bill 259, sponsored by
representative Cerrato.
Deemed Jermaine Pursuant to
Article four, Section five B two
House executive message 45.
Removed from the House Rules
Committee.
Printed and referred to the
House Energy and Natural
Resources Committee. Then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee again. That's House
Bill 259, introduced by Linda
Cerrato.
Jermaine pursuant to House
executive message 45.
Printed referred to the House
Energy Committee and how sex
Asian and Revenue Committee
All right, Little lady from
Berlioz's Casey.
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 116 has had
it under consideration. Reports
with recommendations Do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
116. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye.
All supposedly a the eyes have a
commuter reported opted.
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 127 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house Bill 127 all
those in favor saying if I would
say Nah, I
All those opposed nay.
That was deep and close the eyes
of a community adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 184, as
amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Adoption. We are on adoption of
a favorable committee report on
house Bill 184 all those papers
and if I by saying I
All those opposed nay, the
subcommittee reported opted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee team has been referred
how straight resolution 11 has
had it under consideration
Reports say, with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Joint
Resolution 11. All those in
favor, say nine
All those opposed. Nay, the eyes
have it. Committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee to has
been referred House Bill 134, as
amended has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a Federal committee
report on House Bill 134 as
amended. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Hosni. The eyes have a committee
report adopted Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 195 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker. Move
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
195. All those in favor say,
probably seen I
I was supposed to be a committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker, you're unwilling and
engrossing committee has been
referred. House Memorial 40
House Memorial. 41 has had them
under consideration. Reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory is
signing by the officers of the
House Respectfully submitted
Eleanor Chavez chair.
Move Adoption adoption of
favorable committee reports on
house memorials 4041 all those
in favor signify by saying, Aye.
All supposed, Nate Committee
reported updated
That the record reflect that
copies of the enrolling in gross
copies of House Memorial 4041.
Have been adopted and read an
open session.
Mr Speaker, you're rolling in
engrossing committee to him has
been referred. House Memorial 36
House Memorial. 37 has had them
under consideration. Reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in and gross
preparatory designing by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair.
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Committee report on House
memorials 36 and 37 all those
papers and problems and I
I was supposed to say the report
adopted the record reflect that
the doing rolling the gross
copies of House memorials. 36
and 37 were signed by the
officers of the House in Open
session.
The lady from Berlioz's
Mr Speaker and movie go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
disordered.
Members. Did you enjoy the 100
Bill party?
Uh um.
I was able to make a brief
appearance last night and it
looked like everybody was having
a really, really good time,
which I'm really glad for if
anyone, particularly any of the
sergeants at arms, need Advil or
ibuprofen for their sore feet of
all that, because of all the
dancing Um please come see me.
Ah, And for those of you who
don't know leader Lanes got some
sick moves.
The men can dance.
Big props to represent the
custody Yano for pulling
together such a good party and
Senator McCutcheon, who is a
freshman senator, I believe in
people together a great party as
well. And I do want to give a
big shout out to Betty Hockey's
who is Marciano's legislative
assistant, who put in a whole
lot of work behind the scenes to
help get that thing done.
Congratulations. Glad everybody
had a great time.
Hopefully now you're ready to
put in a
18 hour day.
From early or percent of chasing
speaker. I hope we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Lady from Brenda Leo.
Mr Speaker. And will we go to
that sort of business messages?
Objection, disordered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 76.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 87 as amended Senate Bill
126 and request the concurrence
of the House respectfully
submitted Sherry D. New Hans and
Chief clerk message will be
entered.
Generally from Burnell, your
representative Chase E.
Mr Speaker. I want to go to that
order, business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered
generated from Valencia with
announcement.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. I
just wanted to in regards to the
100 Bill party last night. I
wanted to say a huge thank you
and hopefully I'll get through
this without getting emotional.
but huge. Thank you to
representative Castano because
he had the band sing a song for
an hour of my father.
And and it was one of his
favorites. So there was a huge
honor. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. We're
thinking of you. And of course
here to support you in this
moment.
Um And may I ask what song was
that General 80.
Cruz de Madera. It's a great
song. That's a good one. That is
his favorite song. And if those
of you that are friends of me on
Facebook, I had recorded him
translating it to me because my
parents didn't teach me how to
speak Spanish. They used it to
talk about me. So so one day I
recorded him. We were listening
to it and he was translating it
to me. So
That's something that I shared
as soon as he passed a few weeks
ago. So so it's It's that song
is always special to us. Thank
you, which would translate into
wooden cross beautiful song, One
of the classics.
Gentle lady from Burnley or
representative Syriana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
want to introduce my built for
Veterans Day today.
You mean your certificate
certificate? Yes. Yes, gentle
lady. Go right ahead.
Can. Um it's a certificate so
you could just go right ahead.
We don't have to go to third
reading. Okay. Um, Mr Speaker,
I'd like to introduce it and
have it read.
To the body to read.
The House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico declares
February 3rd 2024 military and
Veterans Day whereas the United
States was founded on the belief
that all Americans should live
in a free society and are
guaranteed the inalienable
rights of life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. And
whereas the freedoms that are
enjoyed do not come without a
price.
But have been fought for and
defended by the nation's
military service members who
sacrificed to preserve and
protect these freedoms and the
nation from all enemies, foreign
or domestic. And whereas New
Mexico residents have a long and
proud history of military
service, dating back to the
native Americans who are willing
to fight for and defend their
land from European settlers
And whereas in 1862 new Mexican
troops were instrumental in
turning back Confederate forces
at the battle of Glorietta past
And whereas new Mexican troops
also served in the first United
States volunteer cavalry known
as the Rough Riders under
Commander Theodore Roosevelt,
and help drive Spanish troops
out of Cuba and led to victory
in the Spanish American war in
1898, and whereas 14,100 new
Mexicans served in World War
1 49,500 in World War two
25,000 in the Korean conflict
and 57,000 in the Vietnam
conflict.
And whereas since the Gulf War
in 1900, more than 50,000 new
Mexicans have served in the
military and whereas the
military influence remains
strong in New Mexico, with four
military installations, 14,333
active duty personnel 7776
National Guard and Reserve
members and 141,746 veterans
living in the state.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico. The New
Mexico's current and former
military service members be
honored and thanked for their
service. And that February 3rd
2024 big proclaimed military and
Veterans Day in the House of
Representatives signed and steal
that the capital in the city of
Santa Fe.
Generally back to you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I just I've
always felt like an honor to be
in the air force. My dad was
army. My daughter was a major in
the air force, and my son was a
marine. So it's been something
my dad instilled in all of us
that serving your country is is
very special and not something
that everyone can do. So, um,
I'm just proud to be in the air
force. So thank you, Um
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Any
other comments on the
certificate?
Ladies. Thank you for bringing
it forward. Um, I believe it is.
Ah, our duty today and every day
to honor and remember that
certain the service and the
sacrifice of so many people
throughout Throughout the years
men and women who put their life
on the line to help secure the
freedoms in the, um
Understanding of this country
and and you know, so many of us
are able to enjoy the fruits of
that incredible sacrifice, and
it is up to us to to honor them
with with words with actions
every every single day. Um
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you, representative for bringing
this forward.
Um as some of you know, I had an
incredible
Um and, um, blessed 25.5 year
career.
With the Department of Veterans
Services. So every day was
Veterans Day for me.
Getting up and going to work was
never a question for me.
I loved what I did.
I felt it an honor to get up
every day.
And take care of those who took
care of me.
Um
It was
It was something that
Was not only a career for me,
but it was a passion and it
remains a passion.
Um
Luckily, I still get calls from
around the state veterans
needing help, not understanding
how to navigate the system.
Um and I'm blessed to be able to
help them still.
Um, I've helped members of this
body.
When they've had constituents
that needed some help.
Um
So for me, um everyday still is
Veterans Day.
Um
I loved what I did. I was
blessed to have that career. I
worked with some incredible
people who
We're not in it for the money.
We're in it because it was a
passion.
Because they had served this
country and then found a way to
serve those who served alongside
them, so I appreciate
Representative said Indiana and
I
Appreciate the other two
veterans representative Garcia
representative Elkann, who
While I was with the department
got the pleasure of working with
them, along with representative
side Indiana to push veterans
issues forward and now I get to
be on this side of the desk and
Um, continue that fight so
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you to every veteran, not only
in this body.
That are listening to us. But
every veteran in the in the
state in this country because we
enjoy freedom, we can sit here.
And make decisions because you
stood in the gap for us. So
thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Gentlemen from civil
and McKinley representative
Alkon.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, representative. Very
Nana has been proud of years are
one number one woman veteran in
the house, Probably the number
one woman veteran in the whole
legislature. So, Mr Speaker, you
know that
I was one of those, uh, at the
time that it happened, unlucky
guys that got drafted.
But after everything has gone by
and everything gets passed
The 19 months and one day that I
served in uniform.
Probably the best investment of
my life. Especially today is
I've been getting to be an old
man.
Today. You know my world. Of
course, there was a draft in
today's world. The draft is
gone.
And one of the things that we're
hearing a lot. There's a lot
that a lot of young men and
women in today's world are not
wanting to serve in the
military. We have to get out
there and we have to let people
know.
That service in the military is
an honorable and great thing to
do. I mean, like I said, I mean,
when they drafted me, I was not
very happy. But let me tell you
it's a whole different world
today. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Yes, Thank you, Mr Speaker.
You know, I also attended the
veterans and military.
Day celebration in the rotunda.
It's definitely a blessing to
see all those people serve and
protect us.
Um I have been blessed that my
my grandfather was a purple
heart. My dad was three tour
veteran of Vietnam.
My daughter who I had to sign
when she was 17.
I signed for her to go into the
air Force.
That was a tough thing. Because
you still your little girl and
and it
Ah, Every kid is different,
right? So my older ones.
One is going to be a funeral
director is, you know it's going
to school for that. The other
one was is a biologist saving
turtles in the in the in the
Gulf of Mexico, and then I have
the third one who wants to go
doesn't want to go to
traditional college wants to
serve the in the military, and
that was a blessing.
Ah, And so she's in Okinawa now
and, uh,
You know, so we think of when I
see those those uniforms in
their active duty and those who
have served before it's an honor
to be on the military and
Veterans Affairs Committee and
and listen to their stories. We
have a lot of work. We've done a
lot of good work. We have a lot
of more a lot more work to do
that we need to
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady yield Mr Speaker, I
stand and support of the
General ladies, Um, memorial
today.
Um, I just wanted to acknowledge
all of our veterans and thank
you for your service to our
country.
My ex husband was in the Navy.
My who's now deceased. My father
who's deceased, buried at the
national Cemetery, and five of
my uncles are buried there as
well and they were all in the
military at the same time during
the years between the forties.
And the sixties, so I just speak
and recognition of our veterans
and thank you. Thank you so much
for your service.
Thank you. Thank you, lady just
just to remind her where we were
on a certificate, so you guys
can skip the yielding
Because we're not official on
third reading. I'm going to go
next to the generator from
Valencia on the certificate.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I wanted
to first definitely on you are
the are three veterans here in
this room. What you serving your
country in that aspect is it is
something that I wish I could
have done. But I honor you for
it. Because thank you for your
service. My favorite veteran, of
course, is my father. He was
Airborne corporal in the Korean
War. And so he he He, actually,
um
For Veterans Day this year,
which I'm so thankful that
happened before he passed the
combat veterans actually did a
ride for him and honored him on
Veterans Day. So it was a very
beautiful service. But my my
family is filled with veterans.
Um I live in a in a military
world with all of my uncles and
cousins from almost every single
branch. I think the only thing
we haven't no
I have a nephew in the in the
Coast Guard, so all of the
branches are covered pretty
much, but I honor you for your
service. Thank you very much.
Thank you, General Lady. Next we
go to the generated from
Bendinelli. Your representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
rise to thank my colleague
representatives bringing this
certificate forward and I also
want to honor and thank
Our colleagues in the house and
in the Senate who have served
As you all know, this is one of
my favorite days when we can
stand up and honor those that
we've been close to
And I always appreciate being
able to honor my father.
Felipe through hell, Roybal.
He's a three war veteran combat
veteran.
World War 2 82nd Airborne
Normandy.
Korea War POW Purple Heart
To Tourism. Vietnam Special
Forces Green Beret.
He was our hero. He was our
warrior.
And he was raised Mr Speaker.
Very poor in Las Cruces is
He entered the military
underage.
As a means to help support
His family on the fortunately or
unfortunately he had three
daughters.
And he wanted to make sure that
his daughters
Did not.
I want to serve the military.
Because he was old school.
And he felt that we needed an
education as women.
In order to pursue
Ah, our careers and our dreams.
He did not live to see.
The fact that
He had two grandsons.
But he didn't live to see that
he has four great grandsons. I
have
Two sons.
And four grandsons. So my family
is surrounded by men.
Although he was surrounded by
women.
And unfortunately
My two sons.
Chose other paths.
So I say this because in his day
He wanted to see.
A path in the military for women
to be in combat. He felt
That women
Had the strength.
Had the intelligence
Had everything that was needed.
To be a combat soldier.
And so I just say this because
It was always his dream.
To see more women in the
military.
And it was we thought that that
was just a really special
Um
Allegiance that he had
But also he honored us. My
mother and his daughters.
In this special way because he
felt that we were just as equal
as he
And we had the capacity and
probably more so than he
To serve in the military, so I
share that with everyone.
In hopes that we can continue to
support our military honor our
veterans.
And make our military
As always, one that we can be
proud of around the world. Thank
you very much. Representative.
Thank you. Gentlemen, from San
Juan. Percent of Duncan. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I to stand in
support of this. My father
served. My brother served my two
nephews serve. They can't tell
me where they serve Otherwise,
they said they'd have to kill
me. So I prefer not to ask that
question. So
But we honor our veterans today,
and we're grateful for what they
do and what they will do in the
coming years. Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen. Generally
from Rio Arriba Sandwell Center
Faint House representative.
Thank you and I to rise and
support and recognition of my
dear friend and colleague,
Debbie Star Nora, and she's a
real leader in the House in
Veterans affairs, and she
invited me to a meeting this
year and I went with her to, um
Um, Sakura, it was
And it was a fascinating
meeting. I learned a lot. I also
want to recognize Mr Speaker and
colleagues at for my brothers
were veterans Uh, Jerry
Dickinson, Denny Dickinson, Bill
Herrera and Jim Herrera.
Ah!
Bill, um, volunteered, Uh,
To go to war, and and this was
Vietnam and I remember being at
the airport and wondering if I'd
ever see him again.
And my brother Jim, because Bill
went to Vietnam went to Germany
and these were the days of the
draft. These were the days of
Vietnam.
Um
When Bill came back, he really
didn't talk very much about
Vietnam. He didn't want to.
really tell any stories or talk
to anybody. And I have to say at
that time this country wasn't
very welcoming.
And I'm embarrassed for this
country about how they treated
our veterans had this time and
it was only like five years ago.
We were on a cruise together on
our way to, um
Alaska.
And we're both early risers. So
we get up at four or five in the
morning and have coffee, and
that's when he started telling
me all these stories about
Vietnam and I'd never heard them
before.
He never wanted to share them
before.
And I was just
It frightened me to the core of
my soul.
Um he was in special operations
in Cambodia.
Ah Ah ah! He was a green beret.
He went with his commander.
And ah
The stories they told were
stories he told me where
harrowing, so I don't think
I don't think um, my colleague
that
Veterans always share their
stories. Or maybe it takes them
years to tell or years to
confront.
But I would like to stand and
thank all of them and thank you
for your service to this
country. Thank you. Thank you.
gentle lady gentlelady from
Chavez representative as ill.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
We do have in my family. We do
have a long history of veterans.
My two great grandfathers fought
during the war between the
states on opposite sides.
Um
My two grandfathers, both in the
army fought in World War one.
My dad was in the army stationed
in Japan during World War two.
My brother served in the army. I
have I had. Excuse me. I had
Three.
Bonus Air Force kids, one was an
F 16 pilot.
They're the ones in 19 pilot.
The one that is deceased wasn't
They're the ones in 19 pilot.
The one that is deceased was an
eighth was an F 15 pilot.
I've got one
Bonus.
Young man that is now in the
Marine Corps now.
Uh, working in Washington, D c
Mr Speaker. We do have some
other people in the house that
our veterans and that a lot of
those are our sergeant at arms.
And Mr Speaker. It's very
Very important to me.
That we take care of our
veterans.
More often than not. We put
other things ahead of our
veterans.
And our veterans are the ones
that gave us this opportunity to
be a free nation, and we should
thank God every day for their
service. Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you, General Lady.
The job from Britain and EU
representative Reed Man.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And, uh,
you know, I want to honor my
family as well.
Ah! My grandfather was World War
one and retired army. My dad was
in World War two.
Uh,
Seriously injured in the battle
of the Bulge. Ellen and I have
got
Three son in laws and two of
them are now out. One is still
in the military.
Um and I want to thank
representative Alan Martinez.
When he was at Veterans Affairs.
I contacted him and he helped
one of my son in law's obtained
benefits, uh, that he was having
a very difficult time Obtaining
And then lastly, my father in
law was Korea and Vietnam.
I'm wearing his below today. He
died just a few months ago.
But one of the biggest things
that he had was distinguished
flying cross.
He had been shot down three
times, captured twice and
escaped twice.
But all of our veterans is why
we have a free nation. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from really was
Sandoval in San Juan,
representative. Lengthy
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me
first begin by giving great
gratitude and thank you to all
of our veterans that served in
this chamber. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, for your
sacrifice is annoyed and for
this country and for all of us,
I also want to recognize someone
that I that oftentimes is a
common thread between all of you
in this room, especially you,
representative.
Garcia, and that's my father,
who was also a Marine who is a
Vietnam veteran. And so we
remember it. We acknowledge him
today to Jerry Lenti and also my
brother, Alonzo. I would love
who was also a Army veteran, but
I also want to recognize someone
by the name of Miguel Trujillo
was who was a World War two
veterans that funding that war
came back and wanted to vote.
And said that you can't because
you're not a citizen because
you're a native American. He
fought back and then got us all
the right to vote as native
Americans, and we cannot forget
him on this day, either. Thank
you. Thank you, gentlemen. The
gentleman from representative
Block.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker,
and I just also wanted to rise
today and say thank you to our
veterans. I'm blessed to
represent Alamogordo, which is a
military town and Mr Speaker. I
just want to just say thank you
to the representative. Here. She
is in the air Force. And you
know, I'm blessed every single
day to represent the airmen in
my area. Which is why on my desk
every day I see my F 117.
Nighthawk.
And it reminds me every day of
the airmen who I represent. And
the military folks who ensure
that our communities are safe
and that our country is
protected. Mr Speaker. I also
have many veterans in my family,
My my grandfather, Johnny Block,
He was a master sergeant in the
Army. And on my other side, my
granddad, Pete, he was also in
the Army, and I'm just very
blessed with the
Focus in the chamber like
representative Suddenly Ana and
so many others, Representative
Garcia and everyone else who is
serving our community, and
especially in the Senate. We
have senator Pope and we have so
many other great folks who have
served our country and I just
applaud all of them, and I think
them and I want them to know
every single day. I remember
them and the service of our
veterans and our active duty
military and I will always
remember them. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Cibola.
McKinley, Berna Leos and want
Zokora Valencia. I got them all,
representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. You
know, I wanted to reach out to
every member of this, uh
Chamber and I want to thank you
all for remember veterans.
You know, it's Ah, It's a good
deal. You know, A lot of people
remember a veteran for Veterans
Day when they go put a flag on
the gravestone and all.
And you remember Reb
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker represent
what would you yield to me?
She doesn't have to yield around
a certificate so you're good to
go anyway. Sorry for that, But
you know when when people
remember you
Your hand and say Thank you.
That means a lot.
You know when a veterans already
deceased and you put a flag on
under headstone, that's fine and
world respectful, But when you
respect the veteran is walking
around, talking to people and
trying to do a good job that
that means a lot to me.
You know, in my family
My dad was in World war two
years in the Navy had two
brothers in the air Force that
went to Vietnam. I want an army
went to Vietnam.
And I went to Vietnam. My senior
crib.
I got traded from high school
the last time May of 1968 and
that was in South Vietnam in
December. December 1916 the
little boy.
You know?
And here I am. And you know what
the non Ireland people remember.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The gentleman
from Ben Ali representative
Garcia system, a speaker.
Ah!
Camera representing test
Speaker.
A long tradition of
Familiar
Serving in the military.
Type.
Uh, entities. Um
My great grandpa to the third
power.
Of course, a Francisco my essay.
Born in 1753 here in Santa Fe.
Was a soldier at the procedure.
Here in Santa Fe.
At the time of the 1776 American
Revolution.
And some of, you know
procedures.
We're like military forts.
Established by the Spanish
colony.
Mexico Santa Fe was that
procedural.
There was also procedures in
California, for example, San
Diego
Speaker.
Also my great grandpa to the
fourth power.
Ptolemy Martin.
Born in 1735.
It was also a procedural soldier
here in Santa Fe.
And, uh, the procedure was the
most speaker wasn't just
militarily.
Or a military and sense
Also was judicial.
Because the procedure soldiers
also settle disputes.
Amongst the residents amongst
the native Hispanic.
Tribal entities as well.
Something like great grandpa to
the six power.
Time.
In 1680.
Yeah. Guadarrama, my Lord.
Which is now known as Durango,
Mexico.
Was also procedure, soldier.
Here in Santa Fe in 1696.
And my dad.
Who died at the young age of 48
years old.
I was a senior.
In high school.
Fighting World War two
He died at the young age of 48
years old.
But it was my dad's
My dad was an inspiration for me
carrying that.
Property tax exemption bill.
400% service, the same ball
vets.
In 2003.
Because
My dad fought not the front
lines in France and Germany.
Told me a lot of stories
horrific.
Which was uncommon for
Lot of lot of red ones We don't
like to share.
But
The thing that I know that
really inspired me most about my
dad.
Was when I was a teenager, You
know, Chicano kids.
We're going up era.
Which was kind of a drunken
spree, right?
You know, and, uh so naturally,
I come in like 34 in the
morning.
And many times I've seen my dad
crawling on the ground.
On the floor.
And he was reliving.
His word is
He was actually talking to his
body.
He was actually kind of giving
orders to some of the the his
comrades in terms of the battle
actual battle.
And so I'd wake him up.
And I take him back to bed.
You know, in my mom never knew
that until
You know, a couple of years
before she passed away and 2019.
When I was telling my siblings
all eight of us
The stories of my dad.
And, um
But you know, it's the most
speaker. Our veterans, um
Should be commended.
Especially for that legislation
that I passed in. 2003 is the
most speaker.
Because
Testifying at
Was hearings.
Veterans from Varela's.
You know one, Mr Dominguez for
in Vietnam.
And his left arm was
Full of bumps.
Crevices, basically like a
gunshot once in his arm.
And flag your challenges.
He came to testify there from a
Crisco and then Aaron Triska
land. Grant is the mad speaker
and
And Flavio.
If he went through a metal
detector. It sent it off.
Even if you if he was
Bone naked
mainly because you know Japanese
grenade fell on his back, and he
shrugged it up, but it didn't
have time to kind of throw it
too far as a little exploded and
he was full of shrapnel.
You know, it's the speaker and
his like people like flower.
Your Chavez is the most speaker
never told their family.
About their experiences.
Fighting in the Pacific.
Against the Japanese fascist Mr
Speaker.
When I passed this legislation,
it's like a lot of veterans
started opening up.
Claudio, They start opening up
to me.
In front of their family.
And the wife would say
afterwards. You know, Miguel has
never opened up to anyway. This
kind of sharing with your story
like been telling it for years.
But, you know
That's the dignity that these
veterans have.
You know, it's like they go
through life without any
recognition. Any
acknowledgement.
And Flavio. I mean, he just
shrugged it off.
Your job for the city.
Okay?
And the human resource of
individual applications said
Sorry We don't have any
openings.
And through the application in
the garbage.
The garbage can right in front
of him. Speaker Here's the
veteran
Time Purple Heart that the job
with the city of
So what did flower you do?
He honed his skills became part
of the
A Brazilian and was outstanding.
You know, concrete cement
finisher.
That built a lot of those high
rises in Alburquerque. That's
what Redlands are still,
speaker. People like cloud your
challenge. They never get the
dignity and acknowledgement and
the respect and the honor that
they deserve.
So thank you, representative,
citing Roma for being this.
Certificate forward.
Thank you gentlemen. The gentle
lady from Eddy and Lea,
representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I to
stand in support of this
certificate and just truly do
appreciate the work of all our
military members, and their
service is absolutely key to to
our nation.
Mr Speaker and members. I just
speak briefly, perhaps about
some of the military legacy and
my family.
My dad was on Omaha Beach in the
first hour on D Day, and he saw
some really horrible things.
It was God's blessing that he
could live to tell about it. But
in fact, Mr Speaker, he didn't
tell about it.
It was something he just didn't
want to talk about.
Uh, Mr Speaker. My dad had
several brothers who were also
involved as American soldiers.
They all came back again. A
blessing from the Lord.
My father in law was enabled
Pilot and his squad stationed in
Alaska.
And a few other places, but they
are in the history books for
what they did for the sake of
the nation, and I'm proud of
that legacy as well.
Mr Speaker. My husband is a West
Point graduate. He is a very
honorable man.
He lives by the motto duty on
our country.
His character is stellar, and I
believe that was instilled in
him, not just in his upbringing.
But in his time at the academy,
and so I'm very proud of him as
well.
My husband and I have a son, Our
youngest son, who is in the
United States Army.
Ah, very fine Young man as well.
Uh, Nathan is first lieutenant
at fort more in Georgia. Very
proud to say he, um
He went through Ranger school,
and, uh, past that and is now
looking forward to some other.
Very interesting moves in the
military. I believe he's going
to be a big part of great
service also to our country.
And for the cause of freedom.
So, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to
say thank you to all of our
veterans.
I esteem them highly.
And, uh, God bless them all.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Lady
gentlelady from Benaglio and
Sandoval, Representative Kids.
Thank you very much. Mr Speaker.
I to stand in support of the
certificate. Thank you for
bringing this forward.
Um, I I hope that the body is
able to walk through the rotunda
today and see the wonderful men
and women of all the branches up
there doing a lot of the same
work that we're doing here. They
have wonderful services and
information about supporting the
individuals and the community in
which they support
Um and and they're doing it
quickly and doing it. Well, I
hope you can check it out. Um, I
too has many of us are have many
loved ones that have served in
branches. My almost 6 ft seven
grandfather was gunner and he
Wajima for World War two, and
I've had uncles and cousins
serve in Vietnam.
And my brother, who lives here
in New Mexico has been in was
served in Iraq for a year in
Honduras in the early nineties.
Um I just bring it to the body's
attention because we as we pay
homage and gratitude to our
military men and women. I want
to let us know that
What a huge culture.
Yeah, and, uh,
That we are entwined with
throughout our state with our
military bases. I served for
seven years as an honorary
commander at Kirtland Air Force
Base and understanding the
community leadership and how it
impacts our culture and our
community. We are not separate.
We are very much entwined and we
need to take care of each other.
And thank you so much
representative for bringing the
certificate forward.
Thank you, General lady. There's
next. We've got the German from
Chavez, representative Henry
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I
would just like to thank the
representative Sarin, Jonah for
bringing this. Um and, uh, I
greatly appreciate it and I want
to honor all our veterans, but I
stand today specifically.
For two men who had
And a huge impact on my life.
One was my father.
Who are passed away just a few
months ago.
He was in the 101st airborne.
In Vietnam in 1967 and 68.
And my father in law.
Who was in the air Force and
flew on the S R 71 blackbird.
They were. Well, My father in
law is still alive, so I
shouldn't say they were, um,
they are
Both great men who had a great
impact on my life.
Um, I spent a number of years on
the USS Asheville, SSN 758 in
the United States Navy.
And so I think Representative
Sanjana very much for this and I
look forward to working with you
on veterans issues. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentlelady
from McKinley resented
Lundstrom. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I'd also like to add my
Um
Support to representatives.
Carignane has done and great big
shout out to gallop. I don't
know that everybody knows that.
Gallup, New Mexico is the most
patriotic small town in the
United States, and that's the
title that we really are proud
of. And you can walk through
that community and and you can
see it all over through the
community. And as you're driving
in from my 40
From the east, you'll see a flag
that is far bigger than any
other flag I've seen on this
capital and it's right right
next to the interstate, and I
think that is a major indication
of where the people I represent.
Thank you know what their
priorities and values are? Thank
you again, representative.
Thank you, Lady from towels,
representative or tests. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. I stand in
support of representatives.
Sanjana's certificate. Um I to
come from a military family on
both sides. Very, very proud
veterans, and I'm grateful for
their service, and they
represent a district that has a
lot of veterans and a lot of
pride, and they've worked really
hard with the county with me,
Senator Gonzalez, the governor,
the whole federal delegation to
bring funding to our community
to build a veteran's cemetery.
And this summer it will open so
I invite the body to tell us
over the summer words beautiful,
very low lows of seventies and
eighties, too.
Honor all of those who have
sacrificed so much and to
welcome you welcome the veterans
and show them that you support.
Um what they have done, so
please look out for that. Thank
you, gentlemen from San Miguel
and Torrance. Thank you.
President. Enough for me is
forward. I just want to give a
shout out to my brother who
served in Desert Storm and in
Afghanistan and my nephew who
also served in Afghanistan.
And all the veterans from my
district as well. Um, this is
the first time this session that
I get a request from the V F W
there in Las Vegas to renovate
their
Space there and, you know, I
funded him almost fully funded
him for the renovation, or we
need to thank them for their
service. I know. Sometimes we
forget why we're free. But we
just want to thank them and keep
them. May God keep him safe. God
bless And thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Members. Why don't we rise and
give a big giant round of
applause, although at Toronto's
that are upstairs right now?
All the way to the rotunda.
Thank you.
Mr Mr Speaker.
May I have a lady from early?
Oh, thank you. I had a short
Really something very funny to
tell everybody a story that
occurred here. My father 93
years old came to my swearing
in.
In 2013.
And as you remember, I mentioned
that he wanted his daughters to
have a good education.
So he was sat here very proud.
Um, we honored him at that time
Representative Garcia. Mary
Helen Garcia was my cousin.
She offered a
Um, resolution actually honoring
him.
And we were He was very proud to
be here. He didn't
I expect the honor.
Afterwards he took us for a
celebration.
And, um, he's sitting there very
relaxed, crossed his legs.
Turned around, and he said.
By the way.
He said. How much are you going
to get paid?
For being a legislator.
And I told him
Daddy. I thought we had
discussed this.
Ah, we don't get paid as a
legislature.
In the Legislature as
legislators, he turned around
He got up and he said, You mean
to tell me that I paid for all
your education? You got all
those degrees you have and
you're going to, uh, be a state
legislator, and you're not going
to get paid. And I said Yes,
sir. That's right. He goes.
Well, I'll be and I won't tell
you what he said after that.
He was in shock.
That
In the state that he came from.
Ah that his daughter would be
serving.
And I would be doing it 100% in
public service.
And so he accepted it
afterwards, but he was a little
bit upset that we still uh we're
not paying our legislators. But
what was funny was that he
thought I was so well prepared.
He had educated us so well and
then just to take a job that
didn't pay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker for indulging me one
more time, like a volunteer, non
paid gig. Thank you, General.
Any gentleman from Chavez, Eddy
and Lea? Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I to just
wanted to rise and honor all the
veterans.
Then we all live with and next
to and to thank them all for
Everything we have.
Everything we have as a country.
We we
Our veterans for it. My dad was
a world board. World World War
two veteran.
At two uncles that served in
Korea.
Yet.
But
One thing I saw this if you eat
today, thank a farmer.
If it's on your table, thank a
trucker. And if you eat in
peace, think of veteran Thank
you.
Beautifully stated Gentlemen.
Gentlemen from some 100% of
Allison.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I think it would be very remiss
of me, not to mention
The infamous Neverhood code
talkers. I believe that the
whole country
We owe our debts to them.
In my family. My older brothers
were members of the Air Force,
the Navy and the Army. And then
my oldest son is also a Navy
veteran. He served in the Iraqi
freedom and also I have a grant
or
Or a son in law that was part of
desert storm, So I appreciate
My friend, representative
Narayana in bringing this
certificate forward. Thank you.
And thank you to all the
veterans. Oh, with the Navajo
Code talkers. There is only
three left.
The old, the oldest celebrated
his 107th birthday about a month
ago.
And the youngest one that is
still surviving.
Is that 97, and he's working
To rise in support of this
memorial. Um, my dad was in the
Navy in World War two and he
also served in Korea, but I also
want to bring special attention
to the women veterans who I
think we sometimes forget.
My add to I never had the
opportunity to meet was a second
lieutenant in the Army nor nurse
course in World War two.
She died because she was exposed
to tuberculosis at the age of
28.
Um, and there is a rock wall,
um, on the property of the Inet
Loreto, where? Um, many
From Santa Fe went to Loreto.
Um, that rock wall was built by
my grandfather.
Um, to pay her tuition to go to
Loreto she wanted
And there is a plaque. I wanted
to bring your attention to the
fact that there is a plaque
there honoring her. So if you
have some time to walk by that
rock wall
Um, that's my aunt.
Got you, Chavez. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Beautiful.
Um, veterans. One more time
round of applause for all of it
That our nose in this chamber in
this building and everywhere
there at
Generating from Ben Ali, you're
presented Chase C
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation. You are a former
educator, teacher, early
childhood, So I'm sorry about
that.
See, you know. Objection. It is
so ordered.
Before we begin. It has been
requested that
Uh, members be allowed to remove
their coats because it is very,
very, very hot in here.
Um, but I will say it was not
accompanied by a funny meme. So
that will be the last time I say
yes, Representative Martinez
unless there's a meme with it
from towels ready and item
number one. I am. Mr. Speaker.
Can you get me to that point let
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house with 41 has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate to amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I believe Mr Speaker and body
that there are more things that
unite this body, then divide us.
All of our constituencies. Want
us to come to Santa Fe and bring
back the resources back to our
districts?
All of our constituents want
innovation and economic
investment.
We all want jobs. We all want
new business opportunities.
We want better infrastructure,
and we want that investment in
our tribal communities in our
rural communities.
We want to take care of the most
vulnerable. We want our low
income folks to to not pay too
much for the things that they
need, like transportation fuels.
We want cleaner air.
We don't want to subject our
families to respiratory
illnesses.
We want them to stop paying for
the medical costs that come with
it.
There aren't many programs in
the state that check all of
those boxes.
Or even like four out of five of
those boxes.
But the clean fuel standards
does that
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you.
Thank you.
This is what the program is
going to do.
They bring $240 million of
investment right here into the
state in quick start low carbon
field projects.
We're thinking we're looking at
1600 good pain, permanent jobs
with about $470 Million of
Wages attached to those jobs.
We're going to lower health
costs for the one in seven new
Mexicans that suffer from
respiratory illnesses in Oregon,
which has a clean field program,
residents have saved $80 million
in health costs related to
respiratory illnesses.
There are so many benefits body.
If we don't do this bill, right
now we lose the opportunity to
attract clean energy businesses
and private investment who are
looking to set up shop right
here in the state. We could lose
billions of dollars from the
federal government looking to
support programs like clean
fuels. We lose the opportunity
to save our constituents money.
Those who are suffering
From respiratory illnesses.
That are caused by the pollution
that comes from transportation
fuels.
We've worked really hard on this
bill. Over the last couple of
years. We have a specific focus
on rural areas so that both were
rural and urban Residents of New
Mexico benefit from this program
equally
Uh, there's a lot of beauty to
this bill, but I'm I'm really
proud that no matter what you
drive
How much you drive or where you
drive that there is a clean fuel
that works for you whether it's
renewable, diesel, renewable
natural gas, ethanol blended
gasoline, which many of you are
driving right now.
Or electric.
Mr Speaker body. I know that,
you know, in talking with many
of you and in committee, you
know you're concerned about gas
prices and I am too. I come from
a district rural community and
not a single person in my
district. We want me to bring a
bill that would increase gas
prices. No other state with this
program.
Has seen a prices at the pump
increase as a result of this
program.
And we have built in some really
important guardrails so that
will address the concerns that
you raised.
Mr Speaker and body HB 41
represents
Great opportunity for all the
constituencies that we
represent.
This bill is about consumer
choice.
Improving the health for the one
in seven new Mexicans with
respiratory illnesses. This bill
is about bringing economic
opportunity, jobs and wealth for
our rural communities and Mr
Speaker. I have two witnesses.
Do I introduce them now?
Introduce him at this time.
Great. We have since Sydney
Lindemann from an Michele Milano
rhymes with piano from the New
Mexico Environment Department.
And with that, Mr Speaker, I
stand for questions.
Seems to be
Generated to close Mr Speaker.
Um there is debate generated
from earlier presented Hochman V
Hill. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Does my friend from Tao sealed
Mr Speaker generally do. Yes, I
do. Thank you. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Speaker. I want to take
a moment. Um and first
acknowledge that this is not the
first time that we've heard this
bill.
Um, And first question I have
for you, General Lady from
Tallis Amaya, sponsor on this
bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
believe you are not
But it's not too late.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you for that. I appreciate the
offer, but no, I am not a
sponsor for that.
And there's a reason and there's
a reason why I'm rising to speak
about this bill. Um, with you
and kind of have a nice
educational conversation about
the concept. So, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady after I was asked by
the speaker to become chair of
transportation
I thought that it was really
important for me to educate
myself on clean fuel standards
and low carbon credits Crow
programs so that I can know what
I'm talking about when we were
talking about clean fuels as
they relate to transportation.
The senators are not showing up
to work. I guess they're looking
for them. What's new Mr Speaker?
Um, Mr Speaker. Lady might they
might come for me for that one.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, so as
part of my education, um
I wanted to become kind of like
a neutral source. I wanted a new
people were going to ask me
questions about this. I knew
that it was going to come up
into the transportation context
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I did it deep dive on
clean fuels since the last time
that we've heard clean fuels,
and I'm excited to talk to you
about the program And so the
first question I have for you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady from
Taus.
What is a CI?
Mr Speaker. General Lady CI is
carbon intensity.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and what is C? I have to do
with clean fuels and carbon
carbon credit programs. Thank
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Thank you. Generally for
that question, I think the body
is probably wondering what any
of this is. What's the program?
What's the credit? What's a CI?
What's the market look like So
the carbon intensity of a fuel.
Um
As measured by calculating the
lifestyle. The life cycle of a
fuel of their emissions, and
this is based on science, You
know? So you're looking at you
know how the fuel is produced.
How it's just distributed how
it's transported all of that
that that calculation goes into
a carbon intensity. Um, and the
carbon intensity. The CI is
really what
Kind of develops the market if
you produce a fuel that has high
carbon intensity, and all of
this is determined through the
rulemaking with a robust set of
You know of of of people who are
working to develop the CI and
the rules. If you're
Creating a fuel trying to sell a
fuel that has a high C I. You
will have to buy a credit from
the market if you are producing
fuels that have a low CI. You
can sell the credit.
In the market.
Fantastic. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. So in
this market in which you either
have to buy or sell credits who
controls this market? How is it
set up?
Well, the market is set up, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, the
market is overseen by the New
Mexico Environment Department.
The advisory committee, which is
pretty clearly laid out in the
bill, who will be on it, um, and
lots of the rulemaking process,
so there will be lots of
commentary and folks
participating who can help
develop that market. Um, they
Determine what the CIA is going
to be. And then they you know,
like a market. It's regulated
by, you know, by the players of
that market.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
from Taus under this specific
program, would it be possible
for your run of the mill Normal
petroleum producer to be able to
get carbon credits through this
program?
Mr Speaker, General lady, Uh,
yes. If they are producing a
clean fuel that that has a low
Carbon intensity.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and so in the art that in
the alternative, um would it be
possible for an alternative fuel
producer to have to pay in the
credit market? And if so, why
Mr Speaker, General lady. Uh,
yes, you You may have to pay in
that market. If you are not
lowering your emissions, and I
think that's a really important
part of this program that I
didn't didn't talk about. Um and
I'll explain it now, um
The market is developed by you
know by the stakeholders and the
folks who are going to be
participating in the market. But
there are some really important
caveats here. You have to
produce fuel that has that has a
low C I That is 20%.
Below the 2018.
Emissions one second
20% below the 2018 emissions.
Uh,
In an aggregate aggregate by
2030 30% below the 2018
emissions levels for CI.
By 2040. So you've got to prove
that you're reducing your
emissions, right? You have to
approve that You're clean. Your
fuel is clean.
That is how you get to
participate in the market,
right? If you produce a fuel
that is higher than than the
target, then you will have to
buy the credits if you produce a
fuel that is lower.
You can sell those credits and
lots of people can participate.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
utilities can participate.
Tribes can participate, You
know, folks, businesses that
will be moving in will be
participating big corporations
will participate. Small
corporations can. It's all in an
effort to
Reduce the pollution.
And carbon intensity of the fuel
so that we have
A cleaner landscape cleaner
communities.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady from Taus. So let's just
say, um
Let's just say that there is a
runaway pricing. Let's say for
whatever reason New Mexico
implements clean fuels and we
see a quick and a high rise in
gasoline prices. Is there
anything built into the carbon
credit program that would allow
New Mexico to regain control of
those prices?
And bring them back within the
what we used to see them.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
lady. Uh, yes, Actually, that
was something that we had lots
of conversations about. How do
we make sure that this program
doesn't increase fuel prices?
Biggest biggest issue, right? So
what we what we did here with
this bill is that we did a
couple of really important
things that will happen in the
rulemaking, right? We we make
sure that we're establishing
mechanisms that have cost
containment measures, and that's
on page nine of the bill. Um
Under four online six. We start
talking about those cost
containment measures. There's
periodic review of the program
to make sure that there are no
unintended consequences. We also
have a provision that if there
is some
Crazy thing that happens some
some emergency, you know, global
supply lines, You know, um, are
affected. You know that the
price of oil and gas increases
so exponentially that we can
look at the program again and
make sure that our new Mexicans
are not paying higher gas prices
that is within the body of the
bill. Here, Madam, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, we We really
worked hard on it because we
We know that we don't want, um,
any new Mexicans, but definitely
no income Mexicans to suffer at
the pump so that they can have
cleaner air, and that's what
this bill does.
Thank you, Speaker, General Lady
and so
New Mexico would not be the
first state to implement clean
fuels, would it Mr Speaker
generally? No. You you were
right to Mexico would not be the
first California has it. Oregon
Washington
There are other states that are
in the midst of doing it right
now.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and in California started
in what year? Do you know?
Mr Speaker, General lady. Uh, I
believe it started in 2013.
The Clean Fuel standard program.
Mr Speaker, General lady
actually 2007.
But that's okay. That's okay,
because that means that we
actually have a lot of data from
California's clean fuel program
and
Throughout throughout the
implementation of that law, Mr
Speaker General Lady has
California scene It's gas Prices
rise.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. There
is no evidence of gas prices
increasing as a result of this
clean fuel standard program.
Mr Speaker, General Lady in
Washington state. Do we have any
evidence of gas prices rising as
a result of clean fuel
implementation? Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, There is no
evidence that shows that gas
prices have increased due to the
clean fuel standard.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlelady from Taus. Other
countries are doing this too. Is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, Generally, our
neighbors to the north are doing
it right now.
Uh huh. And Germany is also
participating, developing a
market for clean fuels.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, and there is some stuff in
the works in the federal
government for clean fuels to is
that correct? Mr. Speaker?
Generally? Yes. And I'm sure you
have much more information about
it than I do.
Mr Speaker Gentilini. I don't
know about that. But I do have a
little bit of information about
it. Um, so going back to this
specific program in New Mexico
should it be implemented, Um,
talking about our rural
communities? How would this
specifically affect them on a
day to day basis?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
think in a lot of ways one there
will be more choices at the pump
that that are cheaper than the
choices that exist today. Um, we
are also because we've included
utilities, um and and co ops. Of
course, our utilities that serve
rural communities they can
participate.
In in in the credit market by
developing electricity, clean
electricity that then gets sold
as as a credit. Um, I think
we're going to see
A lot of opportunities for
economic development in our
rural in our rule places,
especially, you know, in in the
South close to agricultural
areas, you know, we I think the
development of biodiesel, other
biofuels. These are all things
that really can contribute to
the economy of of our local
communities. I think it's really
important to talk about. There
are lots of economic
Impacts economic development.
new businesses, You know the new
industries coming up along the
the I 40 corridor I 10.
But there are also some really
significant health impacts. You
know, um
Where I live. Everyone thinks
that, you know, tosses, you
know, clean and fresh and no air
quality, But we have our quality
issues. New Mexico has air
quality issues. There are lots
of places in New Mexico in rural
areas, especially that are
approaching or reaching
nonattainment for EPA standards
of air quality. And I think that
this is a really important step
to address that.
And rural areas.
Feel the pain from pollution
that comes from transportation
fuels, and this is a really
important way of addressing
that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally so under this program,
would it technically be?
What a large petroleum fuel
producer be able to produce a
cleaner fuel.
Get a credit from that fuel and
potentially sell that credit off
to producers with less clean
fuels.
Mr Speaker, General lady? Yes,
And they are already doing that
in other states that have a
clean fuel standard.
So, Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
John Lady, would you say that's
a way of protecting some of our
smaller petroleum producers
right now, who may not have
access to the capital and
technologies to bring down the
carbon intensity of their fuels?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Yes,
and it gives them some time to
start, Um, entering the market.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So
let's talk a little bit about
that entering the market once
this market is set up. How does
everything get going? How do we
start producing credits selling
credits measuring credits? How
does all that going to work?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generating. I think that first
and foremost, you know, we're
the advisory committee comes
together. Um, as overseen by
enemy D, and they start to
determine what the
Carbon intensity of fuel would
be then they determine what that
would look like with the sort of
the graduated approach to
reducing the emissions and the
carbon intensity of that fuel,
and then they could develop.
They'll just start participating
in the market and selling.
Figuring out what they're gonna
produce and establishing the
credit based on that.
And there you go. Bob's your
uncle, You've got a market.
Thank you, Mr Speaker to the
ladies. So let's talk a little
bit about equity in these
programs. So, um, if you were to
If you were to start this
market, and you have producers
buying and selling credits
Is that going to be an equitable
system? And if so, how does that
equity translate into lower
costs for people for new
Mexicans and they're in their
homes every day.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady for that
question, Um
I think this is where it really
We're really hits low income
communities where there's a real
benefit. Utilities will
participate in the market they
will be producing, uh, clean,
clean fuel credits in the
market. They are bound by this
legislation to
Invest 50%.
50% or more of whatever kind of
profits kind of whatever credits
they make back into low income,
low income communities that are,
um, that need that help and it
could look like a variety of
ways It could look like, um,
cleaner Busses for schools. It
could look like
Conversions. If if that needed
to happen of their vehicles, it
could look like evey tax
credits. It could look like a
lot of or just evil credits. It
could look like a lot of
different things, but they are
bound. They must as part of this
legislation invest whatever
their 50% of party minister or
whatever they're making back
into low income communities.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlelady from Tao. So, just
speaking strictly on a monetary
and financial perspective. Is it
possible that if we do not
implement a clean fuel standard
or something like it that
gasoline costs could get more
expensive for low income New
Mexicans and I'm not just
talking about the cost of
pollution, but from a five from
a financial perspective, Mr
Speaker generally the I'm glad
you asked that, Um, I believe
Yes.
What we're doing now is an is
with this bill.
Is creating an opportunity for
the clean energy. Uh, business,
the clean fuel economy to come
right here to New Mexico to
produce cleaner, cheaper fuels.
Lots of different options for
people. Um and we we will lose
out on billions of dollars of
federal investment. Um, we will
lose out on you.
Creating cleaner air for for our
communities that are suffering
from you know all the health
impacts of transportation, fuel
pollution. There we we lose out
on a lot generally demand, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady, So I know that there's a
lot of ambivalence around this
program. I know there was for me
for quite some time in terms of
Of all the states that have
already implemented these types
of programs, and they're mostly
on the west coast of the Pacific
Northwest.
And none of them have as much of
a dependency on the oil and gas
industry as New Mexico does.
So whatever we implement with
this program is going to be
extremely important and will
have a huge effect. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? General
Lady? Absolutely. And I will
tell you that the folks who
follow the markets are looking
at this program very, very
carefully. You know, I've been
having some conversations with
folks in New York. Like what's
going to happen? I said, Well,
let's see what this body
decides. I'm pushing for it,
though. So you know, there are
people are looking at us, Um
Clean fields are being produced
already.
Uh huh.
Texas in Houston, Oklahoma,
These big oil states are
producing clean fuels and
because we don't have the market
here, they're going to the
places that have the market
right now. California, Oregon
Washington. They're literally
using our highways to transport
that cleaner fuel to markets
that already have
Something like this set in
place. So what we are doing is
providing an opportunity for
that market to exist here to
create real incentives for our
oil and gas companies, many of
which are already doing this to
to prove to make cleaner fuel to
distribute cleaner fuel to sell
that cleaner feel and get us on
the right track so that we're
reducing our carbon emissions so
that we're reducing ground level
ozone all of that, and that has
a real economic impact in a
positive way.
Okay?
For our communities, I think,
especially for the rural
communities. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. John Lady, if you'll
indulge me Well, you've been
indulging me. But if you will
keep indulging me, Um, I just
want to read off a list of
states that have implemented
either some sort of carbon
offset credit program or a clean
fuel standard. Um, I'll save you
the time all 50 of them except
for New Mexico.
Have some sort of tax incentive
program that is in effect. So,
um, Mr Speaker, General Lady, Do
you think that would be the
cause of clean fuel standards
were failing or we're increasing
the economic costs of Americans
lives every day.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I don't
think so.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I don't
think so either. And that was
actually one of the things that
convinced me.
To come around to this program.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
want to talk really quickly
about some focus transportation.
Related points because that's my
area. Um and so can we talk a
little bit about how clean fuels
will affect the role that a 40
plays in getting goods from the
Porta Valley to destinations in
eastern New Mexico? Mr. Speaker,
General Lady? Yes. Let us talk
about that.
We'll play a big role. Well,
first of all, we know that, um
The clean fields that are made
in other states like Texas,
which also has a very robust oil
and gas economy. Um, are
Driving on our highways right
now, bypassing the state, just
as I mentioned earlier were a
key place for commerce and
logistics. But you know, folks
are stopping here. Um, we're
we're an important an important
part of you know that transit to
the ports of L, A and Long beach
and also to Houston and the Gulf
of Mexico.
Um, I'm pretty pretty excited
that there is, um there's a
program right now. The climate
reduction pollution Grant.
that's the federal That's a
federal program that that is
something that state is applying
for, and they'll be working on
sort of funding some of these
clean field transportation
projects along the I 40 corridor
in particular.
Ah, in McKinley County, See
Ebola Sandoval, but Leo and
Quake counties That's that is
starting to happen in the New
Mexico Environment Department
will be working with the local
jurisdictions to make sure that
we are developing those clean
fuel technologies and stations
and businesses and opportunities
for you know for those
businesses to
To to flourish. That is
happening right now. There are
millions of dollars that are
that have just come in $68
million in funding for those
Chargers, those medium and heavy
duty charging facilities on I
10. So they're they're on their
You know, we've got clean fuel
processes coming into place, but
we need a fuel a clean fuel
standard to implement
Fully.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you. Exactly exactly the point,
right? So, as you said New
Mexico just won a $68 million
Federal grant from the U. S
Department of Transportation. I
believe largest grant of its
kind ever given
So go us. But in order for the
state to be able to fully
realize all of those grant
monies we have to. We have to
have a clean fuel standard
right? Otherwise we'll be
missing out and more of those
Those federal matching funds and
federal possibilities. Is that
correct, Mr Speaker, generally
the that that is correct. It is
a lot of money. It's really
exciting and we're going to.
We're going to do it, But we got
to build the program in order to
take advantage of
This. You know, the $68 million
is here, but the billions of
dollars that goes to other
states right now for clean fuel
programs were we've missed out
on them. We're going to continue
to miss out on those
opportunities unless we
Act now, Mr Speaker. Generally
we thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady and just going to
give a little more information
to my colleagues from more rural
parts of the state, um as part
of the client, the climate
reduction pollution grant that
we just got, Um, this will help
fund clean fuel transportation
projects along I 40 so it's like
you said. McKinley Cibola
Sandoval Birnley Birnley Oh
quake counties.
And it's also going to require
those jurisdictions to start
coordinating, which I really
like to hear about, because that
means that all of my dft
engineers are going to all have
to work together to get all of
to get it started. Right. And
so, um
These types of projects if we do
them right, and if we implement
enabling legislation will allow
New Mexico to go from being at
the bottom of the path and
transportation infrastructure.
Um to the top right? Because
we're going to have all this
money coming in, and then we're
going to have a program and
promulgation of rules for that
program That's going to help us.
Um, use all of that money money
to the best of our ability,
right? Absolutely. Mr. Speaker,
General lady, um, we need to
leverage the federal dollars
that are out there. You know,
the private investment.
That is coming. I mean, and that
private investment ranges in
like, you know, it's like $350
billion, like
Companies are doing this private
equity firms are investing in
clean energy because they know
they know that we need to clean.
We know. They know we need clean
fuels, They know that we need to
address pollution in
communities. They know that we
need to continue, You know,
transportation. This is not
about killing an industry. This
is about creating opportunities
for all kinds of industries. And
that's why I think this program
is
It is so good and what we've
done in the last couple of years
to ensure that this program is
centered in community.
I think that is really
important, making sure that low
income communities can
participate that that utilities
can participate. All of those
things sort of you know are are
wrapped up in creating a program
that really works for us that
that is, you know, centered in
health and community, local
economic development and really
leveraging the billions of
federal dollars that exist right
now.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady and other than the fuel
price increase myth.
That, um, I think we would
really like to try and dispel
today. The second myth method
I'd like to dispel is that if we
implement clean fuel standards
and still cause long haul
truckers to just bypass New
Mexico altogether is that true?
Um well, it is true that Mr
Speaker generally that we're
dispelling that myth. Um, I just
wanted to parse out your
question. Um, long haul
truckers.
We'll stay here.
They can refuel they can pick up
Clean fuels and go to other
markets.
Uh, we
We're gonna keep people here.
We're going to make money for
for companies that are based
here in New Mexico. That's what
this program will do. Mr
Speaker, gentle lady, this
program will also allow, um,
development of new alternative
fuel markets like hydrogen,
right and fuel cells.
Mr Speaker. General Lady. This
program is technology neutral,
so
Biodiesel, renewable, diesel,
renewable natural gas, hydrogen
fuel cells, electricity made
from renewable sources. Those
are all clean fuels.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady, And so I'll just conclude
with this, um
Mr Speaker Gentility. Like I
said, I was not
A true believer the first time a
couple of times I took a look at
this bill.
And, um, it wasn't until I
really did a deep, deep dive
into the information and
educated myself and just how
these markets work and why they
work.
That, um, I I went to someone
who went from my barely. I think
I did vote for this bill. The
first time barely, but went to
someone to is an enthusiastic
absolute supporter here willing
to debate you on the bill to
help get all this. I think
really good information out to
our colleagues.
So that we can dispel the myths
and misinformation and talk
about what the program is really
about. So thank you, Mr Speaker,
Jimmy Lady Debate the gentleman
from Lee representative Scott.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from Taus
yield
Mr Speaker, I gladly yield to my
very good friend.
It must Speaker General Lady
that was a terrific
introduction.
And I think
I'm not going to ask many
questions.
I'll ask a few.
And I think at the end of our
conversation
Going to be able to demonstrate.
That this is in reality.
And environment.
Fuel tax. Furthermore,
It's an environmental fuel tax
that can vary, and furthermore,
it will be.
Directly proportional.
To the value.
Of a low carbon fuel credit.
Okay, first question.
Yeah.
The legislation proposes to
reduce the carbon intensity.
Of transportation motor fuels.
By 30%.
By the year. 2030. Is that
accurate, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
It is 20%.
By the reduction of 20% below
2018 carbon intensity levels by
2030.
And does that not rise to 30%?
Mr Speaker? Gentlemen, it does
rise to 30% by 2040.
I'm just correcting.
The numbers that you had. Thank
you for that. Answer. Mr Speaker
and generator.
Oh, there were a couple
Of
I think marginally accurate
representations that were made.
To us in our energy committee
meeting where I heard this
The first time.
The first representation was
That this
Low carbon fuel credit.
Would not act like a commodity.
So let me offer an analogy.
Two a bushel of corn.
The corn can be created.
It can be purchased.
It can be sold. It can be
traded.
And the value of that bushel.
Is dependent on primarily
Market forces, possibly the
weather.
Possibly how much water is
available, but primarily market
forces now
I believe
That this carbon credit
Shares very many similar
characteristics in that.
It can be created.
It can be bought.
It can be sold.
Traded.
And they
And the value is a function.
Of market forces.
Now.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. It
looks like a duck.
It walks like a duck.
He talks like a duck and acts
like a duck. So for the purposes
Of my conversation here. I'm
going to call it
Commodity.
The second representation that
was made in the committee is
that there is no evidence
That these policies contribute
to higher fuel price.
I believe
That the West Coast from
California to British Columbia.
Were all of these policies have
been in effect, some for a
little while, some for a lot
longer.
In every case.
Those fuel prices, or 30 to 100%
higher.
Then they are in New Mexico
today, if you look at a map
From the Triple A auto service
You will find that
To be true.
I believe it was represented in
committee.
That there would be hundreds of
millions of dollars of
investment.
And 15, maybe 1600 jobs.
Created.
As a consequence of this
legislation is that
Roughly accurate representation.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. 1600
permanent jobs, $470 Million and
wage income $240 Million of
investment is what we have
found.
Will happen if we had
established this program.
It must speaker in General Lady
I very much appreciate that.
The reason why
Yes is going to cost the Mexico
consumers more is that all of
those credits
Represent only one half
Of a ledger that must balance
Credits.
The investment that is that is
engaged to produce the credits
that people are hired will not
occur.
Without some return on all that
investment.
This is a private sector
opportunity.
Two.
Take advantage of
Government created commodity. So
somewhere along the wine
To balance the ledger.
Someone will have to pay for
those credits.
My contention is
That the someone that pays for
the credits
Will be
Those of us
Buying fuels that do not comport
that do not
Match the 30% reduction.
Called for.
This legislation.
So
Let's try to develop.
And I'm not going to develop
this with a focus group.
Or a stakeholder meeting or
committees. I'm going to develop
this.
With combustion chemistry.
And a few conversion factors.
That's all.
Let's start.
If we could, with the units of
measurement that will occur.
If this bill comes to pass that
will
That will measure the energy
intensity reduction or those
units defined in the bill. As
Grams per mega jewel. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I have a
question. I'm sorry.
My speaker. Yes, ma'am. That was
the question.
Is the
Intensity.
Reduction.
To be measured in grams per maga
jewel.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Just give
me a second.
I know how much you like the
math, and I thought I was
Ready for your math.
It's just going to take me a
second.
To answer your math question.
Mr Speaker, Channel Lady. It's
not a math question That's in
the definition. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, it is. It is a
definition and you were right.
so the carbon intensity means
the quantity of fuel life cycle
greenhouse gas emissions per
unit of fuel energy expressing
grams of carbon dioxide
equivalent.
Per mega jewel.
Thank you for that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady now crimes per mega
jewel.
It's not
Particularly user friendly. I
don't think
That the majority of my
constituents would know what I
was talking about in terms of
grams per mega jewel. So let me
if you will.
Try to convert that
Into units.
That my constituents and yours
can understand.
Start with Grams, which is a
unit of weight.
And 1000 G as a kilogram.
1000 kg.
Is a metric ton.
Or £2200.
Will you agree?
That those conversion factors or
accurate
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Yes.
Thank you for that Mr Speaker
Generating now let's move over
to the mega jewel.
This is in fact, a unit of
energy.
And
My
Constituents and yours.
Do not buy energy.
In Mega Ju. They buy energy.
And gallons of gasoline.
But it turns out
That there's a direct
conversion.
From mega jewels to gasoline.
121 mega jewels is equal to one
gallon.
The energy contained in one
gallon of gasoline.
Would you agree with that
conversion?
Mr Speaker. Gentleman? Yes, I
would Thank you for that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Would you agree that, according
to the EPA, a
That the consumption and and I
believe all in consumption.
Is a part of this bill.
Which includes the lifecycle
emissions.
From
A
An energy producing entity.
Would you agree with me that the
EPA
Measures the lifecycle C 02
emissions.
Of a gallon of gasoline from
Out of the ground to out of the
tailpipe at approximately 12.5.
Kilograms.
A gallon.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I for
this, I'm actually must do some
math and some, uh, just just a
second to figure that part out,
Mr. Speaker, General, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Um,
there are a couple of things at
play here. We haven't quite
determined because the
rulemaking hasn't happened, How
we're going to measure that. Um,
but what we're thinking right
now, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is
that, um
This is the calculation. We have
the amount of carbon dioxide
admitted per gallon of motor
gasoline burned is 8.89 times,
10 to the negative.
Third power metric tons.
I really hope Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, you understand that
Because
That was an anthropology major.
Mr Speaker, General lady, you'll
have to trust me that 12.5 kg
Per gallon of gasoline is the
approximate emission.
Actually, it's think it's 12.43
and rounding off to 12.5.
But that is the emission all the
intermission.
Of C 02.
A gallon of gasoline.
So, Mr Picker, General Lady,
we're getting somewhere now.
We've got our grams into metric
tons.
We've got our gasoline.
Generating kilograms, which we
can easily convert.
Two metric tons. And if we do
just some kind of very simple
multiplication and division, we
can come up with the fact that
80 gallons of gasoline.
Will generate one.
Metric ton of C 02.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Were you?
I need to do those
During the debate, or will you
accept those numbers?
As fact.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. For the
purpose of this exercise. I will
accept your numbers. They sound
great.
They sound like numbers. Mr.
Speaker, Gentlemen, thank you
very much. Mr. Speaker in
general Lady, now Metric ton of
Co two is trying to
Straight in in California's
traded in Oregon, it's traded in
Washington. It is traded in
British Columbia and the cost of
that metric tongue.
Runs from $80. So I say the cost
of the metric ton. A more
accurate description would be
the value of that metric ton of
co two runs from $80 up to over
$400 in the Canadian province.
Of British Columbia. Let's use
the lower end of that range.
And say.
$100 per metric ton. I'm going
to do this just for easy math.
but at the at the end of the day
I'm going to show that this is
this proportionality.
Works across whatever
A metric ton value turns out to
be
So at $100 a metric ton.
With 80 gallons of
Petroleum based gasoline,
generating a metric ton.
We divide one by the other.
And come up with
A cost.
Of $1.25.
Per gallon.
That's a big number.
However.
We are not wanting.
To compensate.
For that consumption of that
gallon of gasoline for the
emissions.
Generated by that gallon of
gasoline at the rate of 100%.
All we want to compensate for at
the end of this process.
Is 30.
So
If we multiply our dollar and a
quarter
By 0.3.
We end up
What? Somewhere Just less than
40. Cents 38 cents a gallon.
We can add.
Couple of points, two cents,
maybe for
Administration.
Costs.
But this is
The bottom line number.
That will go into a gallon of
gasoline if these fuel credits
cost 100 bucks.
Mr Speaker in general lady if
the fuel credit is $200
It'll be 80 cents.
If it's $300 about 20 if it's
only $50.
20 cents a gallon.
Completely.
Proportional to the low carbon
fuel credit.
And subject to the vagaries of
the market.
Now we can say well
Gas prices go up.
Gas prices go down.
But in this circumstance
To justify the hundreds of
millions of dollars and 1600
jobs.
To generate a return on that
investment. A low carbon fuel
credit will have to have a value
greater than zero.
And if we use the West Coast
As our analogy.
That value runs.
77 cents in California Dollar 30
in Oregon.
Dollars six and Washington and
$3.65 in British Columbia, and
it would not surprise you to
know, I suppose.
That
Gasoline price is between 3100%
higher than it is in New Mexico.
Not all the consequence.
Obviously not all the
consequence of the low carbon
fuel credit, But when you take
the taxes out
In those individual states. You
end up
With a net adder.
That is a consequence.
These public policies.
Given
Kill them.
That gasoline prices will be
directly proportional.
Not from a focus group not from
Stakeholders meetings.
Not from committees.
From math and combustion
chemistry.
Given that those
Fuel credits.
Have a direct impact on gas
prices. Can you tell me, Mr
Speaker and General Lady?
What those low carbon fuel
credits will carry in value.
Today.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do not
know.
The market hasn't been
established. We have not
convened this. The advisory
committee. We haven't
We haven't established with the
carbon intensity is we have not
established it and I have to
take a moment right now, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen to say
that while I love your math, and
it's sound, these are the
calculations that Oregon
Washington, California had made.
Uh and still
Still, there is no evidence that
Prices for gas have increased in
direct relation to the clean
fuel standard in those states
and I see that you're shaking
your head and I understand that
Mr Speaker and gentlemen like I
feel like
I feel like we're not talking
about all the other factors that
make up the price of gasoline.
You mentioned a few of them.
You know, we need to look at, um
Taxes.
Let's look at that. This bill
isn't isn't about attacks. You
know, we pay about 17 cents a
gallon.
Gas tax here in New Mexico.
I'm looking to confirm.
About 17 cents.
Ah, California
58 cents state. Other states
have have higher gas taxes.
We have the second lowest in the
nation, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
of gas tax
Those other states have high
land use costs there, and they
have other kinds of, you know,
add ons and and emission
standards and all kinds of other
things that that go into the
price of gas at the pump.
What we have seen from the
evidence from those those states
that have a clean field standard
is that there is no correlation.
Studies have shown it no
correlation, So I understand
what you're getting at.
But that is not what has
happened that prices at the pump
in California are related to all
kinds of other factors. Global
factors, you know?
Manufacturing. You know what's
happening in Ukraine their own
taxes, but not the clean fuel
credit market.
The evidence is not there. It
just isn't
Mr Speaker, General Lady, you're
gonna believe me or your own
eyes.
I will tell you that if you look
at that
Triple A map.
They're readily available.
On the Internet. If you look at
that, triple a map, those states
that have this low carbon fuel
credit policy in effect
Yeah, Universally.
Have significantly higher gas
prices.
I will tell you.
That there will be no
investment.
There can be no investment in
the development of these
credits unless they have a
value.
That's the only thing that will
return the hundreds of millions
of dollars of investment and
1600 jobs. They will carry a
value and it concerns me.
That we do not know what that
value is and can't make a
prediction.
And that value
With gas prices going up gas
prices going down that value.
Is greater than zero.
If history
And, uh and previous experience.
Is any guide.
That value is going to be
between 80 bucks.
And 400 plus bucks.
And the price of gasoline will
go up.
In proportion.
Speaker and general lady, I
think
I think I've beat the cost side
of this.
Of this equation.
Pretty handily to death. Let me
move.
To the representations that have
been made about how much
healthier
The state of New Mexico is going
to be as a consequence.
Of this policy. I believe it was
represented, and committee Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
That
We were looking at reducing
carbon emissions in the state.
By some, maybe little less than
5 million turns.
A year.
And that did comport with
With my own calculations.
With respect to
This policy if it was completely
successful, is that accurate?
Mr Speaker, General Lady we have
up to 16.2 million tons of
reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions by 2030. Yes, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, But if
you ask your expert I believe
that was over multiple years.
It's a little less than 5
million a year, Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, by 2030. I don't
think you can
Partition it out each year like
that, Um, as a program has to
ramp up, you know, I imagine
there will be sort of
exponential emissions reductions
when you know when the market is
established.
Okay, but the program would be
successful.
If we reduce our carbon
emissions 30% from 15 million
tons a year. That's about 5
million tons a year.
Hmm. And
I believe it's been represented.
That's going to solve the
problems of
Of emphysema, lung diseases,
Long term lung cancer is going
to make us healthier.
Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, clean
filled clean fuels will make our
communities healthier. We never
represented Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that these carbon
emissions directly will
Cure emphysema.
We're talking about all the
other things that are in, um
Transportation fuels currently
that are polluting.
Ground level ground level ozone
nitrogen oxides, There's there's
all kinds of stuff that's not
good for us that if we have a
cleaner fuel market and cleaner
fuels produced in this state and
used in this state will have an
impact on the health of New
Mexicans.
And the last Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
The measurement of the success
of the program is in metric
tons.
Have C 02.
Is that a question? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and Mr Speaker
generally let me offer offer.
An analogy here.
Demonstrates, I think
Not with again. Speculation
conjecture.
Focus groups, just the math.
Here's an analogy and I've got a
turkey baster in my hand.
And that Turkey basters full of
Turkey drippings.
And I
Wrong ladder up to the middle of
Niagara Falls.
And I squirt that volume of
turkey baster.
Drippings.
Into the middle of Niagara
Falls, and then I measure.
How much different the water
tastes at the bottom of the
falls.
Was I able to detect the
difference? Mr Speaker
General Lady, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I don't think I drink
any water or taste any water
that came out of that. But
Possibly
Possibly not.
But Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
Turkey, Greece can be a biofuel
that can participate. If you're
producing that you can
participate in the market.
House for Amendment number one
Speaker. What general Lady? What
I'm trying to demonstrate here
is
It's 40 cents a gallon for every
$100 that are low carbon fuel
credit carries in value.
Is a high cost.
The benefit.
In the improvement in the air
quality of this planet.
Is not
Measure.
And with that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Apologize. A world not
Be able to support this
legislation. Thank you. Thank
you for the conversation. Thank
you. Gentlemen. There is further
debate. The gentle lady from Ben
Ali, your representative,
chasing
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
lady from Talus field?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will
yield to the general from
beryllium, Mr Speaker and Lady
from Taus.
I am. I started thinking I was
on another planet. During the
last I decided. This is rocket
science. And I don't even know
that. But could you try to
Simplify it a little bit for my
constituents in my own
understanding.
Because I have quite a bit of
information.
About the relationship to fuel
prices. Gasoline prices.
And, um, I wonder if you could
perhaps clear it up a little bit
and tell us how this works.
I do know.
That there there have been times
when the price of gas was folly
And yet our price at the pump
wasn't and so there are a lot of
factors that play that we don't
This bill isn't going to control
for I believe, but anything you
can do to just
Um, simplify the explanation for
me and tell me how this will
work.
I think would be helpful for my
own understanding and for my
ability to communicate with
others.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. I'm going to
First off, start talking about
the the gas prices and sort of
how those were created and how
those sort of fluctuating range
and I will say that if I knew
How it how gas prices increased
or decreased. I would probably
not be here. I'd be in Vegas
somewhere. Um, so it's it's
confusing. There's lots of
factors global factors that, um,
that directly relate to to gas
prices. Um, you know how much it
costs to produce a barrel of oil
and in the Ukraine.
Um what's happening with our
global shipping markets? You
know how much
Somebody wants to charge and
Taus versus Espanola, Texas all
that, you know, I I don't put
gas in my own community. And I'm
very, very sorry for for not
putting my tax dollars in the
community in my own community
and house on gasses, Philip and
Espanola and you're welcome to
county because it's just cheaper
and I think it's cheaper because
Um ah, Who knows? Actually, I
don't know why it's cheaper, Mr
Speaker and General lady but it
but it just is. And those those
prices fluctuate all the time In
in a committee we heard about a
member who, you know, drives
around town trying to find the
cheapest gas and we'll wait in
line for several hours trying to
put the put the cheapest gas.
That's what people do so that we
can keep our guests.
Our gas prices low. I apologize.
Mr Speaker. Generally, my thumb
is
Now it's taking. It's really
tired. I wish we had a trick for
this maybe rubber band. So, um,
Mr Speaker, General Lady the way
that program is going to work is
this We
Establish a market.
We will.
We figure out what the carbon
intensity of the fuel is going
to be.
We reduce the carbon intensity
of that fuel if you as a
manufacturer are creating a fuel
that is higher than the
threshold you have to
By a credit. If you're producing
a cleaner fuel, you can sell a
credit. Um, and there are
measures in place that do not
cap that market. We don't want
to cap that market. We want to
inform that market and ensure
that that market is serving us.
There have been situations in
the past with other types of
markets that don't serve
communities.
That, um
You know that that don't
Have investments in communities.
But this market does And what
that market incentivizes as
manufacturers who are producing
a wide variety of cleaner fuels,
and those cleaner fuels can be
made from Turkey. Greece, If you
so choose truly, that is an
option. Um
Could be made from electricity
that's made from renewable
resources. It could be made from
agricultural waste products
that's really exciting. It could
be made from methane gas that
submitted at, um you know, at
landfills. That's something that
can be created, captured and
sold on the market. But there
are a variety of different types
of fuels that folks can take
advantage of.
And I think that the economic
benefits of the local
communities that are creating
these fuels and participating in
the market cannot be
undervalued.
There is potentially so much
money that can come here, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, and
that's something that I do not
want us to miss out on.
Mr Speaker and Lady from Intel's
so well different communities be
valuing This based on their own
standards are how how will that
play out?
Mr Speaker. Generally, that's
that's a great question. It is a
statewide standard.
Mr Speaker and Lady from
townhouse, and there was talk
about how a lot of the states
that have adopted this have
higher gas prices did they not
have higher gas prices to begin
with Mr Speaker and Lady from
Taus, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
They did.
And those gas prices fluctuated.
As gas prices do everywhere, Mr
Speaker Lady from Taus, I I
agree with that. Um, I think
that
And
Then nail than I am receiving
about this. The concern about
gas prices is perhaps, um
Has perhaps misled people to
think that it's absolute
guarantee that gas prices will
increase and from what I believe
you're saying that's not a
guarantee. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
There have been studies done on
this very thing in those places
that have in those states that
have the clean fuel standard
market, and there is no
correlation between price is
increasing at the pump and a
clean field standard. That is
what the studies have shown that
actual, you know, actual market
conditions, not academic
exercises.
Mr Speaker and led from the
house. I don't understand the
rationale then for making that
claim. That's just a statement.
and and I don't know if you can
speculate except that were
people are always afraid that's
going to cost more to drive the
car and I don't want time. We
were having a debate about
repairing the roads and actually
not repairing the roads cost us
all a lot of money.
For vehicle maintenance. And yet
Nobody ever wants to link that
cause and effect together on
when when we have talked, and I
clear back to when Dan Silva was
the chair of the Transportation
Committee, I remember him
standing on the floor and
saying Well, something about the
roads and he said, Well, we used
to call them roads.
And now they're just potholes.
But we we were trying to
Raised the price of gas in order
to repair the roads and even
then,
There was
Yeah, Pardon me. There was
reluctance to connect the
benefits.
Mr Speaker. Generally, the
agreed and I live in a rural
community that has lots of
potholes. I mean, I have to
change my terrors pretty often
because because of that this is
not a bill about increasing
taxes. Want to be very, very
clear here, Um
There is a significant cost to
cleaning up hydrocarbons in this
state. Right leaks from um from
production. I those costs can
are, you know are in the tens of
millions of dollars.
Since 2019. We've paid something
like $17.5 million for the
cleanup of
Hydrocarbons in in the state.
Um
$32.9 million has been paid by
responsible parties for the
cleanup of those hydrogen
carbons. So it's you know, it's
There's a there's an expensive
cost to clean up. Um
And that that's something that
we need to be thinking about.
And this
Clean fuel standard.
Can reduce the cost of that
cleanup because we are
We are putting in a standard for
producing cleaner fuels to the
cleanup.
Will be less as well.
Mr Speaker in later from Taus.
Finally, I just want to say that
it's what we also failed to way
sometimes.
His what it costs to, uh, have
What it costs us as a state for
public health for employers,
when we have
Children missing the school
Their parents missing work
because of, um a severe lung.
Issue or respiratory disease. We
we saw
When we were working on tobacco
taxes in the past. How very, um
Pervasive the
Cost is to our public health and
our employers for folks having
the effects of smoking and
public health, So I think this
this does certainly have a
benefit there as well as to the
overall efficiency and the
Really the probably the cars are
going to work better and will be
able folks will be able to keep
their cars longer if they are
running on cleaner fuels. Would
would you say that's true, or am
I just speculating a little
beyond the the goal?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I do
believe that that is true, but I
want to speak to the health
benefits for just a second, Mr
Speaker and generally because
because you talked about that,
um
It's very costly to treat
asthma.
The
Average cost for for treating
asthma for family member is over
$3000 a year.
I have asthma. I can
Goodness. Siri may also have
asthma, So I'm going to
She clearly wants to be part of
this debate, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
Um, not allowed generally.
I'll let I'll let her know Mr
Speaker, Um
As most expensive respiratory
illnesses are expensive. I I
grew up with asthma. I didn't
know I had asthma. I just
thought that every year I got
bronchitis for two weeks twice a
year. And, you know, I took some
medicine that my mom got in
Mexico, and it was really
disgusting. But it really
worked. Um, but it was costly.
She had to drive to Mexico to
get this medicine that could not
be found here. That's for not
having a debate about
prescription drug prices.
But But I will say this It was
something that I grew up with,
and many, many people in my
family, and my community grew up
within a place that had the
worst air in the nation. So
that's why this bill is is
actually kind of personal for
me, knowing what it cost the
family not just financially, but
in worry in time spent away from
school, my mom taking off days
of work to take care of me for
this, you know, bronchitis that
I had that was actually asthma.
What we can do if we're
cleaning, if if we have cleaner
transportation fuels less ground
level ozone less NOx PM 10 PM
2.5 All these things that
contribute to, uh to asthma, we
will have cleaner communities
and those who are
disproportionately affected by
lack of access to healthcare.
Lack of money to treat these
illnesses. Those will be those
will benefit the most Those
folks those in Mexicans will
benefit the most, and that's
that's that's an additional
benefit of establishing a cute,
clean fuel standard. We reduce
pollution period.
And that's important.
Mr Speaker Lady from Telus.
Finally. I just want to ask if
there's anything else I should
have, Um, tried to extract from
you about how this program is
going to work.
Mm. Madam. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
That you live in.
Bergoglio County, Albuquerque
has pretty high rates of ground
level. Ozone. Um
Not not the highest.
In the state, but but pretty
actually pretty high over the
the federal
Threshold. So Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County is is
suffering and your constituents
are suffering and there
Will be a penalty at some point
if we do not bring those those
numbers down if we don't if we
don't reduce, reduce the numbers
below that threshold there,
there are consequences to us
from the EPA. A. There's more
federal oversight. Um, that
couldn't that can have an impact
on how we You know how we
control our emissions. So that's
something to consider that this
is a program that will help us
reduce those to reduce those.
Numbers below the threshold that
the federal government has set.
And that will will make our
communities um, cleaner and
safer. And lastly, I think
because of, I think because of
the way this market is
developed, Mr Speaker in general
Lady
We were really careful and we
really heard from community
members about how to ensure that
low in that low income
communities can be, um, can have
really experienced the real
benefits of this program.
And what we've done with the
market and with the utilities.
I've mentioned this a couple of
times. I think it's fair. It's
it's worth repeating. You know
that the utilities like P and M
and El Paso Electric and and the
co ops, you know who are all
those are supportive of this
bill because they can
participate in the market,
right and they have to invest.
In low income and
underrepresented communities
They have to use the up to 50%
of their credits that they that
they sell on the market from
producing this, you know,
cleaner fuel and put them
directly into those communities
and and that could be extremely
beneficial, you know, and that
couldn't that it'll just it'll
have a positive impact on low
income communities. I think
that's really important. That's
one of the biggest drivers for
me.
And why? I think this bill is so
important.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you. Lady from tells
There is further debate The
gentleman from Chavez, But
before you go, I understand this
is your first floor debate, and
it is a long held tradition of
this chamber that after your
first floor debate, you sing a
song.
So we'll expect that gentlemen
from Chavez represent of hungry
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady from Taus yield
Mr Speaker. I gladly yield to
the to the gentleman and I must
say before I yield that that is
not true.
You do not have to sing.
That was done away with in 2021.
I had to sing.
But you will not have to. Unless
you want to.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, what is the will of
the body favorites in focus, and
I
I was supposed to be a habit. A
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, um
You know, you and I have had a
number of times to discuss this
bill. Uh, I've seen it in a
couple different committees. Um
and so
We'll see how I feel about
singing After this Last
conversation, um e so
I just wanted to
Ask if I might. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. A few questions.
Um
About
Different types of fuels because
you mentioned there are lots of
different fuels. There's
traditional gasoline.
Traditional diesel biodiesel
drop in biofuels, all kinds of
different types of fuel, So I
just like to talk about a couple
of those, um and two
particularly. I'd like to start
with biodiesel. So would you
Generally, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, um
Agree that traditional diesel
has a
Set amount of
Energy per gallon.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady and
A gallon of bio diesel fuel.
Also has a set amount of energy
correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I assume
so, yes.
Thank you and Mr Speaker,
General Lady the amount of
energy in a gallon of bio diesel
fuel is less than the amount of
energy in traditional diesel
correct.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you. And so
When we talk about costs, and
I'm not talking about
Sorry, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady.
I'm not talking about the price
of gasoline or the cost of
traditional diesel, but the cost
of transporting goods.
I am not a mathematician,
Likeness representative Scott.
So I'm not going to start
throwing out numbers.
Um
So if a gallon of biodiesel
Has less energy in it.
Than a gallon of traditional
diesel. We can say that it is
less efficient, correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
You could probably say that.
Thank you and Mr Speaker,
General Lady, so
As a result of this less
efficient fuel.
You will have lower horsepower.
And worse. Fuel efficiency Lower
MPG correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Uh,
You. You are correct. Um
But this bill isn't a biodiesel
bill only
So we're talking about other
Fuels like renewable diesel,
which actually has the same if
not higher efficiency. Then then
diesel, so lots of different
kinds of fuels, But we can
continue along the biodiesel
army argument if you'd like Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, I would like to continue
on this and we will get to the
drop in biofuels, which are
different a little later so we
can talk about a couple of
different types of fuels. So, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. If
A trucking company is trying to
lower its emissions by going to
Biodiesel.
It then.
Because you have less
horsepower.
And you don't get the same MPG.
But you're carrying the same
amount of goods.
You have lower payloads because
you don't have the horsepower.
You're trying to move the same
amount of goods so in effect
This would result in more trucks
being on the road, correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
I suppose only if those trucks
are only using biodiesel, but
long haul trucking is using all
kinds of different fuels,
including hydrogen.
And renewable diesel, which is
more efficient and less less
polluting.
Well, thank you. And and Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I would
agree with you that drop in
biofuels.
The the things that have
developed with drop in biofuels
have allowed bio diesels to
become more fuel efficient.
I would disagree with you on
Their effect on pollution.
And there are numerous studies
that show while yes.
Drop in biofuels.
Have lower
C 02 emissions they actually
have higher NOx emissions than
traditional diesel.
Do you?
Is that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, there are studies
that show either of those
things, but I want to talk about
long haul trucking firm for a
moment, you know, not all long
haul truckers will use
biodiesel. So I think you're
making you know some some
assumptions about what they're
what they're going to be using
in their trucking business.
Thank you, General Lady, Mr
Speaker General Later, lady. Um,
I
I understand there are lots of
fuels.
Uh,
Choices out there.
But
Would you agree that if you are
the
Trucking company.
You would use the most.
Energy.
Intense fuel at the lowest cost.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if I
owned a trucking company, I
would use the fuel that cost the
lesson. In this case that fuel
is
Hydrogen.
That is the most efficient
Okay. Thank you very much for
that gentle lady and Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. Let's let's talk
about hydrogen for a minute. How
is hydrogen Create Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, it's created in lots
of different ways, and it occurs
naturally as well.
Thank you, General Lady. Mr
Speaker, General Lady is there
enough natural occurring
hydrogen to, uh
Produce enough energy for, say,
a trucking fleet.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
think so.
Thank you, General Lady. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, you are
correct. There are a number of
different ways to produce
hydrogen, and they all have
colors associated with them. Now
there's brown, hydrogen, blue,
hydrogen, green, hydrogen, pink,
hydrogen, white hydrogen. Ah,
there might even be a yellow
hydrogen. Now I forget, but
What is the most common way of
creating nitrogen hydrogen?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um,
Historically, it's been from
fossil fuels, but that is
changing rapidly. And in Taus,
for instance, we are getting
funding to develop a green
hydrogen facility. I think
there are incredible
opportunities in the state for
producing green hydrogen from,
uh, treated water.
Produced water. Think some.
There's some really good, um,
options here. But this is this
is not a debate about hydrogen.
I had that a couple of years
ago. Um
This is this is a debate about
all kinds of different kinds of
clean fuels.
You are correct, Gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. I realized
this is not a debate about
hydrogen, but you mentioned
hydrogen, so I thought we should
discuss it.
Um So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Where
Is the largest
Producer of drop in biofuels.
The largest refinery. Sorry,
madam or
Gentle lady. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, Can you refine your
question? Do you mean the
country and the world in which
county
Yes, I apologize for my
inarticulate question. Mr
Speaker, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I didn't say that.
I I I didn't I was not taking
any offense. I was I was using
that.
Anyway.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady in the
United States, where is the
largest refinery that produces
by drop in biofuels?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
know. But perhaps you do and you
can tell me. Thank you, gentle
lady. I do. It is in Louisiana
along the Mississippi River.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady who owns
that refinery.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, because I
did not know where the biggest
producer was. I probably also
don't know.
The owner of that company, But
I'm sure you do. I do. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. It
is owned by Shell Oil Company.
Um, and to produce Mr Speaker,
gentle lady.
Two.
Produce drop in biofuels, which
Are you take a biodiesel
feedstock?
And you process it.
So that it becomes more energy
efficient.
That process is called Hydro
Processing. Are you familiar
with that process?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Some
people are
For sure.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
And that process is to remove
oxygen from the biodiesel.
And thereby making it a little
more efficient and cleaner.
Again.
That process requires hydrogen.
How
Do you think that hydrogen is
produced at the largest refinery
owned by Shell Oil company?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm going
to take a guess that it's
produced from methane.
That is correct.
So
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Um
The production of the hydrogen
necessary to remove the oxygen.
From
The feedstock.
Is going to be using natural
gas.
Correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen in that
particular instance Yes, there
are many other ways of producing
hydrogen.
Okay. Thank you. And
But this is hydrogen
specifically for
Drop in biofuels.
Do you know who the largest
producer of drop in biofuels is?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it's not
show is it?
No, man that that gentle lady Mr
Speaker. No, They are not the
largest producer. They have the
single largest refinery. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't I
don't know.
Thank you, gentle lady. Mr
Speaker. It is a
Um
Group called Renewable Energy
Renewable Energy Group.
Which is a wholly owned
subsidiary of
Chevron
Yeah, and they bank drop in
biofuels through hydro
processing, And in what manner
are they?
Mostly producing their hydrogen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
I don't know how they're
producing it, but I would
imagine I'm going to take a wild
guess and say that it's methane.
Gentle lady. I think that would
be the correct for the large
bulk of it.
Um
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. The
reason I bring these things up
and we talk about the different
types of fuels and their
efficiency their emissions.
Is because in the bill
Right?
We have, uh, on on Page two,
beginning with line.
Two.
Subsection D. We have the
definition of fuel life cycle.
And that is an assessment of the
aggregate greenhouse gas
emissions.
Including all direct
And significant indirect
emissions.
Including land change.
For each type of fuel.
And so when
I look at what you term as
cleaner fuels.
They have significant front end.
Both direct and indirect
emissions, and I just want to
make sure that that is going to
be part of the assessment
process.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, it will
be part of the assessment
process from start to finish.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Um
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Um, I
think you have, uh,
Said a number of times that
there's no evidence that that
these clean fuel standards have
increased gas prices. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. Um, are you familiar with
Washington State's house Bill
2050.
That was introduced by their
representative gainer recently.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm not
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentle Lady, representative
Gainer in the state of
Washington has introduced a
bill.
Ah!
Two.
Amend their cute, clean fuel
standard slightly
And require
Uh, postage on fuel pumps at
retail gas stations showing the
price increase of their fuels.
Um
As a direct result of the clean
fuel standards. Are you familiar
with that?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Nope.
Well, it is it has happened.
And I believe
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
That it is because Washington
has seen a direct correlation to
its gas prices.
In an increase, and so
In an effort to be transparent.
The bill has been introduced to
show consumers exactly what
affect that law has had on their
gas prices.
So what I would like to do
If I learned how real quickly Mr
Speaker, Madam.
Gentle, a gentle lady.
Mr Speaker. I have an amendment
I would like to introduce and
the 202 number.
Uh, hold on one second
gentlemen, let's get the
amendment over to the clerk in
passed out, and then we'll ask
And Mr Speaker, I would ask for
a roll call vote.
You've got a local
Remember that amendment is being
passed out.
Representatives from all those
counties that wasn't Chatfield
Raise your hand once it reaches
your corner.
All those folks to my left.
Representative Chatfield. Did
you all get the amendment over
there?
Not yet. All right?
Somebody had a paper cut.
All right, gentlemen from
Chavez. The amendment has been
passed out on the floor. Can you
please read the 2 to 7 number at
the bottom? Yes, Mr Speaker. It
is 227722.
0.2 is almost a perfect
palindrome.
Very well. Um we all have the
amendment gentlemen to explain
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. The
amendment is, uh
Really, just a transparency
amendment. It is too.
Ah!
To evaluate
The cost, if any.
To the consumers of gasoline and
diesel fuels.
Ah, that their cost increase at
the pump, if any
Um
Uh, by sticker.
That that shows what their
increase in fuel prices. Maybe
the if, if as the gentle lady
from Taus Ah has has stated
there is no cost increase, then
the sticker will just say zero
cents. But if the cost is, as
some have estimated 30 to 50
cents, that is what the sticker
will say many states have
Similar stickers when they deal
with what their gasoline taxes
are, Um and I am not
calling this a gasoline tax.
Um, but
States do this, They show what
percentage or what price
Is in fuel taxes.
Um at the pump, and so I think
in in an effort to be fully
transparent
We should add this amendment to
the bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Let's go back to the sponsor.
sponsor this a friendly
amendment. Mr Speaker. It is not
Alright is the debate on the
amendment Gentle lady from Ben
Ali or presented Hochman be
healed. Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker. Does my friend from
Chavez County healed.
I do feel gentle lady.
So Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Chavez. You said
that other states do something
similar to this. Can you tell me
which states Those are?
Gentle lady off the top of my
head. I cannot
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um
do you know you're asking the
Department of Agriculture?
To be the department responsible
for these inspections. Can you
tell me why you chose that
particular agency gentle lady.
That is because currently the
Department of Accurate Culture
is in charge of inspections of
retail fuel pumps. Okay, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. So then you
telling me that these types of
inspections are already done?
No gentle lady. Mr Speaker.
Sorry I got the wrong order. Um,
but no, uh
The the
Department of Agriculture
inspects
The fuel pumps for their
accuracy to make sure that they,
um or are accurate and gallons.
Flowing through the handle, Um
They inspect them for to make
sure they are compliant with all
of our regulations dealing with
fuel pumps.
This would be a study done to
see if there is a cost of
compliance. There would be a
periodic evaluation.
And then if and then the the
Department of Agriculture would
produce the stickers and
Get them to the retail.
Pumps so that they can be placed
on them.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Okay.
Thank you. So the way I read
this amendment is that the
requirement for the sticker?
To display the price of what
you're calling the fuel tax.
The it sounds like this
amendment, the department would
be required to begin doing that
right away.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, Um
There is
It, shall I
It does look like it would be
right away. Uh, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady, it may take some
time to do the first evaluation
And then it would be, uh, so
would be 90 days after the law
went into effect. Um, and then
it would be periodically
re evaluated every three years.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. So what if the cost
of this tax was evaluated and
found to be zero?
Uh, Mr Speaker General lady than
the sticker would show that it
is zero and then the consumers
would know that this cost is
zero there.
Reportedly getting cleaner
emissions. Um and so
That's a win win.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, wouldn't
it cost the Department of
agriculture money in and itself
in and of itself to simply do
these studies and then put
stickers on every single pump in
which you're requesting these to
be placed? Mr Speaker, General
Lady? Yes, there would be some
administrative costs.
Um, but we have been, uh
It has been represented that
this project is clean fuel
standard will generate, um
Hundreds of millions of dollars
for the state, and I don't
believe the administrative cost
of this program will, uh, exceed
the that
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, So I'm
just trying to. I'm just trying
to see if I understand here. So,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, you would
Through this amendment required
the department to evaluate the
cost of what you're calling this
fuel tax.
Then determine whether or not
there is a cost And regardless
of whether or not there's a cost
if there's an actually net
Gain. You want to spend the
money to
Put the net gain on all these
stickers and all these pumps
required under your amendment to
have these stickers.
Just so that consumer knows
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes.
I mean, I think that would be
fantastic for the consumer to
know that this program is
actually saving them money. If
so,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, can
you think of any other
Context in which we do something
like this and regular day to day
commerce.
Ah, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Uh,
first, I would. I would like to
point out that I am not calling
this a fuel tax. I said in some
instances
Other states, namely Texas and
Illinois. They post their fuel
taxes on their pumps. Um
I am not calling this a fuel
tax.
This is the clean fuel
standards.
And
I don't know other contexts, but
if we also wanted to do this,
with our fuel taxes are actual
fuel taxes. I think that would
be a good thing as well.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Do you
know there's an appropriation
associated with this bill?
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
No, there is not
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so
I I would submit to you that in
a bill that we're hearing
hearing in a 30 day session with
a message from the governor with
no appropriation. Your amendment
would then be considered an
unfunded mandate for this bill.
Well, Mr Speaker, gentle lady,
Um, the bill came on a message
from the governor. I believe,
And I'm just amending that Bill.
Um the fact that there is no
appropriation in this bill, Uh,
then everything in it would be
an unfunded mandate.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
Administratively. So your
amendment deals with
Administrative agency.
That whose budget is created and
approved by HFC and Senate
finance every year.
Has line items associated with
that budget.
And and what you're proposing in
this amendment is the addition
of an additional line item
because this would be an
additional cost associated with
that agency.
Is there any other way to
To do this amendment. Uh, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Absolutely, because this bill
does not take effect until 2026
and I believe that would be
plenty of time for the
Department of Agriculture to
come back and ask for an
appropriation. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, than I would also
submit to you, then this
amendment.
Is not an appropriate amendment
for a bill being heard. This is
Its own.
But this is its own piece of
legislation. This is its own
legislative concept. This is log
rolling in a way.
Miss Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I
would completely disagree with
that characterization. This is a
the bill is a brand new bill.
And this is an amendment that
directly relates to it. It is a
clean fuel standard bill, and
this is, uh, an amendment to be
completely transparent. About
what the clean fuel standard
does to the consumer.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, What if
we were to go through? We just
finished the fiscal year 25
budget.
Thanks to our appropriations
committees. Um, that process is
making its way through the
chambers and will be signed into
law by the governor.
If you're saying that, because
this piece of legislation
wouldn't go into effect until
fiscal year 26 and there's
enough time to maybe get the
cost of this extra requirement
of the agency and that that
somehow makes it
Also appropriate.
Ah, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. As
you know, I am
Very unfamiliar with the entire
process of this body.
Um, but it is my understanding
that things like this happen
quite frequently, and, uh,
You know, on the entire bill.
On the entire bill.
They're going to have to come
back.
Someone's someone's gonna have
to come back for an
appropriation.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I know,
but but my concern with this
particular amendment is that
You are essentially putting in
an unfunded mandate without the
assurance that there would be
funding through the budget
process for next year for this
agency.
And therefore creating an extra
burden on the Department of
Agriculture, for which it really
didn't ask for and would
probably
I mean, really create a large
burden for them. This is there's
a lot of pumps out there, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
understand that this may be a
burden, but I think it is one
that, uh, we should bear in
In in the
To to affect governmental
transparency.
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Well, I absolutely
appreciate transparency in
government in every way
possible. I don't think this
amendment accomplishes that. I
think that this amendment is one
inappropriate within the purview
of this bill to possible and
unfunded mandate and three
violation of the appropriation
process of how this state builds
its budget. So while I, um
Definitely recognize you for
your attempt to amend the bill.
Make it better. I stand and
strong opposition to the
amendment. I do not think it
would be a good thing for this
bill. Thank you.
There is still debate the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero, Representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker was
gentleman yield.
I will yield to the gentleman
from
Chandler said Ian Otero,
You know, um, Speaker and
gentlemen, I think the people of
New Mexico
Are catching on.
Ah, I think it is.
I don't believe for a second.
That they believe
That
This new process.
Is not going to cost a cent.
And I think
Your bill.
Your amendment.
Is a perfect amendment.
In that it holds government
accountable.
What they do.
They understand.
What it costs.
And although I share my friends
concerned about the burden
Of the Department of
Agriculture.
It's about time this body starts
worrying about the burden to the
people of New Mexico.
That's where the burden lives.
And
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
You're familiar with the
Seattle Times, I guess aren't
you, sir?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Ah!
Yes, I am familiar with it, but
I don't think I've ever read it.
It's not normally a conservative
ragged I would tell you that,
uh, surf, But let me tell you
In, um on the front page.
The Seattle Times.
Ah!
Um
Just a few days ago.
Is an article
About Washington gas prices now
highest in the US, some experts
Point to the new climate
legislation.
Now.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
why your amendment is so
important. We have listened here
this morning about this.
Magic wands.
That's going to create a
commodity that isn't going to
cost anything, and it's going to
just be the whiz bang thing that
just makes everything better.
And it's not gonna cost a thing.
I hear such reluctance from the
other side to put a little bitty
sticker on the gas pump and says
this piece of you know this this
type of legislation cost this
much.
And so
With all due respect to the
body.
It is.
I think the imperative
That we start.
Thinking about the cost to our
Rural people.
Our Native Americans, people in
weeding and Mexico the people in
jail New Mexico, the people up
in the four Corners region that
drive long distances.
This bill without a doubt
increases the cost of gasoline.
We all know it. The people in
the Mexico Noah. They're not
buying this.
And your amendment.
Is what we call responsible
legislation. I'm here to support
your amendment.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Tao from I'm
sorry from Santa Fe.
Mr Alamos and
Sandoval, champion.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Chavez County
yield
Mr Speaker. I will yield yes.
Thank you.
I'd like to understand your, um
proposed amendment a little
better. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so let's let's walk
through it. Um, you asked that
there be an amendment that
states that the board shall
produce stickers for display on
a motor vehicle pump?
Um, from which fuel is sold at
retail, okay?
So the board shall produce.
And later on in the the proposed
amendment, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, you talk about the
Department of Agriculture.
Do you know? Um
Whether or not the Department of
Agriculture, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, reports to the board.
Is there any relationship there?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh,
I do not know that the that the
Department of Agriculture
reports to the board.
Okay. Investor speaker,
gentlemen. In fact, it does not.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Have any sort of
Working or supervisory
relationship, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
So having informed you of that,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
How do you propose this will
work between the two agencies.
Well, uh,
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
believe that they will have to
cooperate and that the board
will produce the speakers,
Stickers and the Department of
Agriculture, which already
handles
Fuel pumps.
We'll distribute them.
Okay? And Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
You're basing that just on?
The notion that they will work
effectively together without any
kind of organizational
connection. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes.
Okay. An act of faith, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I'll
accept that.
Then we go on and we talk about
it shall provide notice of
federal and state fuel tax rate
in cents per gallon for each
type of fuel as of the date of
the sticker was produced. So Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, when
you're talking about federal and
state tax rates are you
referring to, for example?
The 17 cents a gallon that New
Mexico adds to its adds to the
gas gasoline, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Yes.
Okay?
So we know the feds have a
specific rate, and we know the
state has a specific rate.
Do you know what the federal
rate is? Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I
believe it is 19 cents.
So it would say at the moment,
19 cents and it would say for
the feds, and it would say Mr
Speaker, 17 cents for the state
and
And that's at the moment. That's
it. Whenever date of publication
is
Now, this is the part. I'm
trying to understand a little
better.
The
Paragraph two. Mr Speaker. The
cost of compliance with the key
Clean transportation fuel
standard program and cents per
gallon the cost of compliance
and you, you, you, you attempt
to define that Mr Speaker by
saying the cost of compliance
with the clean transportation
fuel standard by calculating the
average cost of a credit.
Sold pursuant to the clean
Transportation Fuel Standard
program.
During the year and converting
that cost two represents the
program's cost incense per
gallon.
Mr Speaker.
Could you tell me, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen?
How you came to this as the
definition for the cost of the
program.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I
believe representative Scott
walked us through that and
significant and almost
painstakingly detailed.
Um
Um, yes, Mr Speaker. Um and I
would agree with one part of
that. And that is it was
painful, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, but I also think I
remember, um representative
Ortez or the General Lady from
Tauro, saying she did not agree
that
Um, that the proposed the
painstaking discussion presented
by representative Scott actually
represented and in the correct
way to calculate the cost of the
program.
Do you remember that Mr Speaker
and gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I do
recall that she disagreed. But,
um
That is her prerogative to
disagree with that calculation,
Mr Speaker. I agree that it's
her prerogative and our
prerogative as a body to Mr
Speaker and representative to
question the calculations of our
good friend, representative
Scott from Lee County. Um, he's
a really smart guy, but he's
also very good.
At, um
I say this. Let me just say
people can create calculations
in ways that aren't necessarily
appropriate for a particular
situation, and I think
represents Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, the general lady from
towels would say that was one of
those situations. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Alright, we're going
to pause right there. Well,
let's get back on the amendment.
Let's not go back to a prior
debaters debate, please. Okay.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Right. There's for the debate.
The gentleman from Sun. I
apologize. I thought we were
finished. Go ahead, gentlemen.
Okay. Sorry, Mr Speaker. Um
So we know there's disagreement.
Mr Speaker that, um, paragraph E
is an accurate way to, uh,
calculate the cost.
And so I guess on that basis
alone, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I would say that this is not an
appropriate amendment, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, I really appreciate Mr
Speaker. The interest in
transparency. I'm all for that.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Transparency has to be has to
have be based on valid premises.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, would
you not agree?
Um, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
would agree that it has to be
based on a valid uh,
calculation. Um, but so far,
Representative Scott is the only
person who has offered a
calculation.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
accept that, um
And but moving forward thinking
that through If there's
disagreement, it would seem to
me Mr Speaker that
This would not be an appropriate
amendment until one can come to
a conclusion consensus as to how
one might appropriately evaluate
the costs. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I'm happy to pass on
the baton.
Thank you, General Lady Baton
passed to the gentleman from San
Juan. Representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield? Yes, I yield to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
So far, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, would you agree that,
uh, the debate thus far on your
amendment.
Has
Ah, focused in on
Many other
Sub topics other than what your
bill or your amendment.
Would do to this bill. For
instance, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I've heard that there might be a
cost that we have to deal with.
Two years from now, which we
Could put an appropriation on
then which we do, Mr Speaker. As
I've learned in appropriations,
we do all the time.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen, that
was one issue. The other one is
That it's gonna be hard to make.
The Department of Agriculture.
Create a sticker.
Which they're doing as, uh,
It worked that we saw a little
bit ago. They're doing almost
all across the whole East Coast,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
In virtually all of those East
Coast states, not to mention
Texas and Illinois that you
mentioned earlier.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
there was also the discussion as
to whether this might be
logrolling. Which Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, This is a brand new
bill so that being said, I want
to take us back.
Two.
The purpose of your amendment,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think you believe as I do.
That there's going to be a
massive cost.
To this Clean Fuel amendment.
And that the people that we are
going to be
Putting this new cost on
Should be able through us being
transparent.
Show them. This increases that
The purpose. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen of your amendment.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. That
is the purpose. The purpose is
to show
That
Whether there is a cost or not.
I personally personally believe
there will be a cost.
Ah!
The distinguished
Representative or TAS does not
believe that
I'm
Um, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I did
not
I, It's okay. It's okay
Generally from from Taus, first
time you're good from towels. I
am very, very sorry, and I
apologize to her.
Um, uh, She disagrees that there
will be a cost. Um
But I think we need
In this
Our governance of over this
issue needs to be transparent.
And show whether or not there is
a cost, and I think that if
there is no cost, and having
that sticker that says, Look,
we're bringing you cleaner fuels
at no cost would be a great
publicity for this legislation.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So the question I have. Is this
thought that you have
That there, there would likely
be a cost to this and it would
likely be significant. Besides
the the numbers that were given
to us a few minutes ago by uh,
representative Scott
Besides that,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do you
remember in the presentation
that we were given in house
energy?
That
There is a brand new industry.
I believe, they said in. I'm not
sure if it was Washington.
Or if the numbers were from
California, But I do remember
the numbers.
That this new industry had
created $330 million. Do you
remember that? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Yes, And I believe
they were referring to Oregon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, but the numbers were
correct at $330 million of this
new industry, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I believe that was
the correct It was somewhere
around 300 to 330 million. I
believe Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that instance, $30
million about 1/10.
Was what the state realized, but
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
other 90%.
Of their
Carbon program.
Who pays for that? Who? How? I
know it's the
Potentially the industry that
pays for it. But Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is that a cost to
them of doing business.
And if it is a cost of doing
business, ultimately who pays
for that cost of doing business,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, it is
my understanding that under the
bill
Um
Some
Producer of a more
Ah!
Quote cleaner unquote energy.
Um, will earn carbon credits.
And they will monetize those
And that money will come from
Other entities.
Who are not reducing their
emissions.
And it will allow them to buy
their way out.
Of actually reducing emissions.
But
They that capital that they use
to buy those credits has to come
from somewhere.
Companies, major companies.
Small companies that have to buy
these credits or that will buy
these credits.
I will not let it negatively
affect their bottom line or
their shareholders. Bottom line.
Therefore
It's economics. They will pass
that on down, and it will be
reflected and I believe in fuel
prices. I think it will be
reflected in commodities.
Um, I think there are a number
of ways that they pass that down
the chain ultimately to the
consumer.
To use that money.
To buy their carbon credits
without actually reducing
emissions.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
So
This has proven to be the case
elsewhere, So I believe your
sticker.
And the transparency portion of
this is just so the average
person
When they see this cost of
compliance, not attacks.
But
Regardless and increase of cost
at the pump.
Let's let's throughout the word
tax because that seems to be
Ah, heartburn over that
language, even though I believe
what this is, is essentially a
regulatory tax that ends up
getting passed down.
But let's let's stay away from
tax. Let's just say
The cost of compliance is passed
on Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
To the consumer.
That is generally what happens
with every commodity Is that not
Mr Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
it is.
So thanks for that, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, it would be
helpful.
To be honest, Mr Speaker in my
mind if
This cost of
The what will eventually be a
cost of which will be a cost of
an increase to
Traditional
Fuel sources.
I would like to see the cost.
Of compliance of these stickers
all the way down to the food.
Or every product that is
delivered.
That there is going to be this
extra cost for. I would I would
prefer that your bill had done
that. They have been very hard
to do, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I believe
That this would have helped us
some sort of a transparent
measure like this would have
helped us.
With those who have seen the
cost of electricity go up since
the E T. A
That there would have been some
indication as to what that cost
was.
And so, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
during the presentation that we
heard in house energy
Did we
One of our members asked a very
specific question, which was
One example.
Of what this would look like.
In real life.
And Ms Speaker and gentlemen,
that correct me if I'm wrong.
What I heard was from the expert
that was there that day.
Was that
Let's say a utility
How'd a source
Of energy.
That created carbon credits.
They would then.
Be able to sell those credits.
To an oil company or a
A refinery. I guess that would
be creating these fuels and then
delivering them.
To let's say Raton, New Mexico.
And that
The creator of that.
Credit.
Would be able to sell it or
trade it or somehow monetize it.
And then the other.
Ah entity with a with a
Source such as gasoline as we
see now in our gas pumps.
And
That they would pay for it.
And I believe are further
questions on that. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen were
Well, then who pays for the fuel
coming out of the pump?
Did I miss anything there,
gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No, I do
not believe so.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
What I'm trying to get to Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, is the
purpose for your
For your amendment.
This was the exact scenario laid
out before us.
In that scenario, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, other than
The refineries.
Would have to create more
sources of biofuels. If it were
a TV source. There wouldn't be
anything associated with it. But
if a
A fuel company, so any place
where people are unable to buy
E. V s
Or where.
Uh, for fuel efficiency that you
described earlier in your
discussion.
Those folks who continue to own
especially
Folks who have older vehicles
and can't maybe can't afford to
buy a new vehicle.
They would be the ones paying
Eventually.
They would be the consumer
paying for this increase that
that sticker
Would help them understand why
their price of fuel went up. Is
that correct? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. That
is what I believe. And I believe
that, uh, there is a cost to the
consumer.
I think that
Um
Companies will be buying
credits so they don't have to
reduce emissions rather than
actually trying to reduce
emissions.
And that those costs of buying
the credits will be passed down
because
Shareholders aren't going to
like the bottom line.
Being negatively impacted.
So, Mr Speaker. Um, I'm gonna
gentlemen I'm gonna I'm gonna
offer you a scenario and tell me
if this is how it could
potentially work out here.
We do have a utility that's in
New Mexico.
That has a, uh, a nuclear power
plant out of state.
Under under this bill under the
underlying bill, it states that
we would not
Discriminate against a source or
whether or not it's an out of
state source of this.
Um
Uh, um, Energy Source.
Um, that that could benefit from
this credit market that we
create. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker?
Let's I know where you're going,
and I know you're going to end
up back at the amendment, but
let's try to limit our question
and answer to the amendment.
We're veering too far into the
bill, and I've let it slide a
little bit, But I think we need
to
Wrap it up. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I will get there.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I
I believe that yes, Under that
scenario, the the
Company would be able to sell
its credits. So thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
The reason I brought that up, Mr
Speaker and I will get to the
question.
Is
Under that scenario.
Where that type of source is
used to create energy.
They would not be doing anything
different than currently.
Except for they be able to
benefit.
On a on this carbon credit
market.
And then the companies who are
producing
Crude oil.
For fuel and vehicles combustion
in, uh
Combustion engines.
For those locations where they
cannot purchase the
Vehicle that or or prefer not
to.
They would be paying for.
And no one would be doing
anything different than today.
The only thing that would happen
is a change.
In the cost of fuel for the
people who are paying for that
fuel.
And your sticker.
Would show whether or not there
is an increase or not. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Speaker and gentlemen, I will
support your amendment because
this is the least cost.
Simple.
Transparency that we were not
afforded, Mr Speaker.
When we did the ET a
The same expert witness, Mr
Speaker that presented that data
to us and energy said
That experts
Are telling us or telling him
That the cost of the E T A will
almost double.
The cost of electricity and Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
That is exactly
Why we need this type of
transparency.
That is exactly why this minimal
Change to this bill.
Should be there. So if this is a
mistake, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen going down this road
at least we will be able to
identify rather than saying
There are multiple reasons so
much Speaker. I support this.
The cost is minimal.
As a matter of fact, we can
figure out the cost in a year or
two like we do on multiple
Appropriations bills. Thank you,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you. Gentlemen. There's further
debate on the amendment. The
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
representative Romero.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield
Yes, I yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, I'm trying to also
thanks for the debate so far,
trying to wrap my head around
Why you chose a sticker? Um,
when it comes to some of the way
this is going to work so first,
which board is it? That's going
to produce the stickers.
Mr Speaker. Uh,
Gentle lady. As as we see in the
bill on line Page one line 20
board means the Environmental
Improvement Board. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. However, this is
under the jurisdiction of the
Agriculture Department of
Agriculture, not the Department
of the Environment Department.
Is that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Ah, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. No.
The, uh, the board creates
Ah, the board calculates the
cost of compliance, if any.
And produces the sticker, the
Department of Agriculture is in
Ah, charge of distributing and
ensuring that those stickers are
properly displayed.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, So goes
through the line and the point
of being able to display a
sticker is to have taxpayers
aware of what the change in
prices. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
is that correct?
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. The
The purpose of the sticker is to
provide the
Consumers of
Fuels.
The current federal and state
tax rates on those fuels.
And
The cost of compliance, which
There has been much debate as to
whether that will actually go up
or we'll have no cost of
compliance. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, do we do that type of
awareness for other costs that
this industry is creating, such
as in oil spills, orphaned wells
or asthma and the cost that the
state endures for that?
Um, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
I have only been a member of
this body for a little over
three weeks, and so I haven't
been able to make changes like
that yet.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen that I
think that would be really
helpful for the public to
understand Really, Truly. What
the cost of, um not implementing
certain rules and norms for the
consumer to understand that
these are externalized costs,
not specific to a single, um,
point of sale and that ecology
itself doesn't control protect
companies pricing decisions as
well.
And so when we look at how it is
that we've been talking about
Washington. Um I also want to
clarify Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
that you're referring to their
low carbon fuel standard, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and not
their cap and invest program. Is
that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes, I
believe so.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So, yes,
Their cabin invest program has
not been instituted in the state
of Washington, which is what we
were referring
Forgive me. The clean fuel
standard has been instituted in
the state of Washington. Um, in
which case, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the sticker program
isn't attached to that program
specifically to my knowledge and
research on how that's working
in that state. Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, can you tell me about
how this is going to affect feel
being purchased on tribal land?
Uh, Mr Speaker, Gentle lady.
First, I would address
Washington very quickly because
Washington did enact the clean
fuels standard. It did not have
this provision in it, but now
they are considering a bill has
been introduced to do this exact
thing because
They have found.
It has had an effect on the cost
of gasoline.
Um
To answer the other question. Um
I do not know how this would
affect
Ah!
Because of gasoline or how it is
done on tribal lands.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, That's a
worry for my community. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, where are
tribal? Uh, pueblos in our
district, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
are in compliance with a number
of the necessities to be able to
comply with federal law and
state law, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but on sovereign land
with the four publishers in our
community that are selling gas
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I want to
be sure that within this
legislation and the change that
they're made that they know what
their compliance is, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and there is no
provision in here for tribal
providers of gasoline. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I do
not know right now whether the
Department of Agriculture does
inspections on fuel pumps on
tribal lands. If they currently
do, I would assume they would
continue to do so. If they do
not, then I would assume they
will not.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Well,
that that's a problem without
the clarity of the law to help
inform that I think with this
when we're instituting a
program that's we expect
universal adoption and
understanding that this is going
to happen statewide and how
these stickers are displayed, as
is a was a was a choice that
you've made to do that. I want
to be clear with our Pueblo. Um
Sovereign, uh, sovereigns in our
community that they would know
what to do, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So that's a problem.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
understand, too from the state
of Washington that they actually
have a means. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, for folks to actually
complain about whether or not
there was a surcharge on fuel
that gets involved with the
attorney general.
And the fact that Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, they would be
protecting consumers on anything
that was unfairly risen, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, what would a
sticker due to help with
compliance or understanding if a
surcharge was unlawful or not?
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Um I
don't think we're discussing
whether a surcharge is
Illegal or not. We are
discussing whether or not there
will be a cost to implementing
this program. And if so, then.
It should be fully transparent.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, in
order for that transparency,
you're saying the sticker is
going to do the job of making it
transparent? That what I'm
hearing Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, again
that that creates a an
interesting sort of prospect for
me on how we're actually getting
to consumer interests and
actually verifying whether or
not this program is creating a
value for them by producing a
sticker Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
for I know, for our community
seems probably a bit trite. Um,
I don't see how it is that
That's going to help us
understand what the value of
this program is any more than I
think what the substance of the
legislation is already doing, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and so the
cost to, um not only taxpayers,
but to produce a program like
this, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't generally see the value Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. And what is
the what happens? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, if you don't comply
with this process
Mr Speaker, General Lady First I
Failed to see how providing
consumers with more information
is a bad thing. Uh, second, um,
I assume that the compliance
issues there that the Department
of Agriculture or Agriculture
already has rules and
regulations in place for
violations that deal with
compliance on fuel pumps at the
time, and I would assume that
the
Those
Would apply to someone who does
not properly display the
stickers.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
there's no actual compliance.
Um, enforcement within this
provision. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, From what I
just heard.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. It
would be the current compliance
standards.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So when
we're looking at how fluctuation
happens in the marketplace,
right, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
this is a market based system
and the percentage base that you
would want to have listed on
your sticker is a point in time.
Um, from that moment, so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, whether the
prices up and down we're just
picking a date. We're saying
there's the price and there's
the the value to the consumer
right at that point in time. So,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, when is
that point?
The Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I
believe we addressed that
earlier.
When we said it would be 90 days
after, uh when the bill takes
effect
Then.
Ah, periodically every three
years.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, do
you recall the price of fuel
going up and down within three
years, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr Speaker, General Lady?
Yes, it does.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if
this is about creating
transparency for the consumer,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
you're placing a sticker that
has been put up. Put one time in
three years, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, is that truly
transparent?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. The
sticker is not related to the
market value of the fuel. It is
related to the cost of
compliance and while gasoline,
diesel fuel's all types of fuels
fluctuate
We are talking about the cost of
compliance. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, so and again, we just
talked about fuels going up and
down. Does the cost of doing
business and of compliance. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
agree is also relative to those
prices, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
am unaware.
Of
An instance where the cost of
compliance actually goes down.
In fact, what we do is enact
more laws. There are more
rulemaking regulations that
increase the cost of compliance
and doing business.
So by that standard, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, that's adding this
layer of bureaucracy that would
then cost taxpayers more money
to run this sticker program. Is
that what I'm hearing as well,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
Yes, there would be some
administrative costs. But this,
uh this bill
With updating on the state of
New Mexico's fleet.
Of cars and vehicles.
We'll also cost the taxpayers a
lot more money. All right, Mr
Speaker fan, and it isn't
funded.
Ah!
Mandate.
Uh, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'll
move on from that. I just I have
some additional questions
regarding how, um enemy D will
work with the Department of
Agriculture on this, Um,
understanding that there are
other programs. I'm assuming Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, if you could
tell me what they work on
together now, so that this would
sort of be in conjunction with
something else.
Mr Speaker. Uh, general. Gentle
lady. Uh,
I do not know whether the
Department of Agriculture and
the Environment Improvement
Board worked together in other
ways, but considering that there
are some related things with
agriculture dairies that have
environmental concerns, I assume
that they work together and in
conjunction on
A number of things.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So when
we look at the board and the way
in which this board is supposed
to operate, and we're referring
in the actual bill,
Environmental Improvement Board,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so this
would expand their powers, Um,
in the sense that they would
have a purview over the
statewide location of every gas
station in the state to display
a sticker.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Do you
have an envision as to who would
design or, um ensure that what
you're seeking to create? Uh,
under what standard? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. How would we know
that this would be created? Mr
Speaker? Gentle lady. I don't
believe this is expanding the
environment Improvement Boards
authority.
It just requires them.
To make an a calculation of the
cost of compliance and create
the stickers.
The bill itself greatly enhances
their authority.
And has a number of
administrative costs associated
including conducting a fuel life
cycle assessment for every type
of fuel.
That will be used in the state
of New Mexico.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So can
you You had referred to that
study before. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, where is that in your
Amendment.
Uh, Mr Speaker? Gentle lady,
could you clarify Because there
are
I just referred to the
assessment, which is in the
actual
Bill.
But the calculation
If that's what you're referring
to is in subsection E.
On Page one.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so the
board is going to calculate the
cost of compliance.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
they're going to do that.
Standard program during the year
and converting that cost, too.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, So I'm
still not following
Hmm. You had referenced in in
some of the previous, um
Dialogue that there would be a
study within this. About what?
This. This, um
Compliance would look like Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, can you
explain
That's what that what that looks
like from your
Amendment, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, if I
I am talking in the amendment
about a calculation and then
that is, um
The calculation in E. If I have
referred to that as a study
I apologize for that.
It is a calculation that has to
be made and then
Re calculated every three years.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Do we
have a good understanding of how
That calculation is made for
cost of compliance is a standard
sort of calculation that we see
throughout state government. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Generally the I'm
sorry. Could you please repeat
that? Sure, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm just curious on
the board shall calculate the
cost of compliance. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, do we do that
with other forms of state
government where we are
calculating that or a board is
calculating that can you help us
understand what this might look
like?
All right, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. Maybe you could, um
Explain to me a little better.
What? What's your getting at?
Because I I'm failing to
understand the question, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, I I'm
For the public's information on
how this board is going to
calculate the cost of compliance
with the clean transportation
fuel standard.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is this
in a form of a report when we
are able to verify what that,
um, stickers should look like
What's going to go on it, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, how How are
we currently calculating
compliance and other forms of
government?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I I'm
not sure
How
I'm not sure we are calculating
cost of compliance in any other
manner. I don't
No. Maybe we should be. Um, but
the calculation is there in
paragraph E. I have addressed
that, uh, with, um
The gentle lady from Los Alamos,
Sandoval in Santa Fe, and, um,
that calculation has been
Addressed.
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so
we don't necessarily know what
what form in which we're going
to receive that information for
the public to meet, ensure that
whatever algorithms, however,
this is being calculated. It's
very transparent that we would
know what what they're looking
at. And what compliance would
look like. So this is just
saying they calculate it and
we're good with what calculation
they come up with. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
Yes, I mean, that that is
I mean, we're trusting them in
the bill to make an assessment
of the life the fuel life cycle
of every type of fuel in
utilized in the state of New
Mexico. Why would we not trust
them to calculate this cost and
put it on a sticker and how that
is actually, exactly going to
look.
I can't answer but it will have
certain information and that
information will be the
Cost of federal fuel tax.
Because of state fuel tax and
the cost of compliance under the
bill.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
I hear what it is that you're
trying to do a bit. Um, I also
just have concerns. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, because when I go put
gas in my car, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I see a number of
stickers. There's hazards.
There's um you know, clarity
about what is there how to use
your credit card? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, is this going to
be also posted? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen in
Language in multiple languages.
Of course, we have a very
multicultural, Multilingual, um
State. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Do
you foresee that we would be
including accessibility for
those who don't have English as
their first language.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
Would not be opposed to that.
but that would be up to the
environmental improvement board
that oversees that it will
oversee the program.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen again on
Creating transparency for this
sticker process, are you
Anticipating, um this working
with current consumer protection
laws, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
under the Attorney General's
office.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady again.
I'm
I'm not entirely sure.
Hmm. Hmm. What? This? What laws?
And compliance were you're
talking about here.
I don't think this has anything
to do with the amendment.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So as I
understand it, this is about
consumer awareness, right
Consumer protection, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So have you spoken
with the attorney general about
how they create awareness for
consumers before creating this
piece of legislation, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr Speaker, General Lady
there. There are two very
different
Concepts there. Uh, consumer
protection is one thing.
Consumer awareness is a
different thing. This is
consumer awareness, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So on the consumer
Awareness front, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, would you agree that
when we're looking at consumer
protection laws that outside of
potentially producing a single
sticker and what the impact
would be Mr Speaker, general men
that the state is trying to
protect consumers.
All together, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. Uh, my thought on this
bill was that if the state was
truly trying to protect the
consumer, we wouldn't have this
bill at all. But the sticker is
designed to make consumers aware
not to protect them.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, the
impact of the sticker is merely
awareness. Is that what I'm
hearing? Mr Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Uh,
yes. And I think I've answered
that a few times.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So going
back to again how this will
work. Technically, the New
Mexico Environment Department is
now going to be working with the
Department of Agriculture. Um
and so when we look at how Mr
Speaker how Mr Speaker, Um
gentlemen, when we see some of
the different revenue streams
that may be coming in
Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Is
that now going to be under the
purview of the Department of
Agriculture when it comes to
both the cost of compliance and
some of the new renewable diesel
that might be produced Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, how are we
creating that awareness? Um,
both to the Department of
Agriculture and to consumers, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady again.
I think we've addressed these
issues numerous times. But I
will say this is not expanding
the scope of authority for the
Department of Agriculture they
merely distribute and ensure
that the stickers are properly
placed.
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, So
we're not supposedly expanding
the powers of the agricultural
department. But we are
potentially doing that with the
environmental improvement Board.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, by giving
this new task, um to oversee
this sticker program, Mr Speaker
Gentleman
Are you suggesting that they
would then in fact have to
oversee that rather than the
Department of Agriculture? Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, Since we're
asking the Department of
Agriculture to do this, how does
the Environmental improvement
board work with them to make
sure that it's compliant? Mr
Speaker? Gentle lady again, I
have answered this number of
times.
But the entire bill
Increases the scope of authority
of the Environment Improvement
Board, so adding a small task to
that is not greatly expanding
their authority and again.
The two
The board and the department
will work together as I'm sure
they do on numerous agricultural
issues that have environmental
impacts.
And this is merely to raise
consumer awareness, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So on that consumer
awareness, we certainly want it
to be accurate information.
That's that we're supplying to
the consumer. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. So where is the data
coming from, Um about how
compliance works and the
calculation that they're making
a re asking industry to supply
that data to the, um
Environmental improvement board.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I've
answered a lot of questions
about the calculation. The
calculation is in paragraph E
subsection E.
And
I've answered that.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, But I'm
asking Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
where the data is coming from.
Can you explain to the body
where they get that data?
Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady.
It says the data is collecting
the average cost of a credit
sold pursuant to the clean
transportation.
Transportation fuel standard.
During the year.
And converting that
Two cents per gallon as
We have
Said a number of times
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, is that
being supplied by the industry
The fuel industry, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. The
Cost of a
Carbon
Credit.
Or clean transportation fuel
credit.
Will be known. It is a market
they will be bought and sold and
traded. That's where the
information will come from.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, you
can't speak to a specific data
source. We're talking about the
market.
Is that correct? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. Uh, yes, but you can look
up right now What the market
value is of a carbon credit in
Washington in California in
Oregon and in British Columbia,
so I don't think it's going to
be very hard to find that
information. Can you speak to a
data source, Mr Speaker so that
the body can understand where
you're getting your information.
Or the information that you
anticipate for where that would
be coming from.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, Um
There are a number of markets
and
The value of the credit.
Depends.
On a number of things, but they
are bought and sold.
And traded.
Um, the the
The fact that this bill does not
have a mechanism to track that.
Maybe a big flaw in the in the
Bill. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think if you're going to create
a program that helps to regulate
or, you know, check and balance
what's in the bill, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that it should be
clearly, um, displayed as far as
what is where is it? We're
getting this information how it
would be.
Calculated. What is it that
we're trying to do with this
program? Um, when we're talking
about consumer awareness, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I just don't
see how this helps. You know the
everyday consumer understand
what it is that we're trying to
get out here, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen and the bureaucracy
and creating
This whole new sticker system
when we're asking the
environmental improvement board,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen to do a
number of things. This seems
very tangential to what it is
that we would like them to
accomplish through this bill. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. So for that
reason I can't support your
amendment. Thank you.
There is further debate The
gentleman from Catherine
Grant Hidalgo, representative
Russia's
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm going
to try and fix this copyright
Tada.
Do you know what capital that
is Mr Speaker with a gentleman.
Did you bring some? No, No,
that's totally but when it is
around the corner, Mr. Speaker.
I'm just trying watching. Uh,
the gentleman Hembree. His eyes
popped open when I said, copied
with Ah,
That was almost as complicated
as Mr Scott's, uh,
Calculation. He thought, he
said, a bad word.
I know it. It does sound like a
bad word.
Mr Speaker with the gentleman,
please yield.
Mr Speaker, I will yield to the
gentleman from Catherine Grant
and Hidalgo.
So, Mr Speaker, I'm just
Shocked that this body although
my friends on the other side
Are debating
As hard as they can for us not
to be transparent.
And although I understand that,
you know this doesn't they
probably weren't anticipating
this, Uh
Amendment.
It is hard, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. For some of those
representatives to understand
what some of us other
representatives deal with in our
districts.
Their districts, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, that
Have
Lot higher Median income.
And do not get affected nearly
as bad as other as other
districts.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Near my district.
And the reason I'm saying this
before I get into this. Let me
explain this. First of all, I'm
going to tell you this. I don't
think any time we create
regulation automatically.
It's going to cost money.
If anyone in this body thinks
that out of the goodness of any
Corporations heart They're going
to pay it out of their pocket.
We know better and so that
people and so do the people of
New Mexico. It is going to cost
money to follow regulation.
And and two and at the end of
the day it will cost at the
pump.
And if it costs at the pump, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, it's going
to cost. It's going to ripple
through all of the economy.
Thank you.
It's going to be rippled through
all the economy.
Energy.
For those of us that understand.
Economics is the one of the
primary causes of inflation.
If the cost of fuel goes up.
Automatically was a transport
that that the food or any goods
and services, it's automatically
going to go up.
I might I buy granite, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and for one
of my businesses, and I get an
increase for my shipping. And
then I have a surcharge. I can
assure you you're going to have
that rippling through through
all the goods and services in
New Mexico.
Now why am I bringing this up?
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Nearby district in the in in the
county of Luna.
We have a poverty rate of 26%.
That has increased
9.22% in one year.
As a result of the inflation and
I know every person in this
body Mr Speaker, gentlemen has
felt that has felt the increase
of the inflation that has gone
through our communities.
I know it for a fact.
But I will say, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is do you know? Do
you happen to know? And I'm just
throwing this figure out there.
Do you know Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, what the poverty rate
is the amount that puts you in
the poverty rate.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do not.
It is $14,580.
If you make less than $14,580
during the poverty rate.
26% of the people in Luna
County.
Are are are struggling with the
poverty rate.
In not being able to feed their
families. I can assure you I
have a piece of paper here that
says The Seattle Times says that
it costs 50 cents a gallon for
the Q. They're they're clean
Fuel program, and this came out
in June of 23.
I can assure you that's going to
cost money at the pump.
And the average gallon. The
average car has about 2020
gallon capacity.
Which is going to cost about
$10.
We live in a place of rural New
Mexico, where we have to drive
for everything we don't drive in
in miles. We drive in minutes
because it's so far.
Everything is far.
My office is alone are 100 miles
apart.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
People have to understand this
body has to understand that in
rural new Mexico, if you want to
see the doctor, you got to go to
Albuquerque.
It's a 4.5 hour drive from my
house. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm just gonna I'm in
a
I'm going to finish your real
quick. I'm getting question. But
anyway what? I'm telling you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, everyone has
to go to the doctor. It's far
it's 100 Miles to go to Las
Cruces. It's 4.5 hours to go to
Albuquerque. This is going to
cost our people a lot of
questions and so are not a lot
of questions, but a lot of
money.
And so it at at $14,580 a year.
The poorest of the poor. The
people that are on a fixed
income Mr Speaker are going to
be struggling, so
One moment, Mr Speaker.
So, Mr Speaker.
Do you understand what I'm
talking about? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Um, pursuant to
house rules 7-4 and 7-4 Dash
one. I move for a call of the
house. The purposes of the call
is for all issues related to
House Bill 41.
Reason for the call is not
required by house rules, but it
is a good idea to include a
reason so that the House knows
Have to read that. Sorry, and I
asked for a roll call vote.
You have the roll call.
Sergeants.
Members of your seats, please.
What happened? I left for two
minutes. What happened?
Members. I believe there is a
color house. I heard a rumor. If
that is the case, please sit
down so that the sergeant's can
count you.
And we can move on.
Members. Please take your seats
so that the sergeant's can do
their jobs.
Be informed by the sergeants
that the call is completed a
gentleman you still have the
floor.
Catching it. Outgoing Grant
represent Terrazas. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. And so, miss Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
You know? Is there a reason why
you didn't want to call this
attacks?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
I don't think it's
It's a cost of compliance is
what it is rather than a tax.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Although this
Although this directly isn't
a tax, it's causing an indirect
tax.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Because, like I said, as food
and or goods and services
increased because of the cost of
fuel, which again I'm going to
repeat that in the Seattle
Times, it said that the cost of
fuel went up 50 cents a gallon
with a clean field program in
June of 23.
That's going to increase the
cost of everything so
automatically the cost of goods
and services in the state of
Mexico. Being that we have a
grocery cents tax.
It's going to taxes period.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I'm just going to give you an
But it's 54 gallons. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and I'm sure you can
do the simple math at 50 cents a
gallon. How much more would that
cost me?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Well, uh, $27 each time you
refuel. That's correct, Mr
Speaker.
And so, Mr Speaker.
Again. The reason that I was
bringing this up, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, is not because it's
going to affect me that way.
Because I worry about my
district. I worry about the
people that are on poverty in
the park, you know, below the
poverty rate 26% of the people
down there in in just Luna
County. I didn't do every single
county Mr Speaker.
But
You know, I thought it was quite
disappointed here.
That one representative Scott
presented a formula for the fuel
crest credit, uh, value.
That he was insulted, and, uh
I just find that strange,
especially when no one else
offered.
To give that massive calculation
back to discredit him.
And so you know again, you know,
this is not going to affect
every every, uh
County the same or every
district the same some districts
like Los Alamos.
Sanofi.
Their their median income is a
lot higher. And so I'm gonna ask
you one last question. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, Do you
happen to know what the median
income is for a family of four
in Luna County?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do not
$30,000
And I bring these numbers, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and to the
body because I want to let them
know how hard this will affect
The rule New Mexico because we
have to travel so far.
And because of the those people
that are on a fixed income.
And have low medium incomes.
High poverty rates. It's already
increased like you said earlier
in one year increased 9.22%.
From one year to another.
And that's with that, Mr
Speaker.
Yakob
from early Oh, point of order,
Mr Speaker. Your point, Mr
Speaker, this matter, having
been under debate for three
hours, I moved to close debate
right members. That motion takes
president. I will go back to the
gentleman to wrap up on his
amendment. After we take this
motion, and then we'll take a
vote on the amendment, and then
we'll go close on the bill and
then take a vote on the bill.
All those in favor of closing
debate, and I
Suppose, may
The Sabbath debate is closed.
Gentlemen from Chavez
represented Hembree to close on
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um
I think this amendment
Is designed
To just provide a little bit of
transparency to the consumers.
Um, I
Recognize.
That I am not the bethe best.
Mathematician in the room.
And that I may not
Ah, no, exactly.
How this is calculated.
But I think the the provisions
that provides for the
calculation is correct.
And if the gentle lady from Taus
is correct, and there is no cost
of compliance
And that sticker will
Prominently display.
That this bill
Is doing what she wants.
At no cost to the consumer, and
that would be a fantastic thing.
To publicize.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
Generate from Valeo moved to
table. An amendment. Mr Speaker.
We are an emotion to table House
floor Amendment number one to
House Judiciary Committee
Substitute for house Bill 41.
Yes, and the amendments have
been tabled. We do have a roll
call vote. He voted yes, and the
amendments have been tabled A
vote of no, and we're back on
the amendment.
What is enclosed by what if 39
the affirmative, 13, the
negative House Four Amendment
number one
To House Judiciary Committee
substitute for housing 41 has
been tabled.
The Lady from towels to close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that house judiciary substitute
for house Bill 41 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for house Bill 41. The vote is
now open.
What about the clothes?
What is enclosed by a vote of 36
in the affirmative 33 in the
negative House judiciary
companies substitute for
housing. 41 has duly passed this
house and because we have
completed business on that
particular bill
Is there.
Unanimous consent to lift the
call.
Yes, Mr Speaker.
The call has been lifted. Open
the doors. It's hot.
Mr Speaker. May I? Um, I guess I
should have not lifted it before
my song.
The gentleman to sing.
Gentlemen to sing.
Hmm.
Look at that. Kansas Topic A
Kansas, Okay, um
My little buttercup has the
sweetest smile.
Well, that was totally out of
order and probably broke a few
decorum rules. But that was
awesome. Thank you.
General lady from Brenna. Leo.
Representative Garrett, Are you
ready on supplemental calendar
item number?
Number one.
Yes, I'm ready. Mr. Speaker, can
you give me to that point at the
record reflect that election is
safer place in house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Substitute for House
Bill five as amended has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I'm introducing the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee Committee sub for
House Bill five is amended.
It is.
To do the Workforce Development
and apprenticeship fund.
Ah, it creates the workforce
Development and Apprenticeship
Trust fund makes annual
transfers from the trust fund
and the Public Works, Apprentice
and training fund and annual
appropriations to the Workforce
Solutions Department for the
purpose of assisting the
Apprenticeship Assistance Act.
it will contribute to the
state's ability to continue
offering these important
resources.
For what we all know is vital to
our state's economic future. And
with that I stand for questions.
There is the gentleman from
Grant.
Catrin representative Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Ah, thank you, General Lady,
for, uh
HP five.
We had a robust debate in
committee.
And, uh,
We? You know, we had a very
robust debate, and we had a lot
of questions that we that I had.
and you answered, and this has
been substituted. And so there
were a lot of issues raised by
organizations, individuals.
The fiscal impact report.
So I'm gonna ask you seriously
questions that were addressed in
House appropriations.
And so the first one, Mr
Speaker, General Lady is
The noted that bill was not
entirely clear.
Uh, if the intent of the bill
was to distribute 2.5 million to
each beneficiary, or 2.5 in
total to create the new fund in
the first two years.
Did you dress this? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Yes, Mr Speaker. We did.
Can you expand on that? Mr
Speaker? General Lady? Yes, Page
two Section D explains it.
I will wait for you to explain
it to me. Mr. Speaker generally,
please.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it's a subject to the subject to
the availability. Availability
of funds Number one on July 1st
2024 and July 1st 2025 a 2
million and you can read it
right there. And then it says on
Page three, Section two
Until I first of each year there
after $1,500,000 shall be
transferred to the public works,
Apprentice and Training Fund and
number B $1,500,000 shall be
appropriated to the workforce.
Uh, dollars to be appropriated
to the Workforce Solutions
Department to carry out the
purposes of the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So, our general lady,
and so, uh
So then.
A total of is it? Let me let me
understand that. Is it a total
of them? Because I heard 1.5. So
is it a total of 3 million? Or
is it a total of 1.5 million?
It's five. Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman in the first
Two years and then three after
that, so Mr Speaker, divided
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. General Lady
explained that again, You said 5
million the first year and then
three. Thereafter is that did I
understand that right? Mr
Speaker, five in the first two
years, which is divided and then
three after that, which is
divided
And I know Mr Speaker General
Lady. We had originally
requested an appropriation of
$50 million. Can you explain
what the new appropriation or
what is in the bill? Yes, Mr
Speaker, as is its custom House
appropriation stripped the
appropriation. Currently there's
30 million in the budget and we
are working.
Hour by hour with science.
Senate finance to add 20 million
You just talk.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Did
you say
3 Million or 30 million. Just
speaker kind. Gentlemen. 30
million is in the budget and
Section five.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, when you said 3
million, I thought we were going
to start bouncing checks.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
um, one of the questions that
off state I'll stick on that for
a minute. And so one of the
questions that I had in
committee and by the way, Mr
Speaker generally you've been
very gracious. I enjoyed our
debate on in committee. I really
appreciate your candor. I
appreciate the way you answer
questions. You're very
transparent. I'll use that.
And so and and so
One of the worries that I had
and for the body. I mean,
sometimes we get all these
bills. Mr Speaker, General Lady.
It's a lot to take in. It's a
lot to understand what in the
world are we talking about? So,
Mr Speaker, General Lady in
general, we're talking about a
fund. And can you explain Just
the basic concept of the whole
thing, and then I'll see if we
can have that discussion here so
that the body understands and I
understand better and make sure
that I'm
The right thing in voting. Yes,
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman. This
creates 1/4 source of funding to
go to our apprenticeship
programs. There's currently 58
diverse. Uh, funds. Excuse me,
apprenticeships throughout our
state, about a third are
nonunion, about two thirds or
union.
As uh, Secretary near explained
yesterday. We have new
apprenticeships every day.
And so we're looking for an
influx of money because of the
increased inspiring
comprehensive development of new
apprenticeships.
In general, Mr Speaker, General
lady. What you're saying is that
we
We are creating a fund because
of we know that we need more
money for this type of
investment of apprenticeship.
Programs throughout the state.
And so I think what I referred
to it, Uh, Mr Speaker.
Is that Mr Speaker? I can't Mr
Speaker, Madam Speaker. Excuse
me, Madam Speaker General Lady
was that, uh, this was kind of
like a CD for the state of New
Mexico is basically putting a CD
or fund. I called it a CDs just
so people can understand that
and what we were trying to do,
Mr or what you're trying to do,
Mr. Speaker, General, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Is put this this dollar figure
out here.
And hopefully it's it's going to
be invested.
It's going to create a little
bit of income in various ways
and then we're going to draw
some of the
Income that's produced by it.
And it looks and it sounds to me
that we're going to probably
take a little bit more than than
what it can gain an interest in
probably start eating away at
the corpus. Is that a
Is that kind of state that
correctly?
Madam's Madam speaker and and
representative. It is expendable
at this point.
So
Madam speaker, general Lady.
And because of the substitution.
I just want to clarify.
What you're stating as
expendable. That means it's
never it's we're not going to
put, um
We're not going to put this
money to work to gain any sort
of interest income or any sort
of investment so we can help
that fund and perpetuate that
money a little bit.
Madam Speaker, Mr
Representative. The state
investment counsel will be
involved in so we hope that it
will grow.
So I'm going to take that Madam
Speaker General lady that we are
going to put some of these funds
because I think it would be
Terrible if we didn't make some
money on the money that's
sitting there rather just
sitting there idle.
So
One of my biggest concerns.
Was Mr Speaker generally was the
or Madam Speaker, General Lady.
It was that
That we're going to start eating
away at the corpus and I wanted
to make sure although it's very
important and keep in mind, I'm
very supportive. If we made all
the changes if I understand it,
all right. Um uh, seems like we
went in the right direction.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, but
what I'm concerned with is a
longevity.
Of this fund and so based on the
figures, and how were the
calculations in the in the
expenditures when you say 55
million and then the following
year, 5 Million and 3 million
hour after I can see it's gonna
get drawn down pretty quick. So
how long will this fund last?
Madam Speaker General Lady?
Madam speaker and Mr and Kind
gentleman. If you look on page
to be the state investment
officers, subject to the
approval of the state investment
counsel shall invest the money
in the Workforce Development and
Apprenticeship Trust fund in
accordance and it lives exactly
what the state investment
officer will be working on.
Right? Um, Madam Speaker.
Generally, I understand that so
they're going to invest it, but
It looks like if we've got $30
million, Madam Speaker General
80. We're getting some interest
unless you know where to, uh to
get return.
That is
Huge
We're going to be cutting into
the corpus, so that means said.
Or the CD, the amount the main
amount the seed of money. I'll
use those three terms.
If that happens, how long do you
think Or has it been calculated,
Madam Speaker generally how long
this fun will last the state of
New Mexico to help these
priorities?
My mortuary lingo came out my
pre arrangement. I didn't mean
that my apprenticeship programs
funded apprenticeship programs.
Madam Sharon and representative
If you look at Page two D it's
is subject to the availability.
I'm having trouble with that
word availability of funds.
The certain amounts will be
transferred.
Let me just think of this in my
mind for just a second. Okay.
Hold on one second.
According to my if we take
5 million to, uh, you know the
following year or this year and
this fiscal year the following
fiscal year, That's 10 million
that brings it down to 20 divide
that by three like you said,
That's another 7 million.
Hopefully that we make it so
that looks to me like maybe nine
years. Maybe 10 is that's how
that's just my calculation.
Out in my head. Madam speaker,
Gentle Lady Speaker Mr
Representative at the current
amount. We currently have 2273
apprentices. So I would say with
the current number of
apprentices at 30 Million,
although we're working to
increase that 9 to 10 years
would be an accurate prediction.
But we can't say for sure.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
generally now one of the other
questions that we had was the
availability of the of the
Legislature to pull that money
If we had lean years. Can you
explain that to us, Madam
Speaker to the lady that is in
section
Section E Page three.
And and
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, that is a fairly
traditional
Um, referral in most of these
kinds of bills based on what
I've read.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
generally, so it's just I guess
one of the things that was
important to me and and you know
again, we try. Madam Speaker
General 82.
Produce produce the best
legislation and forecasting is
the best we can and we're trying
to, you know, and I agree with
you that we absolutely needed
leverage our British programs.
We need to make sure that we're
helping. Ah, this so that these
apprentice that are interested
in in these different fields,
but I also wanted to have
longevity.
And and so, and we want to make
sure that the state continue
continues to
Put more money in the fund, and
I know that's the intention. But
I just you know that was one of
my big deals is is
Ah, hoping that we could build a
fund. You know, in a perfect
world, we'd put this money.
Madam Speaker General Lady in a
fund that would that would earn
interest or, you know on our
investment.
And it's generally about 5%. So
you know my simple calculation
about a million five to generate
roughly love for us to
You know, not use all of that.
And and again. I'm not trying to
amend your bill. Madame Speaker,
General Lady, I'm just kind of
just talking about what
What we would love to see where
this money Then we perpetually
making perpetual instead of
drawing a million five, maybe
drop. We withdraw, maybe a
million three and then the the
state of New Mexico fans, the
other, you know, I don't know.
Uh
8 $900,000. And so it continues.
That way. We can start building
the fund instead of just drawing
it down. Was that any of you?
What did you have any concerns
like that? And did you have any
conversations concerning that
Madam Speaker Generally.
Madam Speaker, Mr
Representative, not at the
present time.
Okay. Well, thank you, Madam
Speaker gently and was there any
reason why we reduced the amount
from $50 Million down to $30
million Madam Speaker
gentlelady?
Madam speaker and Mr
Representative the budget as a
work in progress.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General lady. Okay, So the other
thing that that we had, um, some
Worries about Madam speaker
generally was that the bill
presented in the House Labor
Committee was also required to
be
In order was also
Uh, would also required in order
to be eligible and considered
each apprenticeship program
contractor would have
Ah!
No unresolved complaints or
violations of public works, Um,
Minimum Wage Act construction
Industries Licensing act before
receiving funds.
There was a lot of concern
expressed about that language
and committee.
Does the committee substitute
address this concern?
Yes, Madam Speaker. We heard
that message loud and clear,
Kind gentleman, and that has all
been amended out per robust
conversations with other
organizations that have
apprenticeships.
So, Madam Speaker, General lady,
did you just carve that out? Can
you explain that a little bit
better for me? Because honestly,
I didn't get through this whole
debate and listening and so
forth. I didn't get a chance to
thoroughly read the entire
substitution. And so that was my
my one of my questions. And by
the way, Madam Speaker, General
Lady you, uh, in yourself in in
committee.
Um
We're just so open to
understanding and hearing us and
I appreciate it. I just want to
let you know in this body. I
appreciated what you did. Madam
Speaker, Speaker General Lady
Thank you, Madam Speaker, Mr
Gentlemen, per the
conversations both in the Labor
Committee and outside with
Um
Other organizations that work
with apprentices. We took it out
of the title. We took it all
those compliance sections which
were unneeded out
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, So it was
my understanding the state
registers a apprenticeship
programs were eligible to
receive money.
From this again from these
programs. So can you tell me?
Uh, what registered
apprenticeship program is for
the body pleasing myself.
Uh,
Madam speaker and Mr
Representative any
apprenticeship program that
registers with the workforce
Solutions or the Department of
Labor. Federally speaking
Is eligible, and I'll note that,
um
Many of the federal grants,
including the Infrastructure
Investment Act, that chips act,
and others require the
utilization of registered
apprenticeship programs in their
federal funding.
In order to be compliant for to
be a part of the apprenticeship
program.
What do they have to do? Madam
Speaker General Lady to in order
to be a compliant
To be a part of this program.
Um
Madam speaker and Mr
Representative, the Department
of Workforce Solutions has
standards that you have to meet
to register.
And again, Madam Speaker
generally, I'm not trying to
beat you up. I just want to for
the for us and the body myself
to understand how you know for
people that are listening. How
can they become a part of that
is it Is it something that's
that's very difficult. Is it
something that can easily be
done? For instance, Madam
Speaker generally if I want to
have an apprenticeship
apprenticeship program for
through my business.
Is there a bit away that, uh,
small business or another
business can try to be a part of
this program so that we can also
take advantage of this. These
funds to try to help expand our
workforce.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Yes.
There's certain hours of
training classroom training.
Hands on
Ah, work based
Uh, requirements that you would
meet and your
Um your business would certainly
be able to do that.
So, Madam Speaker, General Lady,
um
With that being said, Do we have
to go to a do we? So we just go
straight to work for solutions
to be a part of that, and
And then is there any special
insurance or anything else that
we have to have to be a part of
this program? Madam speaker
generally speaker and kind,
gentlemen, you can talk to the
workforce Solutions
apprenticeship.
Council and they're happy to
help you.
Speaker, General Ladies, So, um
How many of these programs do we
have? I think I thought I heard
you say, how many do we have?
Madam Speaker General Lady.
In the state of New Mexico.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
58 at the present time.
And of those 58, Madam speaker,
General Lady. How many, Uh
Of those. Ah appreciate
programs.
Are divided between union and
non union.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
about one third or non union
About two thirds are union
include everything from, uh
Things in the city of farming to
NTEU, all parts of the state.
So, Madam Speaker, General lady,
uh I was I was glad to see I
thought I thought I had I saw
Madame Speaker, General Lady, a
lot of the union. I actually I
don't think I saw them back
there. Um, it looks like they're
supporting your bill. Can you
explain the position of the
union and other parties?
Why they were interested in why
they supported your amendment.
Uh, in the amended bill or the
substitute Bill, Madam Madam
Speaker, General, Lady Speaker
and kind gentleman, the entire
construction industry, which I
mean, I believe about 21 of
those 58 or construction
industry. Some unions, some non
union
They just understand that
Apprenticeship programs produce
well prepared people for every
industry and trade.
And so, madam speaker, General
lady when we made those changes
in the language
Um, did that
They were comfortable with those
changes. They saw the did they
see the the ultimate, Um
Goodness of this program and
what you're the intent of you
And without giving a short
answer of Yes. Can you explain
what they how they express
themselves to you, Madam Speaker
generally.
Madam Speaker and count
gentlemen. They were there
yesterday at House
appropriations, diverse
organizations expressing their
support.
You know, Madam Speaker
Generally, I could see the
difference in when we look at
the vote count. Um, Madam
Speaker, General Lady, uh, from
our committee and labor to the
next committee, you saw drastic
change in support, and that's
why I was asking you and And for
those people, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, please don't take
this as this debate as
Me trying to discredit your bill
or or take it down. It's more
for people that had, um
Reservations about your about
the bill, especially those that
just you know, they read the
first the first one and they
still have heartburn over it and
are reaching out. And for that
reason I really like for us to
have a nice conversation to
clarify it, Uh, for art, both
for all of our constituents that
this is a good This is a good
program. This is great.
And then it. Can you expand on
that a little bit. Madam
Speaker, General Lady.
Madam Speaker and county
gentleman. This will just give a
jump start to all of our diverse
apprenticeship programs.
So diverse in the constructions
industries that it does it cover
all the all the, uh, all the
different, uh, departments of
this construction industries,
Madam Speaker, Mr. Chair, any
industry that has an
apprenticeship program that they
registered?
So plumbers, electricians, uh
What are they called? Uh,
I'm sorry. Somebody was. I
thought they were talking to me.
Um plumbers, electricians,
carpenters, uh,
I mean, welders. I mean, can you
just kind of give this body
understanding a list of in
general of the different
apprentices apprenticeship
programs that will benefit from
this bill.
Madam Chair and
Kind of gentlemen.
Uh, fire sprinklers,
Contractors, Bricklayers
Electric co ops.
Uh, electric Companies fire
protection elevator
constructors.
Pipe fitters middle workers.
Uh, curb installers such as
informing tonight.
It's diverse and we're happy to
send this to you. After the
talk I wanted to. He wanted the
body to hear it in the in the
people that are listening
because I wanted to show how
many different Uh
Different apprentices programs.
This bill is going to affect
positively
Speaker General lady are most of
these in, uh, in Albuquerque,
The apprenticeship programs or
can you explain in our large
state, you know, is there some
areas that have more
apprenticeship programs and
others?
Ah, Can you help me with that?
Madam Speaker, Generally, Madam
Speaker and kind gentleman there
throughout the state.
More in urban or rural.
Madam speaker.
And show them and depending on
the need.
They may be more in the rural if
there's construction, for
example, there it varies.
So, Madam speaker. Generally
part of the reason I'm asking,
that is what one of the things
that we're looking for. In my
district is vocational
education.
And we're looking Madam Speaker
General 84
are mining industry is needing,
um
A labor force. That is that has
You know, experience and so
forth. Um, so that they can
actually fill these vacant
positions.
And Madam Speaker, General Lady
I would like to express his
body how this would help the
state of New Mexico.
Not just in funding this, but
how could it help the state of
New Mexico fill all the
vacancies that we have in our
state government?
Madam speaker encounter,
Gentlemen.
I would just say to you that
this is part. I think everybody
in the house has heard loud and
clear the need to support career
and technical education, Pre
apprenticeships apprenticeships.
And so this is part of that
concerted effort.
To respond to what our
constituents have asked for.
Madam speaker generally, General
lady, I kind of got ahead of
myself. I see that you you're
you've got a expert witness
there. Do you mind introducing
him? Madam Speaker Gentlelady.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. I have Secretary
sorry to hear
And executive director of the
Trades Council. Brian Condit.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
generally, thank you both for
being here and helping us with
this and explaining this, Um
again, you know, in our in our
area Well, actually, Madam
speaker generally when, as I've
gone through
Different departments, sometimes
in the state.
See vacant cubicles. I see. You
know, different I see wanted or
not What I said, but I wanted,
you know, wanted people for
higher higher. You know, people
require signs or whatever in our
in our hospitals.
Just in my hospital of Ford
Baird Medical Center.
We definitely are have a dire
need to fill those positions.
And some of these apprenticeship
programs that that you're
talking about. Does it hit any
of the medical field or anything
like that, Because it's common
for us to walk through that
hospital and see 30 plus
positions vacant.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman there are and um,
workforce secretary tells me
that's an area of current
expansion, the medical field.
That's excellent. Madam Speaker
General lady. Yes. Um in Fort
Baird. You go through there and
you know, I see that a lot of
the nurses and medical staff or
exhausted and you know, we hear
in labor. Madam Speaker, General
lady that in other industries,
we are working our people so
hard.
Because we don't have enough of
a participating workforce. Yet
we have a workload that is
increased.
Yet we don't have the people to
fill those positions and so
we're basically burning out our
workhorses in the state of New
Mexico.
Do you guys have any sort of
idea?
By implementing this how we will
see an increase participation or
how it's gonna affect our
participation rates. Um
To help some of these
industries. Madam Speaker and
Kind representative. Excuse me.
Kind, gentlemen.
Um, because costs can include
classroom instruction, trade
related equipment, establishing
new locations to expand
training. This will support all
of that.
You know, it's it's it's you
know, are we going to have any
sort of program?
Um, Madam Speaker, General Lady
to inform
The residents of New Mexico. Our
constituents how they can become
a part of this program.
Where to look for it. What?
What? Um ah, a industries have
it? What Which companies are
offering this? We're gonna have
any sort of program helping us
with that madam speaker.
Generally, Madam speaker and
kind gentlemen, Secretary
Nightmare informs me. They just
got a federal grant to do
exactly what you're requesting.
And Madam Speaker, General Lady,
is it? How much are we going to
be able to leverage?
These dollars that from the
state through federal means.
Madam speaker, and, uh, kind.
Gentlemen, That's a multifaceted
question that involves many
different funds and programs. So
also I can say this will be a
great boost.
House speaker general lady Did I
ask you a copy to the question?
A mixed question. Do you know
what capita is? Madam speaker,
gentle lady. It's Mexican bread
pudding is what it is for those
who don't know that, but what I
meant if you ever see it, it's
kind of looks like everybody put
something in a pot and you're
like what in the world is
But so my question was kind of
Maybe too broad. My question
that I had Madam Speaker. Gentle
lady is does this
We're going to be able to
leverage any federal funds and
if so, do we have a figure any
sort of figure to see how we can
leverage is, um in some of the
committee's We've heard Madam
Speaker, General Lady that, um,
we put sometimes we get eight
times.
For the $1 that we put in the
federal government comes in with
eight more dollars. There's
other there's other factors. I
mean, sometimes it's only three.
Sometimes it's only matching.
But do you have any idea what
that would do if we're able to
leverage these funds in any way,
shape or form?
Yes, Madam Speaker and kind
gentlemen, because some of the
federal programs require
registered apprenticeships will
be able to leverage these
I'm sorry, Madam Speaker
generally, I didn't hear your
answer. Sorry about that.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, because many of the
federal grants require
registered apprenticeships will
be able to leverage federal
dollars.
Gentlemen, give us just one
second to check the rule. Hold
on one second. Give us just a
minute members will get some
more folks back in the chamber.
Members of any of you are
listening and your offices or
webcasts. Can you please return
to the chamber?
All right, gentlemen, we now
have a quorum. You may proceed.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
generally think thank you for
your patience. So I
I was going to ask. So when
would the funds began to be
distributed? What? What fiscal
year Madam Speaker generally.
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
On Page two, subject to the
availability of funds on July
1st 2024 in July 1st 2025 it
starts.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, And so how are we
funding this before? And what
was our budget before? Since
since I guess my question is
Madam speaker generally before
we did this If this goes
through where we currently what
are we dealing with now? What is
our budget now that made this
legislation come forward.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, the three sources of
existing funding for fiscal year
24 with the Public Works
Apprenticeship and training
fund, which was 2 million and
89,000. Workers Compensation Act
Fund, Transfer of 1 Million and
a federal grant of 388,600.
So that being said Madam
speaker, where we did? Was this
a recurring, um up appropriation
for the state of New Mexico?
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. It varies from year
to year, according to the
apprenticeship programs, But the
apprenticeship programs are
getting less because the number
of apprentices are growing.
So Madam Speaker, General Lady
was it because of apprentices
are growing or because of lack
of funds to make apprenticeship,
you know, fund these programs.
Um, was that part of the reason
Which one was it was it that we
got more people coming back to
the trying to come back to the
workforce? Or is it that these
this fund wasn't enough to
actually fund
The the, uh it was drying up and
and and maybe we were losing
some of the people providing the
programs.
Mr Speaker and Council, a menu
have identified both correctly.
It was a both It was both, you
know? Um And so that being said,
I mean, I just I just want
people to know why we did this,
So the idea is okay. Why? Why
did we not decide to say you
know what
Uh, Madam Speaker generally, why
don't we decide to just increase
the recurring? Why? Why would
they calculate from year to
year? How it was done because I
want to. I think the idea of
Madame Speaker generally is to
create stability from what we're
talking about. I think what this
is the matter, Mr Secretary, and
the all of you are trying to
create stability in this program
rather than this roller coaster
thing.
Um And my question is why didn't
we come up? Madam Secret General
lady. Not that I want to change
it. Not that I'm debating. I
want for this body to
understand. Why don't we come up
with maybe a three year rolling
average, or you know something
that we said, you know, we've
got to fund this X number of
dollars. How? Why?
Why would we change what was
going on?
To now.
To this proposal.
Madam speaker and and kind,
gentlemen.
Where this will now increase it.
Uh, it
As it is, should last 9 to 10
years, money will be invested
and we'll be revisiting it, Um,
in section
See
In section C on page to the
state investment officer shall
report quarterly
To the Legislative Finance
Committee and the state
investment counsel on the
investments made pursuant to
this
Section annually report shall be
submitted, so we're going to be
looking at it quarterly to see
how it grows. How it expands.
We're going to be studying it
closely.
So again, my my. My question was
It was what was the reason and I
think maybe I didn't ask it
correctly. Madam Speaker
generally, I guess my question
was really
If we're what made us change
from just deciding year to year
how much we're going to budget
two now making a large
appropriation to cover, uh in
and trying to get you to
Tell this body how that's going
to create stability.
And why we made that decision to
change from what was
What we did in the past to why
we're shifting gears and and
making this large appropriation.
Madam Speaker and count.
gentlemen, we recognize the
growing need to support our
developing apprenticeship
numbers and programs. And I
guess please, I'm sorry to be so
why wouldn't we have just
increased our recurring, uh,
expenditures every year? So you
know what we recognize That will
just you know, we'll just make
it $2.5 million and
Next year. We see maybe
inflation and we need to the
rising cost of of, um of minimum
wage or whatever it is in these
factors and saying, Hey, you
know what we need to increase to
3 Million or 2.5 from 2.5 to
maybe to 39,750,003 3 million X
number of dollars or you know
what? We just need to make it 5
million this year.
Because there's what's
happening. Madam Speaker General
Lady is we're going from about
sounded to me like about $3
million
And then we're jumping up to
five.
For a couple of years, and then
we're going back down to three.
And so I just kind of want to
explain to everyone why we're
doing that. Why? We're changing
what we were doing in the past.
I know we recognize that there
there weren't that we have now
more people wanting to
participate, but financially for
the state of Mexico to change
gears on what they're doing. Why
would we do that?
Madam Speaker Cone, Gentlemen
for stability.
Okay, So, Madam Speaker, and why
are we going, Madam Speaker from
Injecting 5 million in the next
two years and then reducing it
back down significantly to 3
million.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
between fiscal year 22 and
fiscal year 23. The number of
apprenticeships doubled and
overall there was a 21%
increase. So we're addressing
That initially again, we will
study it on a quarterly basis.
Madam speaker generally the way
it's written again. I'm not
trying to discredit just trying
to understand we go up to $5
million
To meet that demand.
And we do it again the next
year, But then the following
year are we anticipating?
Regression where we don't need
that much money. I don't
understand how we reduce it
almost by 40% from one year to
the next.
Madam speaker and can Guillemin.
We believe that the P watt
donations will go up. That's
another revenue stream, one of
the four streams with this added
And so we anticipate that there
will be more incoming money
because of all the construct the
federal construction
Explain the P Watch for me,
Madam Speaker generally.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
about 1.9 million is generated
per year.
From those that do 60 cents per
hour.
Who don't have apprenticeship
programs.
On public works projects only.
So we currently have 1.9
million.
So, Madam Speaker, General lady.
So does that mean that when this
goes into effect, we're gonna
put 5 million. Plus, we'll still
have the 1.9. We actually have
$7 million. Is that correct?
Madam Speaker generally roughly,
and I'm just kind of rough
numbers.
Madam speaker and concealment.
It varies, but roughly those are
parameters varies year to year.
And I think that's that's all I
was trying to to to kind of.
Put in my mind as a as a
businessman, Madam speaker.
Generally I We look at
expenditures and investments in
a certain way. And so I'm trying
to say Okay, Well, we're
spending 5 million in two years
and we've got this other P watt.
Ah, these other people are
dollars coming in through
revenues. Teams stream So we've
got 7 million and we got another
7 million, possibly seven plus
million.
And because we're going to
leverage some federal funds and
then and then all of a sudden
we're going to pull back to
three.
Million and still have the 1.9
hoping, right? We're projecting,
but it's still pulls it back by
a couple million dollars and and
it's it's still no matter what
We're still pulling back and if
we want stability and we want it
I would think stability is more
of a
Level.
A level expenditure right? A
fixed expense. I'm going to call
it that.
Rather than a variable expense
where we're going and it could
vary. I would be fine with very
nifty. We want to build this
apprenticeship program. I'd love
for the Legislature to, um
Appreciate this. This
apprenticeship program and see
the value in it. And so, um, I'd
like to see it rather than
decreased by it would still be.
It might not be 40% with the 1.9
million, but it would still be a
significant decrease of about
maybe 20%.
The following year. And so what
worries me is Madam Speaker
General Lady is we're just
getting going where we're
funding these apprenticeship
programs.
And two years into it. Maybe
someone's halfway through this
through this apprenticeship
program, and maybe their friends
are saying, Hey, Billy did it. I
want to do this. This is great.
Um, I don't want to be a part of
this, and all of a sudden
funding is also
Pull back and then we stay
stagnant for again.
Back, you know, and and back to
where? You know $5 million and
we don't have any real, although
there are some variables I don't
think there unless you can
explain to me differently. I
don't see a significant variable
Unless you can explain that.
That I'm not something that I'm
not seeing, Uh, significant
variable in the P watt dollars
already Another revenue stream.
To see that increase on its own.
So how are how are and I know
this is we're just starting with
this and we're trying to get it
off. It's you know, on its feet.
I guess my question really,
where I'm going with this. I
would have
If we could keep stability and
what we're talking about in this
bill.
Um, Madam Speaker, General Lady
is we start out with 5 million
and we've got these other people
what dollars And then and then
we just continue doing that.
And yes, we're going to spend
the money faster.
Even though that's not really
what I wanted to do, I would
have loved to for the state of
Mexico to supplement those
dollars.
But so that we can get this this
fund
To increase rather than expended
down to zero.
And then be in the same
situation in
10 years, but if we expended it
where we expanded it, where it
was level at 5,000,005 Million,
Plus the plus the 1.9, making it
7 million plus
We could. We could then have
something that's stable.
And then if we don't use those
dollars, then we throw it back
in the pot. So although these
dollars Madam speaker are being
expended each year, what happens
if they are not spent?
Madam speaker and kind
Gentlemen, it's formula spending
and again.
Um
Its formula spending and we're
going to be studying it on a
quarterly basis.
Madam speaker and
Kind. Gentlemen. Also once the
part of many is there, it's
whatever amount is there against
divided evenly among the
apprentices so it may go up or
down, but everybody does get a
piece of the pie.
Speaker general Lady
We have, and I understand that
they're gonna They're gonna
expand it. So I just got to
understand this. So we have 5
million that we're going to 5
Million plus 1.9 million that
are coming in through this P
watt dollars through what?
Revenue source.
And what I'm saying is, what if
we only expand
4 million of it.
Or five out of the seven does it
revert to the fund?
There's a stand up fund, are
they? I mean, are you just Are
you disputing? Dispersing this
money to the two as a whole, and
then they start drawing it down
and whatever is not there
reverts. I don't understand. Can
you please help me understand
this? Madam Speaker Gentlelady,
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, it would always stay
in the fun it would revert to
the fund itself.
So Madam speaker generally does
Does the cog have any part in
this? Do they work? I mean, as a
as a fiscal agent who else works
as a fiscal agent and this to
handle any of this?
Madam speaker and Count
gentleman that caucus not in
five involved with this. The
state investment officer. It's
fun if you go back to
Page one, Section one a. The
Workforce Development and
Apprenticeship Trust fund is
created within the state
treasury.
And then it has the usual
language. The fund consists of
distributions, appropriations,
gifts, grants and donations.
Income from the investment of
the fun shall be credited to the
fund.
Money in the fund shall be
expended only as provided in
this section.
So the expenditures are
In other words, are they sending
so I'm I'm gonna prints that.
let's just say I have an
appreciate program.
I bill I pay my employees.
And then I get reimbursed. Does
that the way it works? Madam
Speaker Generally, Madam Speaker
and kind gentleman, the program
sponsors get reimbursed based on
program hours apprenticeship
hours.
Okay, Madam Speaker generally so
I have a I have my
apprenticeship and I go my
apprentice. Excuse me, and, uh,
I bill on. I don't know. He
makes $15 an hour or whatever it
is he or she and I built this
program and then they then
reimburse me What percentage of
that? And does it depend on
which
Um, different apprenticeship
program or they're different
Variables for that. Can you
explain that to me, Madam
Speaker generally.
Um, Madam Speaker and
councilman. They take the part.
And they divided by the total
number of hours of the
apprentices. It goes directly to
the program.
But Madam speaker General Lady,
I think my question is okay.
fine if they expended like that
it goes to each program.
But let's just say, I don't know
what those numbers are. We just
make them up just for
conversation purposes.
You said there was 50 How many
programs Madam speaker
Generally. Madam Speaker
Councilman.
There's 58 programs. But in
fiscal year 23 there were 2273
apprentices and registered
programs. Okay, so I'm just
gonna do it as a program because
you said, you're going to be
divided evenly or whatever. So
let's just say, there's 50.
There's $5 million. We're just
gonna This isn't perfect math
and I know this isn't the right
thing. I'm just kind of doing it
for
Conversation purposes, Okay, and
we're just going to make it out
that 50 apprenticeship programs
are even are there rather than
53. And we have $5 million And
so we're just going to say that
we divide that evenly and they
all get $100,000.
And so with $100,000 and I get
it as a program in my in my
program.
And I don't have enough
apprentices.
To expand that money.
What happens to that money?
Madam Speaker, General Lady.
Madam speaker and councilman.
It's divided by the number of
apprentices in each program and
their number of hours. It's not
like 50 programs into $50
million. It's by the number of
apprentices times that hours,
and then that's given to the
program.
Based on the hours times the
number of apprentices
training. It's just that
I think we're saying that I'm
saying the same think I
understand that, In other words,
one program might have more
hours and another program and
and so forth. And so it's going
to vary like that. I understand
that Madam Speaker generally.
Um, And so I guess maybe I'm
not. Maybe I didn't understand
that. So this program is divided
and all that, But do they get
the funds?
They reimburse themselves or do
they get this? They say Hey, you
know what you have this one has
100 process so you're going to
get X number of dollars? This
one only has 20. So you get this
many of dollars or is it build?
And then they receive that a
percent you know they received
based on the hours of the
actually do. In other words, are
they getting reimbursements or
are they getting funded? First?
I think that maybe that's a
better question. In the way I'm
probably wasn't asking it
correctly. Madam Speaker
generally.
Madam speaker kind. Gentlemen.
That is correct. It would be a
more of a reimbursement model.
That makes more sense to me,
Madam Speaker generally because
I was trying to figure out how
we can expand this evenly
without doing it through
reimbursement that's normally
how government works, Madam
Speaker generally, but, um
The reimbursement rates. Madam
Speaker Generally D Are they all
the same? In other words,
depending on what's program? Are
they all a certain percentage or
the A dollar figure? How does it
work? I've got an apprentice
here. If I've got a nurse, is
she and I pay the nurse $20 an
hour? I don't know. And then the
next apprenticeship program is
I don't know. Let's just say a
pipe fitter and they're making
$30 an hour are the
reimbursement rates different
for each apprenticeship program?
How do you calculate that?
I met him.
Madam speaker and Consuela
minutes of flat dollar rate.
So it's a participation then. So
it's so they participate with X
number of dollars. So that flat
$5 for every
Uh, apprenticeship. How does it
work? Is it $10? What is that
number? Do you happen, and it's
an I'm understanding Madame
Speaker General Aidid that it's
the same for every single
apprenticeship program.
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. I'll give you an
example and fiscal year 22. It
was $2.58
in fiscal year 23. It was $2.47.
And fiscal year 24. It was $2 in
a penny per apprentice related
instruction, our because the
number of apprentices increased
So basically Madam Speaker.
Generally, the fund was started
dry up.
Because of lack of, you know,
obviously, if it's going down,
it was it was going down. It was
going down basically.
Because you're getting an
expansion of maybe I said that
wrong, Madam Speaker. Generally,
you said you had an influx of of
of apprentices and more people
get in the program so deluded
those dollars to a smaller
amount and so by making it now
this way.
What is the participation? What
do they anticipate? The
participation rate is going to
be from $2. And I don't know.
You said one cent. Is it going
to go up to $4? What? What is
the participation rate? Madam
Speaker, Young lady.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, if we had the same
exact number of apprentices, the
reimbursement would go up.
If the apprenticeship programs
and the number of apprentices
expands, it would be a very
amount so we can't say exactly
Okay, So, Madam Speaker, What if
it just stays the same? Can you
give me a illustration of that
Madam Speaker generally.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman, probably in the
neighborhood of $4.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Generally, I think that's what I
was looking for.
We went through a painful
discussion to get $4 sorry. It's
probably my fault for me. Maybe
asking the questions not
properly or didn't didn't
express myself, right. But thank
you for that. I just You know,
I'm going to tell you I really
One thing that I appreciated in
in committee, one of the things
that have appreciated here.
You know for those people have
you know that that debate your
bill? It's tough. It's tough,
and I appreciate your
Um, you should ability to sit
here and go back and forth a lot
of the debate back and forth
that I'm I'm doing. Madam
Speaker. General lady is when I
go back because I had I had some
pushback on this. Okay? I'm
gonna be honest with you, Madam
Speaker, General Lady. I had
pushed back on this on this and
supporting your bill.
And because I feel that we
should work together, and I
think we all as as a body need
to do a better job of doing
that.
Um I felt that I was because of
the way you expressed to me and
you're
Honest.
Way of answering my questions
and the way you expressed that
you were going to address all
the concerns that we had because
there was a lot of open very
ambiguous. Uh, um, literate or
words in your bill that you you
did a great job in it and
understanding and addressing and
keeping your word.
I can't tell you how much I
appreciate that.
And so I told you this morning
when I came, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, How are you? How
are you? How are you doing? And
I knew we were getting We were
going to have this debate and I
knew we were going to have to be
able to talk about this. But the
reason that I'm doing this is
not to beat you up, And I hope
you don't take it that way. It's
more for me to show my
constituents that we work
together.
And we made a bill that had some
problems.
Bites having this long.
Conversation, this debate back
and forth that we were able to
clean it up and come to a
compromise of something that
would be good, not not just for
one side or another, but for all
apprentices.
And help our one way. This is
not going to be the answer to
everything. And I think you
agree with me on this, Madam
speaker. Generally, this is not
the only tool that's going to
help us increased participation
rates. This is just going to be,
uh, one little one little tool
that's going to help us get inch
a little closer.
And you know, and so I got a
little pushback. Terrazas. What?
Are you kidding me? You did
that? I said, and and you and I
had a nice candid conversations
that Madam Speaker generally I
said Look, if you do that, we're
going to have a great debate.
And I'm not gonna you know,
drill all these different
Uh, concerns that people have
and so for all those business
people out there all those
people that that feel that this
this legislation maybe was one
sided at one time, right? That
was a consider. That was the
consensus that we that we that I
got, um was wait a minute. This
is lopsided. This isn't fair.
This is it seems like it's it's
excluding.
Other apprenticeship programs.
By your work and by keeping your
word, Madam Speaker, General
Lady. You made this a palatable
bullet. A bill that I can
I can stand here and support
I appreciate for all those
people that do these programs
that offer their own. Um
You know their their their years
of experience to share for it
with another and help another
the next generation or another
person not only better their
skills but to
Increase their ability to make
more money.
In a tough world that we're
dealing with. That's including
that we see inflation rates
increasing and and our money is
not worth what it was.
Just a few years ago.
And so I appreciate your work. I
think you've answered most
everything that I wanted that I
needed to ask you for my
constituents. I appreciate the
debate.
God bless you.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we
have the general lady from
catching serious a crow and
Valencia representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the general lady yield
All right.
Madam speaker and kind lady
Kind, gentle lady. Yes, I yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Kind lady. Um I too
appreciate the changes that you
made in your, um in your bill.
Uh, we I went to you early on
and and brought those to your
attention and and, um
I just appreciate it so much.
One of the questions I have,
Madam Speaker. Gentle lady is
the breakdown of how the money
goes in. It starts on page two,
subsection D.
And I wonder why the different
appropriations? Can you just
touch on that a little bit?
Madam speaker and kind, gentle
lady.
In section A. It's transferred
to the Public Works, Apprentice
and Training fund.
And in section B. It goes to the
Workforce Solutions Department
to carry out the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act, so there are two
separate funding streams.
Thank you for that Madam Speaker
and General lady and then on the
on Page three, there's the
1,500,000 in each of those.
Can you tell me why one goes
from 2,000,500 down to
1,000,500?
Madam speaker and kind of gentle
lady forced ability.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady, so
Stability, meaning we need more
in one than we do in the other
four stability.
Madam speaker and counting a
lady.
The P watt. The public works
apprenticeship and training fund
primarily goes to the 20
construction programs.
But the apprenticeship
assistance that goes to all of
them.
Which is one reason why we
amended the bill. Thank you,
Madam Speaker, General Lady for
that. I appreciate it. Um, I
also have a question. Madam
speaker, Gentle lady on on the
oversight and compliance. The
bill requires compliance from a
Senate apprenticeship programs.
But the administrative burden is
on the Workforce Solutions
Department to oversee and ensure
compliance. Um, is that a
significant issue for workforce
solutions?
Madam speaker and kind lady
count, gentle Lady Workforce
Solutions already does that
Madam speaker, gentle lady, But
if we get
A plethora, which we're all
hoping for.
Um do they still have the
ability and the the FTS in place
to be able to do that?
Madam speaker and count gentle
lady. The secretary says Yes,
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady. I appreciate that,
Um, I, uh
I have a lot of apprentices in
my family.
And, uh, always want to recruit
more.
And, uh, always want just
fairness.
I want fairness for all and I
appreciate your answering those
questions and appreciate the
fairness in this bill. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentle
lady. Next we have the
gentleman.
He's not here.
The gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. Will the
gentleman it from Burnley will
yield
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. Yes, I yield
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
How many
I believe I heard and
In the previous
Questioners.
Inquiry that
We were currently spending
approximately $2 million.
On these various programs
apprenticeship programs.
Yes, Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
Uh, the public works an
apprenticeship and training is
2,089,000 the workers
Compensation Act fund transfers
a million Federal grant is
388,600.
Okay, so 3,300,000 or any of
these programs going to
terminate with this new program
coming online?
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. Just the federal
grant will expire.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. Generally
repeat that, please.
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, the federal grant
will expire.
And
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. It expires next year.
Okay, so the entire funding
stream thrown roughly
$3,300,000 will go away next
year.
No Madam speaker and kind of
element only the 388,000 Federal
grant. The rest will vary. It
amounts, but those streams
continue.
Okay, so Madam Speaker.
Trying to lady we're adding $5
million
To a threat. Million dollar
revenue stream.
For a total now of
Eight. Is that correct?
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
Yes, there may be slight
fluctuations, but basically,
yes.
So we haven't speaker
General lady. How many
apprentices
Currently employed.
In those programs in New Mexico.
And as a corollary to that
question.
Him. Many were turned away for
lack of funding.
There's currently 2412.
And Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, nobody was turned
away.
Okay?
Madam speaker in general Lady.
If nobody was turned away. We
had enough.
Money.
To accommodate the program with
$3 million
We're now adding $5 million
Could you explain the need for
all of this additional revenue,
Madam Speaker and kind
gentleman.
Last year in fiscal year 24 each
apprentice related instruction.
Our
Only received $2 in one sense,
so the cost for the programs is
much higher than that.
Okay, So Madam Speaker and
General Lady
So we're going to go to
The ratio is correct time number
of apprentices would now be
going
To about $5 an hour for these
Apprentices.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. We figured in the
neighborhood of $4 you, speaker,
General Lady.
A new described to me.
What the circumstances or that
The pay's these
Or is this $4.05 dollars an hour
going to the Apprentice, Or is
it going to
What else?
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, the money based on
apprentice hours, which has been
put out by the program goes to
the program itself.
Madam speaker. Generally, I
appreciate that. But
But somebody or some
Entity is doing.
Hmm. Is performing the functions
of the program.
What entity directly benefits
from those additional program
dollars.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. Great question of the
program sponsors and the
employers pay the apprentice's
wages. Okay, so I may
Let me clarify
The employers of these
apprentices.
Or paying the apprentices.
Now.
$2 an hour to be in a press.
And then we'll be able to pay
them.
$4 an hour to be an apprentice.
No, Um Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, they get the
appropriate wage according to
the level of apprenticeship
there on
Ah, so let's say they get $15 an
hour as a second year
apprentice. Whatever they get.
But that payment comes out of
the program. The apprenticeship
program and the employer and
therefore the program gets
reimbursed.
Whatever the average is for the
money they're putting in for all
the training.
Okay, Madam Speaker in General
ladies, So would these
apprentices
Making 1518 whatever the number
is.
Which includes the 2 to $4 an
hour.
State subsidy, I guess to be an
apprentice.
Could
Or these apprentices doing yes
for work on projects, or are
they just going to school?
Madam speaker and kind of
gentleman. Another great
question Their full time
employers. Excuse me full time
employees.
So, uh,
Madam speaker, general Lady.
This would be, uh
Fairly significant.
Employees subsidy.
For those entities that had
Apprenticeship programs is that
accurate?
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen. Remember that program
apprenticeship registered
apprenticeship program sponsors.
Ah!
Do think they have to cost of
classroom instruction.
Which you know books, Internet
whatever it is trade related
equipment, which, as you know,
can be very expensive.
Establishing new locations so
they can expand their
apprenticeship program. There's
a lot of expenses associated
with an apprenticeship program,
so
So, madam.
Madam Speaker Jim Lady, can you
tell me what percentage of the
time
These apprentices would be
Would be just in school versus
the time they would spend in the
employ of their employers doing
useful work and providing a
Benefit to the employer with
their labor.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen. It's about 140 for
classroom hours and an average
of 2000 hours of on the job
training.
And and that's an average. Uh,
Madam Speaker and kind
gentleman it does. It would
vary according to the
apprenticeship field.
About
Madam Speaker, 10 Lady. Could
you repent that last we had
A little chatter going on over
here.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen. It's about 140.
Four.
140 hours of classroom style
instruction.
Plus 2000 hours of work.
Okay?
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Are we putting? This has been
the last
Points of inquiry.
Or we putting these funds
In this larger fund and then
drawing from them.
Does that put
The revenue stream going into
these
Training programs on autopilot,
or will they be subject to
Appropriation.
Every year.
Madam Speaker and German. Can
you just repeat that again?
Madam speaker and general lady,
As I understand it, we're
putting a very large sum $50
million into a trust fund, from
which
Every year. For the first couple
of years. We're going to draw 5
million and then beyond that $3
million a year.
The question is
Or those funds coming out of the
trust fund.
Appropriated, go through the
appropriation process, or are
those funds on autopilot coming
out of the trust fund into those
programs automatically.
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen. So there's a one time
fund non recurring, but every
year, the workforce solutions
will have to go through the
appropriations process.
To draw on that.
Okay, so those funds would not
be automatically moving from the
trust fund into these various
training funds. Is that
accurate?
Madam speaker and councilman. It
still has to go to the budget,
even though this formula is in
the bill.
Okay?
Last comment. Madam speaker in
general Lady This looks like
Pretty sweet deal is significant
increase from three
2 $5 million a year.
Yeah, for the for the people
providing these programs.
And I wonder, given that New
Mexico's population is been
relatively stable.
You're quite a long time now.
Construction projects and
And those types of projects that
would gentle eyes apprentices
again.
Operating at a fairly stable
level of activity.
Ah!
It appears as though
That there's a lot of additional
money.
Going into this that might not
necessarily, uh, be be required
that can
Madam speaker. Thank you.
Generating
Next. We have the gentleman from
San Juan representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just
had one quick question.
Um, we've we've seen a few bills
this session that are directly
impacting Secretary near. I just
sold my questions. Probably to
her, Um
Has she given her two weeks
notice, Or is her department
able to take this as well as a
lot of other things?
Representative Think you have to
go through the speaker, Madam
Speaker.
And Madam Speaker. I do yield to
the gentleman.
Madam Speaker will the general
later field
The gentle lady will yield.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. So my
question is, we've we've layered
on 69 year on a couple of other
bills and her department and I
just wondered, Are you able to
do that? Is she able to do that?
And and what will this do with
some of the other bills? We've
seen this session?
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. Basically, they do
all of these tasks and missions.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady. I just sometimes I
just wonder when we get to
building kingdoms and and they
get to a certain point. I wonder
at what point they become
ineffective or are they
effective? So thank you very
much for that information.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Next. We have the gentleman from
San Juan representative Lane.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general 80 from burning will
yield
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, I yield. Madam
Speaker. Sorry.
So a little bit of a habit
there. My apologies, Madam
Speaker, I please forgive me.
Madam Speaker generally from
Berna. Leo. I have some
questions on
Really? I'm gonna try to stick
to the language and actually ask
questions about your bill.
Um so I'm I'm curious.
Um
Let me start with the financial
piece of this so
I see that there is a $50
million appropriation Madam
chair generated from Burnley is
that correct?
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
As is the tradition, house
appropriations are stripped it
because there is 30 million
already in the HFC budget.
And we are working to get an
additional 20 million through
the Senate Finance Committee.
Thank you, madam Speaker
generated from burning Leo.
Um, the reason why I asked. The
question is, I'm curious about
the long term solvency of the
fund and have some concerns
around that, particularly when
we have set dollar amounts. Um,
and so the way I read the
current language in the bill is
we're going to make a
distribution of 5 million
On July. 1 of 2024 is that
correct?
Let him speaker and kind,
gentlemen, yes, as it says in
the subject to the available
availability of the funds.
And Madam speaker generally from
burner Leo and then another $5
million distribution on July 1
2025. Is that correct?
Madam Speaker count, gentlemen.
Yes, Madam Speaker generated
from burning Leo. Then it looks
like annual distributions of $3
million starting July 1 of 26
And every July 1 thereafter is
that correct? Madam Speaker
kind, gentlemen. Yes, Madam
Speaker. Um and I'm glad that
you brought that language up
because I think that kind of
gets the heart of what I'm
getting at. What is what does
that mean? What does that look
like? From a financial
standpoint?
When we say subject to the
availability of funds, because
if we inject 30 million right
now,
Then then those monies are going
to be there. But I have concerns
about dipping into the
principal. If this is going to
be a true trust fund, so can I
get some explanation along that
please?
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, It is an expendable
fun so there it could run out
someday. And Madam Speaker
generated from Berna Leo. So
I guess that
Causes me a bit of heartburn
because I think this actually is
a is a long overdue concept,
particularly in a state where
both rural and Metro
We have a shortage of these
types of trades, workers and
businesses in this industry, so
I really do have an interest in
seeing this being a permanent
long term fund. And so one of
the questions I had is when I
look at the actual the way the
bill is written.
Um
When you let's take Page two,
for example.
Paragraph D as in Delta.
And you look at lines 20 through
22, for example. So Madam
Speaker, General Lady from
Bernalillo, the way I read that
language is that's that's a hard
number.
And some curious How come How
come when coming up this
concept? Why didn't we have up
to say $2.5 million as the the
language Because right now it's
just straight 2.5 million and I
feel like that kind of handcuffs
us that if if the fund does
start to deplete
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
Again. This is reported exactly
what goes on will be reported
every quarter to lfc.
Um and we'll be looking at this
fund's growth or depletion.
Very closely, Madam Speaker
generally from Burnley, I maybe
I'm not.
Express myself very well. So I
want to make sure that there is
an annual distribution out of
this fund.
And at the same time we don't
deplete the principal of the
fund. So that way it is a long
term permanent fund.
So the way that the bill is
written in my opinion.
It doesn't have the up to 2.5
million language, for example,
so I think that
It's either going to be a $2.5
million distribution or it's
going to be zero.
There's nothing in between.
And so in the lean years, we
could still maybe make a million
dollar distribution of there and
still provide for some
scholarship funding. Um, but the
way I read the plain language, I
don't think it allows for that
kind of flexibility.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, it does have to go
through the appropriation
process so it would be
addressed on a yearly basis in
the appropriation process. Madam
speaker generated from burning
Leo, but
This is a statute right?
And so this would be creating
law. And so HB two couldn't
violate the statute. We we we
would have to stay within the
confines of the statute.
And so I
And I actually do feel like this
is kind of an important point.
Because
The way that the language reads.
I think it could be a simple fix
if it just said up to
When you open up online, 20 on
page two, for example, up to 2
million
Um or if you look at line 23 up
to 2,500,000.
And so I just want to make sure
that in the lean years we don't
have to make a decision between
2.5 million or zero.
And I think that's what the
language does. Is it sort of
backs us into that decision,
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman, This was the
legislative language that we
worked with Legislative Council
on
And so madam speaker generally
from Berlin, and I understand
that I mean, God forbid if we
had to come up with languages,
legislators would all be in
trouble. So I appreciate what
the hard work LCS staff does, Um
But
Again, if if we want this fund
to be permanent, I think that we
as appropriators would want some
flexibility.
Because right now
It is truly either 2.5 million,
for example, or none.
And so I guess. Maybe that can
put it this way. Madam Speaker
generated from burning Leo,
would you consider just a simple
fix of the language? Clean it up
here on the floor to just say up
to
2.5 million in each of these
provisions to give us as
appropriators moving forward.
More flexibility.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, it wasn't imagined as
a permanent fund in the sense
that other permanent funds are
permanent.
Okay. Madam Speaker generally
from Burnley also
I'm a little puzzled by that, so
I would think that are intent
that would be to provide for
For apprenticeships scholarships
for from here through eternity.
So why wouldn't we adjust the
language to make that a
possibility?
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
The intent of this language was
to have a specific amount of
money so that programs could
plan explicitly.
Madam speaker generally from
early on, I can appreciate that.
But the problem is
If it's a linear
And we don't have the 2.5
million in the fund to two.
Justify a distribution and they
get nothing.
Right?
Madam speaker and councilman
That could happen. So madam
speaker generated from burning
Leo. So I guess that's what I'm
driving at is to me. It's better
to to
To have the ability maybe inject
1.25 million, or 750,000 in the
linear rather than telling the
apprenticeship programs. Sorry
you get nothing this year, we
would love to be able to give
you less than 2.5 million. But
we can't because the statute
doesn't allow for that kind of
flexibility.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
with that question, Madam
speaker generated from Berlin.
So I guess I'm just a little
puzzled like
I think it's a pretty easy
cleanup.
That would allow for future
Flexibility from this body.
Um, And if we don't do that,
then we really have to choose
between zero and 2.5. Million.
So I guess I'd
I would renew my request to see
if you have any
Desire to to
Changed that language to give us
and future members flexibility
about distributing these funds.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. I don't have a desire
to fix it at this time.
Madam speaker generated from
Burnley. Would you mind just
explaining your rationale to the
body?
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
When this fund was developed, it
was developed as an expendable
fun.
With a lifespan of at least
probably 9 to 10 years.
And that's the way it was
written, and that's why it was
written like this.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
Generally from Brunello that
again, I'm I'm a little puzzled
that at that, as sort of our
thought process. I was hoping
this would be a
A permanent long term.
Fund. Um
To be able to fund these
apprenticeship programs. And I
guess I don't understand also,
why we would bother
Running it through the
investment counsel and
everything else if we're just
going to make distributions out
away, that's going to deplete
the underlying principle.
Um
So I have a question.
About the difference between
Um
The public works apprenticeship.
And training funds. There's
language to that effect in the
bill.
Versus the Workforce Solutions
Department carrying out the
purposes of the apprenticeship.
Assistance Act because those are
two different distributions. Can
you provide me some
understanding on the difference
between those two?
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, the Public Works,
Apprentice and training fund
goes primarily to construction
apprenticeships, which is about
20.
And the
Apprenticeship assistance that
can support all of them.
And Madam speaker.
Generated from Benaglio, so it
talks about carrying out the
purposes of the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act. What are those
purposes, Madam speaker and
kind, gentlemen, the purpose of
the apprenticeship assistant
Generated from Benaglio. So it
talks about carrying out the
purposes of the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act. What are those
purposes? Madam speaker and
kind, gentlemen, the purpose of
the apprenticeship assistance to
actually establish the standards
And can I get some understanding
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman.
Um, and all of the kind of funds
that I've read, they have the
standard language should the
General fund be depleted? They
have the right to use this fun.
And it says, including it lists
everything in that event to
avoid an unconstitutional
deficit. The Legislature may
appropriate from the workforce
Development and Apprenticeship
Trust fund to the General fund,
only in the amount necessary to
meet general fund
appropriations.
For the fiscal year, so that
came from Legislative Council
service, Madam Speaker generally
from Burnley, Yo soy
I think it's in some funds, but
I don't think it's in all of our
trust funds.
Um So I guess I
When I was reading through the
bill, I had the prism that
I was looking through the lens
that this was supposed to be a
permanent
Trust fund. I've now learned
that that's not the case.
Um
Which again I find a little
disappointing, but
I do understand that we have a
constitutional obligation to
balance the budget and all that,
So I understand that there's
times that we have to make hard
decisions as appropriators and
sweep counts sweep accounts.
Um, And so I understand sort of
the rationale there. Um, but
I think, including that kind of
language.
You know what, to the earlier
discussion about having
These programs have the ability
to consistently plan I think it
does throw
Some of that into doubt.
I want to ask a question on Page
seven of the bill, Madam Speaker
generally from Bernie Leo.
So there's a new language added
here on lines four through five
Provided that the fund shall not
be distributed to program is not
in compliance with their proof
standards. Madam Speaker
generally from
Bernie. Leo, can you explain to
the body? What are these
approved standards?
Madam. Excuse me, Madam Speaker
and kind gentleman. These are
the approved standards that the
individual apprenticeship
program itself has established.
Madam speaker generated from
burning will, But I guess I'd
like to know what What are these
standards?
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. They vary from
program to program. It's their
established hours. The training.
what That program has
established as their standards
that have to be met. Madame
Speaker generally from Bernard
Leo. How often if if I have one
of these programs often do I
have to certify.
Madam speaker and count,
gentlemen, once every three
years.
And Madam speaker generated from
Burnley. How many do we have
right now that are certified.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
58.
Madam speaker generated from
burning Leo and
Um
Maybe I would like to know if
your ex experts know this. Or
maybe you already know this. The
answer this question. Um
When is the last time that
someone? Ah,
Was certified, and then they
lost their certification or were
denied re certification.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
known in the last 20 years.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you. Generally from Burnley, I
I'm glad to hear that answer. I
think that's good. And I think
that also shows sort of the
robustness of our apprenticeship
programs and how seriously they
take this.
Um
So I think the last kind of
theme um, I'd like to explore
with you.
Um, I appreciate the reporting
requirements to lfc.
Um, but I'm curious as someone
Madam speaker generated from
Burnley on and I'm talking about
you in particular generated from
burning Leo, who is very active
on L. E S. C.
Um and how we're trying to
develop a lot of CTE programs in
our high schools.
Um and I sort of have this
Concern that I see a lot of
times with, um
Reporting and legislation and
policy issues. We sort of have a
disconnect that happens.
sometimes it's between K through
12 and higher Ed.
Sometimes it's between K through
12 and and finance. Um,
sometimes it's other things and
so, madam chair generated from
burning, Leo. I'm curious. Did
you give? Um have you given any
consideration to maybe having a
report to L E s c two regarding
the effectiveness of
These apprenticeship programs.
some gaps they see. And then I
think we could use that to tool
R k through 12 educational CT
focuses.
Madam. Excuse me, Madam speaker
and kind gentlemen, because this
pertains to apprenticeships and
Ellie and registered
apprenticeships, for the most
part are from age 18 at the
present time. Elliot's C.
Doesn't we tried to pass a law
that they would be responding to
post secondary but it didn't
pass it was vetoed.
Um so certainly
In a C T e discussion. In the
interim. We could call in this
data, but it's not part of the
bill.
Madam speaker generally from
Berlin, and I understand
statutorily. How how the
framework for LSC is defined.
Um, but it doesn't mean that we
can't order other entities to
provide reporting to LSC and
again. I want to avoid this
fractured approach. Um
I really think that we have got
to sort of coordinate a through
12.
And not in there to include a
higher ed all the way through
the workforce.
And it seems oftentimes I see
these different agencies that
are that are coming present to
us, whether it's at lfc
Or in committee.
And
I don't see a lot of
coordination there and I and I
see a lot of duplication of
efforts.
And so one of the things we're
trying to build out as a state
RCT program, and I think we're
doing a great job of that and
continue to invest in that.
It is.
Why not require
These apprenticeship programs to
also provide a report to
L. E s c And then our L. E s C
staff can evaluate
If there are gaps or
deficiencies in this program,
maybe that's caused because of
12 level, that kind of shore up
some of those gaps if that makes
sense, general leading Madam
Speaker and kind gentleman I
totally agree with you, but it's
not part of this bill.
Madam Speaker generally from
Burnley. Oh, so I guess I'm
going to ask you. Are you
willing to to make it a part of
your bill?
Um and two again to sort of
avoid that disjointed approach
to provide a reporting to L. E.
S C to make sure that again are
SETI programs in K through 12 or
as robust as they could possibly
be.
And that we have that full
coordination and information at
our fingertips is legislators,
speaker and kind, gentlemen.
The report. We're looking
primarily at the funding part,
and that's why it's going to lfc
and we can pull these reports up
anytime from Workforce
solutions.
And Madam speaker generated from
burning Leo now's the perfect
time to to tailor these types of
reports.
Um
To to an entity like L. E S. C.
Who is you know, vital and and
studying.
Educational issues that the K
through 12 system.
And so I'm
Again. I would
I would request that. You
consider that
Um
I understand you're resistant to
any floor amendments.
This evening and and I
understand how that works.
Um, But apart from politics, I
really do mean this when I say
it, Madam Speaker generally from
Berna, Leo.
I think we've got to do a better
job of having a whole approach.
And not just cut off at K
through 12, not just look at
higher Ed and in a siphon and
not look at the workforce and a
siphon. They need to be looked
at all as one unit.
Particularly in a state where
we're 50th and so many important
metrics. I think we've got to
stop the disjointed approach.
And so I think this is sort of
low hanging fruit for a way that
we could make them come to the
table with L E s c, not not in a
bad way. But just say look, and
in an honest way, say, what are
What are the deficiencies that
maybe K through 12?
Could do better to help you
shore up some of those
deficiencies. And I think by
having that type of reporting,
especially tailored report, I
think would would go a long ways
towards that. So
Generated from burning Leo. I
I like that We are
Putting some dollars towards
scholarships for
apprenticeships.
I think that's a wise
investment. I think there's
going to be a real R o. I there
Um, I I again I would urge you
to as this bill moves out of
here tonight. And as it makes
its way through the Senate, I
hope that you will consider
Um, language that would make
this more of a permanent fund
and not just a temporary fund.
Um, I know that was not our
approach with the lottery
scholarship and was not approach
with the opportunity scholarship
and I think our trades people
deserve the same as well.
And so I hope you're successful
in getting your 20 million out
of
Chairman Munoz and
And and that will go towards you
having a more permanent fund and
consider Maybe some language
changes along the way. So thank
you, Madam Speaker. Next we have
the gentleman from Simbolon
McKinley representative Alkon
Finally. Thank you, Madam
Speaker with a general lady from
bird NALEO healed.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. Yes, I yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Gentle
lady. You know, I have never
seen so many professionals that
know how to run a program or
heard so many professionals that
know how to run the program as I
have tonight. I mean, honestly,
I think we could get rid of
secretary and just forget about
And just let the let everybody
running the program because
everybody has their own idea how
there's a bread that's a program
is supposed to be run. And if
you run it my way, this is the
way it's gonna work. I have
heard that so much tonight that
I'm thinking here myself or
heck, I think I'm going to apply
for that job, too.
But I'm not. I just have a few
questions and I really seriously
went to ask Madam Speaker and
General Lady.
What kind of results when I re
expected any results other than
program if we get this week, uh,
apprenticeship program going
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, we're going to see
and increased, Uh, robustness of
apprenticeships to match the
need we have for those workers.
Speaker. Gentle lady. Okay,
That's what I'm that's what's
going through my mind. Okay? I
don't know how to run the
program. We already got that
straight.
Ah, but I know
Could be a lot of federal money
coming in.
And there's going to be a lot of
building going on in the state
of New Mexico.
Friends. Are we going to be
ready to have these apprentices
ready to take on the jobs that
are going to be available?
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
we're behind now, and we're
trying to catch up.
And I understand that Madam
Chair, Madam Speaker. I'm sorry.
And General ladies, so we're
trying to catch up right now,
and we don't even have a
program. Is that what you're
trying to tell me?
Madam speaker and kind,
Gentlemen, we have a program and
we have programs. We need more
apprentices to make to build the
pipeline until these traits
Thank you. Thank you, ma'am.
Speakers there. Thank you,
General Lady from bed. Naleo.
You know I come. I represent
three school districts or or
part of three school districts
and one of the hardest figures
for me to live through is what
my teachers are calling me and
telling me, you know,
Representative. It's a 98
degrees in this classroom.
They That's at the beginning of
the school year.
And now
In today's world there calling
me and telling me my futures are
telling Children to bring
blankets to school.
We have a speck systems that
only 20 years old 1015 years old
and we don't know how to up.
keep those pieces of equipment
that are out there now.
And we're going to come out with
new technology and we don't have
a trading fours and now we are
expected to start from the
bottom again. I think we're
going to be hurting because
We should have started this
yesterday. I don't think I need
to tell you how to run the
program. All I want to do is
tell you. Let's get this thing
on the road and I hope uh, how
soon? I just wish it was
yesterday.
Ah, the other question that I do
have
Is. Do we have any shortage of
people that are trying to get
into these programs?
Madam speaker and kind,
Gentlemen, we have
apprenticeship readiness
programs that are ready to go.
So we just have to keep
expanding and and as uh,
minority leader, Elaine said.
It starts at lower grades.
There's the pipeline starts
early, where working on every
aspect of the pipeline.
Thank you. Thank you. Delaney
from thank you, Madam speaker,
So I am just going to say this
is the way I hope this comes
out. I am hoping and I'm praying
that we are expecting to have a
Jobs in the state of New Mexico
for our young women that are
coming out of school, they're
going to be able to get out
there. They're going to be able
to go to work, and not only are
they going to be able to go to
work, but they're going to be
able to go to work and know how
to put together and replace and
repair and he system that is out
there.
And that's what is hell, I hope
will happen because I know that
in today's world, we do not have
the people that know how to
repair and H vac system in a
school and we had people getting
paid to do it. I have heard the
teachers tell me we can see
those trucks or those company
names during him back and forth,
and they don't do nothing. Mr
Representative.
So how do we take care of this?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Gentle lady from Galileo.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we
have the general idea from Santa
Fe representative Johann.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentle lady from Boehner Leo
Guild.
Madam Madam Speaker Kind, gentle
lady. Yes, I yield
Thank you, gentle lady.
What do you say?
Your bill and the fund that is
being set up. It has been set up
in and the continued investment
we're making is adequate.
Madam.
Speaker, speaker and kind lady,
we can always use more money to
build this pipeline.
Hugh madam Madam Speaker.
I think that is that is actually
real. I've heard lots of debate
tonight and I want to say or
this evening it feels really
late. Um, it's past dinnertime.
We've been on this for this
subject matter for quite a
while. I think that there's been
There's been adequate support on
both sides of the aisle that I
really I really respect and I
respect some of the questioning.
But what is what is what is the
what is the cause or what? That
what is the what the issue we
have with our workforce in New
Mexico and meeting the
additional apprenticeships.
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen, we probably have the
best prepared construction
workers journeymen in every area
in the whole country. We just
need more.
Thank you, Matt. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
General Lydia.
That's the issue across the
nation. Is that correct? Madam
Speaker, Madam speaker and kind
lady? It is a national issue a
national shortage. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. I commend you and
I commend all those that have
worked, Um, getting this funding
and getting this in having the
insight to put this together and
now with the amount of money
that we have in our revenue
For our state, having the
foresight to say, Well, what are
those issues in our state that
we really need to invest in and
the investment is in our future
and our future is our youth. And
I'd like to say, Do ask, Do any
of them. Does any of this
funding go to our workforce
solutions when they're working
on these additional problem
programs?
To bring on our youth and get
them involved in the workforce.
Madam Speaker
Madam.
Speaker and kind
Uh huh.
Gentle lady. Yes, it does. But
the federal money especially
goes for that purpose. Thank
you, madam Speaker that that
too, is important. We're going
to we're going to hear and we've
been hearing a lot of bills.
Madam speaker about these
expenditure funds that are
really working towards our
future In the bottom line of
investment, though they they're
not entirely the investment
fund. They are in the investment
in our future and getting those
expenditures out to meet. The
matching funds that are out
there so that we can
We can recruit we can educate
and we can build these programs
and build them and make sure
that they're stronger with with
a workforce that is, it is
educated and prepared. Is. Would
you agree with that man Speaker
Madam speaker. Conscience to
women? Yes, Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
I wish that we could have that
we could get even more money
into this fund into promoting.
Our youth in our apprenticeships
because when we have these
skilled workers
In the
In the industries that we have
available in New Mexico. Then we
know that we're going to have
secure investments as I have
already mentioned, but we're
going to have
Our workforce even that more
adaptable to move into other
other industries and to have the
ability and the support to get
into a new and changing
What is it just industries and
workforce is that is that
something you would agree with
as well, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker Kind, gentle lady.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Again. This is the some of the
better legislation that I see
coming forward and it's it's
quite wonderful to sit here and
listen to the debate. Madam
speaker and just listen to
How we are all moving towards
the same ideas in the same
promotion with our youth and
making sure that they're
prepared and not, I think was
the term I heard tonight was
silo doing things as I looked
onto the Workforce Solutions Web
page. I found all sorts of
information. Madam Speaker about
How how are youth can earn why
they learn and how we are. We
are using these dollars as as of
now and preparing for the future
with future investments of of
extending this fund, and I just
want to say I appreciate again.
You I appreciate this.
Those that have been involved in
making sure that the we are
taking these revenues that we
have in investing him into these
apprentices programs. It is
It is not enough as we keep
hearing and we can always do
more.
Madam speaker of gentle Lady.
What would you consider through
this type of legislation? This
legislation in the future of
Maybe next year if we don't
quite meet the four demand of
what the bill is requesting,
what do you What do you think is
going to happen if we don't
Past this type of legislation,
Madam.
Speaker.
Madam speaker Gentlewoman. Of
course, it's my wish that
everybody vote for this again.
We're going to be looking at it
and lfc every quarter. We're
going to be following it. As
with all legislation, we can
always revisit it.
Thank you, Miss Madam Speaker
and ventilated. I hope we don't
have to come to that point. I
hope that we all get on board
with this this legislation and
realize that if we don't, then
we are really doing a disservice
to our workforce. And those
needs that we hear.
During just about every hearing
during the interim and our
committees and even during our
session hearings, how what they
need is how we need to support
our workforce. So again this
this is a thoughtful piece of
legislation in my book, and I am
happy to support this piece of
legislation with you tonight,
and I hope the rest of our body
looks at what this. This does
for.
Our states and for our
workforce, and I hope that we
can get this done and get the
full support of this body. Madam
Speaker General lady, Thank you
for the time in
And I just say
This is it's been quite
interesting evening to hear all
the conversation, but really
what I'm really engaged in is
that there seems to be quite the
support from the entire body.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you. Generally.
Thank you, General lady. Next we
have the gentleman from Lincoln
and Otero, representative
Vincent
Thank you, Madam Chair are Madam
Speaker in general Lady from
burning Leo.
I've heard a lot of the debate
tonight. And, uh, I want to get
more into the the internals of
what's going on with this
particular fund. So General lady
on Page five.
Where it says on Hallisey, Page
five. It's gonna be line five.
The department shall collect
employee.
Contributions.
So I'm a I'm a new say I want to
start an apprenticeship program.
And I have 10 employees.
And
I want to. I want to start the
program. And how do how do I go
about that?
Madam Chair, gyn Lady, Madam
speaker and kind gentlemen, when
you want to start a
apprenticeship program, you can
work with Workforce Solutions
Department with their
partnership board.
To develop it.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady, so
Whenever I start this program
Does workforce Solutions. Help
me set up on my taxes? Do they
help me set up?
The framework for how I'm going
to take all the the
contributions out of my
employees checks.
Madam speaker in general, any
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. They will help you
set up the premium the
framework. The lines you're
referring to are directly with
the construction trades. They
don't apply to every
apprenticeship program.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady so I can opt in or
opt out of this program.
Correct, madam.
Speaker and kind gentleman.
First of all, no. Many comes out
of employers checks.
Employees shakes Excuse
employees checks. Okay, So what
does Madam Speaker and General
Lady what does come out of their
checks? Or does the employee pay
or the employer pay for all of
it, Madam Speaker and kinda
element Are you asking
specifically about the public
Works, Apprentice and training
Act or are you talking about
apprenticeships in general?
Um Madam, Speaker and kind,
Gentlemen, the framework is
worked out per the individual
type of apprenticeship. It is
For the construction trades if
they have a separate program for
paying a certain
Amount for the public Works
construction projects.
But
That doesn't apply to all the
other apprenticeships. Thank
you, Madam Speaker in General
lady, So I don't know if I got
my question completely answered.
So if I'm a new if I'm a new
business person
And I have 10 employees. What is
the process for me to put my
employees through this
apprentice program?
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. It would first depend
on what type of apprenticeship
I mean, are you building curbs
in a city like farming to non
Are you building
settles?
Are you building? Um, caskets,
you know, depends.
On the type of business that it
is. Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady you choose.
You choose whatever it is and
tell me what the process is.
Don't Madam speaker and kind.
Gentlemen, you have your 10
people You determine who's the
program sponsor? What are the
requirements? What type of
training do they need to achieve
the level of proficiency and
skill? You know how many hours
what kind of classroom training?
What kind of hands on training?
And you work up the standards
for that program. I mean the
program for splicing, um
What
Splicing cable would be very
different.
Than an apprenticeship building
saddles, for example. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and General Lady.
I was just trying to get a feel
for how I would get my folks. So
if say, I don't have a
curriculum and I want workforce
solution to give me a curriculum
so that my employees so I'm not
teaching them wrong, saying I'm
teaching them wrong. Madam
Speaker in general lady, How do
I know that I'm compliant with
Workforce solutions.
Madam speaker.
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen, as an employer, you
could be joining an existing
program.
That already has the standards
you could be joining that or
adopting their standards. You
wouldn't necessarily have to
start from scratch. If there's
an existing type of
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
general lady, So say I adopt
this this program And do you
have any kind of a navigator
that that comes out and make
sure that I'm teaching my
employees the right way.
Madam speaker, gentle lady.
Don't speaker and kind
gentleman, the program sponsor
would be responsible for that.
Thank you for that, and
Madam Speaker and General Lady.
How many times would would that
person come out once a week once
a month.
Twice a month.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. My experts say that
in the beginning, probably they
would come more often. You know,
it's a give and take process
once the programs established
and demonstrating that they're
meeting the standards, they
wouldn't come as often and then
every three years, they
Complete audit every three
years.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
General lady. So once I get
involved in this program, and
I'm doing everything I can to
stay in compliance.
What if I get out of compliance?
Hmm.
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
Your complaint with your own
standards that you've
established.
And
Madam speaker and and kind
gentleman, as as they report, as
my experts have reported, has
hasn't happened in the last 20
years. But if if it was a clear
noncompliance with your own self
identified standards, you might
not get funding as a result.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind of something.
But
Madam speaker.
And kind gentleman, you always
have the opportunity to, you
know, work and meet your
standards and work on it.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind Lady.
So
As we all know there are
Contractors or whoever you want
to say that do shoddy work. It
just happens and say I'm one of
those contractors and I've got
my 10 employees and I'm trying
to stay in compliance. But I'm
just one of those people that
can't quite stand compliance.
How many chances do I get
before? I'm not funded anymore?
Madam.
Speaker and kind gentleman.
First of all, you would be going
through a process to register
your apprenticeship program.
Um, and meeting those standards.
if you really didn't meet them.
Madam speaker and kind
Gillerman, you'd be
deregistered, and then you'd
have a chance to re establish
your standards and come into
appliance with the standards
that you your program actually
set up.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind Lady. So back to Page five
in line five shall collect
employer's contributions,
according accordance with that
act, Review Import Employees
Compliance Statements Review
certified payroll.
So is that what workforce
solution will be doing?
And it does mention investigate.
What what does investigate me?
Will they be investigating my
payroll?
Will they be investigating my
program?
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. This specifically
applies to public Works
construction projects.
If you're not using apprentices,
the new pay 60 cents
Per hour, So this is unique.
To the construction.
Industry apprentice and I will
note.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
that this is existing language.
The only changes our language
changes to be updated to the
Department of Labor Department
and
The Workforce Solution
department.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and kind Lady.
So flipping over the page eight.
And I spoke about this a little
bit in committee.
And I don't know if it's such a
popular question.
But I just wanted to know what
it was. So it talks and on Page
eight line 13 when you start to
set up the apprenticeship and
training advisory committee
And starting on a
The department shall appoint an
apprenticeship and training
advisory committee composed of
nine voting members who shall
Be New Mexico residents The
members shall be as follows. So
two persons representing employs
Of members of Apprentice
apprentice of bull trades.
Who selects those people.
Madam speaker and councilman.
This is not new language. This
is existing a statute.
You did change the
You did change the vision to
department, so I think it is
part of the new
Um Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. The board already
exists, but
And and the process which
already is an existence. Madam
speaker and kind gentleman is
people are nominated and then
the department secretary
approves them.
But as I said, that's already
existing statute. So Madam
speaker and kind lady who
currently sits on the board.
Madam speaker and country,
gentlemen. Um, I can refer you
to the website.
But its people in those
categories
Okay. Thank you.
Madam speaker and kind lady.
The last question that I'm going
to ask you is I
What I asked in The committee is
how How am I going to know that
we have political equity in this
and and I mean that in the most
respectful way?
Um, how do I know that there's
going to be the right amount of,
say Republicans and Democrats on
this to where it's not just a
one way or the other on this
committee?
Gentle lady.
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. I believe this became
a law in 1992, and it's never
been an issue.
Well, thank you for that, Um
Madam chair in kind lady. It's
never been an issue. But is it
ever going to become an issue is
what I'm trying to
Get out.
Madam speaker and Kind
gentleman. I couldn't speculate
on that.
Madam chair and kind lady. Thank
you for the debate. I appreciate
it. But Madam Speaker may be
represented. The representative
me should start our
apprenticeship program together.
I'd like that. Thank you.
Next. We have the general lady
from Braulio and Sandoval,
representative Cates.
Thank you. Madam Speaker Does
the General lady in my chair
yield from Bern Leo?
Madam Speaker. I yield to the
kind lady from Sandoval and burn
Leo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. So
thank you again for letting me
be one of the sponsors on HB
five. This is such an important
issue to me, and I'm grateful
for all of your advocacy for
many years, um on on these
programs and others, um, this
particular hb five this pertains
to apprenticeship programs
amongst public works only is
that correct?
Madam speaker and kind lady. No,
it applies to any apprenticeship
program that's registered.
And and and Madam Speaker,
General Lady I. You don't have
to give me an exact number, but
approximately on the budget that
we sent over to the Senate not
long ago.
Um, how much money do you think
we've put into infrastructure
investments in this for the
state in the next year?
Madam speaker and kind lady
infrastructure ranges everything
from electric charging stations
to airports. Two roads have no
idea.
Um, Madam Speaker Kind Lady.
Would would you say in the
billions
Madam speaker and kind lady. I
know that the transportation
budget alone is 1.2 billion. So
yes. Over.
In the low billions.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Kind lady. So if we were not
investing in our workforce, our
apprenticeships are skilled
labor who would be building who
would be
Creating who would be
Building those infrastructure
investments.
Madam speaker and kind
represents kind, gentle lady.
That's the problem. That's why
many of our projects our
schools, our roads, um, take so
long to build because there's
nobody to build them. In
addition to supply chain issues
and other issues, But we need to
build our pipeline of all those
skilled laborers.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, kind lady. Does this
bill eliminate any of the
exemption of the highway
contractors from the program
Madam Speaker and kind lady,
This has nothing to do with
With anybody that's not in
apprenticeship program.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, Kind lady. Um
Madam speaker and kind lady. Do
you know that my father was a
union pipe fitter?
Madam speaker and kind, gentle
lady. I did not know that. Thank
you, Madam Speaker Kind Lady
When I was born, he was a police
officer, And then he went into
the trade. It was who was
granted his father and his
brothers, which was union where
he was a rebel. He went to union
pipe fitting instead of
plumbing. Um and the local 189.
Mhm, Madam Speaker. I mentioned
this because what does it make
difference?
In apprenticeships that you're
earning money.
While you're
Earning, why you're learning a
skill.
And being able. What are the
wages of union workers and
skilled labor workers? Um, that
are invested in an
apprenticeship programs.
Madam speaker and kind lady. Um,
they vary.
Ah!
Madam speaker and kind lady for
Uh um.
Um
Madam speaker and kind Lady
apprentice gets a proportion of
what a journeyman gets. So, for
example.
A
Okay, A bricklayer. A stonemason
who's a journeyman makes $27.03
an hour and an apprentice
starts at 50% of that which is
1099.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
kind lady, So we are creating
and investing into our workforce
that are going to be able to
support their families on real
jobs and careers. Is that
correct?
Madam speaker and kind, gentle
lady. Yes, Absolutely. It's a
Earn while you learn model that
leads to significantly
Middle class upper middle class
wages. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
That might be a phrase I'll use
with my Children earn why you
learn all the time. So thank you
very much for that. Um, and, uh
And are these programs sees
apprenticeship programs? Are
they trying to recruit retain
Um individuals that may be
marginalized or in of women. Um
and other, um, skilled other
labor that don't realize what
kind of earning potential they
could have by a skilled
position.
Madam speaker and kind lady.
Absolutely. I think many in this
body went to the B probie Proud
truck, which has 16 trades in
it.
So different programs or
targeting our secondary
students, middle and high school
students.
There's other programs that are
targeting disengaged youth,
including high school dropouts.
Uh, people of color. Every
single category people who have
been formerly incarcerated
And are looking for a trade,
Different programs are targeting
all these different groups. This
specific furnace targeting
The registered apprenticeships.
Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker and thank you, Kind
lady. I know that I've run a
social services programs before
like women with co occurring
disorders, and I've always tried
to encourage them to find a
trade electrician. It doesn't
take necessarily big muscles,
but you're earning a wage that
can actually support your
family. Is that correct?
Madam speaker constantly. Yes, I
will say that Madam Speaker Kind
lady. If you wanna dodge me in a
little story, I know that you
know, It was a long time ago
when I was a child, but my
father was able to support a
family of six. There were four
of us on his pipe fitters, um,
salary.
But when there was no work in
the state, he was forced to go
out of state. And so this is an
investment to make sure that the
work that we're doing here we're
actually being to be able to
train and hire new Mexicans
correct.
Madam Speaker Kind lady? Yes.
Uh,
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Kind lady. So I would just
like to say thank you to the
Cabinet secretary for
understanding that, um, when in
this in this rare and wonderful
time of abundance, and we are
really looking to invest in our
infrastructure are very needed
investment that we have to
understand. We need to invest in
our labor as well.
Who are going to be building and
that the infrastructure Um I'd
like to thank you. And I think
the body for their positive and
their support for making sure
that New Mexico keeps working.
Thanks.
Next. We have the general lady
from Eddy and Lea County
representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the general lady from burning
Leo, please yield, Madame
Speaker. I yield to the kind
lady from
Those counts. I think it's two
counties now. The Yes thank you,
Madam Speaker in general Lady.
Well, like the representative
who just spoke. My dad was a
union member in Seattle, where I
spent my youth. He was a
plumber, pipefitter as well.
And I remember general Lady Um,
Madam Speaker.
Uh, how proud I was of him even
as a young age because I saw how
hard he worked, and he was very
dedicated to what he did, and he
was a true craftsman.
Nobody did it better than my dad
When it came to pipe fitting and
plumbing work. He was just the
best, I think and
I remember.
Ah!
Madam Speaker, General Lady
sometimes, um, my dad would
teach us a little bit like he
had to do a plumbing repair at
home.
And he would let my sisters in
me if we wanted to watch how he
did the work, and it was very
fascinating, especially when he
had the torch out to do some
connections.
But Madam speaker and General
lady, so I I'm in support of the
bill.
I do have some concerns,
however, about some of the
nomenclature in the bill.
And I've noticed Madame Speaker
in general Lady that this
session we're
We're setting up several trust
funds.
In various areas, but I don't
think they're really true Trust
funds as we typically think of a
trust fund.
And so, um, we have We know.
Madam Speaker General Lady the
so called Expendable Trust in
House Bill two.
I think the numbers have changed
a little. We were looking at 900
Million, maybe 600 million now,
but
The point there is that it's not
a really a true trust. And so I
wish we could just call it a
fund. Call it what it is, and
it's a fun that's meant to be
spent over a period of time.
But, um
Madam Speaker, General Lady, I'd
like us to kind of think about
what a trust fund really is.
And it's where we consider three
things. One is the needs of the
beneficiaries.
The second is the need to
preserve the trust.
And then the need for income for
a certain purpose.
And so what We're not doing
here, General Lady Miss Madam
Speaker is preserved the trust
It's basically going to be
spent.
And so, um, I wish we could get
back to just using the word
fund. I think it's a little more
accurate.
And certainly, I mean, trust
found trust fund sounds really
good.
But this is truly just a fun, So
I make that observation with the
General Lady speaker like to
share her thoughts on that.
Madam speaker Kind, gentle lady.
I appreciate your thoughts.
And that's my comment.
Thank you, General Lady, Madam
Speaker.
So about 50 million of General
fund dollars will go into this
fund and getting back to the
thought about the need to
preserve a trust.
Um, as it is, status quo. Uh,
We had a speaker, general lady
The state does manage funds all
the time.
And so this isn't really, um,
anything that special that way,
so we're not really seeing a
classic case here and again with
a trust fund. Usually there's a
prudent investor rule that we
take.
5% typically of the corpus and
use that for real application,
for whatever that need is and so
again, Um, I think this is quite
different from what we're used
to seeing. Um, Madam Speaker,
General Lady.
Um So did I hear correctly.
General lady from Burnley of the
Workforce Solutions will have to
go to the Legislature every year
for additional funds. Madam
Speaker
Madam speaker and kind lady.
Even the P watt money that comes
directly from their funding.
They still have to go through
the appropriations process.
Okay, So I did hear that
correctly. Thank you. Thank you,
General Lady.
So I just read a article
Clearly the trend is towards
career technical education now.
I think here in the United
States, New Mexico included.
We took a turn in the direction
of saying every student needs to
go to college, and I think
I know for sure. Madam Speaker
General Lady. I never agreed
with that. Um, I want people to
pursue it interests them.
And what they're going to be
good at, and for a lot of young
people. That was a trades
program, but we should shut them
down in most schools.
And so a lot of people ended up
going to college who really
didn't want to be there. And so
I think we're correcting that
wrong. Turn now, and I know
Madam Speaker and generally that
I've been promoting career
technical education from the
very first year I started here
and that was a few years ago now
and I'm finally beginning to see
that it seems the whole
Legislature is now on board with
that.
Because I know what it is to
have to wait for a plumber.
An electrician. You know, those
are just essential things in our
lives, So I appreciate so much.
What's happening here?
General Lady Madam Speaker. So
the concern now we're hearing is
that because we're turning more
to C T E.
Some of the colleges are and I
mean the four year
Are concerned that they're going
to lose students because these
people are maybe not going into
an academic field, but instead
going into one of the career
tips Um you know spaces.
So, um, Madam Speaker and
generate. I'm just wondering,
Have you been hearing that? And
then what? What do you see
happening there?
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Madam speaker and kind, gentle
lady.
I think
What I see is that people you
know, in 2012. They did the no
child left behind, and that's
when everybody studied math and
reading all day and nothing
else.
And that's when we started
getting rid of the wood shops in
the print shops in our high
schools.
Um, So what I see now is that
people are realizing
That there's just more options.
I don't think people are going
to stop going to our two year
and four year traditional
academic
Programs, but I think that
they're going to be
More broadly focused.
So we have to watch that trend
carefully.
But I think we're going to see a
changing curriculum. We have new
majors. We may lose some majors,
but we're gonna get
cybersecurity. My husband went
to Dartmouth College, and it's
very interesting because it's a
liberal arts college, But people
come out being engineers,
electrician's and all sorts of
Those professions.
Because they realize that
there's a certain grounding that
you can get through the liberal
arts so
I see major changes.
And we just have to watch them
and be supportive in our state.
Of supporting those changes. I
don't know if I answered your
question, but those are some
thoughts.
Speaker in general Lady I love
your answer. Actually, I think
you're absolutely right. We've
been hearing that we're going to
be
Having students today and now
taking on jobs that we can't
even envision yet And so I think
that's probably very accurate.
I, um I think having options is
the whole point and pursue it
interests you and I know that.
Hobbs High School. They have the
career tech building new
facility of $50 Million
facility, and it's my
understanding that they have
about 809 100 students taking
courses.
They're at ceatec, and they're
still doing all their academic
work that they need to do. But
the engagement level of the
students is very, very high, and
they're enjoying what they're
doing.
And they will leave high school
with a skill that they may
decide to take even further and
get additional certifications
and even licenses, So just
applauding what they're doing
there, and I wish we could do
that in every high school here
in New Mexico, but
General Lady Madam Speaker,
You've mentioned the community
colleges.
And so the question came up in
house appropriations when we
heard this bill just recently
and I don't remember the answer,
and so I'm going to ask you to
indulge me one more time here.
The, uh
Many community colleges have
career tech programs. They have
trades programs, this
apprenticeship program that's
under this Bill. House Bill
five.
What will happen if anything
with the programs that are in
the community colleges already
are they going to lose something
in the translation? If this bill
passes
Madam Speaker, General Lady
Madam chairwoman and kind
translated. That's a great
question. I know that the
plumbers and pipe writers
actually are helping to
reinvigorate El Rito campus of
Northern College of New Mexico.
Because
Ah, you can combine courses that
contribute to your
qualifications for
apprenticeships in many cases,
and many of those are for credit
classes, so the opportunity
scholarship pays for them.
Or as other trades. Classes were
working on legislation to pay
for those as well.
Yes, that's true. And thank you
for bringing that up. General
Lady Appreciate that. Um and
madam speaker
Well, I just have another couple
questions I noticed.
Madam speaker in general Lady
that on Page three of the bill,
you have some boilerplate
language in there.
That says that if we have are
heading towards an
unconstitutional deficit that
money here in the fund could be
a basically taken for the
purpose of not having a deficit.
Um So Madam Speaker, General
Lady, I just wanted to point
that out to the members of the
body. It's not really a
question, but we're seeing that
show up in a lot of our
legislation, and I think that's
a wise thing. So I hope we don't
ever have to go there, though.
Um
I do have a question regarding
and this is, um Madam Speaker
and General Lady.
It's come up a little bit. I've
been hearing. So is this only
for
Trades programs. There's a
reference here on Page four of
the bill, too.
Um
The Department of Labor and that
the training programs that would
be recognized
Um, are ones that would be
recognized by the Department of
Labor or
The New Mexico Apprenticeship
Council.
And so my question is
Madam Speaker. Could you tell us
this or that? Are they? How are
they? The same. How are they
different? Madam Speaker.
Madam speaker. Great question,
gentle lady. There's some multi
state programs that prefer to
register with the federal
program. And then there's some
exclusively state programs so it
allows for either. Um
Structure.
And then, um, kind of a follow
up question. Madam speaker in
General ladies, So that means
that the New Mexico
Apprenticeship council could
react to emerging needs, perhaps
be a little more quick and
flexible to add programs.
Perhaps would that be correct,
Madam speaker at an, uh speaker
and gentle lady? Yes. My experts
say that exactly aerate
Thank you And I do have a
question. This is a burning
question for me, gentle lady,
Because I kind of look at the
language, Madam Speaker. This is
not also on Page four. It's line
20. It says That employer means
a contractor.
Subcontractor or any person
acting as a contractor. And so
my question is
What's a contractor, as opposed
to a person acting as a
contractor.
Madam.
Speaker and gentle lady, its
existing language.
The question still stands. Um, I
don't know what the difference
is, so I know it's not really a
reflection of your drafting of
your changes to statute, but I
still don't know what that
means. I'll just let it go at
that, but, um, unless there's a
follow up
Next. We have the gentleman from
Sanchez from Colfax, Margarita,
Reba, San Miguel and Taus,
Representative Sanchez, Madam
Speaker. I was sorry I thought
you were done. I well, I think I
was waiting for an answer. But I
guess Madam speaker and gentle
lady, we think it is because
it's defined in the construction
industry's licensing act. It
came from there.
And if there's anything more get
in touch with you, Thank you,
Gentle lady and Madam Speaker. I
do have a question on something
on Page five. As I believe
everyone knows. I'm very strong
advocate for transportation
projects.
And there's some language here
at line 12. It says that public
works construction projects
except for street Highway Bridge
Road utility your maintenance
contracts with employers.
Who elect not to participate in
training shall not be
constructed unless an employer
Greece to make contributions,
and I'm just asking Madam
speaker generally, if you could
just kind of explain that is
that excluding street highway
and bridge projects and so
forth, or is it saying those may
happen under the apprenticeship
act and get funding? If the
employer agrees, I guess to make
contributions. I just need some
clarity, please.
Speaker, Madam speaker and
gentle lady excludes them from
having to pay.
Okay. Very good. Thank you.
And then Madam speaker, I think,
Let me just double check here,
Um
I think that concludes my
questions.
But I just want to thank you
again for
Caring about, um
apprenticeships and career tech
and I see this as an advancement
of what we can do to meet the
needs in the state, and it's all
over the state, of course, and I
hope this will be a very
successful program. It's kind of
like a, um
Oh, it's It's not a permanent
solution that will carry us for
years. It's kind of a shot of
adrenaline, I think
Ah, to get more people into the
trades, and, uh but it could be
very helpful and I do wish it
great success and again Thank
you so much, Madam Speaker.
My apologies to lady. Now we go
to the representative from
Colfax, Monory, a robust and
McGill and Taus representative
Sanchez.
Madam speaker does generally
dealed.
Madam speaker and kind
gentleman. Yes, I yield
Madam speaker, gentle lady. How
high apologize. I'll be real
brief. I know we want to just
get this past really with strong
support, But just a quick
question. Uh, you know if you're
aware, but I have three older
brothers. I'd be w
electrician's, uh,
Lots of cousins working loss
almost national labs. We have a
short shortage of quality
crafts. Uh,
Madam Speaker, General Lady, Can
you tell me how this is going to
help that shortfall where we
have billions of dollars for
infrastructure upgrades that we
cannot feel the need
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
and and I didn't realize that in
addition to plane really good
music that they were
All in those I VW trades. That's
great. This is going to help
Madam Speaker and count,
gentlemen.
This is really going to help
build the pipeline. I mean, if
we look at Los Alamos
You get your journey, Minds
license and you're making more
than a level three teacher.
So it's a lifelong career that
contributes to your family. Your
community.
Um to your family, your greater
You know your wider family.
Um, but we need more people.
And so that's why this is so
important to build the pipeline
and let the minute the young men
and women of northern New Mexico
in your case know that these
options are out there.
And Madam speaker. Gentle lady.
Are you aware that journeyman
electricians and pipe fitters
routinely make over six figures
in Los almost
Madam speaker and kind,
gentlemen. Once I leave the
Legislature, I may have to
become an apprentice. By the way
that all the supremacy I met
yesterday in I B W was 58 years
old. So for those in the
audience who are thinking of
career changes
Or your spouses or partners, Um
It's an excellent career
pathway. Thanks for pointing
that out, Madam speaker and
gentle area just to close our
majority of those workers drive
up the hill every day from the
surrounding Espanola Valley Park
Heavily, Reba.
Ah, Northern Santa Fe County,
and these these jobs are
precious. And, uh, I want to
thank you for carrying this
legislation. Ah, I know we have
many high school students. I
know I was part of the group
that brought the treats back to
Northern college. And, uh, I
just I just want to thank you
for bringing this legislation.
Thank you, madam.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Last. But not least we have a
gentleman from Otero
representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I
almost forgot to hear you, Madam
Speaker with with the kind
General lady from Berna Leo,
please yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
kind gentleman from Otero
County. Thank you so much, Madam
Speaker and kind of general
lady and you know, many of my
questions were answered today. I
did have some for you.
Because I thought this debate
was actually very interesting to
learn a lot more about the
apprenticeships that are
available. So Madam Speaker,
general lady, maybe I I stepped
out of the room when I didn't
hear this answer, but I'm
wondering who is going to
oversee this fund. Madam Speaker
General lady who is going to be
the investor or
Overseer, Madam Speaker, General
Lady.
Madam speaker and Kind gentleman
on page to be the state
investment officer subject to
the approval of the state
investment counsel shall invest
money in the workforce
Development and Apprenticeship
Trust fund.
And then it goes on to say in
accordance with the prudent
investor rule set forth in the
uniform, Prudent Investor Act
and consulted in consultation
with the state treasure.
That's who oversees it, and then
the state investment officer has
to report quarterly.
To the Legislative Finance
Committee and the state
investment counsel.
On the investments on a
quarterly basis.
And then also, um
Annually report shall be
submitted to the Legislative
Finance Committee, the revenue
Stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee.
And any other appropriate
interim committee.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General lady that that helps
me a lot. I had a bit of a can
question regarding Madam
Speaker General Lady. The
The role. I guess you could say,
Madam Speaker General Lady of
the State investment
Council.
So, Madam Speaker, General Lady
this council this report that
they give
Does it just pretty much state?
What
They made or lost in that
quarter, how they invested, and
then what is pretty much the
performance of the portfolio.
Madam Speaker, general Lady
Madam speaker and kind
gentlemen. They give a report on
the investments made pursuant to
this section, so they're going
to do the steps. I'm not an
expert on investment reporting,
but there are standards and
guidelines and statutes as to
what they have to do.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General lady. Okay. I appreciate
that. I think that's important.
And I see that there is a check
and a balance with the
State.
Auditor, or I believe state
treasure. So Madam Speaker,
General lady regarding this the
investments. I mean, I guess I
don't want to flush it out too
much here. But Madam Speaker,
General Lady I would assume are
most investments in these kinds
of funds related to like bonds,
things that are fairly safe
because Madame Speaker General
Aidid we saw during the
pandemic.
The stocks went up and down. So
Madam Speaker, General lady, I'm
just wondering what kind of
stability is in these funds
because I would just hate for
let's just say another covid to
come. I'm knocking on wood that
that never happens. But Madam
Speaker, General Lady, if
something terrible like that
happened and our stock market
went up and down
Would we? Would these funds be
protected in some way by strong
investments? Madam Speaker
General Lady Madam Speaker and
kind gentleman, they would have
to follow the state guidelines,
according to the prudent
investor role as as listed in
number one
I'm not an expert on investing
so
The basic parameters are here.
but within those parameters,
there's more parameters.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
in General lady and I will just
follow all these fun parameters
and try to figure out what it is
because I certainly want to make
sure the state continues to be
Captain, a safe position, so to
speak, Madam Speaker, General
lady, So I see that it says the
report should be submitted no
later than November 1st of each
year.
To the Legislative Finance
Committee. But Madam Speaker
General Lady I saw somewhere in
the bill. I wrote it down that
there was the role of the L. E.
S c. I believe something. I
believe this is under the L. A.
L E s. C. Is that correct? Madam
Speaker, General Lady speaker
and kind, Gentlemen, Um
Leader. Lane suggested that we
included but actually, I will
point out to both of you that it
lives here. Any other
appropriate interim committee so
this report could go to
L. A s C or any other
appropriate committee that
wanted to see it or that
Economic development or others.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and thank you, General lady,
because I know we deal with a
lot of like investing in finance
stuff in our committee, the the
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee, and that's very
interesting to me. So, Madam
Speaker generally, I guess I
would just make it suggestion to
whoever's listening. Maybe we
should send them a report. But
Madam Speaker, a general lady I
heard earlier.
We were talking about the
apprenticeships. We are the
apprentices we currently have in
the state, and I believe I wrote
it down correctly. I hope I
believe I heard 2273 Madam
Speaker, General Lady, did I get
that number right?
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
That was actually for fiscal
year. 23. We already have 2412.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
general Lady. Well, that's great
to hear, And we haven't even
adopted this yet. So I'm glad
that it's increasing. Madam
Speaker, General Lady and do we
know of the 2412 that are in
this current fiscal year? Do we
know how many of those folks
are in
I guess the programs kind of
vary right? There's there's
educational. And then there's
I guess a union type. And then
there's also just in the private
sector. Madam Speaker, General
lady, So I'm wondering how many
of these are in the
I guess I would start with the
education one Madam Speaker,
General Lady Community colleges,
universities, places of higher
education.
Madam speaker and count,
gentlemen.
Having teacher apprenticeships
as a new area that people are
exploring.
About a third of the 58
registered apprenticeships.
Are non union about two thirds
or union and they they include
minister, municipalities and
diverse fields.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General lady, So I think that's
great that there are some in
municipalities, municipalities.
I guess that's my hard word of
the day. I'm going to try to get
that one out. So madam Madam
Speaker, General lady, So do we
know of the ones that are in
municipalities? I know some some
cities and counties have
agreements with
Unions such as, um
Some of the ones that are listed
here, actually, But Madam
speaker generally do we know if
those are included in the union
portion or
Are those in some other kind of
public sector portion of that
200 where? I'm sorry. 2412,
Madam Speaker General waiting
Ah, Madam speaker and medics
there mixed like farming tonight
has has four unions, electrical
co ops or non union.
Um, this
This fund would apply to any
registered, regardless of
What it's type was
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General Lady. I think that's
good. I'm so glad that
It's mixed, right? I think it's
good that there's a there's a
selection of apprentice types
that we're looking for. Madam
Speaker General Lady I know that
this is from what I'm
understanding is this mainly
focused toward the largest or I
guess I would ask is the largest
number of apprenticeships in the
builders.
Building trades. According to
this, she that I'm seeing here,
Madame Speaker, General lady
that that was that had your
business card on it. It says
1800 active apprentices in New
Mexico. Madam Speaker, General
Lady, I guess I would just
venture to guess Is this the
biggest sector that
apprenticeships would be in
Madam Speaker?
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
About 50% of them are and and
partly. That's just because it's
traditional, and there's a
history there that goes back.
Um, back to the forties
thirties, the fifties, but we
have so many new areas involved
with, you know, cybersecurity
broadband installation. There's
new, uh, apprenticeships that we
didn't know about 10 years ago
five years ago.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady and and thank you
for bringing up a broadband
because I know that right now we
are going after federal funds on
the state level with the office
of Broadband. Some Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I would
assume that
A lot of these new jobs
potentially could go into that
sector. Do we know if the office
of Broadband has a program
currently to try to have
apprentice ships?
In local communities or just
across the board for apprentices
in broadband, Madam Speaker
General Lady
Madam speaker and
representative that is such a
kind John and had such a great
question. I know that many of
the local companies are as they
work with Santa Fe Community
Colleges program. They get that
on the job training because it's
a it's we desperately need
people with those skills.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General lady and I would agree
with you on that. We certainly
do and hopefully in Otero
County. Hopefully, whoever's
listening in the ether is going
to
Send us some photos, some folks
and some money for broadband
because we certainly need that
And we need more apprentices as
we're talking about. Madam
Speaker General Lady does this
program also venture into other
fields such as, like film or
like in the restaurant industry,
or do we even have many
apprenticeships in those fields?
Madam Speaker General Lady Madam
speaker and kind gentlemen, it's
certainly could, and it opens up
Opportunities like the film
industry needs carpenters,
electrician's all of those
fields that have a printer
ships.
Are vital to the film industry.
And so I think with the
development of our film industry
in this state, we're going to
see more of those
apprenticeships because they're
really needed their high pain.
They're great jobs.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
General lady and I agree with
you. I think it's very important
to start growing our own,
especially with the film
industry because a lot of the
time right now, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, we have people
coming from California. Or I
believe Georgia is a huge place
for film and they come from out
of state. Come here temporarily
and then leave, so I think it
would be great to bring more
folks into that. So Madam
Speaker, general Lady
Uh, so a little background from
from me. You know, I got an A in
film production. I don't know if
anyone knew that. But Madam
Speaker, General lady I did. And
I knew I learned how to be a
best boy. How to be a gaffer how
to be a grip how to be just
about everything on a film set
short of an extra or an actor? I
guess I'm not very good at that.
That portion Madam Speaker
generating
But I'm just wondering
So with these schools in the
state, like we talked about
Santa Fe Community College, it's
actually where I got my film.
A would some of the courses such
as the labs with those help
count toward some kind of
apprenticeship program in the
state? Madam Speaker, General
Lady and what is the
accreditation process if they do
intend for the educational
institutions to do that, Madam
Speaker general waiting
Uh, madam, or Mr Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentleman. You've made a really
good point, depending on the
program that class time can
count. It's a program by
program how they measure how
they how they articulate the
curriculum and agreement, but
that is a prime source of
training. Often those courses
require on the job type of
experience, which
Who knew that you were a gaffer
when we make our grand musical
here in the house floor. We know
how to go to. So yes, that's a
very important point, very
relevant to our two year
colleges because they're so
nimble. They can quickly spin
and do the courses and the
training for your colleges to
But our two year colleges are
very, very nimble. So
That's an important part of
building this pipeline as we
develop it, make it
comprehensive, make it multi
pronged.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
general, are Mr Speaker. Pardon
me, Mr Speaker? Ventilating and
thank you for that answer, and I
think that's a good start. I
think it's very important to
start focusing whatever wherever
they want to go, even if they're
just getting a certificate in
something like film production
or or culinary arts or something
like that. I think that would be
great. So Madam Speaker, general
Lady
I will just continue on. I heard
earlier in the debate. We talked
a little bit about we want
robustness and apprenticeships
to supplement what's currently
happening. So, madam, Mr Speaker
and General Lady so currently
I know that there is a program
that's federal. I think it's
called.
I wrote it down here somewhere.
I think it's like we we are we
owe our or something. It's a
it's a federal program.
We are. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General Lady, That's it's a cool
word. I guess even though it's
not really a word, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
How does this
Intended legislation mess with
the current. We awa
Federal dollars. Madam Speaker,
Mr Speaker General waiting
Mr Speaker and representative
the What is it simple.
The Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act well to that
that money actually goes
directly to the Apprentice, as
opposed to this fund that goes
directly to the programs.
But the the wheel money has been
a vital part of a lot of our
state programming.
Okay. Thank you. Madam. Mr
Speaker. I need to get that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady for that, So I I know that
there are a lot of funds out
there. I've spoken actually
before with folks at the
Workforce Development
Department, and they do that
they administer Iowa. So, madam,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
With the current federal
program.
We're talking about. It's like
paying people to work for you
temporarily. I believe in an
apprentice capacity.
I believe so. Madam. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
With this new funding with this
merely help with just the
training aspect, and then the
federal we awa funds would help
supplement their
I guess salary.
Is that kind of what? I'm
understanding with the
complementary nous of both of
these programs. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
in a way the wheel of money goes
to the Apprentice. This fund
money reimburse Isse for each
apprenticeship, our flat amount
of money, which, as I said,
currently is $2.01.
Uh, and could possibly go up
with this influx of thumbing
funding, but
As we learn as legislators, a
lot of funding is woven
together. It's braided together
from multiple sources, so that
programs and the people in the
programs can succeed in meet
their diverse needs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady and I think that's good. I
think there are a lot of very
diverse needs across the state.
But I also have a few concerns
regarding
The
People that may not necessarily
need these funds such as Let's
just say there's a huge
corporation or like I hate to
pick on one of my favorite
streaming services. But let's
just go for it. Netflix
Right, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Let's just say they utilize
these apprenticeship funds to
put people through this at
Netflix and there they already
can afford essentially to
supplement the training.
Programs underneath them. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady is this
anyway targeted towards those
most in need.
Places in the in the
Business sector where we need
the most people. Is it based on
need, or can anybody get these
funds to help with their
apprenticeship programs? Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and count gentlemen,
there has to be an
apprenticeship program specific
to the skill betrayed a certain
area.
Um Netflix might tell
electricians. We hope you'll do
this in the case of, um, the
representative from alcohol.
Day mentioned that there's a lot
of opportunities at Los Alamos
Lab. People get jobs who go
through like the I beat the
electrician, ALS.
Uh, training. So a big company
might say We have a great need.
We can hire your journeymen
apprentices, but they themselves
wouldn't necessarily be a
sponsor of a specific
Apprenticeship program because
they draw on multiple trades to
do what they do.
I see. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady that that helps me
out. I think that's important to
understand.
So they could potentially, but
it's not necessarily targeted
across the board from just what
I'm understanding. Mr. Speaker
generally.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman
That's correct.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and then I heard
earlier during the debate
regarding the appropriation. We
have 30. Currently, I believe in
this sub, but Mr Speaker, I
believe we talked about more
funding.
Do we know if we're intending to
hopefully get that extra 20
million
Under Senate side with the
budget process happening now, or
is there another Senate version
of the bill that has the 50
million and we just want to
squish them together? I don't
know how that works. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
Um, this this bill sponsored by
both reps and senators, there's
already 30 million in Section
five of the House, Bill two. And
as you know, as we negotiate
with the Senate, um we are
anticipating additional funding
for this spill.
So write your senator. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I will have to go across
the other side of the moon and
go talk to them. So thank you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady so
continuing onto the bill. I
think I saw an agency analysis
from the state. It said the sec
and I didn't know what that was
until I looked it up and state
investment counsel.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
believe they said that there
might be some kind of
Issue that they were seeing
regarding the appropriation
amounts.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
believe on page.
Page doesn't have a page. I
think it's the fourth page of
their analysis. It talks about
the description of the new trust
funds spending powers as
follows. Mr Speaker generally, I
don't know if you have it in
front of you don't want to be
reading something You can't see
Mr Speaker, and I'm sorry. I
don't have it with me, kind,
gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, just the issue
that they were bringing up. I
think they said the language
could be interpreted such that
the distribution of the training
fund and W s D is 2.5 million
total.
To be split between the two
entities or
2.5 million to each entity and
then in parentheses, it says $5
million total for fy 25 to 6.
And 3 million total in 27 and
beyond some Mr Speaker, General
Lady That's a little bit of
Greek to me. I apologize for
reading that allowed, but I'm
just wondering, Have we looked
at those concerns and have those
been alleviated in this new
substitute? Mr. Speaker, General
Lady Mr Speaker and count
gentlemen, thanks for bringing
that up. It was fixed in the
committee sub
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady and I know some of
these analyses. We see them when
they're in the first version,
and then something changes. And
so I apologize for for asking
that question since it was
already remedied. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, just a
few more quick concerns or
questions that I see in the
bill. I'm just going to be on
Page four here.
I'm at the third paragraph. I
believe it starts on line eight
and I see that we're stripping
the word Bureau of
apprenticeship and training or
changing it to office of
apprenticeship of the Employment
and Training Administration. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I guess
I'm not necessarily. I don't
understand the difference
between the office and the
bureau. Could you just sign a
little bit of light on that for
me? Mr Speaker to the lady?
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman. I
would love to shed some light on
that in the federal government,
just like in state government.
Names of divisions departments,
organizations change, and so
when we do a bill, we try to
update to the latest corrected.
Version of the name.
Of the administration
organization. In this case, it's
A change under the United States
Department of Labor.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady that is helpful to
me. I I still have no idea what
the difference between the
bureau and in offices but I'll
look it up. You know, I know
there's the FBI. I guess we're
not calling it the fo I So you
know, Mr Speaker, General Lady
so continuing here on page I'm
going to Page seven on the bill.
And I think, it says with
underlined text.
Provided that funds shall not be
distributed to programs not in
compliance with their approved
standards. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady I know this is
amending current language. Do we
have an issue currently with
compliance with current approved
standards? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman.
There has been no problem in the
last 20 years.
And this refers to that
individual programs own
identified standards that they
hold themselves to
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally okay, so
There's so do we know how many
apprenticeship programs that we
currently have that are in
compliance of those 2400 some
odd apprentices. Do we know if
all of them are currently in
compliance, or is there a couple
that still need to get into
compliance? Mr Speaker? Gentle
lady, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Those 2412 apprentices are
enrolled in 58 programs, and
they're all in compliance.
Nobody is not meeting the
standards they've established
for themselves.
Cool. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and then Okay. 58
programs that narrows it down
for me. Do we know how many of
the programs are our
institutions of higher learning
such as community colleges or
universities? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
Many of these programs partner
and have agreements with the
colleges, but they're not
apprenticeship programs at this
time of any specific there. None
of the
Higher education institutes have
their own apprenticeship program
at this time.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady that is good to
know. And maybe this will help.
Push them in the right direction
there, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I think a little earlier ago we
talked about the opportunity
scholarship in the state and so
of the I know it's probably
helping increase in roll mint in
these institutions. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, do we
Do we know how many of the folks
who are going into these
I guess. Do we know how many of
the apprentices currently
Are in school and utilizing the
opportunity scholarship
alongside the current framework
Here we have for the workforce
Development Apprenticeship Trust
fund.
Mr. Speaker Count, gentlemen.
No, we don't have those numbers.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in general, waiting, and then do
I was also wondering what is the
most in need industries that we
have in this state of lycopene
vacancies, For example, it could
be healthcare or building
contractors. Mr. Speaker
generally could you just tell me
which ones are at the top that
we need to fill the most, Mr
Speaker.
Gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and count, gentlemen,
the building trades health
fields.
Construction.
I do believe
And Mr Speaker and Kind
Gentleman, the Workforce
Development Department actually
puts out a list regularly of the
current highest needs area.
Areas.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally and then I another
question, because I know that we
talked a little bit about this.
but regarding the most in need
industries and then skilled
Labor.
I don't necessarily know how to
define that because I know so
many different people in
different agencies and different
different kinds of places in the
economy. They have so many
skills that you would need so,
Mr Speaker, General lady. So
example for example, restaurant
worker or someone who's a
barista that I mean, like
putting that phone thing on a
lot does Art. Right, Mr Speaker?
Generally, it takes skill, so
I'm just wondering, Do we define
that in any way in this
legislation, and with this
pretty much be all inclusive of
the entire
Business.
Framework in the state anyway.
Anything from a coffee shop to
selling cannabis to growing
cannabis or to producing a film,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
I know that four of the tops
our you know our ventilation or
H back are electricians or
plumbers are pipe fitters and
welders. They all seem to be get
employed immediately.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I agree. I think I have
a friend who's a welder and
goodness I couldn't My eyes just
popped out of my head when he
told me what he makes, so it's
great that we have more
investments and those kinds of
industries because, you know,
maybe I'll become a welder and I
may make
Six figures, which would be
great Mr Speaker Generating, so
I'm very glad to see that and
then real quickly. I don't know
how much time I have. But I just
wanted to make sure that I
understood who is on the board.
Of this, and I just want to make
sure that it's balanced. Right.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
Since we're now we're revisiting
the statute to update terms.
Is there a balance between union
and private sector and do we
have? You know, I know it's nine
members, so who is kind of the
deciding votes, so to speak,
since it is an odd number?
Board. Mr Speaker General
waiting.
Mr Speaker and representative of
the department.
Workforce Solutions appoints the
advisory committee and the
members are two persons
representing employers of
members of apprentice. It'll
trades.
Two person representing
organized labor for members of
Apprentice Apple trades.
Two persons employed as full
time training directors.
Or program administrators of
apprenticeship committees.
And two persons employed by New
Mexico Educational entities.
Who teach or immediately
Supervise preparatory
instruction, supplementary
instruction or related
instruction courses. And
finally, the state
apprenticeship director of the
top part of the department
serves as the chair of the
Knights person.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, And I really
appreciate you answering my
questions, and I learned a lot
more about your bill. And I
guess you learned a little bit
about me and that's that's cool.
So Mr Speaker and Madam chair of
the Finance Authority Oversight
Committee, I look forward to the
next interim, and I appreciate
this candor. Thank you so much,
Mr Speaker and General aiding
the gentleman from Dona Ana.
Mr Speaker, this matter of being
heard have been having been
under consideration for three
hours. I moved to close debate.
Motion to close date all those
in favor say Aye.
I was supposed to me.
The knees.
Yes. Have it.
The bed is closed.
Little lady from earlier to
close.
Mr Speaker. I now propose a do
pass for House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill five as amended.
We are on final passage of house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill five as amended.
The votes about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 63 primitive five in the
negative House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Substitute for House Bill Five
as amended, has duly passed this
house.
General lady from Ben Ali, your
representative Borrego, Are you
ready on supplemental Calendar
Item number two.
Mr Speaker. I am ready. I'm just
waiting for my guests.
To walk in, and then I'll go
very slowly as your expert
witnesses walk in, let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
88, as amended on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members. I would just ask the
people over on my right to be
kind.
Um, I am here to present to you.
House Bill 88 and House Bill 88
is a
Being presented by myself, but I
have my co sponsor terror Luhan.
And our co sponsor, Senator Leo
had a meal who couldn't be with
us this evening.
Um, this is an act relating to
firefighters requiring the
Department of Finance and
administration to establish a
program just distribute funds
appropriated to the department
for statewide and local
firefighter recruitment, making
an appropriation and Mr Speaker.
I would remind the house that
last year I had a bill similar
to this, but I didn't bring the
appropriation attached to it. So
this actually is a duplicate of
that bill from last year with
some little minor modifications?
Um, And this, in fact, has a
request was for $35 million
appropriation and in
appropriations, Um, we ended up
with a $5 million appropriation
and I do. Mr Speaker and members
also have a very slight
modification that came out of
our appropriations committee.
And I have that available for
distribution until it is that.
Is that an amendment? Yes. Can
you kindly? Um, Can somebody
kindly walked the amendment down
to the clerk here at the
rostrum?
We will get that distributed
amongst
The chamber. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And with that, I'd also
like to introduce my, um expert
witnesses at this time, Um,
Randy Varela is the state fire
marshal and also Anthony Labor,
Who is the assistant fire
marshal. Thank you, General
lady. We're going to have you,
um, signed the amendments and
then
They'll be walked down here by
the
Sergeants at which point
I will ask you for the 2 to 7
number.
And ask you to explain the
amendment.
Can can I generally would you
please move. House Floor
Amendment number one to House
Bill 88 is amended.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I would like to
move. House Floor Amendment
number one to House Bill 88, as
amended is being passed out as
we speak.
Mm. From Colfax, Curry, Harding,
Quasar, McGill and union. Do you
have the amendment? All right.
Thank you, sir. We've got the
amendment Gender lady from
Berlin. Can you please read the
2 to 7 number? Yes, Mr Speaker,
So the number is 0.227956 0.1.
That's the number I have, and
amendment has now been uploaded
online, the gentle lady to
explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um and
members, um
In the Appropriations Committee,
Um, are beautiful lady.
Representative Gail Armstrong
asked the question about
certification, and there was
some discussion regarding that.
And we agreed that that word
needed to be taken out. So
basically what this amendment
does is it? Strikes are
certified and
And, um, that is the amendment.
Is there a debate on the
amendment? The gentle lady from
scattering Zokora's Valencia
representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Will the
lady yield
I will. Thank you.
Thank you, Kind lady. And thank
you, Mr Speaker. And can you
tell me? Um why the have, um,
the rest of the that sentence is
not been taken out. Just the who
are certified.
Um, Mr Speaker, and, um, kind
Lady Representative Armstrong.
The the way that it would read
now is me use the funds to
recruit firefighters who have
taken the oath prescribed for
firefighters.
And for licensed emergency
medical technicians.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
lady. And what is that, Um
Pertain.
What do you have to do to take
the oath?
Um, kind lady and Mr Speaker and
kind lady. Um, I am being
advised by the fire marshal that
we could take out that entire
line.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
Lady. I
I would recommend you just take
out the whole line because I
don't know who would administer
the oath and why they would take
the oath if they weren't a
firefighter yet.
Generally, if you'd like you can
withdraw the amendment. You can
request a new one be drafted.
There are plenty of people on
the list to debate the bill. So
you have some time to get a new
minimum drafted. Mr Speaker. I
would like to do that generally
has withdrawn the amendment.
Um, generally, you are still in
your opening of your bill, and
I'll have you Let me know when
you're ready for debate.
Mr Speaker, I think I've
sufficiently explained the bill.
so we are ready for debate.
There is debate.
The gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, Kind lady. And you have,
uh, looks like you have a really
professional staff there behind
you.
They always look good in their
uniform.
How old are you Just does the
general later field I do. Thank
you, gentlemen from all those
counties, which I can't see.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
And I will be kind to you
Promise.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
um I see that your bill created
a fund but the appropriation has
been stricken. Can you explain
that?
Mr Speaker, madam here.
Government.
Mr Speaker and representative
Harper. No.
Vincent. Gentlemen from Lincoln.
Vincent. I'm sorry. I cannot see
far away. So I apologize. Um,
Representative Vincent from
Lincoln on Otero.
Um So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
um we did request the $35
million and during the
Appropriations review. This is
the amount that was allocated
and I would at this point, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen,
deflecting the appropriations
chair who I spoke to earlier and
he is ready to respond.
Alright, we're going to yield to
the gentleman from Dona
Representative Small. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady from Berna, Leo. Gentlemen
from Lincoln and those other
counties. I apologize. I can't
see. Um as is process, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, there is
an appropriation. All
appropriations are struck in
committee, so it doesn't come to
Florida. But I can assure the
body that there's $5 million
That's crossed over to the
Senate for this purpose. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen. So I'm back to
The general lady.
So, general lady, um
So you have 5 million you strip
you struck 30 million
That's quite a big strike.
Are you going to be able to
fail? Fail What you're wanting
to do with the 5 Million. Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, and, um Representative
Vincent, I will tell you that,
um
We are still working on the
Senate side of this, um to try
to at least take some of that
money back.
And included into this bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. So on the 5 million
How much of the project or how
much of this recruit recruiting
process is going to be able to
happen?
And is it worth it to do? 5
million?
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, what I
am being told by the fire
Marshal and his assistant, the
assistant fire marshal is that
they calculated the 5 million
would give us 30 positions to
begin the program.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in General
lady. So can you. Can you walk
me through that process? What
That would look like, Um your
are you going to work in the
schools? Are you going through
workforce? How are you going to
recruit the people to actually
start the training?
Mr Chair.
I mean, Miss Speaker Sorry and
gentle lady.
Um, yes, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, what I'm being told
is that we would be working at
the local level. We would be
working with the volunteers to
hopefully get them to create a
career ladder where they could
become, um, for full time
firefighters.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
And just something to share with
you. That's exactly how I
started. My career started off
as a as a volunteer and work
myself up to achieve and I'm
really glad
That you are headed in a
direction to where we can grow
our own here in New Mexico.
And you know, I I have some
some. I'm just envisioning.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
will you Will you go in audit?
Um, volunteer fire departments,
Will you maybe go to the
schools look at dual dual credit
Um, Mr Speaker, and, uh,
Gentlemen, What I'm being told
is that there would hopefully be
a career ladder, with volunteers
looking at them first and trying
to get them to certify so that
they become full time
firefighters at some point and
that they build, probably
combination.
Fire departments so you would
have full time firefighters as
well as part time volunteer
firefighters.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
It's almost not fair.
That your experts are sitting
behind you because they know
exactly how I think and they're
already ahead of me.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
So, um
Why
Why was the original
appropriation amount decreased
so much Is it just because we
couldn't get the funding in
there?
Was there a change of heart?
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Speaker Gentlemen again, I would
have to defer to the
appropriations chair in that
matter.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Mr Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr
Speaker. As the body knows, this
is the first time any money for
this fund has been included in
any budgets. Mr Speaker, The
General Lady and the general
Lady from Santa Fes diligent
work last year has carried over.
So for the first time there was
money budgeted. The executive
made a larger request. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
But I would note and emphasize
that for the first time, the
body has from the houses put
funding in and supported that
funding for this recruitment and
retention tool.
So it's Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
there because there was no money
ever allocated for this think
it's probably fair to say the
executive asked for more. The
house included a new $5 million
for this purpose. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen from Dona
Ana.
So you're saying that the money
It was not there. You couldn't
allocate the the whole 35
million Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
through the appropriations
process. This is the amount that
was included in that process.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Gentle lady. Her gentleman
General Lady, I understand this
is part of the governor's budget
recommendation. And I'm really
glad to hear that. Do you know
if the LFC is also remain
recommended Any funding for
firefighter recruitment?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we do not
have the answer to that right
now.
Okay. And and thank you, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
Going back to your amendment.
Would you explain that explain
the rationale behind your
amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I kindly will explain
that, um, in our discussions
with, um, the Appropriations
Committee, um, there were
discussions about the
certification, which comes
first, the certification or the
you know the recruitment and it
was clear that that in our bill
Um we sort of missed misspoke
and had the certification before
the actual Um um
Recruitment, so we wanted to
switch that and ensure that the
recruitment would come first and
then the certification.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentle lady.
Because I think it is important
because these days, you know if
we're going to grow our own most
most municipalities
And rural volunteer fire
departments. They're really
wanting.
Firefighter slash e. M. T s
And most of the career
departments or at least the
minimum firefighter E. M. T s
And we're hurting so bad. Um and
I was hoping that you could ask
your experts behind you.
Mr Speaker is in lady.
Uh, how? How much? How many
volunteers? Are we short right
now? And how bad are your
department suffering, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Um, it seems to be a
significant amount. From what
the fire marshal is telling me
about. Three years ago, we were
at 7000. And now we're down to
about 3000, so as you can see,
that's pretty significant,
especially in light of the
amount of fires that we've had.
Um, you know, it's in our
forests and other places are
Buskin, Albuquerque.
All over the state and the
healer, the black fire. I think
it was And then um and Maura and
10 Yasko, um significant fires
in the Hamas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in General
lady. So what does that do?
Would you ask your expert
experts? What? What does that do
for our insurance service office
rating.
Whenever our volunteer fire
departments are not coming in at
a good number, and they're
coming in at 10, which is the
worst that can happen.
What does that do to insurance
premiums for a lot of our local
folks in our municipalities and
counties?
Okay. I am being told that there
is a retro grass and our
insurance rates will rise. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
and you know that's that's hard
to hear.
Because
Not only are we faced with
higher gas at the pumps
Everything is higher at the
grocery stores. Now, if we don't
recruit and get our fire
stations full
Our insurance rating number goes
up.
And everybody's premiums goes
up. Is that correct matter, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, Um I am
being told yes, by the for
Marshall.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady and I told you I was going
to be kind. So I've got an
amendment for you.
Mr Speaker.
It has been walked down right
now by the gentleman from San
Juan.
Gentlemen, Would you like to
move the amendment?
Amendment one. Yes, sir. I'd
like to move the amendment.
Right. And I'd like a roll call
vote, please.
Get the roll call. Alright. Let
it get it passed out.
And then I'll ask you to read
Hello. Hello.
No.
Gentlemen, please read the 2 to
8 number.
Mr Speaker. The 2 to 8 number is
Very good.
This amendment is really simple.
All it does is
On Page one line 14 after
firefighter it just inserts and
emergency tech medical
technician
This amendment makes it clear
that the funds can be used for
recruitment efforts of the
emergency medical technicians.
Um Mr Speaker, the government's
budget recommendations noted
funds we needed for both
firefighters and MTs. But the
bill isn't clear and doesn't
state that
Gentle lady from Bernalillo is
is a friendly amendment.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
Thank you for your amendment and
your proposal in discussions
with my expert witnesses. We
reluctant reluctantly do not see
this as a friendly amendment.
Alright, already bait on the
amendment.
Gentlemen from Colfax, Green
hunting quests and McGillin
union representative. Check.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield I yield
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Ah!
What kind of training goes into
being a in the M T.
I think the training Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I think the
training has gone up to like 200
hours, but what they do is there
There's a very extensive state
approved curriculum that you go
through and it is a rigorous
class It takes, you know about
four months to get through it
And in order to run on an
ambulance, you do have to be
certified as a
Mm. Basic minimum. They do have
a first responder, but we prefer
the M T basic minimums.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
whenever you're out in the rural
area, and somebody calls 911
Their days gone really bad.
And you'd like to know that
there's going to be a response
and
You just heard it from the
experts, Mr. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that
I heard today that three
departments had closed because
they don't have enough
volunteers to run those
ambulances and that's not good
for our rural areas.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker Kind gentleman.
It may startle you to know that
I used to be an E m t three.
Went to school months and
months.
I did it for one reason, because
I live in a very rule and very
remote area.
And I went with my kids got old
enough to start
Getting outside and going to
school. And you know, there came
a time when there was a little
girl film.
In the swimming pool at a
At a place that was close to
where we lived. And and thank
goodness you know, her mother
was a nurse and I knew how to
drive fast and we made it.
Gotta cut the hose off the
oxygen bottle in the shop, got
her to help and got her saved.
But I realized that I needed to
take that training so I could
save my own Children. Other
people's Children and maybe even
some grown folks.
And it took months and months of
You say four. I think M t three
was more like six months and he
was long hours every night made
an a on the test. Believe it or
not.
Ah!
And then they lied to me. They
said, Uh, this is your learner's
permit.
You will never be alone.
And you will always be working
with the crew was an experienced
GMT. And, uh
Until you get comfortable and
And learn what you do, and
Well, in the time that I had my
license, I never worked with a
more experienced CMD because
there's there's just not very
many MTs out in the where we
live.
No. We had to go into the town
and we had to ride the ambulance
in some of the bigger cities.
Give us a little more practice
because even though when you
have an accident out there, it's
serious. And, uh, whoever is
next to you need to know how to
save your life.
You know, you just don't get as
much activity as you do in a
bigger city, the other saying
that
Help me to decide to take that
training is
Uh,
Hey, guy on the ranches, horse
fell on him and stopped his
heart.
And the cowboy next to him knew
CPR. I didn't know how to that
was before I took the class.
Yeah, and, uh,
So he saved his life.
And they he had been out he had
been out for, like, three
minutes. They kind of changed
his personality for a year or
two. They said a few more
minutes and he would have
Not recovered. So I think this
is a good amendment. I think
everybody should
Get those skills, especially if
you're a policeman or
firefighter or something because
you don't, uh, you just don't
know what you're gonna have to
face. So I believe in the
amendment, I believe in getting
trained. And, uh, what does an E
M t get? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And thank you, gentlemen.
On your first question. In my
surprise that you were in Mt.
Three? No, sir. I'm not
surprised at all. And it makes
me like even better.
But I will tell you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, an E. M T now is
probably up to about 15 to $18 a
basic and then it moves on up
from there. If you go in
advanced and then two paramedic
you probably earn up to about 25
bucks an hour.
So, Mr Speaker, what happens to
us out in these rural areas is
they have increased that the
Time that you have to train in
the requirements for riding on
the ambulance off in a in a big
city.
So oftentimes our young people
we have had several young people
that took the training got
trained to be an M T. And pretty
soon they moved to Albuquerque
because they can make a good
living with those skills that
they picked up out there and and
so
Uh, that's the way it is out
there out in the wild, Wild
west, But you know when, when
somebody gets in an accident
with the
They like somebody to pick them
up and try to save their life,
you know, and and you never know
when it might be you so
We try to
Try to keep an ambulance going
at one time. We had probably 80
MTs and couple of two or three
drivers. Uh,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
What are the qualifications of a
driver that drive that
ambulance?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So you know the main
thing that this bill does is in
the bill itself, it says a
certified E M t.
And this is not building our
own. And I think that we need to
build and grow our own,
especially in those rural areas.
And you know, I was disheartened
this morning to find out that
three volunteer shops had closed
down that there is no 911
service out there right now in
my district, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen,
There is a department. I won't
mention it, but it's merely run
Their their youngest personnel
is 70 years old.
And they're begging me.
To get them some help, and I
don't know how to recruit them,
And I was so glad to see that
this recruitment bill come
along. However, it does exclude
The M T in this money needs to
go to train MTs to where we You
know, some of them don't want to
fight fire.
And if we put those MTs on the
trucks and these rural areas
than that will be their main job
is to respond to 911 calls and
take care of that aspect of it,
and then we can use the other
people for the firefighting
side, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker. It's good to be
trained in both both areas. You
know, Just a couple of years
ago, we lost one of our
firefighters. We live out in
tall grass country and most
people think of a grass fire.
You don't think it's as
dangerous as a forest fire and
I won't even go into whether it
is or it isn't but But I can
tell you that Grassfire can kill
you because it's killed.
Probably three people that I
know since I've lived up there
and the latest one was an
elderly gentleman. The fire
turned and headed towards him.
The truck went by and he jumped
on the truck, and they were
Leaving in the far cut them off.
and then when the truck went
through the fire and heated the
rail up that he was hanging on
to you, and he turned loose of
it and fell in the fire.
And got burns all over his body,
and he lived a few days and then
passed away and he was a good
friend of mine. I don't know if
there had been some trainee MTs
on the truck. Maybe maybe they
could have rendered a
More service. I don't know.
Maybe maybe there was maybe some
of those guys that were on that
truck were E M T s. I just don't
know the
The small part about it, but
Because I wasn't there, but
Hated losing him. It's a
dangerous occupation, and and I
think folks need to be trained
as E. M. T s so
The the M E M t basics that
you're talking about. Do they
have to go and ride that truck
in in a bigger city and kind of
get some
Sometimes spent saving people
with heart.
Problems and burns or car
accidents or or do they just go
to a class?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
there. It's very rigorous and
they go to class. They have a
vehicle practicum that they have
to go through.
And they will ride the truck
with a precept er and that
precept or will make sure there
that there are efficient and
everything that emergency
medical technician needs to do,
and then they pull them out of
that, and they put him in a
hospital setting and they have,
uh, they have a person in there
that watches everything they do
in a hospital to make sure that
they have a good bedside manner.
And they know how to tend to
patients and, uh whenever they
graduate with their E M t
You really have something? That
the only thing you got to get
them from? There is some
experience and
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, What
we're talking about is
People in their communities.
For example, you
That's a fabric in your
community, And that's the
service that you want to
provide. And you want to serve
your community. I think that's
the least that we could do is
get you trained up.
I want to say 70% of all the
firefighters in New Mexico or
volunteers.
They do it for free.
And
These are volunteers that have
day jobs that leave their day
jobs and they they they have an
arrangement made with their
supervisors. And whenever
there's a fire or an M s call
They let them leave, and the
supervisors and employers in my
area.
They gladly let him leave.
And they're usually gone for a
couple hours.
And they come back, and they do
all that for free. They respond
in their personal vehicles for
free.
And sometimes they have to
respond in their personal
vehicles to get to the station
so they can get into the
ambulance and go to the call.
And
You know, I I don't think that
we do enough for all of our
volunteers. And, um, you know,
with this recruitment thing here
we go growing our own people
keeping them right here.
Teaching a lot of our kids that
are in high school, you know
they have junior volunteer
programs, and they go with their
moms and their dads and their
moms and dads are mentoring to
them, and that's what they want
to do. And they become E. M. T s
usually on their own dollar.
And sometimes when you get with
a really good service, um you
know, they might have some
scholarships to send a few kids,
but I know a ton of people. I'm
one of them that paid my own
way.
Through E. M. T school and
actually fire school at that
time whenever I was volunteer,
and, um
We've got to build our
communities back up.
And we've got to make them safe,
and we have to provide emergency
services to these rural areas,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
It's funny that you mentioned
the high school aspect of it
when I brought when I was
President of the school board.
I brought a
Some folks into trainer high
school students, and they
trained them in CPR and the and
the Heimlich maneuver.
My youngest son at that time was
in high school.
And since that time
He saved his mother's life. She
she choked one morning really
early, and he did the Heimlich
maneuver and and just pop that
right out. It was one of those
big old
Vitamins about the size of your
thumb completely shut her air
off. And and he did. Heimlich
maneuver saved his life He left
with the college, one of the
college kids quit breathing,
totally quit breathing. There
the they
Stop the car drug amount onto
the grass, and my son knew CPR.
He was the only one that knew
CPR. He did CPR on him till the
emulates came and they said if
if that hadn't happened, that
will wouldn't have lived.
So I think it's a good thing to
have in our high schools, you
know, just a basic life saving,
uh, procedure. It doesn't take a
lot, you know, just like, say,
basic Heimlich maneuver basic
CPR, and I know since back when
I was
Trained the CPR.
Has changed quite a bit. You
know those of us like me. I
probably ought to go back and
get it. Get a new
Get trained, get retrained
because I know the procedure has
changed considerably. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
We know that a lot of these, uh
These are, uh, departments are
in volunteer. That's where I was
a volunteer Both E. M T and
firefighter.
So if you're on a paid
department do the E. M. If
you're trained as an EMT, do you
get paid a little more than then
you do if you're just a
firefighter, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Absolutely you do
And, um, you know, I always
built in incentives, you know,
And I appreciate, um, I
appreciate the representative
bringing this legislation
forward because they're trying
to get some incentives.
To, you know, get some people
trained up. My incentives were I
had a fire side of things and I
had an M s side of things and
for every 200 hours of training
that you received, I would give
you 3% increase and you can get
that 3% increase every day. So
what that computed to Mr Speaker
and gentlemen?
Is
At the end when you have
firefighters in the MTs
That have 2000 hours of advanced
training.
You're running a cutting edge.
Fire and E M s program And you
know those people that are in
your in your
Counties and in your cities when
you get a call, and you know,
you probably know this better
than I do when you get a call.
It's It's pretty fair to say
that you're going to know the
person that you're running on
and when you see them in full
blown cardiac arrest.
And you have a razor sharp team,
and they show up.
And they bring that person back
to life.
And you get them to the
hospital.
And you check on them for two or
three days after that, And then
you kind of forget about it.
because you know you got to move
on to other calls.
And then three months later, you
see them walking into the fire
station with a plate of cookies,
telling you how much they
appreciated you, and that's all
it really takes.
Here's a plate of cookies
because we know how much they
appreciated it and in our
firefighters and MTs would
celebrate those successes.
There was also some handsome
Calls that we weren't successful
on but we always celebrated our
successes and tried to stay as
cutting edge as we possibly
could for our communities, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, One of the things in these
small communities is you are
going to know who you go and
render aid to
And, uh,
Usually
Christmas.
Fourth of July.
Thanksgiving.
The number of calls are going to
be enormously more both in
Auto accidents because people
are out traveling.
And, uh,
Also just in heart attacks and
saying for from people
Having a eating or drinking in
its putting stress on there.
On their hearts so
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if
you do answer a call
So you're a firefighter and you
go answer a call, and you render
aid to somebody.
Uh, you think? Well, they're all
right. Uh,
Can you? Is there a protocol of
when you can just
Quit rendering aid and start
fighting fire again. What is
that protocol?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
You know when you when somebody
calls 911 and you show up, you
don't ever quit rendering aid.
Until you can confirm a death
and two or more leads on a
cardiac monitor, and we don't
even accept that.
Um, we load them in the
ambulance and we we work on past
protocols, and we get them to
the ER and we work with the
doctors and we might work
somebody for 45 minutes or an
hour after
I want to make sure that I've
given you every possibility that
I can to make sure you survive.
And the success stories that I
can tell you about is when
people walk into the fire
station with the cookies, and
they don't have any adverse
reactions to anything. They're
perfect.
They just had an electrical
problem in their heart. And now
you know, they get they get stay
with us for a long time and
their families appreciate it and
their grandkids and kids
appreciate it, and it's the most
fulfilling thing that you'll
ever do.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, That is
true. You render aid until until
there's no hope of of anything
or until somebody that's higher
and more well trained than you
comes to assist you in the trade
off and they begin to render aid
so so they have to be more
qualified than you.
Yeah. And then they can, they
can begin to render assistant
and and you can eat them so
So that's the protocol and
And I think it's a good protocol
night. I appreciate you bringing
bringing this amendment because
I would also like to see the MTs
included. I think you know in
our area.
Everybody is a volunteer
firefighter because, like, say,
we have a lot of grass fire.
Sometimes they get into the PJ,
and it could be very dangerous.
It can be very dangerous not
only to the people fighting it,
but but it can engulf your
house. If you
What's on TV. I think it was two
years ago.
There was a huge
Fire up around mosquito.
Burned for weeks and in, uh we
took trailers and and went in
and got people out and forgot
their horses and their livestock
out.
But it was dangerous not only
from being from burn, but also
smoke inhalation. The smoke just
obscured the sun when we were
going in, so I just think to
have a
Have an E M t. On one of these
fire trucks is is essential.
You know, I appreciate the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Their speaker. There's is there
for the debate on the amendment,
the gentle lady from Torrance
and Bruno Leo, representative
Lord
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
kind gentleman from hold on?
Lincoln and Otero, please yield.
I'll yield Mr Speaker, the kind
lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
representative. So on this, I
have some questions for
clarification because I'm not a
firefighter expert.
So
If someone becomes
Firefighter.
The training for the M T the
same or is that different?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. It is different,
much different.
Okay, So you're going to have to
help me with this, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
So I have firefighters.
And then they can. Are they
firefighters and also get
trained to be MTs? Because
There's a M. T s that are also
private. Is that correct? I'm
trying to differentiate between
the two
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. It can go both
ways. Really? You can have a
firefighter. This trained in E.
M s and you can also have E. M s
that's trained in fire and most
of your municipal departments
that
Can't afford to have an
ambulance. Have a fire.
Side and they have an E M s
side.
So, for example.
You go to a structure, fire and
your men and women engaged on
this structure Fire.
And they go through our protocol
was once you've gone through two
air packs. You have to come out
and go to the ambulance. Have
your blood pressure checked.
Make sure your within your
carbon monoxide levels and they
would make sure they kind of in
a in a sense gave you a check to
make sure you're good. And if
you're good, get hydrated. Get
another pack on and go to work.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So that's what I was
just I was trying to get in and
thank you for the explanation
because again, I'm not an expert
in this.
So when we're saying we're we're
looking for the recruiting when
there's growth.
Are we understand the
firefighter part but we're also
going to make sure and I'm sorry
if this is worded, weirdly
We're looking at
Firefighter E. M s.
Not just I'm trying to make sure
we're not trying to look at
recruiting.
And I don't even know how that
would happen, because even if
you recruited people who just
went to college and got a degree
in M s, they still wouldn't fall
under. This is that correct?
Would be
I saw you nodding so I stopped
Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh,
Thank you, Mr Chair and gentle
lady. So what I wanted to tell
you is, um
We're talking about these rural
areas. Usually you're not going
to have as many problems in the
urban areas but the rural areas
and I don't know if you heard
what I said while ago but, uh
Mr Speaker in General Lady. We
had three departments close.
And they have no service.
And they are if you if you have
something that goes on
And it's an emergency.
911 is not coming.
If you do not have a ride,
depending on the what The
severity is of your 911
emergency. You are not getting
an ambulance. It's not coming
because there's nobody there.
What my amendment does is not
only does it give d f a the
money to set this fund up.
The way it states is for
firefighters and certified
E M. T s only
What I want to do is grow our
own and I wanted to. I wanted to
encompass all of that, so we can
Trained firefighters and E. M. T
s or the combination thereof to
put in all of our rural
departments, especially those
that are volunteers met Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
So sad story.
And Torrance County. One of my
friends.
Had an allergic reaction to
something and how to asthma
attack and the firefighters
because there's not a lot in
Torrance County could not get to
Willard in time, and he was
dead.
And he was a very, very close
friend and I missed the heck out
of him, so I completely
understand how that can happen
because
I have two very distinct
districts. I have
My Albuquerque, which is taken
care of. I mean, they're all
fine down there and then you get
up into the rural areas and I
have had
Firefighters. I'll tell your
personal story. So my husband
had a widowmaker. Heart attack.
Um, Mr Speaker.
And luckily
We are right down the street
from our fire department and
they were able to get there to
be first on the scene. And then
we had the EMTs. But it works
different there because we had
firefighters at E. M T trained
and then we had the Presbyterian
MTs that came afterwards. So two
separate things.
But I was extremely grateful
because they got him there in
time. We had a second heart
attack on the way down, So I'm
extremely grateful for anyone
who is a first responder.
But what I was trying to get at
as I want to make sure
That when we're doing this,
we're talking about the combo.
The two and I understand in the
rural areas we need as many
people, especially once you get
out to Torrance County, That's
all.
Whole another can of worms and
I have got firefighters who are
working in like a shack pretty
much trying to get that fixed
for them and have it
structurally sound and it's
unbelievable When they tell me
that there's there sleeping and
cots, and they have a building
that needs to be brought up to
code, and that's very
unacceptable.
But I want to make sure that
we're doing this correctly. Um,
and my main question on this was
trying to understand the
difference between the two and
how they kind of it seems like
the kind of wrap around
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
can you There was a question
where you had talked about.
I think you mentioned being
certified our firefighters.
Sort of facts and a bunch of
different levels that I'm
learning about.
Are the
If somebody's explain to me the
process
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
how they would bring in
An E M T would they bring in
somebody just empty training. Or
would it be somebody? A
firefighter with empty to
explain to me again on that on
the difference between that how
they would bring them in for
growth?
So the way the bills are, Mr
Speaker and generally the way
the bill states is, uh, funds to
recruit firefighters who are
certified and have taken the
oath prescribed by firefighters
and licensed emergency medical
technicians.
So if you know
The the way that link the
language reads to me, is it says
certified.
Emergency medical technicians.
So what I'm proposing is the D F
a
We grow our own.
Keep them in New Mexico.
Keep our people here in New
Mexico.
And we draw down on that $5
million that D F A has and we
have a fireside and an E M T
side And if the firefighters
choose
To take the firefighter
training.
And then after they're done with
that they choose to take the E M
T training. Well, then you have
a combination right there.
That's way efficient.
They can fight fire, and they
can
They can provide emergency
medical services. So
That's that's what my attempt
was. For. My amendment, Mr Mr
Speaker, that a lady and thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
having
Lived in different areas. It's
very interesting. There's a
I've always seen fire fire MTs
together, And when I came here,
all of a sudden there's a level
you know there's Presbyterian
and their private and I've
never. I've never seen that
before. So that's the that's
what's trying to wrap my head
around.
Um, I'm going to say that I have
a couple of questions, but you
know what? I'm going to go ahead
and stop on this so that other
people have time to ask, but
thank you for explaining it to
me.
Because I think what a lot of
people forget is urban areas. I
mean, are the urban areas are
very. I have two very distinct
my Torrance County is completely
different from my East Mountains
completely different from my
Albuquerque with different
needs, And when it comes to
rural, we need to make sure that
we're supporting and taking care
of so that people like my friend
don't die. So thank you, Mr
Speaker to be on the amendment
that young lady from Santa Fe
Representative Luhan. Thank you,
Mr Chair with the gentleman.
Yield.
Yes, I yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Can you
Do you read in the bill that
will soon be amended from
another amendment line. 14.
Um, let's see, I'm looking at
your saying.
Let's see.
Situation, actually, if you look
on page one line 14
Even reading as as it is now
because we don't have the
amendment yet through Page two,
Line two, and if you can't, I'll
read that. So it says.
From all start from line 24 to
make it more congruent may use
the funds to recruit
firefighters who are certified
and have taken the oath
prescribed for firefighters and
for license emergency medical
care medical technicians.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, How do
you interpret that?
It was lines in this bill.
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady
of
I think What's your question is
is what I wanted to make. This
statement is is DFA does not
have an empty side of this. It's
only a fireside of this, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, I took your
amendment to mean that we needed
to insert many places.
And emergency middle technical
technician and what the bill
clearly
States is that the those
technicians are included in this
process.
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker in
general lady. Uh, that's not
what I'm seeing. I don't know
what line you're talking about.
Again, Mr Speaker if you read
Page one line, 24 through Page
two, line two. You will see that
it
Clearly states license emergency
medical technicians.
Unless you have a different
version of this bill than I do,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. You
know the way I'm kind of reading
it is. It's a firefighter that's
taken both oaths.
And what we're trying to do is
we're trying to put the DFA to
where it firefighters and
emergency medical technicians.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm sorry, Are
we we We finished. I didn't mean
to
Yes, I'm finished. Thank you.
Um, so we are already working on
an amendment. We have not
passed. That's why I included
the entire
Language here, but that language
will be struck, but it will
continue to include
On Page two line one through two
licensed emergency medical
technicians.
That has taken the oath, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
So let me let me read you this
18 through 22.
Statewide and local firefighter
recruitment.
So I'm going to repeat that
statewide and local firefighter
recruitment.
The Department of Finance and
Administration shall establish a
program to distribute funds
appropriated to the department
for statewide and local
firefighter recruitment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes. And
if you continue to read
And finish this section. It
includes license emergency
medical technician
That have taken the oath and are
certified already.
Mr Speaker, as I mentioned
before part that language will
be struck from this bill. If we
do accept the the amendment
that's in process.
Mr Speaker and generated. Yes,
it will be struck in and then we
will insert where it has
firefighter and emergency
medical technician. Mr Speaker
in that will weave that will
Include in concludes Section
one, will it not Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
That's not the way I read it. I
read it that you have to be
certified and had already taken
the oath.
I want to make it to where we
can draw down on that money for
people that are not already
certified to become Mt. Medical
emergency medical technicians.
Mr Speaker.
I would just continue to ask or
once we get this amendment, the
First Amendment in place.
That we then go back and read
Section one.
As it will then be amended and
To the point. It will include
License emergency medical
technician
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes. Once that is, If we do vote
on this amendment, it will put
firefighters and or
And emergency medical
technicians.
Mr. Speaker, are you
Referring to the previous
amendment or the amendment that
we are on and debate on
Currently, Mr Speaker in general
Lady my amendment, the one that
I've put in
Thank you, Mr Speaker Again. I
my my debate. My argument with
you is that it is already
included, and therefore this
Your amendment isn't necessary,
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I
guess we disagree. I don't see
it.
Mr Speaker, I we We we agreed
upon a lot of things, and I
think we may agree that this is
actually a really good bill. And
this is a very technical Ah.
Not
I think amended and in the
intention for the First
Amendment would remedy maybe
what you're trying to intend in
this. Your current amendment.
Mr Speaker in General Lady, Are
you talking about the the First
Amendment that they were changed
their mind on and there was no
amendment there, So I put this
amendment to take care of the
The general lady.
Behind You believe we are. We
are speaking one of the same, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Um, I'm
gonna suggest it's up to you all
but it seems like you might be
talking about the same thing.
And it seems like with
The corrected proposed
amendment.
Your issue might be fixed. I'm
seeing a no over there. But I'm
seems like we might be able to
get to the bottom of this
dilemma here rather quickly.
If we take a little time to go
through both amendments and
figure out
Where we land versus arguing in
circles. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I do believe you. You are
correct. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, back to you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Could we just
arm wrestle over it?
I think utility from Santa Fe
has an advantage over you. So be
careful what you wish for.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and that
will take place after the
wrestling match between
representative Alcorn in Garcia,
which was promised two days ago.
So, gentlemen, would you like to
take a little time and work with
the sponsors to see if there are
amendments satisfies your
Your request.
Yes, please, Mr Speaker.
That amendment to deal with the
technical issue that I'm hearing
about, so we'll let the sponsors
the fire marshal's gentlemen
from leaking, Otero. Um
Generally from Ben Ali, You and
Santa Fe.
To figure out the amendments.
Meanwhile, we'll move on to item
number three on supplemental
calendar number One is the
gentle lady from Burnley
representative Dixon ready on
that item.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that the
record reflect that election
necessary replacing House Bill
193 years twice amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate a
millimeter substitution to
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
makes technical fixes to bill we
passed two years ago. The law
enforcement retention fund,
There is debate. Gentlemen from
Otero, representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker,
and, Well, the kind General
lady, please yield. The General
lady from Berna. Leo. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your your
speedy Gonzalez up there on the
chair, And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
I'm gonna go to the bill here. I
have a hope thing about it, Mr
Speaker.
General lady so
I guess my first question Mr
Speaker General Lady would be
regarding the impetus for the
legislation. Do we know what the
primary goal is in changing the
verb Ege in this piece of
legislation, Mr Chairman or Mr
Speaker? Generating? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Yes. After two years
of implementation Department of
Public Safety has worked with
our law enforcement agencies and
our municipalities to refine and
identify improvements to the
core legislation.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General lady, So I see here
on the bill. We're talking about
a retention fund. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady this fund
How is I guess? Where are the
funds coming from? To put into
the fund to grow Mr Speaker
Generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So just as a
reminder, this fund already
exists. It was passed as part of
House Bill 68 2 years ago and
the funds currently Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen Law Enforcement
Protection Fund.
Um
There are revenues that are
previously established in law.
and this appropriation. This
bill also contains $1 million
appropriation to supplement the
fund.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
into the lady. So I guess that
kind of brings me to one of the
questions I had. But you already
went there. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, we said a million
dollars is allocated for this
fund A million dollars. So Mr
Speaker generally do we know if
I'm just wondering what was the
governor's? Ah,
What was the governor's?
Number
And then what came out of
appropriations, right? Usually,
Sometimes those are a little
different. Mr Speaker, General
lady. How did those square Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So the $1 million
figure was discussed in
consultation between the
Department of Public Safety and
Legislative Finance Committee,
and that money has been in how
House Bill two. There was not a
different figure requested by
the governor.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady. Thank you for that. I'm
glad that both of those match
that's good Mr Speaker, General
Lady So on page to your bill.
I'm just gonna start online. I
guess I don't have a line
because I'm just with the
amendments in context.
Diversion, Mr Speaker
Generating, but we change it
from retention differential
disbursements for law
enforcement to full time
certified law enforcement. So,
Mr Speaker, dinner lady, Why did
we change this?
Three words in the bill. Mr
Speaker, General Lady on Page
two.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. My expert
witness. Louise Rebel from the
Department of Public Safety is
actually checking on that. But
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I can
tell you that That is because
what the law enforcement
officers after two years of
having this bill, and this
retention fund felt was most
appropriate. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and General Indian. I
will wait for that answer, but I
will continue on my next
question while we're waiting.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
can you detail the process and
authorities involved in
dispersing funds from the law
Enforcement retention fund per
the bill's provisions, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, in
terms of the amendments that
this Bill House Bill 193
provides, Um yes. The one of the
amendments requires officers to
quote complete.
4914 or 19 years of service
rather than quote reach those
milestones.
Um, the bill further amends the
statute to allow for
disbursements to officers who
have transferred laterally
between law enforcement agencies
within the state.
Those are two of the
differences.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in General 80 when we're talking
about transferring laterally, do
we mean let's just say, Mr
Speaker General Lady Would that
be like a lateral transfer? Or
what? Would we classify that
with this, Mr Speaker?
Generating? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
You are correct. We would
consider that a lateral transfer
and I do have the information
that you previously requested.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and, um,
the distinction is to clarify
Ah, that, um the original intent
of the bill is a full time
commitment. Not a part time.
Okay? Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. So the full time
commitment versus the part time
commitment is what we change
with.
The full time certified because
I know we also are added the
word certified, Mr Speaker
General Lady would a part time
law enforcement officer need
that certification Because I see
that that was changed as well.
Mr Speaker to the lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, they
would not qualify.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady. And then when does
this start? Because, Mr Speaker,
General lady, So if I joined the
department, and I'm not a
certified officer yet, and I go
to the academy to learn
All the things that I would need
to become certified to be a
police officer, Would it begin
at the time of employment, or
would it be begin? The time that
I become certified, Mr Speaker,
General Lady?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That's a
wonderful question. It is up to
the discretion of the agency
when they are hiring that
person.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in General Lady, So the agency
that they're hiring. I know a
lot of these enforcers are under
a
I believe there's like a
statewide like, I don't know if
it's a PR a kind of thing, Mr
Speaker, General lady, but would
they all kind of comply with the
same promulgated rules from the
state level and with those rules
determine whether they would
start certification?
After their final certification
classes, or just as they're
hired, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Once again, it's
at the discretion of the local
agents.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And generally so then
we're talking about full time
and part time do we know of all
of these kinds of part time or
full time or all government
related like in a state agency
or a local county or a local
city? Are there any other
agencies that this would fall
under his like a law enforcement
officer?
Other than a county city or
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, could you
could you do me a favor and
repeat the question and
assistant manner so that I can
make sure I understand.
Sure, Mr Speaker General
waiting. Wow, I'm getting
checked. I appreciate it. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. General Lady.
My question was mainly
Does this only account for local
governments, Counties and state.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I hope
that was distinct. Check you.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Uh,
Hmm. They could be state, local
or county.
That is
Who would apply
Is that what you're
Looking for? Yes, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I'm wondering if
that's all of the governments or
agencies that it would apply to
Mr Speaker, General Lady, or are
there any other law enforcement
agencies?
Outside of the county state and
local Mr Speaker, General lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, tribal entities.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady, and then I'm
wondering like I know you and
them might have a police force
animus you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady would they also be included
in this? Or would it only be
limited to tribal, local county
and state? Mr Speaker?
Generally. Hopefully that was
the sink. I apologize. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Very succinct, and I
appreciate the reiteration U. N
N police would also be included.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General Lady. I appreciate
that. And then what about state
agencies such as I know, Game
and fish potentially has law
enforcement mechanisms. Things
such as that would would only
apply to state police Or would
it also apply to state agency
personnel who fall under law
enforcement or even corrections
as well? Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. Corrections
would not apply, but law
enforcement employed by state
agencies would all right. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and General
lady. So then I'm going to go to
Page three here.
And I don't really know what
number it is because I'm on the
committee substitute or the
amendments in context, but it's
on D
Mr Speaker, General Lady on Page
three, it says full time
certified law enforcer.
Shall be eligible to receive a
retention differential. But Mr
Speaker, General Lady the
original version, I believe that
officer shall receive a
retention differential. So how
does this change the process? Mr
Speaker generally by putting be
eligible in there
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. If you could
hold on for one moment while I
consult
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So we're
changing the benchmark for
eligibility from must reach for
9 1419 years, too must complete
4914 or 19 years, so that takes
the law enforcement officer to
That initial term plus one year
and one day because Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, we want them to stay
on for one more year.
After that.
Uh,
Retention differential.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generating so we said 49 and 14
years so that would add it to
510 and 15 years plus a day, Mr
Speaker, General, ladies, that
kind of what we're looking for.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, the payouts
occur upon completing 5, 1015
and 20 years. Okay, Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And generally that
helps me a lot because
All the numbers. They seemed a
little
Interesting to me, but, yeah,
that makes more sense for
It's five and nine is 10 and 14
is 15 plus one day. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady regarding
a previous question, I asked. I
apologize for going back and
forth, but I was talking about
the folks that are included
under the personnel would also
include a livestock inspector,
Are they included? Islam Force
mint in this legislation, Mr
Speaker Generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady and I know we're
talking about different agencies
like game and fish with
livestock inspectors and other
agencies. So Mr Speaker general
leading being certified. Is
there like one course
certification process for every
law enforcer in the state that
they have to go through on a
state level or can there be more
localized processes to certify
these officers? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, there is
one New Mexico Law Enforcement
academy that they
Can attend, or there are nine
certified satellite. Uh,
Throughout the state.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker in
General Lydia. I'm glad that
nine. Sounds like a lot, You
know? 33 counties nine. That's
that's pretty good. Mr Speaker,
General lady, So I appreciate
that, and then I'll continue on
where I was on Page three. I
apologize for skipping around,
but I'm now going to go to Page
four at the top here, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, it says the
law enforcers shall receive a
retention differential
dispersement of 5% of the
officers annual base salary upon
completion. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, do we have the
figures of what the general
Well.
Average.
Base salary is in the state of
New Mexico. And then how would
this increase that Mr Speaker,
General Lady?
In numbers or in a dollar
figures. Mr Speaker, General.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I can get those
figures for you in just a
moment. I would, however, note,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen that
that's actually information.
Pertaining to the original bill,
so I don't know that, um, we're
changing that in
House Bill 193.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Generally, I
apologize. If I'm reading an
older version. Can I read you,
my tutu number just to make sure
we have the same bill.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, you
can. But what I was saying is
that the question that you were
asking about that information
would have been covered in the
very first Bill House Bill 68
from 2022.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generating. I'm just reading it
because it's underlined, and it
looks like new language, but
I don't know. I think my 202 or
2 to 2 to 6 on this one.
Is a point.
Two of us 69 to 1, So hopefully
that's the same version of the
bill. But Mr Speaker gentlelady,
I'm just wondering, Did we take
this out from a portion of the
previous statute and then
reinsert it on Page four, where
we have new language talking
about shall receive a retention
differential disbursement of 5%.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so, yes. So House,
Bill 193 is amending section
9-19 Dash 14 nm s a 1978. So the
current law
Yes, Mr Speaker generally? Yes.
I appreciate that. And I
understand that, But I'm just
wondering why we've
Because I see what the stricken
language was on Page three. It
says Law enforcer remains
employed as a law enforcer with
the same law enforcement agency
for one additional year
retention differential.
disbursements shall be
calculated based on the salary
of the law enforcement officer
on those dates, and then there's
new language that starts at the
bottom of Page three and goes on
to the
Halfway on Page four, and that's
believe d and E. So, Mr Speaker,
generally, I guess I'm just
wondering
Where this new language is
coming from. It's currently in
the statute, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um, could
you give me one moment, please?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Would you
be so kind as to repeat that
specific question for me?
Of course, Mr Speaker generally
thank you for that. And so my
question regarding this was
With these
Individuals who will be
Affected by this on Page four.
we talked about the retention
differential dispersement of 5%
on the officer's annual base
salary upon completion. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm just
wondering number one.
What is
The current percentage. If we're
just switching this around in
the bill, Mr Speaker, General
lady because this one, says 5%
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Yes. The
current um, percent is 5%.
Okay, Mr Speaker Generating, but
it increases then.
Upon 20 years of service, and I
believe Mr Speaker generally we
previously said it was 19 Is
that correct?
So, um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
So if you're so
Um, in this bill Page four,
starting at line one.
E. M. This What This is doing is
this is adding an additional
Um, retention differential. For
when you have completed the 20
years, so this goes above and
beyond that
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um,
the
What you're reading.
In summary is an amendment to
the statute that allows for
disbursements of up to 5% of an
officer's annual base salary
upon completing each additional
year of service after 21 years.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Internal waiting. So, Yeah, I
am. I apologize. I don't have
the line numbers on my
amendments in context, but I I
see where you are so around the
same page literally and Mr
Speaker, General lady, which is
always nice. So Mr Speaker
generated, we said up to 5%.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay, Mr Speaker generally so it
could be potentially
Smaller than 5% could be like 12
3%, Mr. Speaker, ventilating.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Mr gentlemen. Yes, You did
read that correct. So it is up
to 5%, because what could happen
is if the requests for, um
disbursements from local law
enforcement agencies exceed the
amount of money that's available
in the fund. DPS can pro rate
Ah, the differentials.
So it can be for a lesser
amount.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generality, But so I'm from what
I'm understanding.
It's not guaranteed per say that
it is 5%. But depending on
what's in the fund, I guess Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it could
Be reduced or increased up to
5%.
Can you just go through that for
me, Mr Speaker generally.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, DPS can
prorate down. Um, if the
requests exceed
What is available.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady. So what I'm
understanding is if there's a
like a lot of retirees, if if a
bunch of folks retire after a
certain amount of time
And there are increased numbers
of people needing this
differential.
After a certain amount of time,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, then
this would potentially decrease
if DPS.
Decides that Mr Speaker
generally. Is that what I'm
understanding
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. It there
are three factors that can
affect that, Um, number one is
the number of officers that are
staying on the force. Number two
is
The number of new lateral hires
and
And number three is the
projected increase of
participation by law enforcement
agencies.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, so
Okay, so officers staying on the
force new lateral hires and then
Potential future hires.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Is
that what I'm understanding? Or
did I get the third? One wrong?
I wrote it down kind of quickly,
And my handwriting is not the
best. Mr Speaker generally.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Are you a
physician?
Mr Speaker generally,
thankfully, I'm not a physician,
and I'm not an attorney either.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen. You are correct. It
is. The third item is based on
projections. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady. So let's
just say if we like if there was
a boom, a hiring boom this year
and we heard five new officers
and that
Kids are Max. Mr Speaker,
General Lady if we hit our max
with that five new hires with
that then potentially increase
that differential from 5%
maximum two, maybe 4.5 or
something Lower than that.
That's just really what I'm
trying to understand What this
Mr Speaker to the lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It could in fact
decrease from 5 to 4.5%,
depending on those three factors
discussed.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generating, so the three factors
is it an and like
Officers staying on the force
and new lateral hires and
potential future hires, Or is it
an or like if we have this many
new hires versus current
officers?
Is it? Is it like? I know it's
an equation. Essentially, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it's
math. I know it's late, but is
it and
And and or is it or and
Mr Speaker, generally with these
three different components, Mr
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
My expert tells me that it is a
combination of however, we are
still early enough in this
process of Ah, with this fund
that we do not have benchmarks
established yet.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady. So then the
benchmarks that we would
establish
Would those be needed to be
reported on the local level to
the state? How would we
understand where we're getting
that total figure Mr Speaker,
General lady, or would it be
based on department to
department?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The benchmarks
would be for the fund itself, So
that's information that would be
gathered over time.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So then this fund
of a million dollars do we?
Do we expect this new funding? I
believe of a million dollars to
be maxed out with an X amount.
Of new hires and and other
Other things that might happen.
Mr. Speaker Generating Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there is
currently $4.8 million in the
fund because, as I mentioned
this was established, um
previously and there was a prior
appropriation.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
to the lady. So then the current
found it's not like an annual
recurring.
In the budget. It has to be
renewed every so often. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Is that
what? I'm kind of understanding
with this?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. So the $1
million in this appropriation is
recurring, however, um, the way
the fund itself is plentiful if
you refer to your physical
impact report, um
Currently enforcement protection
fund revenues are 10%.
Of all money received for fees,
licenses, penalties and taxes
from life, general casualty and
title insurance business
collected by the New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission.
Um and so the law enforcement
retention fund gets a payout
from, uh, those
Fees, licenses, penalties and
taxes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
waiting. Okay, So these fees I
I'm pulling up my car right now.
I printed all the agency
analysis, but not the er. I
apologize, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, but with this is this held
in some kind of account to be
invested Mr Speaker, General
lady to grow, or is this merely
just pretty much a savings
account? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so the funds that are
held by GPS, um are in an
interest bearing account.
However, if you are enquiring
about the larger pool of funds
we would need to defer to PRC.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General ladies of that larger
amount of funds would be that
$4.8 million. Is that what I'm
understanding or is there two
different funds?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, um
Currently DPS has $4.8 million
In their accounts for the fund,
and that is from the initial. Um
if I'm not mistaken, $5 million
appropriation, probably plus
some additional funds from the
larger feeder fund and that
larger feeder funds that we were
just discussing those fees,
licenses, penalties, taxes.
Those would be stored at DFA.
For use.
Into the fund.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker in
General Lady. I
I'm still a little confused. I
apologize. So we have one fund
That's 4.8 million.
Which I'm understanding.
And then Mr Speaker. Generally,
we have another fund, which we
had put 5 million into
That is overseen by D. F A. So
Mr Speaker, General Lady the
funding in the bill for the
Million Would it go into the
Defense fund or would it go to
the other fund with the 4.8? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, it would go to DEA
DPS.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and the DPS fund is
overseen by the PRC.
Just so we're on the same page,
Mr Speaker generally, and I see
you shaking your head. I
apologize.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do wish
that I had a White board here so
I could draw some figures and,
um, structures the DPS fund, the
$1 million would go to DPS. And
that is where the $4.8 million
is.
There is a larger fund.
Which is
Gathered from those fees
licenses, etcetera that are
Regulated or overseen by the
PRC. Those funds
Are put in D F A and then
distributed to various law
enforcement entities around the
state, including the Law
Enforcement retention fund.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally because my my guru
over here went with the budget.
He just pointed me to what the
budget, says Mr Speaker, General
Lady, And apparently this
million dollars goes to D F A so
I am thoroughly confused them.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, could
you help me with this?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It will go to d
f A and then get transferred to
DPS.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So then the fund
transfer does is that included
in the legislation or is that
something done by rule to
transfer it Because I I didn't
see that in the actual
legislation. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That information
is part of the current law.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. General Lady, Um, is it
in any current law that is
repeated in the bill? Mr
Speaker? General Lady. I just
want to make sure that those
funds are getting there. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Um,
I can say that it is working
because DPS has received
funding.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that.
I will certainly take you at
your word. I'm glad that it's
already flowing so good. So glad
that they're getting those
funds, Mr Speaker, General lady,
So just continue on the bill
Here. I see on pages seven.
It looks like maybe line three
J. It says to receive funding
pursuant to subsection C.
The law enforcement agencies
shall be compliant with the Law
Enforcement training act at the
time. The request is made
pursuant to subsection H of the
section. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, why did we add this
Clarifying language, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, because we want
to ensure that our law
enforcement agencies and
officers are compliant and by
ensuring that they are
compliant. We are also
instilling greater confidence
from the public in our law
enforcement.
Agencies.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady. I appreciate that. And you
know, I think good compliance is
good. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
have we spoken to the
stakeholders about this? And do
we know what their thoughts are
regarding this this edition
Because it I would hate to make
it sound like were like saying
they're not doing this, But Mr
Speaker generally are there any
instances where this has not
occurred?
And that's why we added the
subsection or the paragraph. Mr
Speaker generally. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, to the number one they
should already be in compliance
number two. If they're not in
compliance, we don't actually
know that we would need to ask
the law enforcement academy. All
right. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady. So if these
Let's just say there's an like,
I don't know some X I don't know
what we call it. Just a police
department anywhere right, and
some police department is not in
compliance with that, then.
Put in jeopardy.
The individual officers from
receiving this differential in
anyway, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. Um,
if their law enforcement agency
is not complying, it could
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Generating that That does
concern me because there may be
very, very good officers in
these agencies that are doing
their jobs, but the overall
agency is not compliant. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady with that
individual officer who is in
compliance, would they still be
allowed to have this
differential?
And maybe be able to transfer to
another department so they don't
lose it. Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, they could
transfer
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Generating, but if they stay in
the current law enforcement
agency that may not be in
compliance.
They could personally be.
Have this differential stripped
Or is it department by
department, or is it officer by
officer Because I know we talked
about the four years than nine
years in the 14 years, and I
believe that would account for
the individual officer. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady if the
overall department is not in
compliance, but let's just say
this person is certified.
They're doing their job would
they still be allowed to count
toward this for nine or 14
years? Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um so
To provide a little
clarification. The agencies have
to be compliant per law already.
They are aware, and we have had
limited compliance in past
years. Um so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I think it's
important to know that, um, the
agencies that are hiring and
recruiting
And retaining their officers.
They should be in compliance.
And their officers should hold
them accountable for being in
compliance.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Idi and I appreciate
that, and I agree. I think they
certainly should be in
complaints. We want all of them
to certainly be there. So, Mr
Speaker general, waiting on that
same page on Page seven. It
talks about pursuant to
subsection C of this section,
The law enforcement agencies
shall have submitted the
agency's most current roster of
full time certified law
enforcement officers, including
commission dates.
To a New Mexico state.
Enforcement Academy no later
than April. So, Mr Speaker,
General lady, uh, what's the
data that they're looking for?
On this? I know it's quarterly,
I believe reported so.
What date would that have to be
the end of when they report on
April 1st? Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen with
regard to the dates, Um they are
required to report April 1st,
um, because
They're required to be in
compliance. They should be in
compliance. April
By April 1st. And then they
apply to DPS. June 1st.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, so when they
deployed when they go to DPS and
give that roster figure on June
1st
If they have a new hire, Let's
just say on April
10th
Would that be included in the
journal June 1st report, Or
would that not be included?
Because we have the April 1st
report of the roster?
What is given to DPS on June 1st
if we have a new higher
following the first date, let's
just say April 10th, Mr. Speaker
General.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So, um
Their start date.
Is still independent of the June
1st right, so their start date
and their timeframe.
Is distinct.
Um
It.
So they would be reported Mr
Speaker and gentlemen for the
agency count, but they would not
be eligible until the one year
anniversary.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
and one of the reasons that we
are requiring that information
is to help with those
projections that we discussed
earlier.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentility that that helps me a
little bit with this. So the
April 10th
Like like If they're hired in
April 10th. We can still keep
them on the roster as a new
hire, but until April 10th of
the next year once they have had
a full year of employment full
time, then we would include
them.
In the DPS report the following
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So the
new hire that we've been
discussing wouldn't be eligible
for the retention until after
four years going into their
fifth. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, But okay, Okay. I
get that so on the April 1st
deadline. We're just giving him
account.
Is that what I'm understanding?
So regardless of if there is
certified, or if they're not
certified, they're merely a
employee of the police
department, and they are
included in the count. But on
the June 1st report
Do we include them on that?
That's what I'm what I'm trying
to get at Mr Speaker. General
Lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen for
clarifying Yes.
They're included on that June
1st count.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. That
helps me a lot. So I'm going to
continue to the next page and
page eight. Mr Speaker, General
lady and I know we changed a few
definitions. I think we changed
it from a law enforcement
officer to full time certified
law enforcement officer. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I'm
looking at these two
definitions. Did we change
anything in the meat of this
definition? Or did we merely
just try to change that?
The title of what it full time
law enforcement officer would be
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
just changed the definition of
who would be eligible.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady that
helps as well.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I'm going to continue on to the
$1 million for the General fund
implementation at the next page
on the appropriation, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, How did
Okay. Uh, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, let me give you a
couple of numbers that you can
jot down. So, uh, based on 194
of at the 20 year plus mark,
we're looking at 640,000 and for
laterals 118 of them at a total
of $455,000, which sums up to be
just over $1 million.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, So I
see.
That's a little over. Do we
expect to be
In a potential bind with that,
because it's It's under a
million, but I know we're
probably looking for even
numbers in the budget. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, do we
expect this number to be
sufficient for inclusion in this
first?
Or in this current fiscal year,
Mr Speaker Generating Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, we should be fine
because don't forget about that
$4.8 million. Got it. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, And then I was going to
ask you about that other $5
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
first year um, DPS dispersed
$1.98 million
And Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
this year they are planning to
disperse 1.86 million
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Ladies, So it seems like
that's about 2 million a year
that we're expending.
From that $5 Million fund. Are
we contemplating, potentially
helping put more money in that
fund? Because $2 million a year
That fund will be way over
completion this fiscal year. Mr
Speaker, General Lady from my
calculation here just from the
rudimentary numbers I got
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Don't
forget about that feeder fund
that we talked about, because
that is always dispersing money.
Uh, that's a continuous
Replenishment of funds.
That are getting fed into the
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General,
ladies to this feeder fund. How
much is put into that fund
annually? May I ask
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. So, um, you
know, the
We are looking at about $2
Million a little less for last
year and this year, so that
gives us some good information.
We know we've got that 4.8 from
that.
5 million and then, of course,
moving forward, you know,
looking at subsequent years, Uh,
those disbursement amounts will
be based on uh, those three
factors that we previously
discussed.
However, the larger fund
Those collection of fees,
licenses, etcetera via the PRC.
Those have their own.
Factors.
That are outside of my
wheelhouse. And my thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally, I appreciate
that answer. And yes, I I don't
really know what those are,
either. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady with the PRC fees licenses,
etcetera.
What kinds of licenses and fees
Pull into the fund. Can you just
give me some basic information
of
Where those fees come from. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, the fees
from the
So
Just to refer back to my I r. I
believe this is Page two. Yes,
middle of the page, Currently
line Force Mint Protection fund
Revenues are 10% of all money
received for fees, licenses,
penalties and taxes from life
general casualty and title
insurance business.
Collected by the New Mexico PRC.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I'm just looking
at my fire right now.
Let me just get to that same
place that you were Mr Speaker
General 80.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally, I wish I
could. I could say I was looking
at my computer instead of paper
to save the environment, But
it's just because I forgot to
print my f A R. So I apologize.
Mr Speaker Generating, but by
the amount of reams of paper
that we go through here at the
roundhouse, I could probably
Probably start a new paper
company just from the excess
paper so
Mr Speaker, General lady. Um, I
would just like to suggest the
absence of a quorum because I
don't see many of my colleagues
here, Mr Speaker generally
pursuant to the house rules,
which I would be happy to cite
for. You know, I got that one.
Thanks.
Well, there's members missing
everywhere. So you all better go
get members. All right, Mr
Speaker.
The whip is on his way.
From early here at home.
You are on
Duty.
Go pull people from the chamber.
From the lounge.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I know
this is a riveting conversation,
and I would hate for anyone to
miss it. When want to wouldn't
want to miss it. We can also do
call the house if you guys want
to make it easier pursuant to
know Just kidding.
It's all good.
I'm all good.
Webster Pirinski and literally
are out there working out
amendments on the other bill, so
If you'd like to continue as
people roll back in or if you
just want to wait and hold in
place that's up to you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will
study my father and my computer
as we wait.
Great.
Do you want to go? Print it out?
Mr. Speaker? Can I make a motion
for the
The caucus chair to print out a
copy for me, Mr Speaker.
Or one of my friends from San
Juan or Valencia or
The Baka or please, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I might actually have
a second copy right here.
Thank you. Mr Parliamentarian is
on her way.
I think we have a quorum. You
can continue, sir.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
waiting. I appreciate that. You
know, this is a very important
conversation, at least for me,
Mr Speaker generally because
I really do care about our law
enforcers, and I want to make
sure that they are fully
compensated. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady I want to know
better fund in General, Mr
Speaker, General Lady this fund
Do we know how many other states
have comparable funds with these
metrics with 5% 9% or I'm sorry.
Five years, nine years and 14
years. And do we know if this
mimics any other of our
neighboring states or any states
in the union? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I actually did
not research that information
when we first crafted house Bill
68 2 years ago. It was a
concept derived from
conversations with our local law
enforcement agencies here in New
Mexico. And as you know, here in
New Mexico, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Sometimes we like to
do things our own way.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. Okay, well, I my
big concern here. Mr Speaker.
General lady is because at least
in my county I know specific law
enforcers in the city city
Police Officer force and also
the county force. Some of them
have left the state because Mr
Speaker, General Lady, they just
pay more and they have more
enticing differentials.
For retirement. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm just wondering
with this Do we expect there to
be hopefully more retention or
are we really going more for
recruitment to get folks in and
hopefully they may stay if we
increase the differential in the
future Mr Speaker with
legislation such as this
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, I think
that it is a problem across the
state of New Mexico that we
don't have enough law
enforcement officers and
frequently they do had to, uh,
greener.
Pastors, so to speak, and this
is one of the tools that this
state has implemented in recent
years to use as a recruitment
tool. I mean, obviously, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, this works
to retain some of our law
enforcement officers because we
do want to retain our great
officers who have been serving
here.
But in addition as new officers
are coming onto the forces, this
is an incentive for their long
term outlook.
And thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady and I appreciate
that. I think that's important.
And I know that we have this 49
and 14 years Mr Speaker, General
Lady, And do we know what the
most common to dip out, so to
speak of the force is to retire.
Do we know if it's mostly the 19
or the 20 Year?
Is that the 15 year or is it the
five year? How? On average? How
long do they stay in Which one
is the most common? Mr Speaker?
Gentle lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen,
The most common time frame is
between that five and 10 year
mark.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady. So then I guess my
next question would be regarding
that 20 year Mark.
Do we need to increase our
differential? And do we increase
that in the bill to hopefully
let people continue to stay on
the force from that 10 to 20
years to have a completion date?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Well,
we do have the 1015 and 20. Then
now with this bill, we are
adding 21 and beyond.
I see Mr Speaker, General lady,
but I believe that 20 beyond it
increases the differential by
By the year after that, so, Mr
Speaker, generally I know I know
at the 20 year Mark
It increases exponentially way
more than you could get at the
15 or the 10 year. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm just
wondering
Since those two are the most
common the 10 and 15 year.
Where I'm in Oregon. I guess the
10 year. What do we need to do
to increase folks to stay in the
force the extra five years to 15
and then the extra 10 to 20.
With the differential, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um,
that's why we have the
differentials for the 15 and 20
year.
Unless I'm misunderstanding your
question, but that's the purpose
of those to keep people.
For those additional years.
Hmm. Mr Speaker, General lady,
So I guess my question is
currently
What do we have?
We have been the we have the 49
and 19 year if I'm not mistaken,
so, Mr Speaker generating with
this change
This increases the differential.
With the bill. Mr Speaker.
Generally, that's kind of what
I'm getting at. I hope that was
I hope that question resonated,
Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, we are not
changing the differential
amounts. We are changing. We're
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, we are not
changing the differential
amounts. We are changing. We are
increasing the number of
opportunities so currently we
have that for 914 and 19.
Right. So we have those markers.
We are
Making it so that
Upon the completion of your
fifth 10th 15th 20th and then
21st 22nd 23rd, etcetera.
You can obtain those
differentials.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and
generally it's it's getting a
little clearer for me.
I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I know it's late. We're
doing math and I know that's
fun. I like to do math at night.
I guess I am nowadays, Mr
Speaker, General lady, But my
question now would be regarding
like the herb urban versus the
rural areas.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I'm just wondering what
safeguards are in place with
this legislation to ensure that
the disbursement of funds does
not inadvertently treat or
create disparities among law
enforcement agencies in rural
and urban areas. Mr Speaker,
General Lady
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, are
you asking? Um, why? Maybe
Some rural departments don't
apply for funds as compared to
urban or you asking, Um
Whether specific officers how we
are encouraging specific
officers to either work for a
rural or urban
Agency.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, So my question was mainly
regarding the the application of
funds for the rural areas versus
the urban Because, Mr Speaker,
General Lady I understand and in
urban areas, they may have more
resources and their police
departments, whereas in more
rural areas we have less
personnel. We have much higher
costs because we don't have as
many personnel and so just one
more thing to add onto the
plate. How does this affect
those more?
Rural agencies. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, Gentlemen. You have hit one
of the nails on the head with
why we're making some of the
changes and adding supports to
DPS so that they can hire for
new full time employees to
assist some of those smaller,
more rural communities that may
be put off by having to complete
the application process.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General Lady and those four
those four new full time
employees that we are hiring
Mr Speaker, General Lady, would
they be administering the funds?
Or would they be mainly just
Support for these local counties
and municipalities, Mr Speaker
generally or universities, as we
stated before.
Ah, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
the positions the four positions
at DPS would be to do outreach,
talked to the local agencies and
help them if they have questions
about the application process,
however, the local law
enforcement agency is
responsible for dispersing the
funds to said officers.
And report back.
So DPS can help encourage and
support local law enforcement
agencies, but they cannot do the
actual work for them.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady. So then regarding
that, I guess the county would
be the fiscal
Agent if it was the county
sheriff, for example, right,
they would be the fiscal agent
to administer the funds to the
enforcement.
Agencies personnel who are
included in this program, or Mr
Speaker, General Lady. How would
those be administered? Because I
know that there are counties
that have police departments.
There are cities that have
police departments who would be
the one that administers that
would be like a county finance
advisor or CFO, Mr Speaker
generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Whoever does
their payroll so if the funds
flow through the county or the
city, um it depends for each
entity.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady and then these four
new individuals do we do we
expect that this shall be enough
for all 33 counties, or I guess
maybe
28 is 29 is rural counties in
the state of New Mexico. And how
do we know if they will be
adequately helped with these
four Mr Speaker, General Lady?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I really
like where you're going with
this. I am a huge fan of
Evidence taking information and
making tweaks and changes
continuous improvement. So
seeing as how, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, this is just the
second year of the program, we
are hopeful that for FTE will be
sufficient. But give us a couple
more years and let DPS report
back.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady. So then do we have
mechanisms in place to study the
efficacy of these four FTE s and
once they are hired? How do we
judge that? Because we're
talking about data data
gathering. How do we get to that
figure, Mr Speaker? Then how do
we know that they are indeed
helping? Is there an X amount of
counties that
That will indeed beyond the
program. What are we looking
for? With benchmarks and
outcomes, Mr Speaker, General
Lady with this new four hires
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, so one of
the wonderful things about the
Legislature and legislative
Finance Committee is, um, if you
have your volumes, 12 and three
handy, um you'll notice that for
our department, we do a report
card. Um and so as part of, I
believe it's the government
accountability something
something
Act. LFC does routinely monitor
progress. And so I think that
through that, um, monitoring and
evaluation and performance
metrics we will be able to
obtain that information moving
forward, But once again, we are
only in the second year.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, General lady and I
apologize. I am a I'm still a
freshman. So I am still reading
my very large volumes that I
have been provided by lfc. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I believe
your on the
The Appropriations Committee
would do you know where I could
find that?
In these reports, either 12 or
three, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
would encourage you to look it
up online and do a word search.
Probably quicker that way.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. I forgot that I'm a Jen's
ear again. I was reading the
book. I didn't look at the the
online document. You're not an
old man like the rest of us. Mr.
Speaker Generating. You said it,
not me, Mr Speaker, So I'm going
to continue here.
And, uh,
So I'm just wondering like a
rural small law enforcement
agency. How would you reach out
to these FT individuals to get
help? Is there like a hotline
that we will be setting up? Is
there some kind of online
support Mr Speaker, General
lady, and would it include, like
online digital support, Or would
it just be merely phone calls?
Emails, etcetera, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So DPS actually
has a list of the law
enforcement agencies that
applied and those who didn't and
so, um, DPS staff will go
through and reach out to the
agencies that did not apply and
see how they can help.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So then these
agencies that did not apply
Do we currently reach out to
them? Because I know we're in
what the second year of this
program.
Mr Speaker, General lady, do we
reach out? Do we send them
something or do we merely have
These individuals come to us,
and then we can help them with
the program. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
By hiring these four ft. They
will now be able to do that and
make sure that they have covered
all of, um, the applicable law
enforcement agencies. But they
didn't DPS did not have adequate
staff. Um, the first year is
they were setting this program
up. And so, as you all know, we
have learned from
Those experiences and are making
improvements. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, General lady, And so
I'm guessing how we arrived at.
That was just from
Lack of
Agencies adopting this program,
or how did we find the need to
hire these four new individuals?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, after
consulting with my expert
witness, I can assure you that
it was quite a lengthy process
in listing all of the activities
that the two current FTS do what
would be needed and quite a
rigorous analysis.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I appreciate that. I'm
glad we had an analysis and then
regarding hiring these new F T E
s
Do we know if the if there's a
Correct amount of pay for each
individual who is hired as an F
T. I mean, do we know what we're
paying them so that we can
ensure that they, too are
recruited and retained at the
state level to help alleviate
the burdens and help these local
departments. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so DPS, um
Will work. What they'll do is as
they're hiring these new for, um
ft. They will look at work
experience education variety of
factors, and they will work to
ensure that they are, um, put in
the appropriate pay band.
Proper placement. My apologies.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady, and so do we have
like a range?
For the job application. Let's
say I wanted to apply to be an
FTE. Do we have a salary range
for that? Is there a cap that
we're putting on the department?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Gentlemen and gentle lady. I
think the question is going
really deep into the weeds of
something that I would say is
probably
Only tangentially related to the
legislation in front of us so I
would encourage us to. Maybe the
answer is
Quick to give it and then let's
move back to the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. We should
probably move back to the bill
itself.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. I was only asking
because we were talking about
these new funds helping to fund
for new F T. E s.
Right? And since there is an
appropriation the bill to help
alleviate these costs, I was
just wondering if this would be
sufficient. So, Mr Speaker,
generally I apologize if that
was not in the scope of the
legislation, but I will
certainly be happy to continue.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, how old
the legislation than affect
The relationship with the state
and federal
I guess funding grants or law
enforcement retention funds that
are available on the federal
level. With these with these FTS
help with that, and are there
even any grants that help with
with those kinds of things, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
It's conceivable that they could
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady, and then are there
already grants that we know of?
To help with recruitment and
retention from federal partners.
Or is this mainly?
I know what this fund this is.
in addition to right, so this is
just one more thing that we want
to help people.
Come here. Retire here work for
us here for up to 20 years or
more and then retire. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm just
wondering, Are there any other
incentive programs at the
federal level that we've talked
to with DPS to see if that can
be
Bundled, so to speak with this
new fund that we've created a
couple of years ago, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I am sure
that there are, um and
fortunately we now have in the
state A federal grants Bureau,
um, that can assist with that.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady, and then I will
just go back to the bill and
regarding the eligibility for
these officers. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, My question stems
mostly with medical leave
maternity leave. And how did
those affect eligibility
requirements?
For people who would be included
in this fund. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
They do not impact eligibility.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General. Ladies, So
that's good to hear, but that
would only be approved. Leave.
Correct, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Let's just say somebody
Somebody got sick and they
needed to get a treatment for
something and it took a month or
two and they had to take off
work.
Could could they potentially,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, I
guess resigned from the position
as a certified police officer
but then get rehired and
continue on that program Or does
it stop? Let's just say if I was
working for three years
And then I got sick and I had
to. I had to quit.
And then come back A year later,
Mr Speaker, General Lady with
that harm with the funds that
have accrued so far, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, with the
amendments that we're making
that previous experience will
count.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, but it would have
to be only upon one year.
Of service. If if I'm
understanding they you're on the
job for a year and then you
qualify. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, if it's like the first
nine months of my service, I
have to quit and then come back
that nine months can't count
because it starts at one year is
that when I'm understanding with
this, Mr Speaker general waiting
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, the clock
starts ticking when you're first
hired. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady. So then what about the
officer who may be convicted of
a crime that was later dismissed
or not convicted about charged
with the crime that was later
dismissed. They were put on
leave, and maybe it went on for
a year or something, and they
were finally cleared. Would that
time between them being charged
and then cleared?
With that count Mr Speaker,
General Lady Since that was an
unforeseen event that I mean, no
one could have could have seen
Mr Speaker generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. In that case,
that would be up to the
individual Law enforcement
agency.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady that is helpful, So
there's no state rules that are
promulgated regarding that
situation.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, no.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady. So then what if the
officer is put on administrative
leave?
Is there anything on the state
level for that, such as, like an
officer involved, shooting
usually requires.
Administrative leave.
Until the officers cleared with
that, then be a local decision
Or would that be at the state
level? Mr Speaker Generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Once again that
would be at the local level.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady. So then what if
this officer gets a raise or a
pay cut during tenure at the
police?
At the institution. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, How would this
affect them?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, The
differential is based on the
base pay at the 4914 and 19.
Okay, Mr Speaker, generally so
Okay?
Base pay. We're talking about
just the pay. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady I know in my county
Officers. We have a I believe in
the city they have like a $5000
retention bonus.
With the bonus be included in
that Mr Speaker, General lady,
Or would it be only just the
base salary? And how do we even
measure that Since every county
and city is so different with
their
Their incentive programs. Mr.
Speaker generally. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um
Let's see if I remember the
answer. Now that I just had it.
Um so
The so bonuses do not count were
dogging base salary. So if if
there's that $5000 recruitment
or, you know, uh
You know?
A plus.
Bonus that does not count. So
it's the base pay and then the
other part of your question. Ah,
hold on just a second.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen.
Sorry, and you had asked how DPS
knows what those salaries are.
That's because they're reporting
that to DPS in the application
and in the certification
process.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, So then we do not
report
The Let's just say extra 5000
bonus. Do we report that as
well? Or is it just base salary?
The DPS wants to see regarding
this differential.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, for
this program, it is the base.
Cool. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady. So then my next
question is regarding what is
the officer temporarily changes
like jurisdictions, for example,
like cooperating with another
agency on assignment or a state
cop filling in for local
positions. Mr Speaker, General
Lady with that in any way affect
this, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, is the law
enforcement officer part of a
multi jurisdictional, Um, task
force?
Mr Speaker. Generally? Yes.
That's the question. So let's
just say if the county
desperately needs an officer to
help them and for certain period
of time, my pay rate changes
because the county made
Have a lot higher rate of pay
and the county's reimbursing the
city for that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, How would that
affect this eligibility
requirement? Mr. Speaker? Mr.
Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
It is still only the base pay.
For the long point Law
enforcement agency that they are
employed by
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, General lady, And
then is there
With this
I know we had 20 years. Is there
a cap?
Let's just say I started working
at 18 and I wanted to retire it.
65 and I could still pass the
physicals and everything, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Or maybe
I wanted to do it until I was
75. I would be racking up
I would be racking up a lot of
money with that differential.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, Is
there any kind of
Cap on how many years I can
utilize this or does it just
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So
In this, uh
House Bill 193. There is not a
cap. Um
However, my expert has, um
shared with me that the longest
serving
Commissioned officer just
recently retired from the state
police after 46 years.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally well, congratulations
to that person. Good for him. I
don't know if I could stick it
with one job for the Lord knows
I wouldn't want to probably
stick around here for 46 years.
But you never know, Mr Speaker.
Very young. Mr. Speaker. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, so
I guess that kind of cleared it
up for me regarding that that
there is no cap and I guess it's
very good that we're honoring
our law enforcement by letting
them get on this. I wish that
that officer that did retire
started with this program. Mr
Speaker generally, but I assume
it's not retroactive in anyway,
Mr Speaker, General Lady Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, no.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker in
general lady, so I guess.
When you started this program
two years ago.
That would be the first start
date for the program. So if I
was an officer for 20 years
prior
And
And I decided to retire two
years after this.
Would I begin at the 20 year
mark because it doesn't go
retroactively. So would I be at
just two years and I would have
to go all the way up to the five
years stipulated in the
legislation. Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. It is not
retroactive.
And so you know, from the
lessons learned, um in the two
years of implementation, uh, we
are making modifications. Okay.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady because I I could see this
as let's just say I was a 25
year.
Person that was there for 25
years working for the department
and then a rookie comes in, and
he starts at the same time that
I'm starting if the program
started two years ago.
Mr Speaker, Generality. I just
don't see how that could be
squared as fair for the officer
and that could actually probably
encourage more people to retire
because they don't feel like it
is fair. So Mr Speaker generally
have we spoken to law
enforcement officers do they
have the same concern, Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, the
If the law enforcement officer
just because the program is only
two years old, Um if they have
been serving for 15 years,
they're still at 15 years. It's
just that the program is only
two years old, so some people
may have missed a particular
increment.
I see Mr Speaker, General lady
and I know that and I know
they've already accrued 15 years
of retirement, but they've
earned that retirement.
Whereas this is in addition to
the current pension system and
whatever other federal grants
and stuff are available, so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I just
see that this could be seen as
unfair to people. I'm just
wondering. Have you heard that
concern with calls or feedback
from the individuals that may be
or may not be in
This program. Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen know concerns on
that particular issue have not
been raised.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, and from what it
appears. This legislation aims
to expand the current program,
so I know that we are amping up
our resources on the state
level. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady, are we also contemplating
Such things as more local
assistance in regions or will
the four people that are F T
that will be hired will mainly
be in one central location for
assistance to local counties,
Cities, municipalities
Schools, For example, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. So as we
sort of discussed previously,
the four FTS will look at who
applied and who didn't apply and
they will reach out to the
people who did not apply. Um and
you know, then that law
enforcement agency can decide to
apply or not apply.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in general lady because I know
some law enforcement agencies
are like two people and like
very rural areas, and
You know, one person is
dispatching calls, and then
there's one sheriff. That's
going out. I don't I actually
don't know if that's the case,
but I'm sure there's some very
very rural communities that that
is the case. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Is there any any
help on the state level to
actually help fill out the
applications and get everything
in so that that one person who's
fielding calls as well as trying
to do all the administrative
burdens?
I mean, I'm just wondering
what's the scope of work? Mr
Speaker John Gentlemen, the
scope of work. I mean, I fail to
see how this relates to
Do the bill other than very
tangentially, so I would
appreciate it. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Generally, I
apologize. I just I'm very
curious about these FTS because
I really want to know what their
what their roles are and I will
continue here, but I just wanted
to make sure that those would be
all inclusive of the needs of
the departments and that folks
will be getting the services
that they need even the most
rural communities.
In places all across the state
and where they will be rural or
urban. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Um, I'm just going to continue
here with my questions that I
wrote down here, Um
So I'm just wondering, Do we
have there been any like
potential legal challenges or
opposition to this legally with
the first two year
implementation And do we expect
our foresee any kind of
litigation relating to this, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. No.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady and I know we talked a
little bit about this
disparities potentially in rural
areas, and we'll leave it
alleviated those concerns. Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I
would hate to continue on
But not talking about the bill
because I think this bill is
good.
And I'm contemplating voting for
it. Mr. Speaker, General Lady, I
did have that one concern about
potential unfairness.
With recruitment, and I think
that might be something that
officers may have a problem
with, so I will reach out to the
officers that I know in my
community. I don't know if
they're awake at 1025. Some of
them might be an shift, so you
never know.
But I think that's a very good
start. Mr Speaker, General Lady
and I did have some concerns
about them. 1 million figure
because it seems like this is
really growing at a large speed,
Mr Speaker, General lady, and
how does inflation play into
this? Because I know inflation
has gone up since 2021 about
17%. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, are we factoring that in
to this 1 million figure, And do
we expect this to be, I guess,
awaited or
Padded for any potential
increase in inflationary.
Expenses.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I think that the
question of inflation would
really depend on whether or not
the fees
Licenses, penalties and taxes.
Um, also stick with the C P. I
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general. So these are all these
fees and everything are weighted
to the C P. I from my
understanding. Is that what I'm
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
actually don't know that if they
are
Then it would increase with
Inflation.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I would hope they
would be because I don't want to
be putting not enough funding in
this because as I'm sure we all
agree. We support our law
enforcement officers, and we
want them to get the best and we
don't want this fund to have to
be.
You know, I don't want $0 in
this fund in the future, right?
Mr. Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, um
and and you are correct. That's
we do fortunately have enough
funding there for several years.
And, um, you know, as we're
doing now, if we need to make
adjustments in the future, we
can
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady and I appreciate
that. You know, I've heard in my
my very short two years so far,
and the Legislature that we're
always talking about not not
wanting to put band aids on
things and not wanting to just
have a stopgap measures. And Mr
Speaker, General Lady Since this
year, we have such a large
budgetary surplus.
I'm wondering why we didn't just
go for it with this and spend
more now to accrue more interest
now and
Just put some money in there for
the years to come, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I would
say that that's a philosophical
choice and comes up or comes
down to opportunity cost.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Ladies, So I'm just
wondering what's the opportunity
cost then of putting an extra $9
million in a fund.
When we have a three point I
think 1 $9 billion surplus. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because we
have the funding right now to
meet the needs that we have for
the next several years, And that
would mean that you're not
spending $9 million on something
that might be more pressing.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I did say million
Billion, but I mean, I would
love to put billion in there. I
mean, why not? I love our law
enforcement officers.
There we go. Mr. Speaker, I
might have to get one. So let
let me continue here so they can
get that prepped and I will. I
will work on that Mr Speaker,
General waiting, but I my big
concerns with this legislation.
I will support it. I'll vote for
it. Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
will, but I want to make sure
that we have fairness in
departments. I want to make sure
that new officers are not being
given.
These shiny new objects that
that people in the department
for 20 years didn't get and then
also, I do want to make sure
that this fund continues to be
solvent because I absolutely
believe that our law enforcement
are the best of us. And these
folks work so hard every single
day to protect us and our
communities in my city in my
county and on the state level,
Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady, so I will continue
to be advocating for extra
funding. And I would love to
maybe potentially work with you
in the future on this
legislation, which I really do
like, and if we're both here
next year, I would certainly
happily help you. I would love
to be a co sponsor. Lord knows
if the bill would pass if I was
the co sponsor, But I would be
really happy to add more funds
here because I love law
enforcement and I support them
wholeheartedly and everything
that they do so.
I don't know if you have any
other other click thoughts on
that, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Mr.
Gentlemen, I welcome your
support.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker,
and that's all I have. I will
try to get that amendment. Thank
you.
There is further debate The
gentleman from Berna Leo
representative Dela Cruz. Thank
you. Mr Speaker does the general
lady yield
Mr Speaker? Yes, I will yield to
my colleague from Bernie. Leo.
Mr. Speaker for someone
apologize to General lady for
stepping away from the chambers
For a minute. When this bill
came up, I had no idea would be
the previous one would be
rolled.
But I also want to take a
moment. General Lady Mr Speaker
to thank our co sponsors.
Sponsor from Sandoval, the
gentleman Ellen Martinez, as
well as the general lady from
Braulio. Natalie Figueroa. Thank
you for that, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. You did a superb, superb
job. I really believe that
everything happens for a reason.
And there was a reason that you
had
Handle and debate this bill.
Jack. Mr Speaker, General Lady.
The reason that I was excited
about this bill, and I'm excited
about this bill is because
Of us recognize that we have to
do the best that we can to
retain our law enforcement
officers and deputies.
And other law enforcement
officials in the capacity to
help us
Ah, the idea of retention and
hopefully including recruitment
is just critical for all of our
communities across this entire
state. So, Mr Speaker, I want to
thank the gentle lady the co
sponsors and and the body for
for what? I'm sure will be a
sizable approval of this
particular change of this bill.
Thank you, General Lady, Mr
Speaker.
Respond to meet the gentleman
from Colfax. Curie hoarding San
Miguel in Union representative
Chatfield
Mr Speaker. I was on the board
for the other bill, and I just
didn't punch out. Thank you,
okay.
About the other two. Are you on
the board for the other bill?
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you. Mr Speaker, will the
general later field
Mr Speaker. I will yield from
the I will yield to
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General 81 question. I may have
missed it somewhere in in the
debate here. I always worry
about the small and rural
counties and the rural
departments. Will this impact
rural departments, um, any
different than will the larger
departments in the urban areas.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
won't in terms of the
differentials. What we are going
to be able to do. Moving forward
with this bill is have more
First two years.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
But welcome to the process or
actually do the process for
them, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Yes, it will be staff at DPS to
help walk them through that
process.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen and General Lady will
will there be, um
I don't really know how to
phrase this. Um will there be a
way that DPS can or will there
be anywhere in this department
that there will be a almost like
a waiting list or a list of
folks that have applied or that
that have some folks out there
that they don't need or that
these can be kinda
Shot to some of the smaller
departments.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. And
generally that was a bad
question. Um so
So let's just say I'm from the
town of Albuquerque and I got
400 people that applied only
need 100 of them.
Um, but I know that Colfax
County needs one, and then
Espanola needs one.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So
this fund is only for retention.
This is the retention fund. Um
so it wouldn't really apply for
Applicants to you know, folks
applying to start at APD and
then moving to other venues.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generally but if they if they
already started, for example,
and they had had decided to come
back
So this is a retention Only this
is not if they wanted to.
Shoot across desperate Noland
working SPL instead of a B A. P.
D.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the lateral transfers is one of
the changes that was brought to
the attention of the
municipality, the local law
enforcement agencies and is one
of the issues being addressed in
this bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
for the answer to that. I always
worry about a small departments
because we're the smaller
departments than the ones that
are getting hammered. Bigger
departments can pay more. And so
we train and they still so thank
you.
There is a debate The gentleman
from Lee representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady from burning Leo
yield
Mr Speaker. Yes, I will yield to
my colleague. The gentleman from
Lee.
Mr Speaker in general lady, I
have, um, we talked about this
bill a little bit in
appropriations and because of
the way our appropriations
process works.
The questions that I had that
night. Um, I'm gonna bring to
you today.
With respect to that, Mr Speaker
in General Lady the, um
Agency analysis from the
Department of Finance.
And administration. Do you have
that in front of you?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not
Mr Speaker and General Lady
under significant issues states
in there that the L A. P P F is
administered by the Department
of Finance everything that you
and represent a block talked
about
The without going in depth on
that.
One of the statements from the D
F A is that it would be more
effective.
It's this fun was
Focus to the DPS not to the D D
F a
And as as I recall, Mr Speaker
and General Lady
The appropriation we have right
now.
Is targeted to the D F a
Mr Speaker and General Lady
Elsa. Curious is this bill
because towards the Senate if
that's something that you would
be willing to change
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is something. Um, I'm certainly
happy to have conversations with
DFA about. But the
As the bill is constructed.
Um, and per conversations with
GPS and D, F A and lfc. The
decision was made.
To disperse the funds to DFA
than to DPS.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, General lady That just
confuses me when the DFA places
that and their significant
issues
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, and
that may be something that could
be addressed in a separate bill.
If we're talking about the funds
from the l E P F thank you very
much, and the whole intent of my
questions is just to clarify.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
The the the nuances within the
agency reports.
In No way Am I trying to stop
legislation? What I'm trying to
do is just
Get a grip on understanding
what? What and why.
The analysis or the agency
reports say what they say.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Department of Public Safety
Agency code 790 on technical
issues states that
Within Section one d two.
However, it should be amended to
read that the officer must
remain employed at the same
enforcement agency for an
additional year.
Mr Speaker and General Lady as I
go through the twice amended
bill, I don't see that. But that
doesn't mean I didn't miss it.
Can you help me through that?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
could you point me to the page
and line
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Um, in the analysis, it says
drafting error was identified in
Section one.
D
Item two that requires revision.
And it gets to the language.
Ah of
An officer must remain employed.
And it asked to have
Quote.
The same law enforcement.
So it would be in Section two.
Uh, indeed, to
And I just don't see that same
language in here, and I'm
curious if there was a conflict.
From the bill sponsors with
respect to that, And if so, why?
Uh, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
I'm happy to show you a copy of
the agency reports if you need
them.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. If that is
indeed a
Technical issue and a typo. Um
As it sounds like what DPS wrote
in their analysis. That is
something we could certainly
fix when the bill gets to the
Senate.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
That was the answer. I was
hoping for. Thank you.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
have one more from the, uh, New
Mexico Department of Justice
Department code 305.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, the
the significant issues
From them.
The proposed subsection e,
creating an annual retention
differential disbursement.
In the amount of 5% of an
officer's officer's salary.
This is a significant departure
from the previously adopted
structure of 5% just
disbursements.
Upon completion of 5, 1015 and
20 years of service.
Additionally, while HB 193
proposals to eliminate the
requirement of the additional
years of service upon completion
of the
Of each five year increments.
Be at the same long force Mint
agency proposed section.
Subsection E maintains that the
same requirement of the evidence
additional year being performed
at the same law enforcement
agency. So these kind of feel
like this kind of conflicts, Mr
Speaker and General Lady with
what I read from the other
department.
Mr Speaker in general lady. All
I'm asking is I go through these
is that the bill sponsors look
at these.
And see if there's something
that
Some, We can remove some of the
conflict from the three
different departments.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Thank you for
those flags, and we will
absolutely do that.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
do appreciate your time. Um
I'm not going to belabor this
anymore. Those were the three
issues that I came up with. And
I do appreciate it. Thank you,
Gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Torrance groups have lowered
Oh, geez, I better speak
quickly. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the gentle lady from Berlin
County please yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to my neighbor.
Hi, Neighbor. Mr. Speaker. Hi,
Mr Mr Speaker. I do have a
question for the gentle lady.
So
Question that has come up for me
is that
It says here relating to the law
enforcement attention fund, the
line potential different
changes disbursements for full
time certified.
Um So when you mean certified
because we have got sheriff
sometimes in our areas that are
not certified law enforcement.
So like in Torrance County, that
would be the case. So with that,
sheriff be excluded from this,
Um
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes.
Under the current proposal if
the sheriff is not a full time
certified law enforcement
officer
And Mr Speaker. And generally is
there a reason why we have
excluded excluded some of these
sheriffs that are working as
real sheriffs and doing all the
things they need to do in law
enforcement why we would not
allow them because they were
elected. They are sheriffs. And
what would the reason be? Why
we'd be excluding them from
this.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady because they
have not even though they are an
elected sheriff. They have not
gone through the New Mexico Law
Enforcement training Academy and
received that certification.
I can't. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
and I am trying to formulate my
question.
Because my sheriff and Torrance
County is not certified.
Is elected.
And is working in the sheriff.
I don't understand.
Why
I mean, I guess you're saying
that technicality, but I'm
trying to think from ethical
perspective. Why are they
excluded? Because I mean,
they're doing the job and
they're doing the job as
sheriff. They're doing the for,
um, law enforcement towards
county. Why are these people and
there's more than just him? Why
are they specifically excluded
if they're doing the job as a
law enforcement officer?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, um
and elected sheriff can choose
to go.
To the Law Enforcement training
academy and become certified, so
that is an option available to
all elected sheriffs that are
not currently certified.
Okay, Mr Speaker and General
ladies, So I understand that
technicality. But what is more
of the
Uh, I'm looking more over the
ethical reason. Why would you
exclude somebody who was elected
in there? Working as law
enforcement? Maybe did 20 years
as a sheriff, Why would be why
what would be the reason for
Excluding them.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. If
the elected sheriff served 20
years as a certified law
enforcement, um officer then
And was now the sheriff. They
would have had their previous
certification.
Okay. Mr Speaker and Jolene. I'm
talking about somebody who they
get elected.
They are not certified.
They've spent.
1020 years as
A sheriff. Why should they be
excluded from this? Um, Mr
Speaker? Gentle lady, um
You know, that's a It's an
interesting, um, issue that you
have pointed out and one that
has not been brought to the
attention of DPS previous to
now, and so I would recommend
that as we have discussed
continuous improvement and
changes moving forward that, um,
sheriffs in that situation have
those conversations with GPS so
that
Moving forward. We can make that
assessment.
About how best to handle it, but
certainly I don't
I think that I'm I'm not an
expert in that, and so I would
not want to make any
suppositions.
And thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so I had no idea this
was such a thing because it was
such a controversy. People
running while they're not
certified. They're not
certified. And then we ended up
with an elected official that
isn't certified. So it does
happen. It can happen and can
also if I am trying to think I
don't have an expert with me
that I could text right now
because
Unlike us, they're all asleep on
a Saturday at this time. Uh, but
if I remember correctly, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. There's
also
Situations where it's a weird
thing that somebody can go and
then be certified another county
so they can have jurisdiction.
That's also it goes both ways.
So I think in the future for
this bill would be good to look
at.
Certified versus not certified
to make sure that like my
sheriff, if he does this for X
amount of years is not excluded.
So I appreciate that very much
and to look into that, because,
like I said, I didn't know that
was such a thing. I thought you
had to go through the academy,
but you don't have to When you
become an elected sheriff.
So, Madam cherubs and I
apologize. I don't have the
So I'm looking at the F R and I
have to look down here because I
don't have it. I prefer paper
and very old school, and I like
to write notes and and do stuff
on here, So I'm trying to look
at
On the F i R.
Okay. Hold on. One second. I'm
looking through here just had
Okay. So on
The spill and I apologize. Mr
Speaker. I'm not standing up
because I got to look down
because I can't see
The appropriation of a million
dollars contain this bill is a
recurrent expense in the General
Fund, and any expected or
unencumbered balance remaining
at the end of FY 25 shall not
revert to the general fund. So
We're looking at. We want to do
this bill to expand the pool of
officers that are now eligible.
Explain to me real quickly if
you can when we're looking at
what is the overall scope
because I have as the represent
broader land trying to be
redundant.
But as the representative
brought forward earlier
We have got
We've got multiple issues. First
of all, we don't have many
people in the academy and I know
that from because I talked to a
lot of law enforcement. We have
people that don't want to be in
law enforcement and more in the
The ones a lot of them are
leaving.
Especially the Missouri because
Missouri offers a huge move.
They'll pay for your expenses to
move. They'll give you $10,000
up front and they'll pay you
more money. So explain to me how
this what we're about to do
here, which I want. I want more
law enforcement. How does this
Make law enforcement want to
stay here in New Mexico and not
move away.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker, Um
and gentle lady. Um
Law enforcement if they are
interested in receiving a
retention differential. After
five years. That would be an
incentive to remain in New
Mexico. And thank you, madam.
Sorry, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
With that retention. Is that
gonna match other states Because
I always worry about
With our law enforcement,
leaving New Mexico. I always
worry about
Are we going to make this
equitable to make them on a
stage to explain to me like
maybe if you can look at other
states like what they're doing
versus what we're doing. Is this
going to be something that is
enough money, which is a weird
thing to ask? Is this going to
be enough to make them want to
stay? And can you tell me if
anything of another comparable
state of what they're doing? Um,
thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I can't speak to
what other states do, but this
is one of the tools that the
Legislature has implemented over
the past several years.
To recruit and retain more law
enforcement officers here in the
state of New Mexico.
And thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I completely agree
because we do have a serious
issue because somehow a lot of
my friends have become law
enforcement and they tell me
How they are either looking
forward to their retirement.
that's coming up, but they're
looking forward to get out of
the state and we need to do
everything we can to keep them
here.
Which includes, um, making this
something to make more people
want to stay here. So Mr Speaker
and gentle lady, is there
anything
In this bill, and I may have
missed it.
Um, because one of the things we
need to do is we want to keep
new Mexicans and Mexico, right?
We want them to stay here.
Is there anything as far as,
like marketing when we go out?
Is this going to be something
that we're going to try to
promote? Like
If you come here to New Mexico,
and you do a lateral transfer,
or if you, um
Become a law enforcement
officer. Here's the extra
benefits that you're going to
get.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentle lady. So, um, as part
of this bill, DPS will have more
capacity to work with our local
law enforcement agencies and in
working with them, they can make
sure that these local agencies
know that this is a tool that
they should be using in their
recruitment efforts.
And marketing and Mr Speaker and
Dilly. I completely agree with
that, because sometimes things
will happen will be shifts in
what we do, making the policy
here, but it doesn't necessarily
get out to the people. But it's
a small world and the law
enforcement that I'm sure that
it will.
And I may have missed this. I
was looking for Mr Speaker.
General Lady is there
Any commentary from any of the
I'll start with just a sheriff's
associates there. Any commentary
back from the Sheriff's
Association because I try to
reach out there and I haven't
heard from any of them.
So that might be that they agree
with the bill, and they don't
have described. But have you
heard from any of the sheriff's
departments or their unions to
say that they are supportive of
this?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentle lady. So the reason
that this bill has been brought
forward is because of the
outreach that the staff at DPS
did over the last year year and
a half in talking with
Various sheriff's police
departments, all of our law
enforcement agency partners, and
these were the two things that
those stakeholders felt needed
to be addressed.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generated because whenever I do
anything, I don't know if you
noticed I brought an expert for
me to ask questions because we
were talking about firefighters
and I want to have somebody that
could talk to sitting next to
me. Say, Hey, what is this Do?
How does this work? So I was
trying to talk to the people
that are boots on the ground, so
I always get concerned whenever
we're passing anything with law
enforcement, Um
If we're making sure that all of
our stakeholders have had a say
so in this
Um, where? The eye you said
there was people from sheriff
with their anybody from state
police. I'm sure of state Police
don't agree they would be here.
But I don't also see anything
from them A green on it.
And what about like we're in
Albuquerque. Did anybody did?
Uh, Chief Medina? Anybody
support this? I'm just trying to
find out what they had to say.
In this.
Would you ladies state police is
part of the Department of public
Safety, so I would assume that
they are in agreement, but
generally from early Oh,
Madam, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady.
Yes. The state police, Um, due
to their close proximity to the
program have been able to
provide real time feedback and,
um
It is entirely possible that
Chief Medina reached out to the
other.
Expert witness who is not here
this evening from DPS.
Okay. Thank you. Um, Mr Speaker
and ventilated. Yeah, thank you,
Mr Speaker pointed out the DPS
that they had that would have
come directly from them if there
was a disagreement.
Um again. I just want to make
sure that I always make sure
that all of my stakeholders in
this have some sort of, say so
and excuse me again while I look
up this F I r.
And again, I have to look down
here.
So, it says Currently the law
enforcement protection fund
revenues are 10% of all money
received for fees, licensed
penalties, taxes.
Etcetera.
Um by the New Mexico Public
Regulation Committee. Under
current law, balances of excess
of 100,000. What is l e r F? Um
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentle lady
L e. R F stands for Law
Enforcement retention fund.
Thank you for stating the office
there, Mr Speaker and General
Lady.
Um, So what?
What rate are we going from
right now?
To so I can look at the jump to
see that will be more enticing
for law enforcement, Mr Speaker
and generally
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
so the differential rate is not
changing. What is changing is,
um
The addition of years after
20
And including lateral transfers.
Um and if you are interested and
have your fire handy, there is a
nice little chart on the very
last page.
Showing the projected revenues
and expenditures.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady I'm looking at. I think I'm
on the last page. Hold on one
second.
So with these jumps up
Um, And this pretension fund.
What? The money that we have a
lot of to that right now. Has
there been is? How did we
calculate that? And are we also
calculating those?
Expectations for hopefully
getting more people to do
lateral transfers from out of
state.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentle lady, as we
were discussing earlier, there
are three factors that go into
the calculations that DPS is
making. And since it's only in
its second year, we don't have
benchmarks. But we do have some
projections that you can refer
to on the last page of your f I,
R. But looking at laterals
looking at, um new recruits, you
know, all of that data does go
into the formulation of
projections.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. I'm looking at that right
now. So we have
Addition of lateral transfers.
We have money projected for
2526
Hold on one second. Okay, so
With the lateral transfers when
you meet a lateral transfer
Would that be anyone?
Out of state and in state or
just in state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. We're getting
some clarification on that the
expansion of laterals in the
substance of the bill refers to
lateral transfers within the
state. Um, but we are just
getting clarification.
Thank you, Mr Speaker generally
because I would like to make
sure that we included this bill
moves forward that we look at
people from Addison. I mean, we
want more new Mexicans, but the
same time we have a shortage, so
Mr Speaker and General Lady as
we're waiting on that answer, Um
I don't know if you have any
other questions that you'd like
to proceed to.
Yes. Thank you, Um
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, Um,
when we get to that portion, I'm
just
It's kind of a cash 22 right?
Because we want to give our
Local people first dibs, but at
the same time
We also have such a shortage. We
want to do everything we can
Because right now, this is what
I'm hearing from our law
enforcement. Hold on. Hold on.
I'm gonna see if you're getting
an answer.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. We did confirm that it's
in state only, but that is your
your idea about out of state and
bringing those folks in, um
would certainly
Um, be something that you could
bring up the next time we do,
uh, changes to the bill.
Yeah, And thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. I would
definitely
Like I said, it's like a catch
22 of
We want to keep our people here,
but we also want to if we can
compete because with all the law
enforcement officers I'm talking
to they get much better offers.
I mean, the further away, the
better they get. You look at
Alaska, and it's huge movie at
the Missouri is pulling a lot of
people away. Texas is pulling
our people away so other states
And this is what I'm getting The
feedback on
When we look at the totality of
all the things we're trying to
do. This is one of the tools in
the toolbox I agree with, but we
need to make sure that we're
keeping open to other people
coming into the state because
it's almost like a look at it
like a spaghetti strainer. We
got people leaving and we want
to keep refilling them. So I
think moving forward that we
should also look at
Doing the same thing for lateral
transfers at a state to hear if
it's you know.
If it's equal.
To what they've done in other
states. So Mr Speaker and gentle
lady
Um, I would definitely please
ask you to consider that in the
future and also for the, um uh,
the certification.
Ah, Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. How
would the fund be protected
against potential?
Hold on one second.
Miss Allocation of
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. Um so currently the law
enforcement agencies have to
certify.
Um, the information and the use
of funds but moving forward with
these additional FT. DPS will
actually now be able to perform
more auditing functions.
Okay, Mr Speaker, and generally
I always get concerned to make
sure that the biggest thing
always look at when I'm looking
at bills is oversight to make
sure that we have
And I like when bills have
listed oversight and there
because sometimes I'll see
things where we're putting money
out. And there is enough
oversight. Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, did I see anything in the
bill that had anything to do
with any minimum age, so for
them to start qualifying for all
this? Was it a minimum age or
did it just have to be time
served? Or how does that work
out? For the record? That
question has been asked and
answered already, Um
If you have another question,
please go ahead.
Sorry, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. I didn't hear that had
been answered. So, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. How will the
legislation accommodate new or
emerging the law enforcement
roles that may or may not have
been considered at the time of
the drafting of this bill.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
would say that DPS is very open
to, um, talking about other
needs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Let me look
through a few more things. I
know. I had another question on
here.
And thank you, Mr Speaker Deli.
That kind of asked one of the
questions on here, where it said
significant issues Invest
investing in recruiting and
retaining high quality law
enforcement officers and
important component. Um
I agree with you on this bill.
I just want to make sure
That we're prepared for what may
happen as we bring forth more
enticement to keep our law
enforcement officers here.
And I want to make sure that, um
like in Torrance County.
We don't have
Our sheriffs who like like I
said earlier, had
Then there for a long period of
time.
And yet they're not going to be
able to be qualified for this,
even though they put the time
in. So that's the one thing
definitely. I would like to see
in there because I don't want to
exclude them. And then I want to
see in the future that you
include people that
Are doing a lateral transfer.
Out from there.
Into out of state and into New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen.
Apologize. Let me know if this
question has been asked before
what it says on Page three, Line
seven, and we crossed that in
the amount of 5% of the law
enforcement officer salary, and
then I see down here.
It was redone on 21.
Dispersement of 5% of the
officers annual Base salary. Can
you explain that differentiation
in the wording because it says
5% 5%, but now we change it to
percent of the officers Annual
base salary. Can you explain the
difference between what was
crossed out and added in on Page
three, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
I believe we've crossed that
bridge, but I'll allow the
generator from Italy Yo to
rehash it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, we
did review that particular
question in my extensive
conversation with your
colleague, But we have clarified
that the differential is based
on the base salary.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. That's all the
questions have, but please and I
see you nodding your head.
Please take into consideration
because I definitely do not want
my sheriffs are putting in all
this time Acting
Elected as law enforcement and
did not be eligible and to
consider the round whether it
would be a positive or negative
that if we included people from
out of state because we have to
do everything we can to bring
people in while at the same
time, we're trying to get people
to go into the academy because I
keep hearing the numbers on that
are so low that we want to make
sure that we're doing everything
we can to keep our best and the
brightest here in the state
because
The things I keep hearing is
morale is so low people are
leaving.
We need to do every single thing
that we can to make sure that we
keep our law enforcement here.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, lady Gentlemen from
Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will my
friend from Bern Leo, the kind
lady yield
Mr Speaker? Yes, I will yield to
my friend from Sandoval County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
Kind lady from Bruno. Leo there,
I have a couple of questions.
Um, that came up as I was
talking to the local law
enforcement agencies and
Members of law enforcement in my
community.
Could you explain to me the
reason for the clarifying
language of full time certified
law enforcement?
Gentlemen, I think we we've
Talked about that at length
already. Um, but you are a co
sponsor of the bill. So maybe if
the general lady would want to
revisit that briefly, That's
fine. But we've already visited
that at linked to it.
The reason I asked Mr Speaker,
there seems to be a lot of
conversation about that.
Um, I started getting text from
members of law enforcement in my
community.
Um
Because of the growing number of
the volunteer part time.
Especially with the sheriff's
department. There's there's some
volunteers that or with the
sheriff's department
There was a lot of conversation
that I had with members of law
enforcement in my community. Are
these people going to be
qualified?
Um And I think the language the
the part that I wanted to get to
Mr Speaker, Madam.
Uh,
Is that full time certified.
Precludes those volunteers from
applying for this.
Also because they don't get a
salary.
So at the end of five years,
they would not be able to apply
for that. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, Um and, uh
Colleague of
The reason that we are changing
the language in the bill is
because certified officer is
needed because the public and
legislative body must ensure
that officers are qualified and
well trained. And as we
discussed, the certification can
be obtained by going to the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
or any one of its nine
satellite.
Facilities.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
Kind lady from burning Leo and
also the the full type. The
discussion that I had was the
full time.
Um, and that precluded the
volunteer officers from
Trying to take advantage of this
at the five year mark.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, are
volunteers paid
Mr Speaker, Um
Kind of lady from Burnley. Oh,
no, they're not. And that's what
I tried to explain to
Those people in my community who
expressed expressed concern
about
This issue. Um so I wanted to
thank you for
Only clarifying it on the floor
several times. But in for
including that language that
exact language.
In the bill.
Um
Another question, Mr Speaker,
Kind Lady.
Do you know how many counties
have term limits for their share
for their elected sheriffs?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not know the answer to that.
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. Um, I
know in our
County Central County. They are
termed out after two terms.
Um, is that elected sheriff at
the five year mark?
Able to
To claim this benefit.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, if
they are a certified
Law enforcement officer.
Um then.
The time that they are putting
in would qualify.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
ladies, So the key is their
certification.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that
is correct.
Mr Speaker. Kind Lady. A lot of
the the serving sheriffs across
the state have come up through
the ranks.
And so they have maintained that
certification.
So they would be able to qualify
for that, Mr. Speaker, um and
gentlemen, yes, as long as they
maintained their certification.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
lady. Uh, my next question.
There's been a lot of discussion
as to why the money goes to D F
a
And if I'm correct
Um most agencies have their
budgets sent to DFA, and then
they draw draw.
That money down.
Ah to the local agency. Is that
the case?
With the money appropriated to
these funds, Mr Speaker, Kind
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
sorry. Could you repeat that?
Just the crux of the question.
Mr Speaker, Kind Lady. The
moneys appropriated by this
body.
Two state agencies go through D
F a
And then our drawdown drawn down
to the the whatever agency it
is. I know my agency. We would
draw down
For payroll contracts.
Other other monies that were
appropriated to the agency's Is
it the same process for this
fund?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so in
the earlier conversation, uh,
that your colleague and I had,
we did, uh, discuss the location
of different funds. Um
Some funds are housed in an
interest bearing account through
DPS. The $4.8 million, But
you're correct that this $1
million appropriation would go
to D, d F A and then to DPS.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
lady. Um
So there were. There were a few
funds that were discussed. There
was a $5 million or was the the
$4.5 million
And then there was the $1
million in this year's
Uh,
House Bill two.
Can you tell me, Mr Speaker?
Kind lady. Um
You give an explanation earlier,
too?
Another representative, but I
wasn't quite clear.
You said one of those funds is
actually housed the DPS.
And then this House bill two
would be drawn down be drawn
down through
D F A
The money that's housed at DPS,
Mr Speaker, Kind lady.
Is that the interest bearing
account talking about
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the $4.8
million that is housed at DPS is
an interest bearing account.
Yes.
And then Mr Speaker, Kind Lady.
The money that is
Overseen by PRC. Is that also an
interest bearing account?
So just the gentleman
gentlelady. We've we spend a lot
of time on these questions
earlier with the gentleman from
Montero just for the record, So
if we can please not be
repetitive, That would be great.
My apologies. Mr Speaker. I must
have stepped out of the room
when that part of the
conversation was
Was being held.
Um, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady. My
last question.
Um
Do we? Do We have any idea how
these programs have
Worked in other states, too.
Retain those officers is do you
know if there's uh
A much higher rate of retention
in those other states because
that would be the ultimate goal
of this bill is that is that
Correct, kind, lady. And do you
have that information handy. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, That's a
great question. But what we're
actually doing is DPS is
gathering that information
through the, uh, application
process and the information that
they require departments to
provide on April 1st and June
1st. And so that information
will actually be much more
relevant to us because it will
tell us what's happening right
here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady
and and
It was a little bit of
discussion earlier, but I'm I'm
I'm confused about
You talked about this program
being two years old.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that
is correct.
So, Mr Speaker, Kind lady. What
is the purpose of this bill? Is
it simply funding
The program.
Mr Speaker, Kind Lady.
My apologies, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, could you repeat that
Mr Speaker Kind lady because the
program is already two years
old. The what? What is the
actual purpose of
How hospital 193 is it?
Just to provide more funding. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, No, um,
it is. There are multiple
purposes. One is to provide more
funding, but number two. The
main purpose is to take the
feedback that DPS has learned
through the implementation
process over the last two years
in their conversations with
local law enforcement agencies,
state police and others
Um, and make the changes that
through those conversations, the
stakeholders feel would make
this program even better.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind of
lady. Do we know how the
Program has worked up to this
point.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
um, we do We do gather that
data. DPS has that and, um
Yes, I I feel like I should have
provided that to you when when
you
Co sponsored
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
Lady. I just it just
I kept wondering about that if
the program is two years old,
were making technical changes.
If we knew how well the program
how many had been retained.
How many
Um, we're lost.
Um
Basically how well this program
had worked in the past two
years if those reports are
compiled yearly
Um, it would seem like we would,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is all of the information that
DPS is collecting, and one of
the reasons why the additional
FT will be so helpful to analyze
that data.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
lady. Um and maybe I should have
asked for that information when
I signed on to the bill.
Um, my last question, Mr
Speaker, and I appreciate your
patience.
Kind lady, can you
Please tell me
If
There is no more funds
appropriated to this.
Through this bill.
Yeah. Through future years. How
long we expect these funds to
Being affect us, especially the
interest bearing accounts.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. And just for the
record. I am so pleased that you
did decide to co sponsor very
much appreciate it. And, um
On the last page of the ER.
There is a bit of a projection
it goes out, so it's projected
50 Sorry. Fiscal year 25 and 26
and you can see that, um, the
revenue from the Law Enforcement
protection fund, which is the
transfer that we discussed
earlier. Um, that
That amount fluctuates, but
you'll see that the revenue and
expenditures um are sufficient,
at least for the next several
years, and so then we can make
further assessments once we pass
into fiscal year, 27
But it looks like a fairly
robust
Um
Ending balance in fiscal year 26
of $5.5 million
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Count
lady. I'm
I'm just going over the
information that you provided
me.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
lady and I know you went over
the numbers of
How many had been How many had
Of these bonuses had been paid
out up to this point.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, if
you'll give me just a minute,
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the first year, uh, DPS
dispersed $1.9 million to 574
officers within 47 law
enforcement agencies.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen for
year two.
Which is the year we're
currently working on.
We're looking to disperse 1.8
million
2 500 officers at 60 different
agencies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Kind lady. Do you know how many
Different law enforcement
agencies there are across the
state.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Just one
moment, please.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't have the information about
the total number of agencies I
do have the information for the
first year of the program and
the second year of the program
of the number of agencies that
received funds.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
Lady. I was just curious as to
how many
You know what the percentage was
That actually took advantage of
this because
I think this is a great step
towards
Rebuilding the losses that we've
seen in law enforcement over the
past few years. And once again,
Mr Speaker, Kind lady. I wanted
to appreciate you for allowing
me to sign on this.
I know law enforcement.
The different law enforcement
agencies among gentlemen from
Colfax, Harry Harding, Quasar,
McGill and Union Representative
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. It's a new day now.
Does the general 80 years.
Mr Speaker, I will yield to the
gentleman from all of those
counties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. Um it's kind of it's very
customary in appropriations to
strip the appropriation in the
bill.
Since it's already in
House Bill two.
And this is stroke appropriation
is not stripped. I just wondered
if there was a reason for that.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, I
do believe that the Second
Amendment was stripping the
appropriation.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady That explains that. I just
don't
I'm looking at the bill.
On Page seven.
This goes back a little bit,
too, eh?
Question that was asked a while
ago, but I don't believe it's
not the same question. Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady on Page
seven.
Line 12.
It says.
Shall include in this is
stricken language shall include
any evaluation.
Of the programs efficiency.
In law enforcement retention. So
apparently that's been the
practice in the past, but that
language being stricken
So now would not be the
practice.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. I'm just
checking on exactly why that
particular component was
stricken. Obviously the
remainder, which says the annual
report and other statistical
data reports Shelby made
available, Um
And perhaps well, I won't
speculate. I'll see if I can get
the answer.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, while
I'm waiting for that particular
answer. Do you have another
question that you'd like to ask?
Ah, yes, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Ah!
I
I see that and I did hear the
discussion that
Part time law enforcement had
been stricken Mr Speaker.
And but I'm just wondering why
How many of them Mr Speaker are
there in the state? And would it
encourage them? Mr Speaker,
General lady to go ahead and
become full time if they were
not stricken from this benefit,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so the
reason that we have switched to
full time certified has been
discussed. And this bill is
clarifying that the retention
fund only applies to full time
certified, Um
And I apologize. I'm still
waiting on. Um, the DPS. Um, so
the reason that that particular
line was struck is because they
can still be transparent by
providing the annual report so
that information will still be
made available. It didn't need
to be, um
In those words.
In the bill.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I'm
curious how you can have a
Report on performance if you're
Um So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
So, um
The information that you're
interested in about the
evaluation of the programs,
efficiency or its efficacy. I
apologize that is going to be
part of the information that
By expanding the number of FTE
at DPS. They will have the
capability and the capacity.
To do that research and
information and include that in
the report. Um I think, as you
know, in lfc, one of the things
that we are able to do is
question our agencies about, um,
the spending of money and
whether it's working.
Um
You know?
I I I think it's uh
Fairly, um
Simple.
Perspective as to whether or not
The words on lines, 12.
Deleted through and on 14.
If you feel are necessary.
You know, I feel comfortable
that that's the essence of the
information that would be
reported, But I can certainly
appreciate that. Um, some people
would prefer it to be spelled
out more prescriptive.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. The thing about it is you
can look at the numbers.
But you can't really tell if
those are new recruits or
retention of older.
Officers that have been there
and that our experience, so
there's a there's going to be a
quite a quite a difference there
and you wouldn't really
Unless the mean the agency
knows, but unless they're
required to analyze and report
that information maybe you
started with 10 officers. You
ended up with 10 officers, but
you have
Five old officers left and five
new young ones come in.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
and I think those are great
points that the data that DPS is
collecting now will, um, help
Us understand whether or not
they're retaining officers and
if it is making a difference,
But being this this is the
second year. You know, we don't
have that data yet. But that
information we will have over
the course of years to make
those assessments. So, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady would you
be open to and striking that
line and requiring them to do
that analyst
So, Mr Speaker, and, um
And gentlemen, Um what? What DPS
felt was that it was an unfunded
mandate and that third party
evaluations are expensive and
that they would need
administrative costs for the
portal. Um, I think that
The concern that you're bringing
up is something that we should
continue to discuss with DPS, as
opposed to make a change right
now, because I think I'd like to
understand better exactly what
their concerns were about that
But I will say that, um
We worked.
DPS DF to worked in consultation
with LFC on this bill, um and
some of the changes that were
made were at the request of lfc,
particularly with regard to
reporting from our local law
enforcement agencies. Um so
Like you, Um
I take
Um, you know, I think it's
important in this bill that we
are able to assess.
Um, the impact of the program,
but
I think that having more
conversations with DPS would be
important.
Rather than me.
Saying one way or the other that
those words should be included.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
Um, I think this is a good bill
and and I appreciate you for
bringing it. It does not say a
3rd 3rd party report. It says
reports generated by the
department so it would be
reports generated internally.
I'll move on.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and so what? I am
further understanding is that
staff at DPS felt you're correct
that it didn't say specifically
that it needed to be a third
party analysis, but staff felt
that by doing a third party
analysis, it would be
independent and unbiased.
And be able to better provide,
um
Information that could be acted
on. So that's a little bit more
clarification. Uh, thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
What? What does it take to make
that happen? Uh,
More funding more time. Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen. Yes. And so that is
part of the reason that we are
putting the $1 million.
recurring appropriation. Um in
it, So, as you know, as a member
of house appropriations. That
appropriation was included in
House Bill two.
And that funding will support
all of these efforts at DPS. It
will provide DPS with four more
FTE.
And as you know, I discussed
with with some of your
colleagues from rural
communities like yourself.
Um, by having those additional
people at DPS, uh, they can
reach out to those the more
rural communities that don't
have all of the staff and help
them make the applications and
support them through the
process.
And part of that will be
gathering of the data and
information and analyzing it.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. Is
this a recurring or non
recurring, uh
Fine.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so, uh, the funding
included in this bill and House
Bill 193 has twice amended, Um
is 1 million recurring.
Now.
In the initial bill of
Two years ago, We included an
appropriation for the fund.
And the fund itself does have
money that comes in on a
continual basis from those fees
licenses, etcetera that we
talked about from the PRC.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
knew I know that you spoke a
while ago about an officer
changing from one agency to the
other.
But part part of that I didn't
understand. I understand
clearly.
That if he's been there
10 years 20 years.
He must remain with that same
agency for another year plus to
receive the bonus.
What if he just worked there?
Eight years or worked there
three years and he's changed
agencies.
And he was still a full time
employed. Uh, whatever.
But he just moved to a different
town or he, uh, whatever. And,
uh
Does he start all over from
scratch? Or does he
Get the amount of time that he
spent.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. So based
on the feedback that DPS was
hearing in working with the
various law enforcement agencies
across the state over the past
two years, one of the concerns
that was raised is that in the
current statute, the clock would
start over again if someone
transferred made a lateral
transfer within the state.
And so you know, after working
with all of our local law
enforcement agencies, um, one of
the reasons that we are amending
the providing this bill is so
that if you are a law
enforcement officer in one
municipality in New Mexico and
you move you make a lateral
transfer to another law
enforcement agency, also in New
Mexico.
That time goes with you so you
don't have to start over again.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady that that is an awesome
Good improvement on this bill. I
really liked that. I appreciate
that. So, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
We have some folks out there
that work undercover. Nobody
really knows that their law
enforcement officer and they
have a lot of
Highly
I mean, no, they don't want
anybody to know who they are,
what they do, but they are full
time law enforcement officers is
what safeguards are put in place
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that's a That's a
very interesting question, and
certainly not one that had had
crossed my mind. And so my
expert was able to provide a
detailed answer, so let's see if
I can relay it correctly. Um so
When local law enforcement
agencies apply for the funds
they do provide to DPS the name
date of birth date. Oh, sorry.
Date of hire my apologize date
of certification.
And
Salary and social Security
number now
That information gets to DPS and
is encrypted.
If someone
Uh, put in an opera request for
that information. Um, DPS would
be able to redact some of that,
um
Hopefully that
Ah, alleviate some of your
concerns, although I don't know
If it really relieves 100% of
them.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady I
once spent a year on a federal
grand jury.
And I promise you if you ever do
that, you will never see the
state fair the same again
because there's a lot of special
agents there.
Ah, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady.
It seems like this is going to
be probably be a very good
Uh, tool for retention.
Ah!
How about, uh,
Recruitment. I mean, is this
going to affect recruitment?
Maybe
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
recruitment one of the other,
uh, prongs in our multi pronged
approach. Unfortunately, this
build is not specifically deal
with recruitment outside of the
fact that this is an incentive
if you're looking to move to New
Mexico and start your career as
a law enforcement officer, and
you want to know that
After five years 1015 20, You'll
get a, uh
Retention differential. So in
that sense, this is a
recruitment tool. However, the
Legislature has appropriated
Well over $100 million in the
last several sessions
specifically for recruitment,
and so
You may recall that we felt as a
legislature that we also needed
to support our existing law
enforcement officers and
encourage them to stay with our
forces and continue to serve
here in New Mexico. And so
that's why we did create this
retention fund.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. I know if it were me, I
would. I would take a heck, I'm
going to move over there and I
didn't go to work. There's
incentives for
For recruitment. And then I'm
going to stay five years and and
get a little more money. I think
it would help recruit me.
Uh, well, the law enforcement Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Will the agencies involved?
Well, they have a skin in the
game. Are they going to
contribute to this in any way,
Or is it all from the from?
Up above from from the capital.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
a great question. This is since
this was a statewide effort, um,
aimed at supporting our law
enforcement officers statewide.
That was not something that was
included.
Previously.
Uh, Mr Speaker, gentle lady, I
think. Lastly, how will this uh
Money.
How how will we address
Administration and overhead and
management of this fund and and,
uh
You know, putting it on the
ground.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. So when
the bill was first passed,
setting up the fund, DPS was
able to absorb some of the
costs. But what we have learned
since then, is that they really
needed more staff to be able to
get this program to its full
potential and provide us with
information to make.
Better informed decisions and
assess its efficacy. And that's
why the recurring $1 million
will help with that effort. Um
I think that answered the
question. But if I missed
something, let me know.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
believe that answered the
question. You know, I think
What it all boils down to, as we
need more good guys unless bad
guys and I think this bill might
help us get there.
Mr Speaker. I thank you for the
time.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
for the debate The gentleman
from Dona Ana representatives
Small. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker would the General
Lady from Berna Leo Yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to my colleague. The
gentleman from Dona Ana.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. I know this has been a
long evening, Mr Speaker,
General, any really appreciate
you for taking the time and Mr
Speaker. Generally, I want to
thank you and your co sponsors.
This really continues an effort.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, you
spoke about that a little bit.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I want
to briefly touch on that.
Uh, Mr Speaker, General Lady as
we look to build retention,
which your bill is really
focused on correct, Mr Speaker
in General Lady Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Yes. Uh, this was
what we felt coming into the
session a few years ago. Lots of
discussion about the need for
recruitment. But you know, as
legislators, we heard loud and
clear from our law enforcement
officers that we also needed to
support retention efforts. And
so that's why
This fund was created Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank you
for that. And Mr Speaker,
General Lady, you know, coming
from Las Cruces. This actually
rings really true. Initially on
the recruitment side, Mr
Speaker, General Lady Mr
Speaker, General Lady, do you
recall when the recruitment
funds were first put out there
was the community that I come
from Las Cruces.
It seemed like we were fairly
quick on the draw, and actually,
we're aggressive out of the
gate. Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and we're
discussing the recruitment
funds. Is that correct, Mr
Speaker, General Lady to get us
to the retention funds we first
have to recruit And so yes,
we're talking about the
recruitment funds. Oh, yes, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I do
remember the first go round of
the recruitment funds because I
Mr Speaker and gentlemen was
shocked.
That the Los Cruces police
Department I think had 280
Positions that they were
recruiting for might have been a
typo.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I and
I believe we drew down well over
$5 million. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, um, that, you know,
jumping around a bit here. But
Mr Speaker, General Lady is that
sort of administrative portion
within your bill within the $1
million recurring. How important
is that money to ensure that
communities across the state
Not just ones maybe that are
looking at that portal, the
quickest to sort of sees on an
application the quickest to
apply. How important is that
money and that recurring
staffing going to be in your
estimation, Mr Speaker, General
lady to ensuring that there is
an even and fair distribution of
these funds.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you for that question. Um
It is. This is 100% necessary.
Um, you know, obviously, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, we had the
example of you know the typo
with the recruitment funds. But
as legislators and as
appropriators, um, it is really
important that we ensure that
Public funds are being spent.
Efficiently and for their
intended purpose and so by
Allowing and supporting DPS.
In hiring more staff.
You know, we've we've talked not
only about the outreach that
they will now be able to do to
some of our smaller, more rural
communities, which is absolutely
incredible. I mean, we saw the
increase from 47. I think the
first year to 60 the second year
and just imagine how many I
don't know if my colleague from
Sandoval was able to
Covering the entire state.
But then also, you know
As members of LFC will be able
to see the impact we will be
able to dive into the data that
they are collecting and I've
seen, you know, just the
preliminary data that my expert
witness has and just imagine,
After five years what type of
Information will learn will be
able to see what is really
moving the needle. What do our
law enforcement officers need?
How can we continue to make this
program better? So yes, the
Recurring funds to support staff
is absolutely critical, Mr
Speaker, General Lady that's
really encouraging for me to
hear. Certainly Mr Speaker,
General Lady for that efficacy
for the fairness for the
equality approach, because, Mr
Speaker, General Lady when we
come up here, Of course we come
representing our communities.
But it's great to know that
there's going to be a focus on
wherever you are in New Mexico
if you take the time to go
through our law enforcement
account, um e. To get certified
that there is going to which I
want to visit a little bit about
Mr Speaker, General lady
because, as I recall, there's
been a lot of work on that Law
enforcement academy that seems
to be bearing fruit.
But if you do that, if you take
that time that this Mr Speaker
General Lady as a state we're
committing to pay you to have
these retention components. And
Mr Speaker, General Lady. It
sounds like you're really
committed to not stopping here.
Is that fair to say, would you
Mr Speaker General Lady be
looking for other opportunities
to
Continue to make New Mexico a
strong place for law enforcement
to be to serve and and to have
their careers.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Absolutely. Um, you know, I am
really proud of the law
enforcement officers, um, that
are always present in my
district. I've had a wonderful
opportunities to engage with the
Albuquerque Foothills area
Command and just wonderful,
wonderful officers doing great
work.
And actually, Mr Chair, and, um
gentlemen, the county sheriff
was able to move into a little
substation in my neighborhood,
which is just been tremendous,
um
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um
When we talk about public safety
Um
I think what we have all learned
over the last several years is
that addressing public safety
and tackling crime?
Really?
Is a multi pronged approach and
requires a holistic.
Solution.
And ensuring that we have
Enough law enforcement officers
who
Live and work in our
communities.
Is one of the best investments
that we can make.
To make our communities safer.
We know you know the the data
really shows and lfc has been
great. So if members have not
had a chance to read some of the
LFC evaluation reports on public
safety, I highly encourage it.
Um, but one of the things we've
learned is that
The presence of law enforcement
officers.
In and of itself is a great
deterrent and so making sure
that we have
Enough law enforcement officers.
It is an easy
First step.
That we should always be looking
to make sure we have failed.
Mr Speaker, General lady. I
couldn't agree more, Mr Speaker,
General Lady as you were talking
about some of the improvements
and some of what you've seen in
your district. It did make me
think back, Mr Speaker, General
Lady to this summer, actually,
when, as part of lfc we were
offered a ride along with the
state police, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Some of the things
I remember vividly from that
ride along first
How the state police talked
about the non emergency response
and the benefits Mr Speaker,
General Lady that in
Albuquerque it was generating.
Secondly, Mr Speaker, General
Lady I remember stops and
welfare checks along the route
that I was traveling with the
state police officer and Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Not only
were there members of a PD who
are there
Actually, it ended up being that
Secretary Bowie himself from the
secretary from DPS. Was it one
of the stops. Mr. Speaker?
Jerry, General Lady. Where was
he headed? Next up to do a town
hall with the general lady from
burning Leo. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady think that shows
and it showed again to me the
interconnected nature of our law
enforcement officers.
The mutual aid that they bring.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady. It
makes me think a whole lot about
what our recruitment classes are
looking about. Like because
again to retain and I love the
incentives that are being put in
here. We have to be recruiting
in. And Mr Speaker, General Lady
speaking down in Los Cruces,
we've had
Some pretty robust classes of
folks going through the academy.
I think one of the really the
hallmarks that we've seen that
has also been a hallmark that
this legislature and this
governor have done over the last
couple of years is a lot of work
with our law enforcement
Academy. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, the longevity the bonuses
that you include in your bill.
Part of supporting that, I think
is continuing to build upon to
enhance and to deepen the
structure of within the law
enforcement academy and the
training they receive. Can you
tell me a little and perhaps you
can talk with your expert about
some of the investments that
we've made with our law
enforcement Academy? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes.
Give me just a second to confer
with my expert, please.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so there is a lot of
information going on. I'm going
to have to go back to my expert
multiple times. She she gave me
the rundown. But unfortunately,
as I like to say, I have too
many penguins on the iceberg up
here, so some had to jump off.
Um so
Let's see.
We? Oh, great. The last three
Basic Academy classes have
exceeded 6060 cadets. That is
incredible. We, Mr Speaker, uh
and gentlemen, we do not have
space for that many cadets. Um
so one of the things if I
remember correctly that DPS is
looking for in capital outlay.
Hopefully, people funded this,
uh is dorm dormitory. Oh new
Academy, Uh, better dormitories
and erase track.
A driving track. I'm sorry. So
you know for those speedy
getaways.
I think that Mr Chair or Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, there
were there were several other
things, but I think that
probably provides a nice little
summary. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. That's
certainly tracks. Mr Speaker.
General Lady with some of the
feedback that I bring again from
southern New Mexico.
And some of the academy's with
with Los Cruces Police
Department, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and the reason I briefly
touch on that recruitment part
is that when we look in your
bill here, Mr Speaker General
Lady at 5, 1015 and 20 years
that are included in the bill. I
want to spend a little bit of
time and each of those junctures
because Mr Speaker, General Lady
Ah, it seems like we're starting
to really get a handle, or at
least we're putting a lot of
investment, seeing some really
fruit that's coming from new
folks, you know, oversubscribed
academies. But Mr Speaker,
general lady getting to that
five year mark that can be
pretty difficult. Would you say
that? That's the case. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes, my
expert wholeheartedly, agrees.
What are some of the and Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Those
factors that sort of make
getting to that five year mark
and we see this in other
professions. Mr Speaker, General
Lady certainly makes me think of
educators and how we're starting
to rebuild the educator
pipeline, But still, those first
years are critical. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, how important is
having that bonus and this
bonus?
In that year. Five. How
important is that to that
initial class?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it is
critical. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, It certainly seems that
way to me and Mr Speaker,
General Lady, as I think about
all the other supports you said
Mr Speaker, General Lady over
$100 million that this
Legislature has dedicated to
this purpose to building and
expanding our law enforcement
officers here in the state.
Did you see creative local
police departments and law
enforcement offices, sort of
structure their bonuses in ways
that could provide incentives
all the way through year five
sort of in the door through your
four and then your bill kicks
in. Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Absolutely. Um, you know this
retention fund? Uh
It's definitely stackable
something that local law
enforcement agencies you know
they can identify other tools
that work for their recruits.
And you know, and they can come
up with programs. Uh, won't take
away from the retention fund but
will supplement so yes, they
can.
Um, offer additional incentives.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, you
You have the right word there.
Thank you for saying it's
stackable incentives. Stackable
benefits, Mr Speaker, General
Lady That makes me ask the
question with the additional
administration with these four
new individuals who are provided
as part of your bill.
Mr Speaker, General lady because
those individuals help in the
advising and do you see DPS,
perhaps serving in this sort of,
you know, perhaps slightly
steering the ship sort of way,
maybe more better determined as
an advisor, but to help guide
the stacking of these benefits
The availability of training and
education, really creating a
culture that financially rewards
law enforcement officers that
trains them that values them
could or are those positions
only limited to talking about
retention? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, No. You know this is
part of the solution and
By having for more FTE at DPS,
you know they will really be
able to work hand in hand with
some of our smallest communities
that have the greatest need, Um
Earlier in the evening. Uh, I
mentioned, um it came up with
one of one of our colleagues.
The federal federal grants,
right? And you know, and there
is a lot of potential out there
for federal funds and,
unfortunately are smaller
communities and smaller law
enforcement agencies.
Don't necessarily have the
capacity but by having
additional staff FTS at DPS in
constant communication with our
local law enforcement agencies,
understanding the recruitment
and retention challenges that
they might have, um, you know,
I think this has endless
possibilities. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, That's great. That
is really encouraging to me. I
want to thank your expert and
DPS first structuring that
approach so that folks can serve
in this really utility capacity.
We're giving more tools. More
investment now with sort of
more.
Uh, you know more players on the
field to help steer that it's
really encouraging. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I want to move now
to the 1015 and 20 years
briefly, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, it's my sense and having
talked with folks, constituents
and friends from where I come
from that they're you know,
getting into that 10 to 15 year
Mark. These are folks who are
incredibly season.
Who have deep roots in the
community. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Their families are there
they're often coaches or
otherwise participants in after
school activities. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Would it be fair
to say that that 10 to 15 year
period is some of the most
important and some of the most
productive in our law
enforcement officers careers?
Hmm.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
it is. It is extremely
important. But I would be remiss
if I didn't also stress how
important um, our officers are
at the 20 plus timeframe, But
you're right. I mean, I think,
um law enforcement officers in
that 10 to 15
Uh, 10 to 20 range. You know,
they are really embedded parts
of our community, you know,
raising their families. Um, you
know,
Just valuable. Um
Valuable members of the
community. Not not just as law
enforcement officers. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank
thank you and thank you for
correcting me. I certainly
didn't mean to say that after
that 15 year mark, there was Mr
Speaker, General Lady. It
actually makes me think. You
know, I had the privilege to
serve on the last Cruises City
Council.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. We had
the chief of recently a new er,
chief chief who's doing
excellent work who shared with
me notes that I had written back
when I was a city councilor and
with when there was community
policing efforts, efforts, and
Mr Speaker, General Lady sort of
surprising as it may seem, that
was over 15 years ago. Uh, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
And the fact that we're putting
in place you're putting in place
with your bill, a powerful tool
to retain these officers to show
them to show the state. Frankly,
Mr Speaker in general Lady to
show other states that new
Mexico is a place to be for a
rewarding career in public safe
in public service.
Protecting public safety. It's
really encouraging, Mr Speaker,
general lady, Um I can't wait to
see what this does. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. I appreciate in
the conversation that we've also
highlighted some continued areas
of investment and ways for us to
further support and continue on
this work. But Mr Speaker,
General Lady
It seems like our recruitment
efforts are bearing fruit.
You're bringing the retention
component. Here we have a strong
training academy and just a time
where I'm really proud to say,
I'm really appreciate your
legislation. Proud to stand up
in support of it. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Lady from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker, this matter, having
been under consideration for
three hours, I moved to close
debate.
This matter has been in three
hours after consideration.
There's a motion to close
debate. All those in papers in
the privacy and I
I'm supposed to meet.
Really? You represent Dixon to
close Mr Speaker. Um, you know,
with all of those folks left on
the board, I have just been
Amazed at the interest and
engagement in this conversation.
Um, thank you so much. Mr.
Speaker. I move that house Bill
193 as twice amended. Do now
pass. We are on final passage of
house. Bill 193 is twice
The borders are closed by vote
of 61 in the affirmative zero in
the negative house, Bill 193 is
amended as passed his house from
burning Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business Committee
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to miss Bring Lyford
House Bill 102 has had it under
consideration.
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Committee report Announcement 10
to all those in favor say if I
was in I supposed Nate, the
Civic Committee report docked
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to Mr referred House
Joint Resolution One has had it
under consideration. Reports
with recommendations Do pass as
amended, Respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair, Mr
Speaker. Move Adoption Committee
report on the House Joint
Resolution one. All those in
Has been referred House joint
There. Mr. Speaker. Move
adoption adoption of a federal
committee report. And how is
your solution to all those in
favors and favors and I
Supposed name. The committee
report adopted Mr Speaker. Your
Judiciary Committee team has
been referred. House Joint
Resolution five has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Respectfully,
Smitty, Christine Chandler
Chair, Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Favorable Committee report on
House Joint Resolution five. All
those in favors and if I was a
nine Hi, puppy.
He said. I or she said I was
wolf Snake. The eyes have it.
The doggy has it committed
adopted woof.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee team has been referred
house right Resolution seven has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move adoption
expressions of
Passion from the gallery,
please.
Well, adoption of favorite
committee reported. How's your
resolution? Seven. All those in
favor signify would say Ni
The eyes. Have it coming report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, Your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
tomb has been referred House
Bill 117 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the Taxation
Revenue Committee. Respectfully
submitted during White Guy goes
Chair, Mr. Speaker. Move
Adoption Adoption Committee
reporting has been 117 all those
in favor. See if I would say no.
I suppose Nate.
The committee report adopted Mr
Speaker Your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
209 has had an under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
respectfully submitted during
White Guy goes chair.
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Committee report in the hospital
209 All those in favor say if I
was in, I was supposed to say
the eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, Your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 275 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted during
White Guy goes Chair Adoption
Adoption of Favorite Committee
report in the House Bill 275.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Supposed name. The report
adopted Mr Speaker, your
consumer and Public affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 226 has had
it under consideration reports,
Same with recommendation that it
do not pass, but that House
Consumer and Public affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 226 to pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari
chair.
Move for adoption adoption when
I'm Federal Committee report in
the hospital to 26, but a
favorable committee reported in
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for house
Bill 226. All those in favor
signify by saying AYE supposed a
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
233 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 233 is
reported without recommendation
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Liz Thompson chair
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Adoption on on Federal Committee
report on the hospital to 33.
But a report without
recommendation for House Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for house Bill 223.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
All those opposed nay.
The eyes Havoc report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill
258 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that Health, Health
and human services Committee
substitute for House Bill 258 do
pass and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair Move
Adoption Adoption one No
Unfavorable Committee reporting
House Bill 258, but a favorable
committee report and House
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for hours
with 258. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed they, the
subcommittee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill
288 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption adoption of
a favorable community reported
house Bill 288 all those in
favors and if I was sane, I
suppose me
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Gentle lady from Bernardi. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order business third reading of
legislation.
Mr Speaker Now being 1159 am I
move? We adjourn until 1201 PM
will come to order Mr Speaker. I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended. The journals
show that all those president
this morning session our
president this afternoon
session. There's an objection so
ordered Mr Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and that your
records show that the journal
has been read in full and
approved subject to the revision
and approval of the rules in
order of business.
Committee. Objection It is
ordered from Leo.
Mr Speaker. Remove we go to that
order. Business. Third reading
of legislation. Objection. It is
an order generated from Burleigh
or preserve Thompson.
Are you ready on item?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Can you get me
to that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing them?
House Bill 151 on final passage
has been taken. It is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker House Bill
151 we've seen in this chamber
many times. I believe it's
passed out of this chamber three
times.
Um, Basically, it's really it
requires state funded post
secondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
prevention of sexual assault,
domestic violence, dating
violence and harassment or
stalking. So, Mr Speaker, I'm
going to let my co sponsors have
a few words and we'll start with
the general Lady from Santa Fe.
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, Um and the
general lady yields. I'm Yes, I
healed. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. I'm so proud to be
co sponsoring this piece of
legislation with you this year
and all of the past years that
we that you have continued to
champion. This this issue of yes
means yes.
And educating our young people
to ensure that they understand
what body sovereignty means They
understand what decisions they
are empowered to create and make
and that there's a curriculum
attached to what it is that we
can do to promote better, well
being understanding when when it
is that things might be
happening, Um
As we're continuing to grow up
and understand more about
ourselves and what it is our
boundaries are Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I so appreciate
establishing that and being able
to empower folks to make the
best decisions for themselves.
Um so I stand in strong support
for what you're doing. I'm so
grateful to get the higher
education involved and how it is
that we can promote. Yes means
Yes. Thank you, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'll go
now to the General lady from
Burnley. Your representative
Little lady from Berlioz's
percent of little
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you.
Very much. I too am so proud to
be a part of this bill.
I have, and this is a, uh one
that I'm looking to the future.
To the future for nieces and
nephews who are right now in
grade school elementary school,
mid school and high school.
One day they will be going to
seek out higher education, and I
believe it is not only my duty,
but the rest of us to protect
These beautiful souls. Um
And I am very, very pleased.
Thank you so much for having me
join you this evening on this
bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. We'll go
to representative Corolla.
The Lady from earlier
representative Corolla.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. My mentor and
representative, um, gentle
leader from Bernard Leo. I'm
very honored to be part of this
legislation Last year was one of
the ones that I was looking
forward more to see implemented.
As an educator. I know we had to
explicitly teach many things sad
that we need to talk about this
and we have to reinforce things
like this, but it's also a way
to promote healthy and happy
relationships.
I know we assumed that everybody
understand and we assume things
are happening and everybody
agrees.
But as a teacher and seeing kids
develop and growing up, I know
that assuming sometimes we miss
the point, but not but nobody in
this place it again is not Mr
Speaker is not always something
that we want to be always
wishing for somebody to know,
but but it's actually preventing
and ensuring that kids can have
a
Fulfilling life and grow to be
happier, right and means not
have misunderstandings. And and
if you have to go through
consequences for the rest of
their lives, too. So thank you
so much for letting me be part
of this. I'm very honored. I'm
really looking forward to see
this.
Working and be implemented.
Thank you for the advocates and
everybody who has been part of
this will Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Early. Oh, thank you, Mr
Speaker. The next co sponsors
majority floor leader,
Representative kick Chase E.
Earlier presented JC Mr Speaker
Will the Lady yield
The yield
Mr Speaker and Lady. I am stand
with you on this. And as I have
in the past, we have a different
Bill here tonight, though, than
we've had in the past because
rather than trying to impose
penalties for certain behaviors.
What this bill does is require
that post secondary educations
that receive public funding
implement policies that are
clear.
For the students. So all of the
students that a school now and
female become aware of what the
expectations are and really
tries to eliminate gray areas so
that students feel safer on
campus, and I would hold that
this is
Better for both male and female
students.
To know that, um they're going
to be supported in their actions
and to know what's acceptable in
what is not. So I think this
will help promote healthy
learning environments throughout
the
This state and also just in
general.
Really reduce bad behavior and,
uh, make everybody feel safer.
So with that, Mr Speaker, I
think, are we ready for
questions?
Alright, There is debate the
gentle lady from Dona Ana
representative Lada Kalina.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
dental lady from Bernard
loyalty Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Dona Ana. I
guess you're gonna have to
listen closely, because my voice
is going away.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Dental lady. I'm grateful to be
debating this bill again.
And appreciating your leadership
and that of your co sponsors and
the new Mexicans from so many of
our communities that have helped
shaped this bill.
And understand why it matters.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady, might
you share how this bill came to
you and why you've introduced it
again.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Excuse me. I am. As I said, I've
been running this bill, a
coalition of folks, including,
um
Um Planned Parenthood. Young
women United Brothers together.
I can't think of all the names
right equality, New Mexico and
we have been working year round
on this bill for
Five years, maybe with monthly
meetings. We have a big
coalition.
So basically, it comes down to
in the time that I grew up and
the women in here who are around
my age, um
We were expected to be nice, no
matter what someone did to us,
or tried to do to us, Um we were
expected to just
Smile and move their hand away
from where we didn't want it or
we weren't expecting. We weren't
Essentially allowed to have body
sovereignty. So I've been really
and I had a conversation with. I
have five sisters, and at least
five of us have been raped,
including me. And it took me
probably 40 years before I told
anybody about it, So I want
young people to know what the
standards are That only yes
means yes.
And that everybody has a right
to say no at any point.
And then Mr Speaker. Part of
this with the reason we have
landed on post secondary
education is because of some of
the events that happened with
the eggy basketball team last
year with the sexual assault of
players by older players, and we
thought this was the time that
we really needed to get
something in post secondary
education.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady.
I'm honored to represent New
Mexico's House District 33,
which includes the main campus
of New Mexico State University.
And that's an institution that,
like many is complex.
And while we can appreciate
that, it's a place where so many
families, including both of my
parents were able to seek higher
education and change the
economic future of my family.
It also has a place that has had
to grapple with institutional
racism and episodes and
situations like this.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. It's
meant a lot to me that I've been
able to move through my own
processing and healing in
debating your bill.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady, one of
the I can't remember if it was
last year or the year prior.
In really thinking about what
This meant to my life.
I was able to acknowledge to
myself similar to what you've
shared, gentle lady.
That the majority of sex I've
had in my life was not
consensual.
And still when I when I've told
that story, including as
recently as this week, somebody
said to me
Mr Speaker. Generally someone
someone said to me you were 40
years old when you realize that
And that's the reality for so
many of us
When we've navigated systemic
violence, institutional violence
and interpersonal violence.
There hasn't always been a place
where we could turn and be
believed.
Or supported or respected in
what we share and the truths
we've experienced.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady for
these first couple of years, I
felt the impact of your bill at
a personal level.
And began to worry and imagine
what that meant for me as a
parent.
And gentle lady as the news of
the enemy issue. Assault broke
when we were in Santa Fe.
So many of us in the building
were also grappling with the
whispers and rumors and
questions about what happened.
I still remember last year being
at a
After floor event.
Somewhere in Santa Fe.
When people are walking up to me
and saying
Don't worry.
This is getting blown out of
proportion when you hear what
really happened.
You're going to realize it
wasn't a big deal.
I don't need to wait to hear
what was in that report.
I didn't need to wait until the
lawsuits were filed.
And someone had the courage to
come forward.
And say they were harmed.
That institution from the
coaches to the administration to
the regions.
I should have handled it with
Grace and Karen integrity.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I was
proud.
That in the preceding days
There was a decision made to
cancel the remainder of the
season.
But as we all read and listened
and heard over the months and
the years since then
More was revealed more came out
and it was clear that even
though we could be impressed by
the swift action
On that media cycle.
That there were big questions
raised about
Where there could have been
accountability and care much
earlier on
Mr Speaker and gentle lady the
first weekend when we had Friday
Friday off of the session of the
House floor and House
committees.
I was able to get home to see my
kids.
And as it happened, there was a
last Cruces high school
basketball game that Saturday.
And after Mr Benjamin was a Hall
of Fame player for the intimacy
you Aggies.
He stayed.
In our valley, and he made last
cruises home.
And for decades now, Mr Benjamin
has been the coach of the last
cruises high school basketball
team.
So here I was a couple of weeks
ago home from the session.
Watching a basketball game in
the same gym.
Where I attended high school.
With my kids with my mom as it
happened, seeing a lot of faces
that I recognized and new around
that gym.
But I could not help.
But keep looking and returning
my gaze again and again.
To Mr Benjamin.
At his bench with a team full of
new Mexican young people.
And this time besides processing
my own life, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady
And whether I'd had room and
thankfully more often as an
adult.
To engage in affirmative
consent.
I thought about how much Mr
Benjamin had given
To the young people of our
community.
And I thought about how heavy it
must have been.
For him after his years of
advocacy after he served within
us let IQ communities and with
sports communities and with
other coaches, he served all
these years as a voice.
To have more honest and
accountable. Conversations about
hazing about sexual assault
about grooming and predatory
behaviors.
How must it how much? It must
have hurt him.
That he sent his kid.
To be an Aggie basketball
players. Something had been
dreaming of his whole life.
And to know that he set his kid
up.
To be harmed.
By an institution that was not
going to carry their
responsibilities to keep our
students safe.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I don't
know if I remember the score of
that game.
Because all I could return to
Was that shakiness.
Mr Benjamin might be feeling
that I can't imagine,
thankfully.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I have
been to coach Um, a youth soccer
team. I think I'm in my third
year had no business or interest
in doing that. But as it turns
out the girls on the wait list
in my town. We're never getting
called. So, the league said, if
you want to give your kid a
chance to play, it's time you
coach
Mr Speaker gentlemen every
season, even though it annoys me
because I've been a coach now
for a couple of years, I have to
do online trainings safe sport
trainings. Some of those are
about concussion prevention.
But most of the material
Is around hazing and making sure
we're watching for predatory or
grooming behaviors, making sure
that our young people aren't an
unsafe situations with one adult
or with other players.
And I keep thinking, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady, that if I have to
do this
As a volunteer, recreational
soccer coach.
What are the failures in our
institutions that these young
people who have invested their
lives and being student
athletes?
Somehow don't get any
accountability when things have
gone wrong.
Because coaches have let them
keep a culture to their own in a
locker room.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
I
I know that when I brought my
values to this body.
I know that in the world view
that I hold, I see that we
criminalize black men.
Here around the country.
And so many of our societal
norms.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
It's complicated for me.
That the only action we see
After the courage it took for a
young athlete to come forward.
Is the criminal prosecution of
young black men.
Who their whole lives were told
to be tougher and more masculine
and to make sure they got out on
that court and one no matter
what.
Who are likely raised in
cultures of hazing, who are
likely raised in cultures where
they didn't get to have
conversations about affirmative
consent and be heard and
supported in that learning.
Yet. Meanwhile,
They have not been coaches or
administration or the
institution.
Face any accountability. They've
remained unscathed.
Well, young black men are facing
criminal charges.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady just to
confirm and clarify. Does your
bill
Further criminalize young people
who've
Fallen into situations like
this.
Mr Speaker and General General
Lady. No, it doesn't. We have
had some penalties in the past.
This time we took those out. And
with what part of what This bill
does is to teach affirmative
consent and make sure that
everyone that it's part of the
orientation that all students
staff faculty and regions
understand what affirmative
consent is, and it's very
simple.
Only yes means yes. Not saying
no. Doesn't mean yes, being
passed out doesn't mean yes
Being incapacitated by something
else doesn't mean yes. So in in
another part of this bill is to
provide counseling or what? To
both the accused and the victim.
But there is no punishment and
another part of it is that if if
something happens that and we
know that college kids drink
underage and do things that are
not part of the code of the
school, and they shouldn't be
doing, But we are taking out any
punishment for people who
because they're afraid to come
forward because they were there
was underage drinking, or there
was drug use, or there was
whatever.
And so they're afraid to come
forward. So we've taken that out
that short of something really
serious or something around
plagiarism or something that the
students will be held harmless.
The witnesses
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you. For those clarifications
and
Reminders about the compromises
you've made. And the focus
you've brought to this bill as
you've introduced it today.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I also
really appreciate that you've
included new considerations
about counseling and access to
support and resources both for
what society might call the
offender and the victim.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I'm
sure you're familiar with the
research. But when someone has
been a survivor of inappropriate
behavior, sexual assault, sexual
harm.
They are more likely to become a
perpetrator.
Of that same harm.
And while that's a heartbreaking
reality and data point
I often wonder where we failed
these young people in the first
place.
So we may be failed to keep them
safe.
We catch them later on in life,
and then we punished them for
the harm they have caused.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. It's
certainly not what your bill is
called, and I appreciate that
This is about affirmative
consent. Yes mean yes.
But for me, this is also about
restorative justice.
We're trying to catch things
upstream.
We're not trying to
Investigate and enforce Just
when things happen. We're trying
to encourage cultures.
And meaningful conversations so
that people can make different
decisions about their bodies and
lives and their futures and Mr
Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate you for centering
those values in your bill.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady, as
as they get to the wrap of my
points. I also remember in your
bill, and especially now that
there's such a focus on higher
ed. What it meant for me to
consider reporting.
Sexual assault and intimate
partner violence when I was a
college student
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Until
the end. I refused to make that
report.
Because I did not trust the
institution.
Had the capacity or interest.
In keeping me safe.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady and in
that part of my life.
I was in a relationship with the
national championship athletes.
And they walked around that
campus like they were Kings.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady in the
years preceding when I'd start
to hear the folks checking in
like
He used to hurt you, didn't he?
I thought, did they not give a
damn about the hurt when it was
happening?
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady when
the institution found out in
roundabout ways.
I was pressured to report
And they said, we have to
Capture what he did, and we have
to, um, figure this out and
document it and I said, the
threat of violence to me is
still so real.
What are you going to do to keep
me alive?
Much less put me through a
rigorous process where I
imagined my integrity, sobriety.
Um
Decision making around my sexual
activities. We're going to be
questioned.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
didn't trust that they would
keep me alive.
I thought what restraining
order? What policy? What
procedure is going to keep him
from coming to end my life.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady,
they said at the time because of
academic and institutions
institutional procedures.
That they had limitations.
To what they could do.
To consider my safety in that
process.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
happen to not be the athlete in
that situation.
But no one was asking me about
affirmative consent.
No one was asking what I'd said
Yes to or what? I had said no to
At that point, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady, which I imagine is
part of the decision making that
happen at MSU. They were
managing liability.
They wanted to document that the
day they found out they had
taken some action.
That was not based on what I
needed.
It was based on managing their
legal risk.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Does
your bill
Move institutions.
To a different conversation
about their own internal
policies and procedures.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes, it does. In several ways it
requires, as I said before that,
that they they teach affirmative
consent in their orientation and
that the member the people, the
staff of the university, who has
responsibility for investigating
and taking these complaints.
Do so in a, um
Well for that first day if the
standard is affirmative consent,
That's the standard that they're
going to be going things on, Um
And so the staff of the higher
post secondary education has to
treat the people with, um,
trauma, informed care and
trauma. I'm I'm blanking, but
and they also have to have
Either contracts or agreements
with
Local resources for as I said
before both the the victim and
the person who who did it so
that
Both of those parties can have
access to counseling legal
advice if they need it. Um,
Both of those parties can have
access to counseling. Legal
advice. If they need it. We're
trying to take care of
particularly the victim, but
But everyone at the at the
college or university, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
When I hear what's possible with
this bill, we can't guarantee
People's behaviors or actions we
can't guarantee that
institutions are going to tread
with more care or consideration.
We can't guarantee we're
changing cultures.
But Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
I so much as I have for several
years now.
Appreciate your bill because
you're taking us in the right
direction.
You're giving the young people
and the people of all sorts of
generations, including the
people today that asked me
what's affirmative consent? No
means no. And I had to laugh and
say.
No. Yes Means yes. We're
learning today. All of us today.
Deserve those kind of
conversations as Dini Mexicans,
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. Thank you for
bringing this bill. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Can I please sit?
My body is falling apart all
over the place.
Next. We have the gentle lady
from Chavez, Curry and Roosevelt
representative Reap.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
generated from burning Leo.
Yield, please? Mr Speaker, I
yield
Thank you, General lady. Um
I understand.
What I think you're trying to do
here and and and I would just
preface is with
My career has been
Prosecuting rape cases and
sexual assault cases. So I have
anybody understand.
What victims go through and have
dealt with it for 25 years, and
I want to talk a little bit
about the bill and the process,
But then I also want to talk
about maybe
In effect that
Mr Speaker and General lady,
that maybe not everyone's seen,
which might be that it's going
to really affect how rape cases
are prosecuted and actually
whether there's successfully
prosecuted.
And so I want to try to
understand your bill a little
bit because I'm a little
confused on the layout of it,
but
Mr Speaker and General Lady, So
this is going to be
Where a
University and public University
or state funded post Secondary
Educational University is going
to adopt policies and trauma
Responses on how to investigate
sexual assault. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker? General? Yes, okay
and
I learned. I noticed that you
list and I don't want to really
get into the policies and
procedures about what it means
to consent or not to consent or
what it means.
Whether it's obviously no. You
cannot have sexual intercourse
with someone who's unconscious
is kind of mirrors the criminal
laws a little bit, Mr Speaker in
general lady, but I'm working
CERN about
First. Let's talk about the
process. Um
How will this How will this
happen? Can you explain if
somebody who has been sexually
assaulted?
Um, how do they report this?
What is the procedure? It
doesn't seem to be laid out very
well as to what will happen. So,
Mr Speaker. Generally, if you
could go into that a little bit
for me, Mr Speaker in general
Lady that's governed by title
nine.
Okay. And if you could explain
that to me, please. What? What
does that mean? It's governed by
title nine. So what is Title
nine. Say about this issue,
please. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Hmm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. So it will the
people whoever the university
decides are the the appropriate
people will will get a report
and we know that there is
mandatory reporting if they're
under 18, But so they will. They
will
Try to help the two people or
more people involved, and
eventually it will end up at the
E E O C office or compromised.
Okay, Mr Speaker generally, so
I'm not really understanding so
somebody
If I come in, and I'm a student,
and I decided to report to the
university or whoever it is, I'm
still not really clear who who
it is.
And I say I've been sexually
assaulted what will be the next
steps that will occur, Mr
Speaker?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, gentle
woman. I'm sorry.
It will be referred to the
whoever the investigative office
on campuses.
Okay. And so, Mr Speaker,
generally so
Well, each campus have like a
different policy on this or it
will just automatically referred
be referred to a certain section
on the campus like Is that going
to be the initial
Person that it's disclosed to
and will the campus be the
initial
I guess point of contact and an
I met Mr Speaker and General
Lady. This is this is not about
prosecution or investigation.
This is about providing support
and needed services for the
students who are involved.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady and I
understand that, but
I also want to look at what the
best results will be for some
type of investigation that would
occur. Are you aware or have you
talked to? Um specifically? Do
you know what a
multidisciplinary team is in the
state of New Mexico in reverence
to sexual assault?
Yes, Mr Speaker and General
lady. Thank you. If you could
explain what you believe that Mr
Speaker, and generally this bill
has nothing to do with that, but
it would be bringing a
multidisciplinary team together
that could include
The DA's Office Investigators
university folks, but But this
this bill doesn't address that.
And Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
I understand doesn't address
that, but it affects that. And
so that's what I want to talk to
you about.
Um in the state of New Mexico
districts across the state have
developed what's called
multidisciplinary teams and
you're aware or maybe not aware
they involve specialized
People in sexual assault for law
enforcement, um sexual assault
nurses.
Children need them Families,
safehouse interviews and these
people come together in these
different districts, and they
determine how to best respond to
a sexual assault case in order
to make sure the victim is taken
care of, and there's the best
chance of a successful
prosecution. And so have you
discussed, Mr Speaker.
And, um, General Lady. How this
bill
This administrative type
situation will affect
prosecutions with these
different agencies involving
rape. Mr Speaker and General
Lady. Yes, we have. All right.
And what did they express to
you? Mr Speaker Generally.
Mr Speaker, and generally they
did not express concern that it
would interview and I want to
make a point here that
There may not be a report to law
enforcement. This is what the
victim decides to do so they
can. They cannot report to law
enforcement and enlist their
under 18. And there's mandatory
reporting that is their
prerogative.
Well, Mr Speaker and General
lady. What I'm concerned about
is if you did talk to these
agencies.
They would tell you
That the university doesn't need
to probably be the initial
responder because
There's there's a lot of issues
that go. These are very
specific.
Types of cases as I'm sure
you're aware and we've talked
about. I mean, you're aware of
how many
Um
People actually report rapes.
Correct, Madam Chair or Mr
Speaker and
General lady Mr Speaker in
general Lady.
The majority.
The majority. Do not report
correct. Actually, Mr Speaker in
General Lady 6
6% of rapists actually ever even
served a day in jail. Would you
agree with that?
Mr Speaker, and generally this
has nothing to do with the
criminal justice system. Mr
Speaker General, I'll get I'll
get to my point. But would you
agree with that?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I
don't know.
Alright. So, Mr Speaker, and
generally if they're reported
Do you know what percentage is
actually has a chance of being
arrested? Just speaking.
Generally, I'd love to hear it.
50%
And if they arrest is made, Mr
Speaker in general Lady
Do you know? Um what the chances
are of them actually going into
a prosecution.
Please tell me 80%.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. But
if the prosecution actually
occurs, do you know what the
actual conviction rate is for
somebody who's been sexually
assaulted in the type of
situation that you're talking
about? Mr Speaker? Gentle lady.
No, I don't.
58%. And my point is Mr Speaker
in General Lady. This is a very
specific area of crime. Very
specialized. People have to work
in it and how it's responded to
is extremely important. And Mr
Speaker in general lady, Do you
know why this conviction rate is
so low and generally no.
It's because there's never any
witnesses to these crimes and
and I'm sure you can understand
that Mr Speaker in general lady,
so you're dealing with
situations, especially on a
college campus where it's often
intoxicated people.
Or, um, he said, she said cases
things of that nature. Mr.
Speaker generally would you
agree, Mr Speaker, and generally
this has nothing to do with the
criminal.
So I'm not sure why we're going
down this road. We're going down
this road. Mr. Speaker in
General Lady, is it? I'm looking
at Page three of your Bill
section E procedure shall
include an initial response by
the post Secondary Educational
institutions, employees or
contractors to report of an
incident including providing
written notification to the
complainant.
Bob la and eventually eventually
refer them to services and law
enforcement. Um, are you
familiar with that part of your
bill? Mr Speaker? And generally?
Yes.
And these people that are gonna
actually Mr Speaker in general
Lady.
Uh, take these initial reports.
Are they going to have
specialized training in that
area, Mr Speaker and generally,
yes, it's already required by
title nine.
All right, and so
My concern is
If you deal with cases of sexual
assault.
Do you know what the two most
important things are when
someone reports sexual assault
of in response for a victim?
General lady, please tell me the
two most important things that
if you if you did discuss this
with, say nurses, and he did
discuss it with sexual assault
law enforcement, they will tell
you the first most important
thing. Mr Speaker, General Lady
is to make sure that the victim
is medically okay.
That she's not. I mean, if she
had been strangled if she's been
raped, that she gets the medical
The medical care that she needs.
That's the number one concern.
And number two. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, is it? There is a
preservation of evidence in case
she ever decides She wants to
prosecute that case. Are you
aware of those two things, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady? Yes,
All right. And so when you talk
to sexual assault, nurses and M,
D, T s and sexual assault
specialization, law enforcement
officers, I'm sure they told you
that correct.
Mr Speaker and gentle Lady
actually knew that before
Alright, so I My concern is if
we put an institution Mr Speaker
in general lady into the realm
of this where they are the first
people to be reported to
You're taking the chance that
They are actually ever let me
just strike that Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Is your first priority that this
victim in this situation gets
the medical care they need.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, if
they need it, yes, but many
times reports don't happen until
days or weeks or even months or
years later.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I
absolutely agree. That is the
situation often, but that is
also the opposite. In many
cases, correct.
Mr Speaker and Generating. My
experts are saying no. And I
will. I will introduce my
experts. Alexandria Taylor, who
is the executive director of the
sexual assault programs of New
Mexico, and Jess Clark is a
Just director of Prevention.
Alright, so your experts are
saying no. To what? Mr Speaker
gentility that
I'm sorry. I
Could Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Could you repeat the question?
If you Mr Speaker generally if
you spoke to sexual assault
nurses, and obviously your
expert is very familiar with
that. I'm sure she would agree
the number one priority is the
safety of the victim in the
sense that she received or he
received medical care and
treatment.
Mr Speaker and General lady.
Yes. And would she agree that
the second most important thing
is that this male or female?
Whoever it maybe has a chance to
actually have the evidence
preserved in case they choose to
it someday.
Prosecute their case They don't
have to. They don't have to
report it to law enforcement,
But they have that choice
someday down the road if they
choose to do it.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
What? What's most important to
do is what the survivor wants
you to do at that point
And I, Mr Speaker. Generally, I
agree, but my concern is that
we're having people that maybe
are not very experienced in the
area, deciding what is best for
somebody else's prosecution of a
case or administrative hearing.
And I worry when you have an
administrative hearing with a
burden of preponderance of
evidence, When is this
administration is this and Mr
Speaker? Generally, It's not
clear in the statute because it
or your bill it jumps from
The policies and procedures down
to
What the burden is or the burden
of proof preponderance of an
evidence of evidence, but it
doesn't really lay out the
procedures very well in the bill
at all of how this will take
place, and so is this
administrative hearing. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. When is
this going to occur? Mr Mr
Speaker and General Lady. Those
are all title nine functions
that are spelled out. And so I'm
asking you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. When were they occur?
Mr Speaker generally when the
victim reports
She would, Mr Speaker generally
then she would immediately go
into administrative hearing Or
would you immediately refer her
to law enforcement Or what would
be the procedure? Mr Speaker and
gentle lady? As I said, before,
it depends on what the survivor
once
All right. And so if
I am in concerned what the
institution is going to advise
her, Mr Speaker, General Lady
like if someone comes in and
says I've been sexually
assaulted.
What will your people or the
institutions people advise her
to do or not to do?
So there, Miss Madam's Mr
Speaker and General Lady. There
is, um let me see.
Ah, they're they're having
having a grievance process in
place to address title, nine
complaints and then contacting a
complainant confidentially.
To to discuss availability of
supportive measures with or
without filing a formal
complaint.
Consider their wishes and
explain process for filing
formal complaints.
And Mr Speaker, and generally
that's that's title nine.
One moment, Mr Speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. I'm
just the concern to me is the
way this bill is laid out, so
the burden of proof is
preponderance of evidence.
Obviously, in a criminal
proceeding, it's beyond a
reasonable doubt. Would you
agree with that? Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady it is, but this has
nothing to do with the criminal.
Justice. But Mr Speaker
generally it does because this
is such a specific area that if
you involve a university and an
administrative hearing
You have the ability to really
blow the chances for this victim
to get a successful prosecution
or case if you were his or her
case, if you are not handling it
properly, Mr Speaker, General
Lady That's why it's such a
specific area was specifically
trained people to They know how
to interview these people. They
know how to recommend services.
They know how to treat them.
They don't force them into
prosecution. Of course, they
have to decide if they want to
do that themselves.
But when you throw Mr Speaker
General Lady a university into
this in an administrative
hearing, that basically will
probably happen even before I
would assume a criminal trial.
And you don't do the proper
steps to make sure that this
victim is actually seeing the
people she needs to see
preserving evidence.
You're basically I will say.
Just blowing the chances of a
successful prosecution for her
if that's what she decides she
wants to do. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I want to know if
you've considered the fact that
law enforcement
If she I mean, if she came in,
would you refer her to
immediately to a rape crisis
center? At least in the
situation, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. Yes. All right. And so
what? Do you believe? A rape
crisis, Mr Speaker and generally
provides advocacy and support
and to go back to what you
stated before universities are
already involved.
Under title nine, and this
report says that there is the
impact on the criminal process.
No impact schools have an
independent duty under title
nine to respond to allegations
of sexual assault. This does not
impact criminal process anyway
as it is a separate process, Mr
Speaker generally that's my
problem because it does impact
it. It does impact the
prosecution of the case.
Because it is such a sensitive
and specific area with specific
people. Your prosecutors
specialized in this area. You
have cops who specialize in this
area. You have sexual assault
nurses and then for kids safe
House interviews. There's just
so many different things
involved in the prosecution of a
case like this. Where if you
don't handle it right at the
university level.
They do They do actually deal
with each other. Mr Speaker,
General Lady what Senate
administrative hearing? Is that
going to be able to be used in a
criminal proceeding? What if
it's not handled properly? They
could be consistent statements
Inconsistent statements. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Are you
saying that none of the stuff in
the administrative hearing will
come into a criminal case
Because Mr Speaker, General Lady
In my experience, it probably
could if it's any statement
made.
Hmm. Mr Speaker and General
Lady. Those procedures are
already in place under title
nine, and they are confidential.
Mr Speaker. I'm looking around
Alright.
Website. Penske's getting cool
By the way, Mr Speaker in one
hour into my birthday, and I'm
here on this floor. Yes, and I
heard Nice gentleman from
Chavez.
Where are you? Not not This
gentleman, the other the the
other gentleman with more hair.
Curly hair.
Represent 1000. I made an
executive decision while in the
bathroom.
That Henry is the newest
Happy birthday song singer of
this chamber
So if the body will indulgence,
gentlemen from Chavez to sing
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady.
Happy birthday.
Birthday.
Two.
He didn't have a people.
Birthday, too.
B.
That day.
Hey.
Madam represented
Happy paper.
Birthday.
That was awesome.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentleman
know that these are webcast and
archived forever.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I am, uh
Regrettably aware of that, Okay?
Happy birthday. Looks like we
have a quarterback. So thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Um, Mr Speaker and General Lady.
We were talking about whether
the administrative hearing will
have any effect. I believe on
the criminal proceeding, and I
believe you stated that it would
not
And Mr Speaker. Generally that
might be from the administrative
perspective but from the
criminal realm, I can tell you
that any prior statements can
affect a criminal proceeding.
Mr. Speaker generally. Are you
aware of that?
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
Yes, but as as has been stated
many times, this has nothing to
do with the criminal
proceedings.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, I
understand. I understand that
you don't believe it does, but
I'm telling you in reality, it
does affect the criminal
proceeding. Mr Speaker, General
Lady because
For example, what if the
administrative hearing finds
something inconclusive or not
preponderance of the evidence or
whatever it may be, And at the
same time, Mr Speaker?
Generally, there's a criminal
prosecution going on. And I
guess Mr Speaker, General Lady
I'm suing you can imagine there
there could be a dual dual thing
going on at the same time, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes, of course there can But as
you stated with your stats more,
the vast majority are not
reported.
Well, Mr Speaker. Generally, I
believe I would beg to differ.
They are not reported. But if
they're going to report it to a
university in my experience, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, they're
also going to probably reported
to the police.
Um, Mr Speaker and Generating.
My experts are saying that is
not the case. Okay, well, Mr
Speaker, generally we can agree
to disagree on that. But I've
seen that if someone is willing
to talk about being raped
Or sexually assaulted or
domestic violence there do
generally willing to tell the
police and they're generally
willing to talk about it, so I
haven't seen many circumstances
where they tell the police and
don't tell anybody else. And in
fact, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I think it might even be
arguable that it would be harder
to tell the university than to
tell the police
Because of what they may go
through in the university
situation.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Part of what this is attempting
to get to is to have someone
that they can trust that they
can go to. They can go to a
professor at the university and
its wood. It's a lot easier in
my opinion when I was raped. I
didn't report it for a long time
to anybody, but it would have
been a lot easier for me to go
to someone I trusted.
Than to go to police because I
knew at that time. What were you
doing? What were you wearing?
Were you drinking and and? And I
wasn't prepared to handle that.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I 100%
understand that I've tried many
cases where that is the
situation.
But what a better alternative B
to educate the students that
they could actually go to a
sexual assault nurse or a rape
crisis center where they can get
the medical treatment that they
need and actually had the
evidence collected so that if
they do want to prosecute it
later, you haven't just
demolished the entire case
because the initial responder
Has been someone from a
university question and a stupid
question a student or a victim
about a case where they really
don't have the expertise and how
to do that type of
investigation. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker Generally, could you
repeat your question, Mr
Speaker? Generally, I guess my
question is
Wouldn't it possibly be a better
idea instead of handling it
through the university?
As the initial responders to
refer them to rape crisis center
immediately so that they could
actually get the help treatment
care and everything they need.
instead taking statements from
talking about, you know,
administrative hearings or what?
What have you, um so that they
can actually
Get the health care. They need
to decide if they want to report
it to law enforcement.
And actually preserve evidence.
So if later down the road, they
do decide they want to prosecute
that evidence is there
Mr Speaker in general lady. That
is the process that they will be
referred to services again.
What? What services they feel
they need. They will be provided
resources. They will be assisted
to get to those resources. So
once again, it's all about what
the victim wants.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
understand what you're saying.
But you and this bill say that
you're going to be the initial
response and initial response
should generally be somebody who
specialized in this area. So
have you thought about
I like the educational part of
it. It mirrors the criminal
statutes and
I think that
Maybe an edge of the educational
piece might be some type of
orientation as you suggested, or
some type of training to where
you're saying, Look if you're
sexually assaulted, you can go
to this rape crisis Center, Mr.
Chair, Um and general lady and
say, Look, I'm going to report
this. It's confidential. You
don't have to tell anybody. It
doesn't mean the cops are going
to get involved. And then you're
gonna have a specialized people
actually discussing with them
taking statements from them that
are not going to affect
A potential criminal
investigation.
Mr Speaker, General Lady or
Have a somebody in a university
with no training, possibly
taking statements that will be
used against them in a possible
criminal proceeding. If there
one bit like inconsistent, and I
can tell you from experience, Mr
Speaker, General Lady that is so
crucial and criminal sexual
assault case that it is handled.
Perfectly and so have you
thought about just maybe
educating
These students.
And getting them to a rape
crisis center without the
university be involved in any
type of statements taking any
doing any type of ministrations
hearing until they have figured
this out with law enforcement if
that is what they choose to do.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, As
I've stated before. This is
federal law under title nine.
There has to be a title nine
coordinator at each university,
and they are highly trained.
Well, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I can tell you that there are
specialized law enforcement
training people.
That that make up every county
in the state so that these cases
are handled properly. I can tell
you what this bill what? I
understand you're trying to do
is is trying to confirm that no
means no. And I believe
Mr Speaker, General lady at this
point and where we are in
today's society. I think most of
these things everybody pretty
much knows. I understand that
females get drunk and they think
it's their fault and then and
then they feel like they
shouldn't report that is a very
common thing in a rape case, and
they'll report it when they want
to report it, But what we want
to do is make sure that we
actually get them reporting to
the proper people so we can have
a proper investigation where we
don't have leading questions and
we don't have somebody.
Demolishing the criminal
investigation that they might
want to proceed with. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady I feel
like maybe possibly informing
them of their options and
getting them not in the system
with the university, which, by
the way, Mr Speaker, and
generally what if it's a faculty
member? What? What would you do
in a situation where student is
alleging something against a
faculty member?
In this administrative hearing.
You don't lay out really
anything about who's going to be
on this. Who's going to decide
this case? Mr Speaker and
General Lady. That's the title
nine rules. Okay? And Mr Speaker
generally. Could you tell me
those title nine rolls, so I
know
Mr Speaker in General Lady. So
the complainant for lack of a
better word will have someone to
support them as well. The
respondent in the university has
investigative personnel that
that will that under title nine.
They have to do an
investigation.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I guess
my my question was who's going
to make up this?
Panel of people who are going to
decide whether this
Incident occurred or didn't
occur, and especially if it's a
faculty member, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I guess I go back
to this whole I don't like an
internalized into a university
when they could be protecting
their own things of that nature.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
Can you explain?
How this and I am still unclear.
I know you say it's all
listening title line, but I am
not familiar with that. And I
don't know if the body is
familiar with that. So if you
could list out when somebody
comes out comes in and reports
of sexual assault to a
university exactly what
procedures will happen? How will
they get to this administrative
hearing?
When will this administrative
hearing happen?
And then
And then when will I know? You
said it can't be used against
him. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Anything they say in another
hearing can be used against him
in a criminal case. Those are
criminal laws.
Maybe the Ministry of hearing
things that but the criminal
courts think different any prior
statement they make.
If it's leading questions from
someone in the university or
anything like that. It's going
to be used against him later in
a criminal case and possibly
make their case worse.
So if you could just Mr Speaker,
General Lady lay out what this
title nine processes so we can
understand exactly what's going
to happen when these
Adults, young adults. Children
come in and report they've been
sexually assaulted. Mr Speaker
and General Lady. I think I've
covered that that they will that
both the respondent in the
complainant will have someone to
help them get counseling get to
the rape crisis Center. Um,
whatever the need is and these
teams already exist at
universities under title nine.
So we are not going to write in
this bill what the team is going
to look like because that's
federal law.
Well, Mr Speaker, General Lady
and I understand They were not
writing it in the bill, but I
think the body has a right to
know exactly what will happen
when somebody reports a case
like this.
Can you explain to this body and
to me, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
what exactly is going to happen?
Besides referring them to
services? Is someone gonna take
a statement from them?
How long will it be before they
get to an administrative
hearing? Um what are the
processes as an administrative
hearing so that I can
understand, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, how that is going to
affect a rape victim in her
criminal case.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, the
title nine coordinator will put
the team together and they are
responsible for
For the the What happens
essentially
In schools have trained
investigators.
So, Mr Speaker generally when
Who will this administrative
body be that decides whether
this victim
Was a victim or if this
perpetrator did something wrong.
Are these members of faculty or
these specialized train people?
I'm not clear on that Mr Speaker
Generating Speaker in General
Lady, every school must have a
title nine coordinator
Every school must designate at
least one employee who was
responsible for coordinating the
school's compliance with Title
nine. This person is sometimes
referred to as the title nine
coordinator. Schools must notify
all students and employees of
the name or title and contact
information of the title nine
coordinator.
The coordinator's
responsibilities, including
include overseeing all
complaints of sex
discrimination and identifying
and addressing any patterns or
systemic problems that arise
during the review of such
complaints every school must
have and make known procedures
for students to file complaints.
Well, that's discrimination. Um
That's all of it and under title
nine
Okay, so matter, Mr Speaker,
and, um, generating. I'm not
sure my question was answered.
Will this
This title nine investigative
body, whoever it is
Who are these faculty members?
Are these just people? Can you
explain that to me, please?
Generally from from
Chavez Curry Roosevelt,
generally from Burleigh. Oh, I
Excuse me for interjecting, but
I believe that depend on the
university and the institution
so
Um, I think that
The question itself is fair. But
I do think that the answer is
very broadly will depend on the
institution. Proceed. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I just
wish she would have said that,
but I mean, I've never were able
was able to actually get her to
say that. It's just depends on
the university. So that that
answers my question. Um, in that
sense, but
It still doesn't change the fact
that
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Are you saying that you 100%
know that what is said in this
administrative hearing or what
happens in this administrative
hearing cannot be used against
the victim.
Or the perpetrator later in a
criminal proceeding, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady, I can't say
that Okay, and that Mr Speaker
generated that is my concern
because of sensitivity of these
cases and the specialized
training that is involved with
these cases. And if you go into
administrative hearing, Mr
Speaker and General Lady and the
preponderance of the evidence is
what above 50%? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
And this this body, whoever it
is, and it could be the
perpetrator could be a faculty
member. For all we know.
Mr Speaker, generally correct.
It could be a faculty member
against the student. Mr Speaker
and young lady. Yes.
And so they decided, well.
I don't believe that this
actually occurred. She was
intoxicated or whatever whatever
they decide.
How is that decision possibly
going to play into the criminal
matter and more so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady into the mindset of
the victim that that hearing
will probably occur prior to the
criminal proceeding because of
because they're just going to be
faster than how long it takes to
criminal court and those two
inter lapping together
overlapping together.
Mr Speaker, General Lady will
actually probably or could hurt
the victim more and not wanting
to go forward in the criminal
proceeding. Mr Speaker and
General Lady, This is a process
that's already in place. We are
not affecting that. What we are
saying is that the university
people have to provide
Trauma, informed care.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, I
understand that I'm just what
I'm not liking is is that
they're the first response to
what is a definite protocol of
best practices in the state of
New Mexico. And so Mr Speaker
generated that. That's my
concern is your it says in the
spill your the initial responder
and the initial responder takes
statements. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, they are involved in this
process.
And so that is my concern is
that
We have specialized people who
do this training and I'm not
really sure When you talk about
these title, nine people what
type of training they have in
sexual assault or questioning
victims or if you're even going
to question the victim, or if
you're going to re firm right to
a rape crisis center. It's just
so unclear to me, Mr Speaker,
John Leddy, and I understand it
could be the policies. But Mr
Speaker, and generally this this
process is already in place
under title nine. We are not
changing any of that.
And and the university does not
necessarily have to be the first
person. It depends on where the
victim feels most comfortable.
They may take themselves to a
rape crisis center. They may
take themselves to a hospital.
There's nothing in this that
says that the university has to
be the first place, but it's an
option if that's where the
victim feels the most
comfortable
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
will, um you be if a victim
comes in and to the university,
will you be telling them that
they should or could report it
to law enforcement initially,
right when they come in
Mr Speaker and General Lady. The
processes are already in place
in title nine that that
referrals are made to what
whatever the victim wants,
including the option of
reporting to a law enforcement
officer.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I
understand. I think what you're
trying to do with this bill is
Is something that
It is good in a sense, but I
just want the body to understand
that there is more to this and
justice. One process, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
that
If you talk to people who
specialize in this area.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, you're
going to see that these cases
have to be handled in a certain
way to even get a conviction,
which the victim may want in
this case, and it all depends
from the very initial start How
it's handled, Mr Speaker
generally, and that is why
across the state we have these
teams.
That meet monthly to decide. How
do we deal with this to where we
can make this?
The best for the victim as
possible, and initially it is
getting them into that sexual
assault unit so that they can
have their exam and make sure
they're medically okay if they
had been strangled or anything
like that, that they can still
have major health issues from
being strangled and make sure
they're treated for any sexually
transmitted diseases that they
could have gotten. Make sure
they weren't
Given some type of rape drug all
these different tests that can
be done so it's most important
thing, Mr Speaker, General Lady
and the second is to give them a
chance to preserve the evidence
that might be on their body.
Even if they don't want to
pursue it.
That it can be held for years in
case they changed their mind and
want to pursue it. And I guess
my point Mr Speaker, General
ladies, we have a problem with
the spill is I don't think this
well, I don't think the bill is
laid out very well. Um, I think
it it jumps all over the place
and it's It's not clear exactly
how the system is going to work.
It's not clear, Mr Speaker,
General Lady whether these
findings in the administrative
case
And the criminal case how those
will affect one another. Even
though Mr Speaker generally I'm
pretty sure that it will affect
the criminal case, Majorly, but
I just think this bill is, um
All over the place.
And mainly, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I think we need to
really take a big broad look at
what sexual assault is about.
And these different things that
are listed. You can't have sex
with somebody who's
incapacitated. That is a
criminal law right now. Most of
these are actually the criminal
law right now, if you just look
at the rape statutes
Um and that has to be proven
beyond a reasonable doubt. And
I'm concerned if you have an
administrative hearing with a
preponderance of the evidence
standard.
That's going to come way before
the criminal proceeding with
people that we don't even really
know our experience in sexual
assault, you could be doing more
harm to the victim.
By this type of process than if
it was just handled by the
specialists and the way it needs
to be handled to get a proper
case, but more importantly, to
make sure that the victim is
taken care of, and gets to make
the decision on what she wants
to do.
So
I can't support this bill. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady. I don't
think it's a bill that is going
to help victims. I don't think
it's a bill that's going to make
cases better for victims. I do
believe that they report to the
university that they are going
to also report to law
enforcement. I believe they
should be report be referred
immediately to law enforcement,
or at least to a sexual assault
center.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I would
hope that you would consider in
this training.
Even posters or things that's in
the bathroom. Things like that.
They would say if you've been
raped.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, you
can call this number and you can
have a confidential appointment.
You will be treated and it will
not be reported to law
enforcement will be confidential
and you do not have to report
it.
And I think something like that
type of campaign would work way
better than some type of
administrative hearing.
That we don't even know if
faculties are involved in
protecting their own. It's just
a process that seems very
unclear to me, so I cannot
support this bill. Um big
concerns how it's going to
affect crime, victims of rape
and actually domestic violence
Also, because, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I guess you are
you familiar with domestic
violence in the cycle of
domestic violence?
Speaker and generally yes. Would
you explain that for the body
could understand that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen and General
Lady, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. The cycle of domestic
violence is about power and
control.
Yes, Mr Speaker, General lady
and it is an and so part of
this the way the cycle of
domestic violence works is
Crimes committed and you have a
victim and the victim will
report to law enforcement or to
the university or whoever might
be and they will tell the truth
about what happened because
they're scared.
And then what happens? Mr
Speaker? General Lady is the
perpetrator starts reaching out
to this victim and starts
apologizing.
And starts telling him that
they'll never do it again. Mr
Speaker, General Eddie and then
what happens is the victim
starts realizing well, I can't
make it without this person, and
then they recant.
And so if they go to this
administrative hearing, and they
recanted, and there's no basis
for anything found, I also
believe that will affect a
criminal proceeding because
those those recants that went
and the victim re cancer will be
used against him in a criminal
proceeding. I can I can just
guarantee it because this is
what I've done for my whole
career.
So I have concerns about the
domestic violence aspect of this
bill to, um because of the cycle
of domestic violence and how
victims of domestic violence I
would say, Mr Speaker, General
Lady at 20% of the time, Don't
recant. I mean, so if you think
of the statistics on that
Pretty much every victim ideal
One out of five actually wants
to go forward and sticks with
the case until after they've
been abused. Maybe five or six
times, Mr Speaker generally, so
this this also deals with
domestic violence and it deals
with the situation where you're
going to have a victim who's
going to recant and
administrative hearing and then
that is going to affect a
criminal prosecution because Mr
Speaker General Lady
In a criminal prosecution. We
can use things like
911 calls and legal evidence
that wouldn't generally not be
admissible and
May not be understood and
administrative hearing frankly,
like it would be in a criminal
proceeding. So I have concerns
about the domestic violence.
part of this bill. Also, um, but
for those reasons, I just don't
think this is good for sexual
assault victims. I don't think
it's good for any victims to
involve the university in this
process with an administrative
hearing.
Because it's not the proper way
we deal with sexual assault
victims.
Under best practices in the
state of New Mexico and dealing
with law enforcement and the
specialized people who deal with
this every single day. So with
that, Mr Speaker, Thank you,
gentle lady and I'll pass. Thank
you. Thank you. Generally to
this further debate, the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
representatives, the Penske
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady from Benaglio
Yield Mr Speaker, I will gladly
yield to our whip.
Thank you, General lady And Mr
Speaker. Um, Mr Speaker. I
wanted to highlight. Um, some of
the pieces of this bill that are
really important to me.
Um, as many of my colleagues in
the body. No, I am a mom of two
boys, and they are a few years
away from college. So I look
took a very close. Look at this
bill. Um, because I I know that
for me, you know, it's sort of
thinking back to my college
days.
Um what I even knew about this
issue. What? What was the
discussion about consent at that
time?
And I really kind of came up
short. I'm not sure that I
really had any experience where
someone sat me down and said
Have you thought about this?
This is these are some of the
things you need to think about
in terms of consent. This is, um
what it means to give consent. I
don't
Granted, my college days are
many years behind me. Um,
probably more than I care to
admit, Mr Speaker and generally,
however, um, I thought, what a
valuable discussion this would
have been
Um, for me to understand. Um
what? What consent really looks
like and Mr Speaker and General
Lady, um
Is is one of the the figures
you're seeking to impact that
one in four undergraduate women,
um, experience sexual assault it
sometime in college.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes.
And actually, Mr Speaker and
General lady. Uh, it also has
come to my attention that almost
7% of undergraduate men.
And another one in four
transgender and gender
nonconforming college students
have also been sexually
assaulted. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. Yes.
Mr Speaker in general Lady. I
think that brings me to my
initial point. Which is this is
why this legislation is so
critically important.
To think that one in four
college students could be
experiencing something like
this, uh, is pretty staggering,
and it means that we Ah
I really need to get this
policy right? And it also means
that
Truly what we're doing. Maybe
isn't working that well, if this
problem is so significant
Mr Speaker in General Lady. How
many years have you worked on
this legislation?
Or Mr Speaker in general Lady,
if you know how many how many
years has this legislation of
this type being brought before?
The body.
Mr Speaker. And generally this
is our fourth time. We've been
working on it since 2019.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
I appreciate that, Um, the
complaint portion of this
Legislation.
Is important in terms of how
that is handled and what the
response from the institutions
are.
Um, However, you know when I
think about sending my kids off
to college, or I think about
myself going off to college, I
think the one of the things I
really appreciated about this
bill is the prevention
components in the educational
components, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, one
of the things that I was looking
at, Um was the unpaid three is
outlined a comprehensive trauma
informed response training
program, Mr Speaker and General
lady, and I would imagine that
part of the reason that that is
so important is because
If someone steps forward.
To share something that has
happened to them.
Um, We want to make sure that
that response does not also
Um, perpetrate trauma on that
individual, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, do you? Would you agree
with that? Mr Speaker and
General Lady 100%, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, I think there I
can think of many times in my
life where having been through a
difficult incident and shared
that with a friend that their
depending on their response,
their response either made me
feel better or worse about
myself.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Would you agree with that? Mr
Speaker and gentle lady? Yes.
And I have this Mr Speaker and
General Lady, um
I can also think of times where
those responses serve as part of
the educational experience.
And
I think about our college
students who are I mean, I
really grew up in college.
That's when I really sort of
Finally figured out how to
navigate the world. And a big
piece of that is learning about
these some of these most
intimate interactions, Mr
Speaker and General Lady and, um
Ensuring that
The employees, contractors
anyone involved in investigating
and adjudicating sexual assault.
Domestic violence dating
violence.
Um, you know, very serious. Um
Experiences that are being
addressed by this bill and
ensuring that each and every
person
Who is going to be involved in
the response to that complaint
has been trained in how to
appropriately respond to that.
Not only to assist that
individual but also
To continue the education and
the prevention experiences that
are a part of the college
experience by
By virtue.
Of the educational experience.
Everything I general lady Mr
Speaker in general Lady.
On Page four.
One of the things that is
contemplated in this bill is
really building a community
around an educational
institution.
And, um
Ensuring that higher educational
institutions are drawing on
community resource is like on
campus community based
organizations, rape crisis
services, counseling, health
care, mental health care,
advocacy, legal assistance and
resources for the responding
party.
All of those services being
based in the community being
grounded in the expertise that
we have in our local
communities. Mr Speaker and
General Lady, do you feel that
these are going to bring
significant asset to our
educational institutions and
ensure that all of our education
higher educational institutions
across the state
Are in partnership with those
community based services, Mr
Speaker and generally, of course
we do. That's that's what our
aim is, is to have a
Community of folks to to support
The college students who are
involved.
Mr Speaker. And generally would
it surprise you to know that I
was doing a little research that
affirmative consent policies
have been shown to change
behavior on college campuses and
also improve the identification
of inappropriate?
Or unwanted contact and improve
the accuracy of that.
Mr Speaker in General Lady? Yes.
Mr Speaker in General Lady.
That's one of the important
pieces of establishing these
policies, creating training for
everyone involved in handling
these. These complaints. Um, and
these issues, creating a
comprehensive prevention and
outreach programs in this
legislation. You are
Um
Including awareness raising
campaigns. Primary prevention
bystander intervention risk
reduction That's full scope of
the training that could incur
and the educational programs and
the awareness raising that would
happen through this bill is part
of what gets us to a shift in
culture.
And a shift in what is
considered appropriate behavior.
respectful behavior. What is
considered consent on our
college campuses and I would
submit to you, Mr Speaker in
general lady that when we have
one in four college aged women,
um undergraduate women
experiencing sexual assault
It means that we have to take
this effort to the next level.
We have to
Look at policies and trainings
that are going to touch every
person that is part of that
college campus so that we can
reduce the incidents.
Of sexual assault and sexual
violence generally.
Um, Mr Speaker in general lady
responding to individual
complaints is important.
But would you agree that the
educational components of this
bill are also critically
important?
Mr Speaker in General lady? Yes.
And in in the five years I've
been working on this and
carrying this bill, I have had
numerous women of all ages come
up to me and said, say, I wish I
would have known about
affirmative consent, as as the
gentle lady from Dona Ana talked
about. I wish I would have known
it when I was in college. Um
So, um, someone before said
that, you know, everyone knows
about affirmative consent. They
do not. But we need them to and
and the hope is that it will be
started young that it will be
started in preschool or younger.
Not about sexual contact per se,
But about if someone wants to
hold your hand. They have to ask
you. If someone wants to give
you a hug, they have to ask you
and get affirmative consent.
Just
To build up those those body
sovereignty ideas and that the
fact that your body belongs to
you and no one else.
Mr Speaker in general lady.
Thank you for that response. Um
It is again one of the reasons
that this legislation is so
critical because these early
experiences shape our young
people for the rest of their
lives. And when we are in it in
a situation again, where one in
41 in four undergraduate women
is experiencing sexual assault.
When we are in a situation where
one and almost one in four of
transgender gender nonconforming
college students gender queer
have been sexually assaulted 7%.
Of undergraduate men have been
experienced sexual assault.
It means that that those
experiences are shaping them for
potentially the rest of their
lives, depending on their access
to care, their access to
recovery services to trauma.
Uh, informed counseling. Um
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
You know, uh
I happen to have a social worker
in my family, and, um you know
the some of the stories that I,
uh, have heard over the years
just sort of vague, non specific
stories, But some of those
stories
That I understand. Um, that
happened frequently, Um, in that
practice are around some of
these issues, and they do linger
for years, and they do shape.
Honestly, sometimes the what
potential a person may feel they
could have in their lives.
Um, the impact cannot be
understated.
Mr Speaker in General Lady.
That's another thing I wanted to
highlight in your bill.
It is.
Ah, on Page four. You also are
outlining that every incoming
students orientation is going to
include
Affirmative consent education on
affirmative consent. Um and Mr
Speaker, General Lady as you
just mentioned, um, so many
students are even unaware of
this concept. Mr. Speaker in
General lady, Do you think it
shifts someone's the way that
someone might approach
An encounter. Um with new
friends. New, uh after hours
Correct extracurricular
activities, um, to know
About affirmative consent. And
how do you Mr Speaker in General
Lady? How do you feel that that
would potentially improve their
ability to hold that respect to
understand their choices to
understand what might be, uh,
something they should or should
not accept or something they
should or should not tolerate.
Mr Speaker, and generally I do
feel like it. It is important. I
talked about mostly women coming
up and say they
What? We're glad to have learned
about affirmative consent in
their forties fifties sixties
while I was working on this bill
One other year, I had a young
man college age men in my office
and we were talking and he said,
I wish I would have known about
this because in high school
The guys were that the goal was
to get the girl drunk and have
sex. And he said we just that
was just the way things were.
and we essentially didn't know
any better. And so we need to
start teaching. Um, both sides
what? What is appropriate and
what is not in all I remember
last year, I was doing an
interview on this bill.
And, um and I person who was
interviewing me. I told her the
the story of my sisters, all
having been raped and she
started to cry. And after the
interview, I asked her if I
could give her a hug. And she
said, Oh, that's affirmative
consent. I said, yes, that's
affirmative consent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Gentle lady for that
response.
Mr Speaker in general lady. I
think that's really what is so
exceptional about this program
because
Without consistent policies at
all of our educational
institutions across our great
state.
The the learning about what the
nature of consent is, is really
from movies. Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady. Its from TV, Mr Speaker,
General Etienne and, um, as I
know, in the case of young
people today, um it is social
media. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
it is
Um, lots of, uh, you know, lots
of ways that our young people
are interacting.
Um and it's not, uh, it's not
based on evidence based
practices. It's not based in a
true understanding of these
policies. It's based on some of
the messages. You just described
Mr Speaker in general lady
around what? How to engage how
to initiate contact. How to have
that start those relationships.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, that
doesn't start a relationship on
great footing. Um, when the goal
is to get the other person
drunk and um and engage in other
activities after that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, um
The other piece I just wanted to
highlight is
Ensuring that every student in
these educational institutions
understands the policy. Mr
Speaker in general Lady
Um
Many institutions have been
working on these issues of how
to report
Sexual assault. How to report
harassment. How to report
Behavior that creates a hostile
work environment. In this case,
it would be creating a hostile
learning environment, Mr Speaker
and General Lady. And would you
agree that the education just
about how to make the complaint
in and of itself?
Can be incredibly important for
someone who has experienced, uh,
an issue where affirmative
consent was not obtained. Mr
Speaker and General Lady. Yes,
very much so.
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
I appreciate that answer,
because if you don't know who to
report to, if you don't know how
to how to seek help.
Mr Speaker in general lady, you
risk uh, you run the risk of
grappling with the experiences
that you've had on your own, Mr.
Speaker in General lady and you
Um
You may not understand how to
access services like trauma,
informed counseling or other
kinds of help. Legal assistance
is also contemplated in this
bill.
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, we are training offering
training at orientation. Mr
Speaker and General Lady, we are
Consistently implementing
comprehensive outreach and
training programs to students.
We are doing bystander training
so that if if a student sees
something that they think is
an appropriate, um or or is not
does not comport with
affirmative consent.
They can bring that forward and
they will understand what to do
in that situation. And Mr
Speaker, General Lady is, isn't
that also a very difficult
situation to be in when you were
witnessing something that, you
know, um, has the potential to
be very inappropriate or harmful
And you don't know what to do.
Mr. Speaker in General Lady Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Yes, I'm
a firm believer in knowledge is
power and
Those kinds of things when they
happen either to you or when you
might be a witness. Your your
senses are just kind of thrown
into a blender. Essentially you
don't You want to protect the
person but you don't want to get
them in trouble. You don't want
to get yourself in trouble. And
maybe maybe this is, um from the
olden days, but I don't think it
is.
Where women are still, um, first
off, they're not believed and
second off, you know, you start
thinking about well, you know, I
did. I was on a date with him.
and you know my skirt was short
or whatever, and that's going to
be horrible for me to tell
anybody because they're going to
blame me and I will say as a as
a survivor.
We can't help but have our own
guilt. What did I do wrong?
Should I not have gone out with
this guy and so knowing where to
go to get support makes such a
big difference for every Mr
Speaker and General lady. Thank
you for raising that Because Mr
Speaker in general Lady that is
one of those learnings that we
do not want.
Our young people to come away
with. We do not want them to
have an adverse experience in
it. Unfortunately, there's no
way we can protect our Children
from all of these negative
experiences. They are going to
be hurts and harms that come
their way. But the last thing we
want them to walk away with is a
sense of guilt and shame and
feeling that they had brought.
Some kind of harm to themselves
because of their behavior.
Um, rather than understanding
some of the parameters of what
actually should have been
happening in that situation, Mr
Speaker in general Lady
Mr Speaker in general Lady, we
are, um
Educating people at orientation.
We are
Training bystanders. We are
raising awareness in your
legislation.
We are doing that through
comprehensive prevention and
outreach programs. Mr. Speaker.
We are bringing all of the
community's resources to our
educational institutions so that
our students can access those
services. Um, that that that
maybe maybe best provided in the
community.
We are partnering those services
with the educational
institutions and Mr Speaker and
General Lady. We are educating
all of the staff and everyone
who was involved with the
investigation of these
complaints and addressing and in
creating these programs on
these, so we're really creating
a wraparound affirmative.
Consent training program and
prevention program. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I just want to
thank you because as someone who
as I mentioned will have some
kids going off to college in a
few years holding onto them, I'm
holding on to them. But in a few
years and I want them to learn
In a safe
And proactive manner, and it is
safe and proactive program. What
is affirmative consent?
How to initiate these kinds of
relationships, how to navigate
these new situations in ways
that are appropriate that are
respectful, um, that really take
consideration, um, and provide
respect to anyone that they're
interacting with. Um so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, thank you
for bringing forward this
legislation.
And I encourage the body to
support this. It is good policy.
It is comprehensive. It is
rooted in public health. Um and
it's going to do a lot of good
for our young people. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady before we
go to the next debater, it has
been requested by the chairman
of the House Labor veteran
military for his committee that
we excuse committee members for
a committee meeting in room 315.
Approximately
Approximately 10 minutes. Um, so
those members will be free to go
for that committee meeting next
on the list. We have a point of
order point, gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, So I just want
to make clear that
We're debating a bill.
Tell basically 350 in the
morning.
And this is a very important
bill in my caucus feels very
strongly about this bill.
And now they're going to have to
make a decision about whether
they attend committee.
Or they be allowed to debate
this bill on the floor and
listened to the debate.
And I find that to be incredibly
unfair. And so it asked that you
reconsider.
I understand the hour and what's
going on?
But it seems not appropriate to
hold the committee hearing.
In the middle of the night and
and beyond that to draw my
members and make them make a
decision between
Joining a committee hearing.
To hear bills and ask questions
on behalf of their constituents.
Or remain on the floor.
And listen to the debate on a
bill that they feel strongly
about.
That is understood, gentlemen.
Um and I think from the
Uh, gentlemen, the other
gentleman's perspective. There
are three bills that are very
also important, especially as we
celebrate. This is we celebrated
Veterans Day yesterday tour out
of these three bills deal with
issues affecting veterans, so I
think that there is a shared
urgency to hear those bills.
Obviously, we can excuse members
and whoever
ER would like to stake obviously
can stay or they want to
participate in the committee
hearing they can participate in
the committee hearing.
And I'm just saying that to
share his perspective with you
and the body as well.
Now, if you'd like we can go to
the next debater while we have a
conversation offline and see
Next on the list is the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you. Mr Speaker Will the
general lady yield Mr Speaker I
yield
Um, I've got a few questions
about this and so
Um, I'm going to give you a
hypothetical
Um, I'm a father. This is not
hypothetical. I'm a father of
four daughters.
And, uh,
I'll tell you right now. I
raised my daughters.
I told him if you ever assaulted
you call me. I'll come get you
will go to the hospital will
prosecute the little guy to the
fullest and hope he spend the
rest of his life in jail.
That's where I come from.
So quick question for you
hypothetical situation. Let's
say young lady does come and
reports it to the title. Nine
folks.
It doesn't feel like going to
the police 10 days later, she
says. I want to go to the
police.
Is the title nine folks going to
go with her to court and with
the D A.
Prosecute.
Mr Speaker and General lady that
that's a separate process, so
no, I'm sorry about that. Can
you answer that question again,
Please, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that the criminal part
is a separate process so that
the title nine person would not
be involved in that.
Okay, that that concerns me and
I and I understand where my
colleague was going with this
simply for the fact that
evidence could be lost so
Um, let me I'll go over to
Um
Page three line 14.
Um you have plagiarism, cheating
or academic dishonesty.
Can you? Can you tell me in what
reference that would be used,
Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen, if you read the
whole paragraph that all parties
who participate as a complaining
or witness in an investigation
will not be subject to
disciplinary sanctions for
violation of the post Secondary
educational institutions.
student conduct policy at or
near the time of the incident
unless the post Secondary
educational institutions to Shin
Determines that the violation
was agree GIs, including an
action that places the health or
safety of any other party at
risk, or involves plagiarism,
cheating or academic.
Thank you, Mr Chair and in the
gender lady. Would this be an in
case where an individual lied,
gentlemen, That's not what this
is referencing.
Can you explain to the body what
That means? Then? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, as I as I stated
before, this means that
witnesses or the students
involved will not be in trouble
for lack of a better word of
phrase for drinking or using
drugs or something like that.
Around the time of the incident.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
General Lady. I understand that
part. I just wondered why
plagiarism, cheating or academic
dishonesty was involved so
Thank you.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
the exception. They can still be
held responsible for plagiarism,
cheating or academic dishonesty.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair and
gentlewoman
Page four.
Line 16.
And you tell the body what
bystander intervention means and
how what The university does to
perhaps help that out, or what
they do to inform bystanders.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, there
are pro. There are evidence
based programs around training
bystanders who may intervene or
who may just be witness.
Okay. Thank you. So thank you,
Mr Chairman and General lady. So
if if a bystander does step in
and help out
Do you also offer them? Um
Counseling. Do you offer them
help? Do you have them
protection? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes.
Thank you.
Um, on page six.
Starting with line 11 student
means a person who is enrolled
in a credit bearing program.
What about the students that are
involved in a non credit bearing
program?
Are they afforded the same
information and the same
opportunities that a credit
bearing student would be
afforded?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, this
mirrors title nine language, so
it's the federal law.
But schools can adapt policies
if they so choose.
Thank you, Mr Mr Speaker. And
generally so has the university
has adopted those policies.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know. I know you and him
has a pretty robust program, but
I can't speak to the particular.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady Mr Speaker have an
amendment for
House Four Amendment number 151
House Bill 151.
Okay. Sorry. You're moving the
amendment. Yes, sir. I moved the
amendment. Make sure make sure
Okay, gentlemen. Um
You formally moved the
amendment. I believe.
Right? Okay. Yes, sir. And I'd
like to have a roll call vote
call. Let it get passed out.
Then we'll get to the 2 to 7
number and then we'll have you
explained to him.
All right. We've got the
amendment. Um, apologies for
that.
Uh,
Madam clerk going to have to use
a little white out because it
says House floor Amendment
number 151, which is not the
case. It's House Floor Amendment
one.
So let's get back. Okay,
gentlemen, please read the 2 to
7 number.
Yes, Mr Speaker. The number is
227913.3. That's what I have.
And before you go on to explain
the amendments and debate the
amendment in consultation with
the minority leader and the
chairman of the Labor Committee
were we will not be excusing
members of Labor Committee for a
meeting right now.
So, folks who are on the labor
Committee, please stay in the
room and debate this bill.
Um
Let's go back to the gentleman
to explain the amendment.
Unpaid three line 23 after
including insert
One, referring any allegation of
sexual assault, domestic
violence, dating violence or
harassment or stalking to the
relevant municipal Police
Department or the county
sheriff.
We have a moral obligation to
report this to the police.
Um, I I cannot
I cannot imagine one of my
daughters one of my
grandchildren. My grandson's,
um, ever
Having put up domestic violence,
But if they do we have a moral
obligation to report him.
Okay, General lady, let's go
back to the sponsor is a
friendly amendment. Mr Speaker.
It is not
Okay?
Would you like to expand on the
Why not Mr Speaker and
I'm I'm Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So are you saying
that
If someone goes to someone at a
university, there is mandatory
reporting of that to the police.
Hmm. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
we have a moral obligation to
report any domestic violence of
any type. I'm afraid if not, the
university is going to get sued.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen in
title nine that it must be
confidential. That's federal
law.
Just give us a second, please.
Mr Speaker, while the
Okay, while they're looking it
up. Um, I would
Um, point you to
Section number E on Page three
line 21 procedures shall include
an initial response by the post
Secondary Educational
institutions, employees or
contractors to a report of an
incident including providing
written notification to the
complainant with the contact
information for on campus and
community based resources.
Services and law enforcement and
Mr Speaker. We do not We first
off, we can't legally have
mandatory reporting and second
off the best way to make sure
that someone doesn't seek help
system is for them to know that
it's going to go to law
enforcement. They will just not
tell anybody.
So your lady just reiterate on
friendly amendment.
Okay?
Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr Speaker. Sorry about that,
Um, General Lady, we have a
moral obligation. And where does
that take us?
Okay, So is there a debate on
the amendment? Mr Speaker? Yes,
I'll take a stand for questions.
The Lady from Bern, Leo.
Research. Easy. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield
Mr Speaker? Yes, ma'am, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. I think
what's not cleared him in. I was
trying to get my colleague to
ask you is Does your amendment
require the institution to do
that reporting
Mr Speaker generated? Yes.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe that we were told by,
um but that the prosecutor with
and I respect her experience
that
We cannot report unless the
victim agrees. Mr. Speaker. Can
I ask the D A. That question.
Sure. The lady from Chavez Group
Roosevelt Percent of Riebe.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield? Um
Yes. I don't think that you can
actually force of victim to
report it. Unless there it's a
minor. But if it's an adult,
they have the right to decide if
they want to prosecuted or
reported or not reported
generated from really Oh, so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, that's why I
believe my colleagues said his
unfriendly because we can't
force that.
We can certainly encourage it.
and I think the the thing that's
frightening to
Um
The victim is knowing for sure
that if you go to seek help from
the what's contemplated by this
bill is to have safe people to
whom the report that it's
automatically going to the
police. I think I think first of
all the amendments infirm
because you we've
Been told. Really, the
institution cannot do it without
the victim's consent.
And But the other thing is that
we want this victim to trust the
person at the university so that
that person can really help.
That individual
Feel strong enough to go to the
police and preserve all of the
evidence as well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so then what if the
victim is a minor?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
So
We have Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
for Children under the age of
18. There's mandatory reporting
required already. So this would
not be necessary because we have
mandatory reporting for under
age 18.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, But are you still
going to let a woman or a man
suffer from what? They just
experienced? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, we're talking. I'm
talking about the wording of
your amendment and the fact that
you can't force the victim.
Two. You can't report it without
the victim's consent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. So I guess my other, um
My thought then would be
Are they able to handle this
domestic violence and and the
counseling that comes with that?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we're
talking about your amendment,
which is mandatory reporting.
And mandatory reporting is not
legal. Thank you, Mr Speaker. We
still don't know where it is.
Untitled nine.
The answer. Mr Speaker, General,
Gentlemen, I believe that was
the section that was read by the
Lady from Burnley, Ill.
Earlier.
It's it's the family,
Educational Rights and Privacy
Act.
And Title nine.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Okay. Um, we're on the
amendment.
Right, Mr. Speaker. I'm waiting
for a response to the fact that
the amendment itself
Is violating the
The law.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. Um, I just have a
hard time when somebody is
mistreated in any way, shape or
form and allowing that to go
forward without encouraging them
to go to the police.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I admire
that.
In you and I have a hard time
with it, too.
Yep, There's
a lady from billion towards the
percent of the Lord.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentlemen please yield
Mr Speaker? Yes, a little yield
to my colleague.
Mr Speaker and Dillmann. I think
What you're trying to point out
as some of the absurdity in our
laws.
And that I cannot imagine.
Being a teacher and having a
girl coming with a busted nose
and a black eye.
And you're not going to report
that to law enforcement makes me
sick to my stomach. I really
And the others, and,
unfortunately, haven't been able
to ask these questions yet.
But we have an investigation
happening.
I don't know who's doing it.
I have no idea what the training
is.
I don't know what is happening,
and I can imagine fear reassess
that I would be or you.
To have a child that was raped
or beaten.
And for you to find out that
this team of I don't know who
Investigated.
And did what
I have no idea what training
they have is absolutely
And furthermore,
What is yes means, Yes mean
Every time.
In certain situations.
Do we need a notarized letter?
I cannot imagine.
A
Man. Are you young kid?
Being accused. Furthermore,
And we're going to have some
investigation team to try to say
What did you say? Yes.
Well, I don't know. Did they
just break up?
And that persons can say no, I
didn't.
That's rape.
And at what point I
I get
Teaching kids.
When you passed out on the
floor, Don't molest. Take care
of them. Don't harm them, right?
I understand that a million
percent. I also understand if
you've been raped and you've
been beaten.
You want to have somebody that
will escort you and help you to
go to a rape clinic? Because
What if they were drugged?
Who is this person that is
looking at your child, Mr
Speaker.
Looking at your child and saying
what to them.
Is this going to be a big cover
up at the school?
That didn't happen.
What happened with the false
accusation. What happens with
anything in this thing?
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I understand your frustration
with this because I don't even
know when yes happens when
you're kissing when you're
touching.
When does because they're saying
silences rape?
But what if you're in a
relationship? They're talking
about that same thing.
Boyfriend girlfriend began to
fight.
They go to the person.
I didn't say yes now is that
there are so many questions I
have in this because it's a good
bill in the intent that we want
to take care of our Children, Mr
Speaker.
We want to prevent rape. We want
to prevent domestic violence. We
want God to have a stalker, you
know?
This stuff is very serious
stuff. Mr Speaker and
representative
But holy heck, I don't know who
these people are or what they
are saying.
And then it's like
Okay. You got raped? How do they
know how to make an assessment?
Like how did they know that
there's not tears?
In this person. Are they going
to do an exam?
Are they going to ask him those
personal questions? What is this
investigation look like? Is it
done by law enforcement? Is it
being done by anybody with any
qualifications? Or is it just
some Schmo who got a one day
training on what? You should be
asking people
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
I hear your frustration.
Because you have Children, and
we've talked about this and how
angry this makes you and it
makes me angry to the more I
learn about this bill, the more
angry yet because there's too
many what and why's
And what happens if a student
makes a false accusation? Where
in here? Is there anything?
So going back to your concern,
Mr Speaker and representative
It's incredibly frustrating.
I can't imagine what would be
like to be a parent.
And find out a couple of things.
How heartbroken and mad you
would be if your child was
raped and they thought that I'll
just go talk to this person with
no training.
Or worse, yet this person came
off like their authoritarian and
as it says in here, we're doing
an investigation. We're looking
into this blah, blah, blah, and
they think it's been handled in.
It's not evidence is lost or to
have your daughter Mr Speaker,
representative beaten
And they say to you, but I told
my teacher she saw my black I'm
I busted nose.
Baby, what they do.
Uh, nothing.
They said. Here's a pamphlet
goat. You can go these different
places.
You as a human being. And as a
father, Mr Speaker represents
would want that person
prosecuted.
You would want them to go to law
enforcement and not have whoever
these people are looking into
this thing.
That is wrong on so many levels.
Mr Speaker.
Representative.
The parts I agree within. This
is on the education part.
I'm 100,000 million% behind
that. But when we start getting
a bunch of people that I don't
know who they are or what
training they have, or if they
even know how to handle
somebody or what to say to them
in a delicate situation.
situation makes me sick and Mr
Speaker, and I cannot
Imagine the pain.
What if your daughter thought
this was being handled and finds
out? It wasn't
Are there going to be a
disclosure? That says Hi. We're
just a bunch of people don't
know we're doing but we're going
to give you some references, but
we're not going to encourage you
that you should go to law
enforcement to ask you to send
the amendment and I don't
appreciate you saying things
like Joe Schmoes and people who
don't know what they're doing. I
believe those are professionals.
And I believe that this bill
Seeks to establish policies and
procedures so that students
deserve the services that they
deserve. And you know, I've I've
let this go on for a while, but
I think you need to debate the
amendment debate The amendment
ask questions. Um, and let's
move forward. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I was just
going off with some other people
that earlier had pontificated
for quite some time about
personal stories and never
really asked a question.
So I'll wrap it up. So Mr
Speaker and representative, um
The Joe Schmo comment was
because I don't know who these
people are and what they're
doing.
And I know from the body of
hearts of sat next to you for
some time that you're very
honest and very sweetly, very
sincere person and that your
amendment was to say we need to
make sure that our Children are
protected.
And not being told when they
have a black eye.
I don't know what
So thank you for bringing this
for and I appreciate the
sensitive in this topic. Thank
you, dear lady from Riyadh,
Rivas and the vials and the
favorite city. Let out. Mr
Speaker will the kind gentleman
yield
Mr Speaker? Yes, Ali yield to my
colleague.
Um
Thank you. I, uh Mr Speaker and
kind gentleman. I really
understand exactly where you're
coming from. I really do.
But
I want to ask you. Do you
understand that parents of black
and brown Children may have very
different conversations with
their Children about going to
the polls.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
think parents of all different
colors have the same
conversations in some some
respects.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman. I
assure you that they don't
They don't
There. There are young black men
who do everything they can to
avoid any contact with the
police. There are young Hispanic
man who do everything they can
to avoid contact with the
police.
Um, they they when they have
private conversations, they talk
about how how to handle that
situation or what you would do
so I think
I I I think that that different
families assume different things
because different families have
different experiences in this
nation.
And and there has been a body of
evidence.
To prove that
And and so I would just ask that
you consider that and not assume
that everybody would handle a
police situation in the same
way. Even though I understand
your intent, I understand where
you're coming from. I would like
for you to understand where
other families might come from.
And that's all I have. Miss.
Madam Speaker. Thank you very
much.
There's further debate on the
amendment representative Ream
from Ronald Hill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentleman from San Juan
yield
Madam Speaker. Yes. My friend
and office made
Madam speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan. And if the body will
bear with me for a moment,
This is from
A law enforcement officer who
investigated these cases.
This is from the sergeant who is
over the sex crimes unit.
And I think it's important to
understand the mechanics of the
investigation.
And this goes back to what
Um
Representative and retired
district attorney Reed was
talking about
So the importance of this
amendment is to preserve the
evidence.
And so let's let's begin with
the investigation. There is a
call.
There's a notification Whatever.
When law enforcement arrives.
There's an assessment quickly as
do you need rescue
Okay?
Then the other portion of this
investigation is
Have you changed your clothes?
If so, we need to take
possession of those.
Um, have you taken a shower?
Anything like that?
Long enforcement is not going to
seize.
Technically, the the
D N a evidence. Let me leave it
there.
That is done by the hospital.
But the the important part is
getting the mechanic started.
So that if the victim desires to
prosecute
You have the evidence if you
don't go ahead and do that,
properly in the beginning, then
you don't have the evidence to
proceed forward.
It is the victim's choice.
To prosecute or not prosecute.
It is not law enforcement's
choice.
On the prosecution.
And
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
That's why it's important to
have them involved in the
beginning.
To preserve the evidence so that
if they want to proceed forward,
we can go to the D A's office
and give them the evidence to
move forward.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment of the representative
from Dona Ana representative
Rubio.
Is there further debate on the
amendment?
Representative from Otero,
representative Block.
Thank you so much. Madam Speaker
will the kind gentlemen please
yield the gentleman from San
Juan, Please healed.
Madam Speaker. Yes, I'll yield
to my colleague.
Thank you so much, General, or
I'm sorry, Madam Speaker
Gentleman from San Juan. I
really appreciate you bringing
forward this.
Amendment because I find it to
be important to protect the
safety of these students,
especially a student who is
under such duress and and just a
horrifying
Place in their life, Madam
speaker and gentlemen, and so
I'm I heard a little bit of the
debate on why we disagree.
With this piece.
Or this amendment. Madam
speaker, gentlemen, but I did
look up. One of the the acts
will actually the act that was
referenced. It's called ferpa.
And I looked it up. Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, and what I
saw. I won't read the whole
thing, but it pretty much just
said Generally, schools must
have written permission from the
parents are eligible student
Unless, and it goes on to say
appropriate officials in cases
of health and safety
emergencies.
And state and local authorities
within juvenile system pursuant
to state law. So, Madam speaker
Gentlemen, we have two different
cases appropriate officials in
cases of health and safety
emergencies. So, Mr Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, would you
believe that this would be a
health emergency or a safety
emergency for someone who got
raped?
Madam speaker. And yes, I would
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, So I find this to
be an important amendment
because clearly, the law says
health emergency is safety
emergency. They can refer and
also madam, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I would also note
that a lot of these campuses
have police forces.
On the campus. They are directly
attached administratively to the
actual university. So Madam
speaker, gentlemen, I would make
the case that if let's just say
I was at U and M and I God
forbid was assaulted if you and
M decided to share what I shared
with administrative officials.
At the campus with campus
police. Madam speaker Gentlemen.
Do you find that to be something
that would not be in compliance
with the largest, stated madam
speaker, Gentlemen?
Madam speaker? No, sir. I would
not
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. And I
think that's that's really the
crux of the issue. You know,
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen, I have
friends and family members who I
know
Who have been in these scary
situations and these horrible
situations that I wouldn't wish
on my worst enemy. And so, Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, I just find
this to be something that we
need to continue to refer to.
To protect
The most vulnerable members of
our society, especially
On college campuses.
Where they should be feeling
safe, especially our tax dollars
are the ones that provide
services and actually fund many
college degrees in this state.
So, Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
just want to continue and and I
just want to wonder.
I don't see why there is
opposition.
To wanting to get help.
For somebody who is so
desperately asking for it. Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, Do you see
this? This simple report to
someone who could bring help to
this victim.
As a burden.
Madam speaker? No, sir. I do
not.
Thank you so much, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, and so I'm
looking at where this fits in on
the page. So starts on line 23
after including, so it would
then say, including
Referring any allegation of
sexual assault, domestic
violence, dating violence or
harassment or stalking to
relevant municipal police
Department or county sheriff.
So, madam Madam speaker,
gentlemen.
This includes stalking as well.
And as we know myself, I know
the general lady from Berna, Leo
and Torrance. We have people who
literally are stalking us and
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, we
have actually told this to
police. We begged for help
because we do not want to be an
unsafe environments.
And have our life and our safety
compromised. So, um, Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, can you just
elaborate a little bit more
about the stocking portion and
how that fits into this?
Madam speaker, gentlemen. Um,
the law is clear on that and I
would think that the you know as
you report that and seek for
help that you would get that
help.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. And I
appreciate that. And, you know,
I want everyone in at our at any
college.
In the state, especially these
public colleges, which this
affects directly
I would want people to be safe
and I would want them to feel
like they can indeed reach out
to
Anyone on campus for help. I
hope that we're creating that
that environment that's
welcoming and wanting to help
and
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I know
that there are probably colleges
up where you are. I have
actually visited some of the
colleges in your neck of the
woods And I know that the
personnel there is very helpful.
And so, Madam speaker,
Gentlemen, I've heard I've heard
testimony tonight on this
amendment, where some people say
Well, just because the color of
my skin
That I wouldn't
Ask for help. And Madam speaker,
Gentlemen, I actually kind of
find that offensive.
You know, I come from Spanish.
I'm Hispanic, and I'm a Native
American descent.
And Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
would not dare.
Try to pin that on the race that
I am that I would not ask for
help. I actually find that very,
very offensive.
Madam Madam Speaker, Gentlemen.
So I know you didn't say that.
I'm sure someone else did. But
can you just
Elaborate on that to me, Do you
find it to be something? That's
a race based and just asking for
help? Madam Chair, gentlemen, I
would hope that parents of all
walks of life All colors would
have these very serious
conversations with their
Children and their Children
could trust them and getting not
only the help they need, but
Doing what they need to do.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentlemen. And I
appreciate that, and I would
hope that people do seek help,
and I would hope that the
colleges and universities in our
state would be welcoming places
to foster relationships with
people and reach out to help and
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I
would hope
That we would have fewer and
fewer instances of this violence
on our campuses. If there is
something that is a safety net
for people to know that they are
being heard.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, I see
this amendment as the
institutions saying we
understand we hear you.
And we're doing something about
it. We're not just going to talk
about it. We're not just going
to say Oh, well, we We feel bad
for you. Good luck.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, this
is actually something that is
tangible, which we will
certainly be able to alleviate
some of the pain even just
bringing forward a police
report. It's something tangible.
It's something that can be held
in one's hand to recognize.
The abuse that these individuals
have suffered through Madam
speaker, gentlemen, So I just
want to say thank you for
bringing forward this amendment
and I fall I I fully support it
wholeheartedly, and I appreciate
everything that you're doing
with this amendment to protect
the most vulnerable people in
our society, especially on
college campuses across our
state. So thank you so much, Mr
Chairman.
And gentlemen, I appreciate it.
Thank you. Debate on the
amendment. Generally gentle lady
from Santa Fe representative
role metal.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. I realized the bill
is
Um, probably not drafted
properly, and I'd like to
withdraw.
But I would like to consent into
the debate.
Okay, So you're rejoined the
amendment? Yes, sir. Mr Speaker.
Okay. We are withdrawing the
amendment. So we are back.
On the bill and the gentleman
from San Juan still has the
floor represented Duncan
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I live with a woman who's sane
nurse.
I don't know what goes on.
And I'll never know what goes
on.
But I hope we can provide the
help that people need.
We have a moral obligation.
Right is right and wrong is
wrong.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. We have
further debate. The gentle lady
from Bernanke, your
representative on you in order?
No.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield Mr Speaker I
yield
Hmm.
Thank you very much, gentle
lady. Um
I want to thank you. First of
all for bringing this bill back.
We've heard.
The very
Personal experiences of one of
our own colleagues and
Um
I know that this legislation I
mean, we know that this
legislation is very badly
needed.
Because whether every single one
of us stands up and tells the
story of our own personal
experiences. I know many people
in this room have been in a
situation where they have felt
Personally physically violated.
And I'm I'm kind of I'm
struggling to find
A better term Mr Speaker,
General lady than violated
because
When someone
Assault someone else.
It's not
Necessarily.
Even if the assault itself as
sexual the act
Of that assault is not
necessarily sexual as, um,
Reppert as representative Reed
mentioned
Earlier. Sometimes that assault
is based from like a power
dynamic perspective.
And I think that's part of why
This bill is so important. It's
not just about teaching consent.
It's about teaching respect.
For another person's body.
And when that respect is
violated.
I know.
That in much more minor
instances when somebody's you
know, touched me that I have not
been okay with
Um
That I have felt almost
disconnected from my body.
Um, you know,
Some of the debate that we've
heard earlier is like, Oh, you
know you have to. Now we have to
ask consent for a hug. Well, if
I may for a moment digress just
a little bit. I have been in an
instance where I was hugged by a
complete stranger.
Without my permission.
In a grocery store from behind.
They were aware they did not
know me. And when I turned to
see
Who had their arms around me,
because certainly no one just
goes up behind a stranger and
wraps their arms around them.
I was
Facing a man who is about 6, ft
five and £300 something and I
was alone.
In a public place and I was
absolutely terrified. So yes,
Uh,
Sometimes it is definitely okay
to ask permission for a hug. So
Um, just getting back to the
bill.
You know, we know that
Less than 20% of college age
Sexual assault survivors even
bothered to report so my hope.
For this training is that
We will see cases of sexual
assault go down, but we will
also simultaneously see reports
go up as people feel empowered
as you, you know, and that word
appears in the bill to teach
empowerment. I hope that with
that empowerment, um
Survivors feel more confident to
report to someone they trust.
And I believe this bill will
bring that still.
My first question is, Is there
anything in this bill that would
prevent a sexual assault
survivor from reporting a rape
to the police?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, there
is not
The it as I've stated before it
is up to the victim to decide
what they want to do if they
want to go to a trusted person
at the university. That's their
call. If they want to go to the
police, that's their call if
they want to go to the right
grace rape rape Crisis center.
That's their call. We're just
providing options.
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady for that answer Does
Federal law through title nine
already require an
administrative process on
campus? Mr. Speaker in General
Lady? Yes. Excellent. And Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Does. Is there anything in this
bill that would change that
requirement? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, General Lady? No.
Okay, well, I was hoping to give
you a little bit longer a break,
but a lot of the questions we
have covered a lot of topics
already. So I just really want
to thank you again and commend
you for your persistence. You
and your co sponsors for your
persistence on this bill.
It is greatly needed,
particularly because you know,
it does require that colleges
and universities teach
Affirmative consent, just as
they teach other academic
topics. It's a really important
piece of legislation, and I'm
proud to support it. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Generally for the
debate, the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Right?
We'll go next to the gentleman
from
One represented Montoya. Okay,
let's go to the agility from
Santa Fe Represent Romero. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady healed? Mr Speaker?
I gladly yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, I did not get to
fully sort of discuss some of
the reasons why I feel so
strongly about this bill and
want to add, Ask some questions
of you is to
I think what the purpose was the
impetus for bringing this back
time and time again and sticking
with. I think the the potential
for having this and
Um
You know, when I was an
undergrad, I ran an organization
that helped students pick up
folks late at night, right
Studying until this hour. Um,
you know, and make sure that
they were safe and getting home.
Um, and they could call. Pick up
a phone call a direct line from
the campus phone.
And get to our hotline so that
if they were in a crisis if they
were in a situation where they
felt unsafe or if there was a
situation with which they felt
like they needed a little bit
more advice, or maybe just a
safe ride home. Um, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, they had a place
to just make that call.
And as a student, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I was able to
train staff on how to handle
these cases and what to do and
what's going on with folks at
certain different times, whether
they're talking whether they're
not and understanding that all
of these different situations or
nuanced when it comes to
Protection of a given person and
and and what it is that we're
asking of, You know that that
campus the peer support and
folks who were employed to
maintain and to make sure that
they understood to where those
boundaries were as well and so,
um, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
you know from that those those
times and understanding those
different situations and nuances
having the ability to get
training
To know what to do to be able to
move through various scenarios
and still be able to provide
help, Um and and be able to look
at all of the different options
on the table. Mr Speaker,
General Lady was very empowering
to not only, um, me as a
student, but certainly to my
peers who felt like they could
come to somebody to ask
questions or just know where to
get a reference.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Can you talk about some of the
impetus for why you believe this
would be supportive in New
Mexico?
Mr Speaker in general Lady. I
think it starts with education.
It starts with the that we want
our young people in post
secondary education to
understand what affirmative
consent is to understand what
their responsibilities and roles
are and
And as I said, before, knowledge
is power. We're trying we we are
trying to change the culture of
colleges and universities. But
the whole our entire culture
needs to change in the way that
particularly women are treated
and we want to empower, as you
said.
The victim, um that that he or
she
Knows that they will not be
turned into the police because
if that if that ever happens
No one will report. Essentially,
I mean, I didn't report mine.
And if, um
And if I knew more than than I
do now, now, I probably would
have, but I didn't. I don't want
someone else to make that
decision for me being being
sexually assaulted. Takes away
your control of your body. Your
you have lost all control. And
so we're trying to give you back
some control and make sure that
the decisions that are made are
the right ones for you and the
only person that can make those
decisions is you
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. That's precisely some of
the situations that we were
dealing with with students in
different situations that they
were weren't ready, perhaps to
talk about what they had
experienced, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, sometimes you know they
were coming from a situation
where they were, you know,
breaking up with a person or
Perhaps had an uncomfortable
encounter with a person, Mr
Speaker, General lady, but until
we could learn more, perhaps
provide that safe space. You
know, we couldn't We weren't
going to encourage one way or
another. What? What potential
path That would take Mr Speaker,
General lady until we could were
able to actually have those
conversations.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, we
wouldn't want to choose for a
person about what was best for
them. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
So I so appreciate the thought
process with which you have put
into this in order to not only
empower someone to make their
best decision but to empower
others around them to help them
guide in that direction.
Mr Speaker, General lady when
we're looking at the purview of
this bill as post secondary
around the state, would this be
established across also
community colleges, or can you
just talk about where it is that
where this education and a
program like this would end up
existing, Mr Speaker in General
Lady any any instant, higher ed
institution that get state
money, either through
scholarships or
Or the regular budgeting process
would be responsible for putting
this in place.
Mr Speaker, General Ladies, So
we're looking at consistent
programs throughout the state is
what I'm hearing. Is it
dependent upon population? Is it
dependent upon? Um past
performance? Can you explain
what it is how that's going to
be measured in this bill? Mr.
Speaker? General Lady, Mr.
Speaker generally, I'm not sure
I understand. Mr Speaker,
General Lady just on how many
you know staff would be
dedicated or anything like that.
Can you just describe how those
programs are going to get set
up?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
General Lady this program the
title Nine programs have been
around. This is kind of a a a
boost to the title nine programs
in telling them that they must
use trauma informed.
Um and and use affirmative
consent as the standard because
there there there has been
confusion. Well, you know, she
didn't say no. So I thought that
meant yes. But in this bill were
saying only yes Means yes being
asleep being, um, silent that
none of that means, yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I love that there's a
clarity. You know when it comes
to again the questions about
these situations about what that
affirmation is, you know, and
requesting that and being able
to understand where someone
would be at any given point in
time, But that's the standard
that we're trying to set is that
you do have a voice. You have an
opportunity to provide that
consent. And then we know we're
in the green zone. We're good.
Um, we can, you know, understand
what it
It is that that could happen
next.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
um, going back to some of the,
um
Cost of these programs and and
certainly where it is that we
understand.
How we're going to test the
waters of Is it working, isn't
it? Mr Speaker? General Lady,
Can you just talk about some of
the checks and balances for how
we would determine whether or
not this program is working?
Mr Speaker in General Lady one
of the best ways at least in my
mind is if reporting goes up,
not necessarily reporting to the
police.
That we know that if they have
they have control. They have
lost control of their body
during the during this and so we
are trying to give them back
control over the situation for
as I said, for whatever whatever
is what they need at that
moment, and I will say that it's
not only
Yes means yes, but consent can
be revoked at any time. If
you're involved in something,
and all of a sudden it's like
Whoa. I don't want to be doing
this. You can say no. And that
has Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you for confirming that I
also just curious to again. Um,
when it comes to whether or not
the program is working, so we're
looking at reporting data.
Ah, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
What other factors might be
taken into account about the
efficacy of these programs.
Mr Speaker in General General
Lady, the higher it.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady
The universities will be keeping
track of things as as they do
under title, nine Higher Ed
department.
Mr Speaker, General Lady as I've
looked through some of the
analyses for this bill, Mr
Speaker generally I understand
that you and I would be sort of
the gold standard potentially
for how this program would be
run. If folks were trying to
understand what the program
would look like, um, who would
be sort of running the show?
Something like that if we were
Going to look at a potential
program. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, would that be for
information to our local
community colleges? Some of our
other local post secondary
institutions is that sort of
like where if we were asking
for, um where? What would this
look like? Would that be the
right standard to sort of look
at
Mr Speaker and General lady. I
don't know all the particulars
about you and M, but I have
talked with the folks that you
and M who do this, And as I
said, we have a whole coalition
and, um
And you and M is in my
understanding is doing a good
job. Of course it's going to you
know it's going to look
different in different places,
depending on the student
population and all that. But you
and M has been doing it for some
time, so they are sure they can
be Roma.
Consultants essentially
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. Um, I'm just so grateful
to the amount of time and effort
that has been put in and since
we hadn't enacted this in
previous years, Mr Speaker
General Lady has the price gone
up to run these types of
programs consistent with some of
the other rising costs across.
um, you know, being able to
bring new programs into into our
post secondary institutions, Mr
Speaker, and generally, of
course there is inflation. But
as I've said Title nine has been
In in place in all of these
university.
So it's not really necessarily
setting up a new program. It's
just putting different
parameters or
Different demands on on the
programs that are already in in
place.
Mr Speaker, General Lady and
There are but is the budget
prepared for implementing this
program? Or does the bill and I
can't recall if it had the
stripped out? Appropriation? Can
you just talk about how it is?
We're covering that cost. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, General
Lady, it's getting late, so
We? We? We don't know. Think
that there will be costs as as
this programs are in place.
Under title nine. So, um, there
may be some costs around and
I can't imagine, you know, maybe
posters in the bathroom that
someone said earlier, but that's
kind of up to the university so
and there are
One of my guests. There are
model policies and one of my
expert
Is a trainer, and I believe you
do it for free.
They have programs across the
state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I really appreciate, um,
just understanding how that
might look. Hopefully, it's
improved drastically since I was
an undergrad. It's been a long
time, Mr Speaker, Gentle lady
and understanding, you know,
even at that time we didn't have
a clear affirmative consent
policy or understood what That
really meant. I think there was
a lot of gray area when I was a
student and even providing that
advice.
It was very challenging Mr
Speaker, General Lady without
that.
Clear standard. Yes means yes,
We can understand what that that
really looks like Mr Speaker,
General lady, So I'm just so
grateful to understand that
that's what we're trying to do
in in post secondary schools
today. I'm so grateful to the
fact that you've continued to be
diligent about ensuring that
Our students are safe and
informed in these post secondary
institutions. Um, and that the
folks that are on the ground or
there to help empower themselves
and others to provide those
resources there. So with that,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen all
General lady, I'll yield
There is some debate related
from Torrance and Bird earlier
percent of Lord.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady please healed? Mr
Speaker? I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So it
seems like
There's a title line, which I
still don't see the portion we
talked about earlier but
You're saying that this is a gap
in the title nine where you're
now going to
Mandate that they now must use.
Uh, affirmative language that
correct from affirmative
consent, Mr Speaker, and
generally, yes.
Okay, Mr Speaker.
And General lady. So can you
explain to me because we're
talking about? Yes means yes,
and I have a bunch of questions
about that.
When you say that, yes means
yes.
Does that mean?
Uh, because when I'm trying to
do is I'm trying not to get
somebody falsely accused. I'm
looking at both sides. I
understand the trauma of
Survivor domestic violence.
What I'm trying to because
there's no consent. In the best
of violence. There's none zero
consent in that there's no
consent of being stalked or
harassed.
But when we go into the sexual
assault portion, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady
When
Yes.
Mr Speaker and General Lady
throughout the process.
Okay, Mr Speaker generally, so
let me see if I understand this.
And I'm gonna try Mr Speaker.
Stop me from getting too graphic
because you can go a little over
on this.
I need to know.
If you're on a date.
The first date. Second date, 30
Whatever.
Do you have to ask to hold their
hand and I'm being serious?
Where does the affirmative
consent start? Does it start
with hand holding Mr Speaker and
General Lady when we talk about
Barry sovereignty? Yes.
This is my hand. You have no
right to touch me without asking
me if it's okay.
Okay, Mr Speaker.
So we're starting at the hand.
So then, if you were to move
forward, almost want to say like
second base, but
Let's keep the quorum, please.
I'm trying to Mr Speaker. I'm
asking in all sincerity. I don't
know how to ask these questions.
You can use to somebody else if
you'd like.
When Mr Speaker when we're going
through the process of different
things that people do when
they're being intimate.
Is that, okay?
Sure.
Do you have to ask?
Yes. Before every
Process.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that
affirmative consent is
continual.
Okay. Mr Speaker and
Representative is that
Because you said that consent
can be withdrawn, so
If you're dating somebody.
You still have to go through
that process? You can I hold
your hand today.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes.
My body is still my body.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. I'm not going
to go anymore. Miss Speaker. I'm
not gonna go anywhere. I just
wanted to make sure it was
understanding. Thank you about
without getting graphic.
On how this process works.
Because now my concern
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Is
there something in here?
About false accusations and how
that's handled in the school. Mr
Speaker in general General lady
that that's not part of this
bill that that's part of title
nine of how that is dealt with.
There are no penalties. We are
not talking about.
Any of those kind of things.
Thank you.
Mr Speaker and and generally
have been reading title mind for
some time and going through and
it the way it's written, at
least the way I'm seeing it.
It is.
You come up with this code of
how you should be teaching these
different things.
Can you tell me where entitled
Nine. It says that if somebody
makes a false accusation how
that is hand
Mr Speaker in General Lady. It's
a part of the school's policy.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
I'm going out for your bill.
And can you tell me where in the
school policy Because you said
it was entitled Night is not
entitled Nine wherein the school
policy There's it say that
somebody that
Okay?
We're adding a new language
affirmative consent.
Where does it say in the bill
That now that we're using the
words affirmative consent.
That if somebody says they break
up with their boyfriend or
anything else
That if that person falsely
accuses them
What does the school due to step
in with that?
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
that our policy doesn't address
that.
And Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Why is that? You wouldn't
address that because you're
adding new language.
But you don't have anything in
there to address somebody making
a false accusation. We have all
all kinds of other things.
But we don't have false
accusations. Mr Speaker and
General Lady, we're not changing
anything about the investment.
Well, Madam Speaker and General
Lady, what I'm saying is
You added new language.
Of affirmative consent because
you said
That was the gap. Then what
would happen Because you're
saying
And here on Page one.
That you shall adopt a trauma,
informed policies and trauma
foreign responses for the
investigation of allegations.
Ah!
Sexual assault.
So what I'm trying to figure out
is
We're going to have this team of
people. They're still unclear
who they are. But Austin just
second.
And they could say we didn't
investigation.
And we found that you did
something.
If they find that out. What does
the school do when they found
out the person they believe? Did
something wrong?
And what do they do if there's a
false accusation?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
False accusations are less than
3%. The universities and
colleges already have something
in place with how they deal with
that.
So, madam, I'm sorry, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, I guess my
point I'm trying to make is
So what happens when this team
of people goes out and says Yes,
This person was guilty. They
did. What is this school? Then
Do Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
That's the school policies that
we are. We're not telling him,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
So you're saying that you're
going to add
The new language that they have
to use affirmative consent.
That correct If I may interject
my reading of the bill is that
this
Um this statute would require
universities to establish
policies to deal with all of
those issues that I would
I guess, probably very educated
gas that in fact, each
institution probably will look a
little bit different based on
where they're at, based on their
community based on their needs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. When it
That's why I was trying to get
up because when we don't mandate
things, and we allow the schools
to do whatever they want
So with that, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. Would that become like
public knowledge, so that if
somebody was going to send their
child
To that school that they could
see this school doesn't
Follow through or this one does
or if there's a false
accusation. Is that going to be
listed somewhere that the
parents could look at Mr Speaker
and general Lady?
It's a part of every student's
invest. Um
Orientation and
I'll leave it at that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And I don't think anybody had
addressed. I know we were
talking about because one of my
concerns was one second
So we're making an
investigation onto these
charges.
What is the end goal that you're
looking for in this bill? If
you're saying that
We want this to be investigated.
First of all.
What is the endgame? Or is that
literally every school?
And who are the people? And how
are they going to be trained
speaker and general lady As I've
stated many times the title
title nine has the requirements
of what the training is, and
each university has a title nine
coordinator already.
Mr Speaker and gentle Lady,
would I keep hearing it keeps
refer back to Title nine. Title
nine. Does it give me the
information trying to find
If you're making a bill that
says they're going to be people
investigating it.
You're saying it's up to the
school, then to decide.
Who they're going to get to
investigate. That's what I'm
trying to find out.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. The
school names the title nine
coordinator.
And they're required to go
through training. Okay? That's
okay. So, Mr Speaker, and
generally that's what I saw in
the title nine.
There's a title nine
coordinator. The title line
person is going to take this.
Add this in
But then you're saying so. It's
up to every school to determine
the type of training
And who they're going to use to
do these investigations.
Mr Speaker and General Lady
Title nine already lays out what
type of training title Nine
Coordinators have to receive.
Mr Speaker, and generally it
doesn't lay out for what they do
for this affirmative consent.
That part is lacking.
Mr Speaker, and generally this
is adding that standard
Mr. Speaker Daily, Can you You
guys keep referring back to
title line. I read it numerous
times. I don't see anything
explicit. I see in here. Every
school must make
Procedure for students to file
complaints. Every school must
have a title nine coordinator.
Every school must have and
district uh, a policy against
sex discrimination.
But I don't see in here.
In the actual title. Nine.
Because it's saying H complaint
has a right to present their own
case. I don't see anything in
here that says
We will look for people who have
experience or training or we're
going to hire people and we're
going to train them. Mr Speaker
generated I don't see that in
title nine.
Mr Speaker, and generally it's a
federal law.
And it's defined by federal law,
entitled Nine is a very, very
long type of long document
statue. General Lady.
Okay, So Mr Speaker in Delhi and
so I'm understanding is we don't
know where it's at entitled and
I just have to
You're We have to believe your
expert is saying that I need to
trust
That that is in there. Is that
what I'm understanding? Gentle
ladies, I think for the sake of
this debate, um the build in
front of us.
Again.
Would require
Institutions to set up a number
of policies. And I think that
some of the line of questioning
which is great and very
insightful, um, has its answer.
On title nine as the guiding
document for some of these, um
Policies that will be expected
lease institutions. Now let's
remember Title nine has been
around for a very, very long
time. It's been litigated. It's
been proven what's in the
statute is very, very sound. So,
um, generally from earlier back
to you apologize back to you.
You're both from barely. I
forgot. No, thank you, Mr
Speaker, and thank you for
explaining that I just get
frustrated because I'm kind of
nerdy and I want to know what
page what number so I can go
read it. So maybe I'll just have
to do more research because
If we're going to be able to
debate a bill and understand it,
I like to get the full picture
of what's happening. Mr Speaker.
So on Page three, Mr Speaker and
represented for comprehensive
and online 16 for comprehensive
trauma and Ford Response
training program.
The institutions, employees or
contractors involved,
investigating and adjudicating
So adjudicating means it's kind
of like judge and jury.
So is that going to be because
that's actually what it says on
Page three.
So how are they going to be do
adjudicating again? I know you
guys are gonna say title line,
but that's not really fair
because I'd like to know.
What you mean by adjudicating
Mr. Speaker in general Lady, Um
Entitle nine.
It's getting late.
They have requirements to notify
both parties of the results of
the outcome of the
investigation, and they can take
steps like things like making
sure they're not in the same
dorm or, um
Any variety of things that the
universe Okay, so
Mr Speaker, and generally I'm
starting to get a better picture
of
So an into an incident happens
And I guess your pregnancy title
nine
The incident happens.
They make their own decision on
when they want to report it.
They reported. It goes to a
group of people that I still
don't understand what their
training is, but I'll try to go
look that up later.
And then there's a process.
How long does that mean?
Here's what I'm trying to get
it.
Mr Speaker Deli, So if they
report and say this person raped
me or beat me or stalking me
How long then before a decision
is made, or is that up to every
single school to figure out or
is it immediate?
Mr Speaker and General 80 that
is not spelled out in Title
nine. That's federal law.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, and then
later where? Where In the
federal You keep saying to the
federal law. Where do you mean?
The federal law? Where? Where
would I go? Look that up Title
nine. Mr Speaker and General
Lady.
Okay?
Sorry.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, Deli. That's
what I just said. I said title
line, and then you said federal
law so everything that I need to
know which unfortunately is
entitled Mine, which does not
answer my questions. Um so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, so
The frustrating part with this
bill is I'm not getting the
answer dealing. But I did get is
the yes means yes starts with
holding a hand.
What I didn't get. That's
frustrating as I would have
actually preferred. If your
expert would have said Oh,
representative, it's
Page nine, Section two that I
could go look at so I could
actually read because I can't
make a decision on this bill
without the full picture of
knowing everything that's going
on.
And I can't trust that. The
answers I'm getting are actually
answering my questions when I
keep being told to go back to
Title nine. Title nine is
something that you're saying is
a lengthy bill.
But I don't know who these
people are what they're doing,
how it's been done.
And while I'm for the training
part
I get frustrated in
False accusations. I get
frustrated in that there could
be coverups in a school that
doesn't want this kind of
scandal.
I don't want to come back and
five years from now, you know,
some university was brushing
this under the rug.
Because they didn't want to
address the rapes and the
violence that was happening in
their school.
So, Mr Speaker and
General lady on Page three.
Line 21 we talk about procedure
shall include an initial
response.
By the post secretary.
indication institutions,
employees or contractors to a
report of an incident.
Including providing written note
vacation. The complaint with the
contract information on campus
and community.
Resources. The next page
services and law enforced. So is
that same is this just talking
about the report?
Of what happened or what do you
mean in this section?
Mr Mr Speaker. Generally,
speaker and General Lady, it's a
referral.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker daily, So
you're keeping track of who you
referring them to?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
The university is required to
make the referral to resources.
And whether whether the
The person may say, I'm not
interested in that now and
And or they may or they may
decide to do something different
in the university will have no
way of knowing.
What that person has decided to
do unless they share it with
them.
Um, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
um
Unfortunately, I didn't get the
answers I was looking for.
And it's very frustrating.
Because what I wanted to know
was what we're basing this off
of Title nine page this title
nine here and their title nine
and I wanted to hear things like
It will be handled immediately
and that if it child is going to
score us, our young adult that's
going to school.
That this will be taken very
seriously. The people have the
proper training and if somebody
is living
Near someone who is a stalker.
That that would be handled by
My whole crux on this is
I don't like this process, and I
know what you're trying to say
is a shove somebody go to, but I
think there should be an
advocate.
And I think when somebody
suffering from domestic violence
That it should be good point of
order this matter, having been
under consideration for three
hours, Mr Speaker, I moved to
close debate. That motion takes
President. I will go back to you
to close your debate after this
vote, General lady and then I'll
go to the gentlelady from
earlier to close out the bill.
We're on a motion to close
debate. Although federation if I
was in I
I was supposed name.
The eyes have it. Debate is
closed.
General lady from
Burnley and Torrent again.
Close your arguments.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the
opportunity. Close my argument.
I pretty much made it. I have a
lot of issues.
I
I have too many issues about
Hmm. Things not being handling
quickly and swiftly. I'm too
worried about
A young adult who needs far more
guidance, and I'm not sure that
people are doing it and I want
to make sure if they have a
stalker, and something has
happened, and they're not
allowed to live in the same
dorm. There's a separation.
And I also have an issue because
I can't imagine if I had a son
who is dating somebody and
forgot to ask.
Can I hold your hand?
Thank you. Thank you generated
from earlier too close, Mr.
Speaker, not one person in this
chamber once any victim of
sexual assault to suffer or
failed to report the crime and
received justice, so this bill
does not set up barriers to
successful prosecution of these
charges, if that is what the
victim seeks.
I commend the prosecutors for
not wanting to interfere with
with their getting convictions,
but this bill is designed to
educate and support all students
in publicly funded institutions
so that they understand exactly
how the institutions seek to
protect them, and they will
receive the support.
If desired.
All right, Mr Speaker. I moved
that hb 151 do now pass passage
of house Bill 151. The vote is
not open.
Well, it's about to close.
What is now closed by voting 44
in the affirmative, 17 the
negative house. Bill 151 has
duly passed this house.
Lady from
Mm. Santa Fair Penske. Mr
Speaker, I move you go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business
ordered announcements.
The announcements.
Gentlemen from civil are makin
the reasonable cordon Mr.
Speaker your year, labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee will meet immediately
after we get off the floor this
very morning hopefully will be
out of here before the end of
the session.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Members
take note.
Any other announcements.
Gentlemen from San Juan, Mr
Speaker. I recognize it's the
The progress of a chair.
To call the committee meeting
whenever he feels is
appropriate.
It's 315 in the morning on a
Sunday
And he's asking staff.
To attend a committee hearing.
And I find that to be
objectionable, and I'm
encouraging my Republican
members not to attend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Members take note.
Any other announcements.
Little lady from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move the house
stand in recess until 11 am
Monday morning. Objection that
is ordered in the house sending
recess until we live in on
Monday morning.
