Members. We have a quorum roll
call is closed.
General lady from Chavez with
the invocation, everyone, please
I'm going to start out with
this.
For 18 years on this particular
date.
Still here on the House floor.
You are a very special woman on
her birthday.
2022 I had to travel to contain
Turkey.
At the beginning of the
legislative session to attend
her funeral.
Today would have been her 1/100
birthday.
Today.
I am offering these this prayer.
In memory of my mother in law.
Mary Louise is El Cata. John.
Let us pray.
Dear God.
We are always reminded how short
life really is.
And how we are just passing
through.
So all the people you haven't
told you love lately. Tell them
And live your days like you mean
it.
For God. So loved the world that
he gave his only begotten son.
That who so ever believeth in
him should not perish.
But have ever lasting life.
John 316.
Amen. The gentleman from Otero
representative block with the
Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
The gentleman from Benaglio
representative Martinez. My
apologies.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business.
I see no objection. So ordered.
Gentlemen, from Bernardino
Within announcement. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you for the opportunity this
morning to address the body I
rise to, um, to Nour, the life
of a dedicated in lifelong
public servant who left us? Um,
just at the end of this past
year, that was Speaker David
Norval.
Who served four terms in this
house of Representatives, among
many other, um
Opportunities that he had for
public service in the state.
Um, as you know, Speaker
Norville was elected as the
youngest ever speaker of the
house in 1969, and he quickly
distinguished himself as a
strong leader.
And change maker.
Speaker Norville. Um Mr Speaker
was often ahead of his time and
champion forward thinking
policies that gave voice to new
Mexicans across the state from
critical worker protections to
fighting for the state's
landmark human Rights Act.
Speaker. Norville later served
as a G
Where he helped establish where
helping establish New Mexico is
a national leader and set a
strong foundation for those to
seek to build upon today. Ah
Mr Speaker and body, But I would
I would argue that maybe David
rivals claim to fame was his
beautiful family. And we are
joined here today by by his
daughter, who is in the on the
floor and and and, of course by
his by his wife, our dear leader
and friend and colleague and
mentor.
Leader yellow chasing Mr
Speaker. We have a certificate
today and I would ask the body
for their
Ah, permission to have the clerk
read it clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico,
remembers David Lean, Orval.
Whereas David Lee Norville died
at his home in Albuquerque on
December 21st 2023 at the age of
88. And whereas David was
elected to four terms in the
House of Representatives from
1962 until 1970, whereas in 1969
at the age of 34 David was
elected speaker of the House of
Representatives, the youngest
person ever to hold that
position.
And whereas David also served as
majority floor leader during his
third term in the House of
Representatives, and whereas
David was elected attorney
general in 1971 and served until
1974 and whereas David was a
legislative legislative
visionary who championed civil
rights legislation and was a
prime sponsor of the Human
Rights Act.
Which became law in 1969 and
created a civil rights
commission with enforcement
powers. And whereas David also
advocated for a higher minimum
wage, public employee collective
bargaining, environmental
protection laws, funding for
public education, court reform
and abolition of the death
penalty. And whereas as attorney
general, he hired a record
number of women, assistant
attorneys generals
And issued several significant
opinions, including opinions
supporting the right of Native
American students to speak their
native language in public
schools and the right of state
employees to engage in
collective bargaining. And
whereas after one term as
attorney General David declined
to seek reelection and returned
to his private law practice,
where he primarily represented
criminal defendants and
plaintiffs in medical
malpractice and civil rights
cases.
And whereas in 2002
David met Gil chasing while he
was running for her fourth term
in the House of Representatives.
And whereas David and Gail were
married in October, 2003 and
whereas David enjoyed supporting
gales legislative goals,
including her decade long effort
to abolish the death penalty,
which ended in success in 2009
when Governor Bill Richardson
signed House Bill 2085 into lot,
and whereas Governor Richardson
appointed David to the gaming
control board, where he served
until 2013
And whereas David continued to
practice law until his
retirement in 2016, and whereas
David was born in Kansas City,
Missouri, on January 31st 1935
and grew up in Bartlesville,
Oklahoma, the only child of
Kenneth and Mildred Norval.
And whereas David graduated from
the University of Oklahoma
School of Law and was a lifelong
boomer sooner fan
And whereas after graduating
from law school, David opened a
lot of practice in Clovis. And
whereas David loved flying and
during his time in the
Legislature, he flew his own
plane between Clovis and Santa
Fe. And whereas David loved his
family, Children and
grandchildren, dogs, law,
politics and watching and
playing golf and tennis. And
whereas David is predeceased by
his son, David Jr.
And his former wife, Mary,
Vivian, Trent Hman, Norval.
And whereas David is survived by
his wife, Gail, his Children,
Teresa Norville, Felicia
Norville, Connie Beers and Jack
Norville girls Children, Garrett
Beam, Lindsay and Tyler Beam.
Anna his grandchildren. Hayden
Beers, Trenton, Norville and
Nicole Norville Gales
grandchildren. Mechanic Kayan,
Lucy and Jorge.
Girls, Brothers, Don Chase E.
Anna and Jim chasing.
And his beloved animals who
adored him. Dogs lower and teddy
and cat Izzy now therefore be it
resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that condolences be
extended to the family and
friends of David Norville, who
will be remembered for many
years of service to the dedicate
of dedicated service to the
people of New Mexico signed and
sealed at the capital in the
city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, clerk. Um, as you heard,
this is a large reason There's a
big reason why I'm honored to
walk in the footsteps of Speaker
Norval. And every time I walk
through my office and I walked
past the portraits of all the
former speakers, I always make
it a point to look at it and
wink at it because every time I
saw him
In the Legislature over the last
10 years. That's what we would
do to each other, and I would
often ask him. How are we doing?
And he'd be like
Are you getting in trouble? I'm
like no. Well, you should be
doing better then. Um, I I think
that you know, this year we've
we've celebrated the lives of
many who have left us many
public servants who have left
us.
Um And and this one. This one
hurt in a different way, Mr.
Speaker, So, thank you. Thank
you for the time to to honor Mr
Norville and all yield the floor
to anyone else who who might
have some some stories about.
Speaker Speaker Norville and
thank you to his family for
allowing me the time and the
honor to to honor his life on
this floor.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentle lady from Bergoglio,
representative Chavez. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um
I, as a state worker, Um, am
Eternally grateful.
For the work that David Norville
did when he was attorney
general.
He issued a ages opinion.
That gave public employees like
myself.
The right to bargain
collectively before there was a
law.
And for many, many years we were
able to
Negotiate our union contracts
that gave us the rights and
protections that workers and the
public sector enjoyed.
And for that I am forever
grateful to Attorney General
Dave Norville.
That young lady from Berlin. Leo
leader Casey. Uh, thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I wasn't expecting this today
and I'm most appreciative. I
want to thank all of the members
here because I had flowers from
the Republican caucus and
flowers from the Democratic
caucus, which
Teresa and I am the rest of the,
um my Children and and her
brothers and sisters all
appreciate it very, very much.
I I have to say.
It was while I was married to
David that I managed to amend
the human rights Act twice, and
it took me years to do both
things. One was to, um
Prevent discrimination to people
based on sexual orientation or
gender identity.
The other was to pass the
pregnant worker accommodation
act. David never even told me
that he authored the bill. So
that's how he was. I mean, he
just did things. And then that
was the last you ever heard of
it. So, um, I m I do appreciate
this. And
I certainly appreciate
The Lady from Burnley l.
Talking about his opinion
regarding collective bargaining.
That was that was a really good
one. We heard some other really
good stories, too, that he would
never have told of himself.
But, um
I
I appreciate this very much and
I, as other people have talked
about losses that they have
sustained recently. I have not
been able to get up.
And speak to that, But I feel
it. Thank you.
Members any further
announcements.
The lady from better, Leo. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um, and what a
powerful remembrance of our
ancestors today and the people
who have shaped this chamber and
made it what it is today.
Um, today I'm rising in
celebration of Lunar New Year so
shiny in Kuala to everyone here.
Today. I'm wearing red in honor
of my Taiwanese family, and some
of my earliest memories are
celebrating this important
holiday.
Um, this Lunar new year. We're
celebrating the year of the
Dragon and the dragon is
inauspicious and extraordinary
creature unparalleled in talent
and excellence. It symbolizes
nobility, honor, luck and
success, and this year is set to
bring about many opportunities,
changes and challenges.
And if you're seeing a shift
right now, in your current lives
this year may offer a favorable
chance.
It's an important year because
the Chinese people were assumed
to be descendants of dragons and
therefore carry within them. The
dragon blood, the Chinese Zodiac
is divided into 12 year cycles
with an animal that represents
each cycle. And so that is why
we celebrate the year of the
dragon. So if you are in this
chamber and you were born in
1950 to 1964 1976 1988
2000 or 2012. If you're born in
2012, you might not be old
enough to run for office yet.
But if you are dragon, you are
in doubt with prominent
abilities and revolutionary
ideas in 2024. If you are dragon
and you wear your red or purple
your predicted to bring luck and
avoid any troubles in the year,
the Zodiac is further divided
into elements Word fire Earth.
Metal and water. And this year
is the wood Dragon Year, which
means this year will bring
calmness, loyalty and
reliability. So I wish everyone
across New Mexico who is
celebrating with their families
today, very happy Lunar New Year
and the rest of the world as
well. A happy Lunar New Year.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
gentle lady.
Happy Lunar New Year
announcements. Gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I move we go to the
next order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered.
Mr Speaker.
Your Labor Veterans and Military
affairs Committee to whom has
been referred Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 87,
as amended has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Alice L.
Li Alkon share
Mr Speaker Move, Adoption were
an adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Centerville 87 as
amended. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Opposed. NAY report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Bill 137, as
amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr Speaker. Move
Adoption adoption of our Federal
Committee report on Senate Bill
137 as amended all those in
favor saying, if I was saying, I
suppose
The eyes have it report adopted?
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to miss been referred
Senate Bill 152, as amended has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations Do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker Move Adoption adoption
about favorable Committee Report
on Senate Bill 152 as amended.
All those in favor signify was
saying I
Opposed. Nay coming report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, Your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 165 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a federal company
reporting husband 165 all those
in favor magazine. Ah, I
suppose May, the committee
report adopted Mr Speaker, Your
Appropriations and Finance
committee to has been referred
House Bill 303 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass as
amended. Respectfully submitted.
Nathan Small Chair, Mr Speaker.
Move Adoption Adoption of
favorable Committee report in
house about 303 all those in
favor signify by saying, Ah, I
I suppose me?
The eyes have it report adopted?
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee to has
been referred. Senate Bill 159,
as amended has had it under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations Do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker, Move
Adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable community report on
Senate Bill 159 as amended. All
those in favor signify by
saying Aye supposed name.
The eyes have a community report
adopted little lady from
MM Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. And now being 1159
am I move? We adjourn until 1201
PM to order
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show that all those present and
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session.
Objection. It is ordered Mr
Speaker, asking animus consent
that the rules be suspended, and
the journal show that the
Journal has been read in full
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
order of business committee.
Objection. It is order
Happy Super Bowl Sunday.
Game starts at 430.
Sunday. Already we rolled the
clock lady from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and some
miscellaneous business order
members. I have a very special
guest up here on the rostrum
with me, and he has building me
a dinosaur figure out of Legos
or whatever.
His name is Theo Donald Stead,
and he is the eldest son of our
general counsel. Megan Dorsey.
Please give him a big round of
applause.
Theo is five years old and those
of you who have been here a
little while me. Remember him
when he was a tiny little baby
sitting up here with Megan
Gering?
Some legislative session ago.
And so it's really, really good
to have him back here, Showering
us with love and and all the
cool things that little kids do.
Ah, well, they're around us. So
welcome. Feel hope you can stick
around all day.
Your mom's gonna buy us all
pizza. Great.
He is an honorary member of the
house. He has a badge. He's the
71st, but maybe we can get him
to oppose the committee reports
with you and then
That might be the
He's got the voice for it.
Alright on announcements back to
the gentleman from Bendinelli.
You're representing Garcia
testing when I was speaker.
The massacre,
representante
Mr Speaker, Um
This past week.
There was an acknowledgement of
one of our deceased members.
Candy Cordoba from Valencia
County.
Former state. Rep
2001 to 2007 and also she served
her.
Speaker. I was a Valencia county
clerk for many years.
Mr Speaker, I was not able to be
here.
When we were recognizing and
acknowledging
The line for about
Former Webcam The Cordova.
We were tied up in the energy
committee.
But I'd like to reflect on a
couple of significant
Events.
Um do you mean the term of
County Cordova?
For lunch. She
Sponsored estimated speaker.
The compulsive gambler.
Reform legislation that we
currently have in the books.
She was really adamant about
that, especially
Upon the onset of
Damian Gaming.
And there was that Boyd
That existed after we passed the
Uh, the Indian Gaming compact.
Having to do with compulsive
gamblers. All sorts tomorrow,
speaker
She passed the monumental
Um, nursing
Home.
Reform legislation.
And also the nominating petition
that we all have currently is
basically the work of candy
Cordova. She's the one that
standardized that
Which we flex. What we have
today is tomorrow, Speaker
You know one of her pieces of
legislation.
Also
Tomorrow. Speaker Candy
Did some reforms in terms of
property.
Tax exemption limits for
Honorably discharged veterans,
setting the limit at $4000.
And that was done incrementally.
From 2 to 3 or four. Anything
else speaker But as the mass
speaker
I was witnessed.
Ah, Sandra Candy would sit right
here where representative model
is
And I would sit right next to
her.
The seven years that she was
here.
And, uh, Speaker I was witnessed
And, uh, Speaker I was witness
to a miracle. Oh, yeah, I was
going to America on this floor.
With Condi and another
legislator.
Speaker once we passed into law
Once we passed the
That nursing home reform bill.
It had some bipartisan support.
But for some reason it really
irked. Um
The state Republican Party
chairman.
At the time.
Who was
John Dandong.
And what John Dental did is he
Ordered rural
The humanizing demoralizing
Attack piece.
And Candy Cordova's district.
Right after that vote.
And, uh, it was really a
dehumanizing and demoralizing
piece of legislation that we
hadn't seen estimable Speaker
But that's what John Dental
brought.
Two.
The report to the political
community.
It is.
Kind of an extreme.
What type of Lhasa fee
That called for
No by the no bipartisanship.
And, uh and it reflected itself
and in that piece of attack
literature in that candy Cordova
Naturally, she resisted That and
For one who re election easily.
But
In the process.
Uh, the aftermath has the mass
speaker that attack piece.
Ordered by
Republican chairman, chairman of
the ST John Dental.
One got me.
Conservative Democrat
conservative Republican.
States tides
Comes up to candy.
Right here on this. This, I'll
And says candy.
I saw that attack piece on you.
And I
Do not. I abhor
What my Republican chairman has
done in regards to attacking you
for this very valuable piece of
legislation that you brought
forth and candy.
Here's a check for $5000.
To do.
Mm hmm.
A literature piece.
Kind of really setting the
record straight speaker. That
was the miracle, you know, and,
uh, but that's run. Got me for
USD Miles weaker.
He was a very ethical man. He
served as director of the Board
of Ethics of Burning Oak County
for many years.
But he was a conservative
Republican.
He abhorred.
The medical marijuana bill that
we passed.
I mean that, and he also asked
him on speaker was
At the forefront of 24th.
The banning of cockfighting.
In our state.
But he was extremely
conservative in terms of
philosophy, but very ethical
And that reflected itself.
You know, in terms of this
gesture that he did with candy
Cordova
So that's what I remember Most
decimal speaker
About Candy Cordova.
Being here in this chamber.
University Mount Speaker with
the advent of John Dental
As chairman of the Republican
Party statewide.
That's where we begin to see in
this chamber, a total
polarization.
You know, he basically called
out the Republicans that would
vote for a Democratic speaker.
And he also called out
Republicans.
That didn't hold the line.
And kind of favored this
bipartisan approach towards
politics in this chamber.
And that was really sad when I
reached out to rob Progressive
Chicano.
That comes from traditional
You know, roots in this state. I
reached out to him. He must
speaker to see how we can kind
of a man things and kind of
help. Moderate moderate, um,
help moderate.
Some of these philosophies that
were really extreme and divisive
Esteem. Our speaker.
But again in concluding a small
speaker.
Acknowledging of candy Cordova
is, uh
She was one great
One great lady.
And, uh,
And I attended her funeral.
This past year there in the
land.
And, uh and we are allowed to
candy.
Internal accomplishments and
really building up.
Quality of life there in
Valencia County, the district
that she represented
And, um
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Representative.
Thank you gentlemen. Webcasts
Archive, Trevor anyone?
Generated from burning Leo.
Mr Speaker movie go to that
order of business messages.
Objection. It is ordered House
Executive message number 50.
Speaker Martinez and members of
the House I have this day signed
House Bill 171, as amended
enacted by the 56th Legislature.
Second session 2024.
Respectfully Yours. Michelle Liu
hunger from governor.
Message will be entered.
The lady from Virgilio.
Mr Speaker, and we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation Objection.
It is so ordered.
Senate Bill 239, introduced by
Senators Munoz and Hemphill.
Act relating to higher education
scholarships, amending certain
definitions in the legislative
Lottery Tuition Scholarship Act,
changing certain requirements
for eligibility for the
legislative lottery tuition
scholarship, providing an
exception to the minimum credit
our eligibility requirement in
the Opportunity Scholarship Act.
Exempting dual credit classes.
From counting toward the
opportunity scholarship credit
our cap, allowing credit for
summer semesters in each
scholarship. Senate Bill 239
Senate Bill 239 have been read
to us by title is referred to
the House Education Committee.
Generated from burning Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to the
VAT order. Business. Third
reading of legislation.
Objection. It is so ordered.
Members. We are going to start
our third reading calendar bills
have been shared with, um,
probably the entire caucus. At
this point, I'm sure
We've got quite a list to go
through a lot of important bills
to go through a lot of healthy
debate, so we're going to start
with item 36 on the third
reading calendar is generally
from Dona Ana radio on that
item.
I am. Mr Speaker. If you can get
me to that point, the record
reflect that election necessary
for police in Senate Bill 153 on
final passage has been taken in
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. That
lady to explain the bill. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I
also want to before I start. I
want to make sure I introduced
Kelly. Clint Who is my witness
today, Mr Speaker.
Senate Bill 153 is an LFC
endorsed bill which increases
the distribution from the early
childhood Education and Care
Trust fund. We are asking that
new appropriations new childhood
education Excuse me. We are
asking that new appropriations
from the fund B.
$250 million, which is a $95
million increase. The increase
will support the early childhood
education and care Department
budget request. In addition, any
annex expended and encumbered
funds will revert to the trust
fund and the new distribution
amount will be affected. July
1st 2024. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I stand for questions
The gentleman from what they
know. Representative block.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker
with the kind gentle lady from
Dona Ana, please Yield I yield
to the gentleman from Otero.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker in
general lady, So I'm looking at
your bill here, and I'm just
wondering Mr Speaker, General
Lady. I believe right now we
have about
About $10 billion or something
in that fund. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, is that not
sufficient where we increasing
the amount, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, from
our detto, so the distribution
is as at 150 million. And so I
know that the the trust fund
looks big but were only able to
take out certain increments and
so in order to make meet the
early education budget, that's
how we're going to do that.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so currently what's
the what is the annual
Allocated amount versus what
we're trying to
Increase it by Mr Speaker.
General Lady Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from Otero. So
currently we have we're just
reading 150 million and we're
asking for 250 to make sure that
we meet the budget.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally, okay. I see
that on Page two of the bill.
That's that's a lot of money. Mr
Speaker, General Lady is this a
one time?
Recurring, or is it recurring
for $250? Million? Mr Speaker
Generating Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen from Otero is
going to be recurring part of
what we When we established this
trust fund is that we started
the increment at a lower level,
and the plan was always to build
in reverb.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So my my big
concern with this is what if we
hit an economic turn where we
can barely paid?
The phone bill. So to speak, Mr
Speaker, General lady. What
would happen in that event?
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
right now, the with where the
funding is we have enough money
to cover those costs on a
ongoing basis.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady, So if we
have enough costs
To go for an
For a good amount of time. Mr
Speaker, General Lady with this
$10 billion
I just don't really understand
why we need to add even more to
the fund now.
If we already have sufficient
enough money to
Do it for a year to in an
economic downturn. Mr. Speaker
generally could you just think
you Mr Speaker and gentlemen
from Otero, So the I think the
confusion is so the money is in
the corpus, and that's not the
money that's being taken out.
And so we're asking for the
money to be taken out? Um, so we
can cover the cost for the
additional budget.
Which is earned revenue.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and
I don't miss. I don't really
have a very good grasp on who is
overseeing these funds. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady is this
with
Uh, lfc who? Who is looking over
this, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Otero, it's state investment
counsel who oversees the funds.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady from Dona Ana. So the state
investment counsel, do they?
What do they invest in with this
fund? Is it mostly bonds as it
stable investments? What are
they
Putting this money into Mr
Speaker, General Lady and Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen from Matera.
I don't have the answer to that
question.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, that helps me a lot.
I'm still kind of confused Why
We're increasing the amount But
Mr Speaker generally all listen
to the debate and I really
appreciate the answers. Thank
you so much. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Debate gentlemen from
Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will
generate you from Donna. Annual
Yield yield to the gentleman
from Lee, Speaker. Gentle lady.
This is a huge percentage
increase.
In the money going to those
programs. Can you tell me
What it's going to be utilized
for.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen friendly so
I've got a list, so I'd like to
reveal to read that out to you,
Um, Childcare assistance
copayment restructure child
assistance rate eligibility
child assistance, infant and
taller contracts, Transfer HST
infant and maternal and maternal
health service says Transfer
HST.
Ah, for doulas. And, like Tae
shin support, I t support
transfer HST, Medicaid home
Visiting rate increase and pilot
initiatives program support full
time employee home visiting
prekindergarten quality. Um
Update
In early childhood education
care programs. Um and that does
it.
And speaker generated commuter
And speaker generated, Can you
Toby? Approximately
Children participate.
In this in these programs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. For late firmly,
My expert is pulling out her
calendar. So to give us just a
moment, please.
Actual time, gentle lady.
So, Mr Speaker. Fine, Gentlemen
27,000 are participating in
Child care assistance.
17,000 in prekindergarten.
5000 and home visiting
And and I think that's where
we're at. Thank you. Fine,
gentlemen.
General lady you did that fairly
quickly.
Did you have those added up, Mr
Speaker? Fine Gentleman from
Lee. I am fortunate enough to
have a mathematician next to me.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Please
proceed.
So? So I'm I think we've
answered the question, Mr are
gentlemen.
Mr Baker generated. What I was
looking for was the total number
of kids participating in these
programs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now
you're asking for a real
mathematician, right? 39 39,000
ish.
Children that are participating.
Thank you for that, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady. One moment, please.
So my speaker generator
But
By my calculation, it's about
6000.
$400 per child.
Does that comport with the data
that you have?
Mr Speaker that does.
Miss Baker, General Lady, That's
uh
That is very cool. That's quite
a large sum.
Protection early when
Our existing programs.
Funded this year.
Only about two thirds of that.
Are we
Do we have?
A significant increase in the
number of kids year over year.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, could
you clarify your question?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I was
wondering about with respect to
those numbers that you just gave
me.
Is that any increase year over
year in the number of Children
participating in the programs?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it is.
And Ms Speaker. Gentle lady, Can
you tell me
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, we're
looking at 11 or 12% increase.
So, Miss Speaker in general lady
What we're looking at doing here
is pulling out.
An additional $150 million from
the early childhood fund.
Two.
Process.
An additional 11%.
Participants in the program is
that correct?
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen firmly
So that's from last year to this
year. And, of course, the, uh
the hope and the the goal is to
make sure that we capture more
Children in in
In raising those numbers.
Yeah.
Mr Speaker generated. That
increase seems completely
disproportionate to the number.
Of the increase in the number of
Children participating.
So
Grow up, interested to hear.
What the rest of the debate
sounds like for some more
justification. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's
further debate. The gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Lane.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
generated from Dona Ana Yield? I
do yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, generally
from Dona Ana. I think my line
of questioning is fairly brief.
I understand the need to to
expand the distributions because
the
The the
The principle is growing at such
large amounts.
And I don't have any issue Mr
Speaker, generally from Dona Ana
with
Increases for childcare
assistance and child and
maternal health. I'm looking at
the FR for home visiting
Quality support for pre K. I
think all those things make
makes sense.
Mr Speaker generated from Dona
Ana. I think where my concern
lies and
Where I hope that there's not a
lot of expansion. But can you
Tell the body
What the guardrails will be to
make sure that
These additional distributions
Don't go towards, um
Department administrative
Oversight.
Expansion, So I'm worried about
the money getting into our local
communities.
So so, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
so we're looking at
approximately a million dollars
in administration feel, uh, fees
to to run all these programs
with the addition going the rest
of it going towards actual
programming.
Mr Speaker, generally from Dona
Ana. So is that an additional
million what the department is
is requiring for implementation
oversight right now.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it is.
And Mr Speaker, generally from
Dona Ana, and so
That
That number. That intention of
an additional million is that
within the builders that what
the agency is represented to you
as the bill sponsor?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is within hospital, too.
Mr Speaker generated from Dona
Thank you Appreciate the
clarifications there is for the
debate, the gentle lady from
Britain Illegal and torrents,
Representative Lord. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentle lady
from Dona Ana County please
Yield. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and General Lady. I had
some questions. I was trying to
write down things when the other
representative asked what that
was going to be covering.
And did I hear that and I just
want clarification. There was a
toddler contract. Can you
explain to me what that was? Or
if I misheard that Mr Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. It is you did hear
correctly, and it's to expand
the program to make sure younger
toddlers get into, um into the
programs.
Thank you for the clarification
because in my head, Mr Speakers
imagine toddlers doing contract.
So thank you for the
clarification.
And can you and there was also
something about child pay
repayment restructure? Can you
explain to me what that is?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. So at this time
But so there's federal friends
that are allowing the families
not to have copays. Those
federal friends are now going to
be used up, and so we're going
to have to do a restructuring to
add copays into, um, the the
fundamental the the formula.
Okay. Mr Speaker and generated
just said a few more questions
on this, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, And then there was pre Was
it pre K qualifications was that
one of the things that was also
that you said, like I said, was
trying to write these down as
quickly as possible.
So, Mr Speaker and and gentle
lady, it is It's pre. It's pre K
quality, and that's to make sure
that we've got instructions to
keep up the standards in those
classrooms.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and then just a
couple more questions. You said,
um, pilot initiatives. What kind
of a pilot initiatives are you
looking at? Mr Speaker and
General Lady?
So, Mr Speaker and gently and
I'm I apologize, but we're
looking at our list here and so
I think you may have missed, um
Let's heard that because we're
not piloting any new programs,
Okay, Mr Speaker, Deli. Thank
you. I was like I said I was
trying to. I thought I'd heard
there was something about pilot
initiatives.
So I think the last couple of
questions I have so
Did you say it was also for? Um,
is it for
I don't know how you said this
for child lactation experts was
that something that was in there
that you said
So, Mr Speaker, and um and
General Lady, it's for doulas
and lactation support.
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, So I'm assuming and I'm
just gonna assume that you're
talking about birth. Doulas, not
death duel is I would I would
hope that's correct so
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, so
What? How do
How did child lactation
assistance and duelist because
doula does with birth?
And child lactation is usually
before we get into early
childhood education.
So how is that applicable to
this child Education fund, Mr
Speaker, and generally Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. It's
all part of the bonding process
which we are promoting for
Medicaid families and for all
families.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady,
are these people that are child
lactation experts and doulas.
Or is it child? Lactation
person? Are they expert or
where? How are you? Hiring them?
Or we're beginning Referred. Are
they getting paid out of this
fund? Can you tell me how that
works? Mr Speaker and young
lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gently, so it's going to go
through the through HST and so
they will make those referrals.
Okay, so, Mr Speaker gently so
that we don't know we well, do
you know Mr Speaker generally
are doulas are they certified?
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. They
are okay, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, And then there was hold on
one second.
I believe it was HB 196.
Uh um.
Early childhood Education
department to pilot a wage and
career ladder.
Is that something that you guys
would be considering in this
Because it was something we had
debated before, And I wanted to
see if this is something to talk
about getting more funding for.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Um,
thank you for the clarification,
But it does not that that's not
part of these funds. And this
this bill.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Generally,
that's I think all I want to
clarification for just trying to
figure out why we had such a big
uptick in the money and
What? We were looking at pain.
Um, for for what we're getting.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is a debate the gentleman
from Katherine Granted Alga
resented Terrazas. Thank you, Mr
Speaker With General Lady and a
friend of mine from Doriana,
please yield.
Uh, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
do yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally. Yeah, I think my my
questions kind of follows it on
the same.
Um
Line of questioning and only
because I was reading the
policies and performance
analysis.
That was given to us in volume
one.
And I look on page 104.
I was just looking at the
metrics. You know, that's just
Kind of gives us a nice overview
of what what? What has been
spent.
On early childhood education and
Care Department. I'm looking at
On the left hand side of there's
a little graph here.
And I see it on 2023. We took a
massive increase.
Looks by the graph here. 400 a
little over 420 million or
approximately that up to 625
130. I don't know It's a It's a
graph, so it's not exact.
But we see significant,
significant increase of above.
50% there.
And then I looked down a little
further.
The bottom of the middle of the
page, and I look at those red
dots.
And I started seeing red dots,
which means we're not
Hitting our metrics.
And so I just, You know, Mr
Speaker, General Lady I look at
If I 23 and our target is 1500
Families.
Ah, enrolled in medical. Excuse
me. Medicaid home Visiting.
And I see that they're only
participating about 4 440.
And I keep going through this
and it's fire. Find other
metrics like that that I find
concerning
And so I just Mr Speaker.
Generally, I don't. I don't want
to.
Go on and on about it, but I
think it it does.
It does concern me when I'm
reading things on between 104
and 106. Word says. Even the
percentage of
Of early childhood
professionals, including tribal
educators with degrees or
credentials and early childhood
feels have a have a red rating
or a bad rating, right?
And so I'm hoping Mr Speaker,
General lady that you know here
we are trying to increase it
again.
And it's been increased
substantially in the last
couple, Uh few years.
And so, but it as a businessman.
You know, we we invest and we
want to see results.
And I feel that we're falling
short and I'm just just causes
me a lot of concern. And I hope
Mr Speaker, General Lady
That the next time we read that
That this investment I'm going
to support your bill.
But I I really hope that I see
Um, better metrics, and I hope
our early childhood development
and programs
Ah, show us better better, Uh,
Ratings and what we're getting.
Do you have anything to comment
about that? Mr Speaker
generally. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and I agree.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. General Lady, I think
we're all the same page. I think
William investing so much money.
We've got to see a lot more
green on those pages. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. The debate The
gentleman from San Juan with the
best hair out of the 3% of
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
appreciate that will the general
lady yield
I will yield to the gentleman
with the best hair.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. Did I hear you say that
we're going to restructure the
copay?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that is
correct.
Can you Mr Speaker? And
generally can you explain that
to me?
So, Mr Speaker, uh,
Gentlemen.
There will be skin in the game.
As I know that you like to hear
we will be looking at family's
income, and we are looking at 5%
of their income.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. That is
news to my ears that I love to
hear. Thank you very much for
that.
You know for the debate, General
lady Too close. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I now move that Senate
Bill 153 do now pass final
passage of Senate Bill 153. The
vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
I'll leave the vote open for
just another 10. Seconds in case
you all forgot the 30 vote. The
32nd vote clock.
We'll reopen it for 10 more
seconds.
Or 30 difference, I guess.
Did everybody vote.
The vote is now closed by about
15 in the affirmative 14 in the
negative Senate. Bill 153 has
duly passed this house. Let's go
next to the gentle lady from
Reba's Sandwell, Santa Fe and
Towers representative ERA. Are
you ready on item number?
20
Mr Speaker. Will you get me to
that point at the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House agricultural
sectors and water resources
Committee substitute for House
Bill Tweet 11, as amended on
final passage has been taken. It
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. House
Bill 211 amends various sections
of the water Project Finance
Act. Uh, it adds wastewater
conveyance and treatment as a
qualifying a water project. It
allows water project funds to be
used to hire technical
assistance for qualifying water
projects. Which means that, um
Small water systems can actually
get technical assistance and it
basically removes outdated
provisions and eliminates
conflicts with US statutes that
now exists.
And, um, I would like to
introduce my, um expert and it's
smart key to wrestle as CEO of
the New Mexico Finance
Authority. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I'll stand for
questions. Gentlemen from Otero
represented black
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind general lady from
The rivers Sandoval, Santa Fe
and Taus. Please yield. I
could've just looked at her
plate back there, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. I recognize that
kind gentleman.
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, I just have two
quick questions for you.
It will not be long at all. I'm
just looking at Page four.
Of your bill. I'm on the
amendments in context. This is
in Section two. I believe it's
item five.
And it looks like we're struck,
some language says and conduct
an audit of projects. Financial
records. Mr Speaker generally,
why did we strike the auditing
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman
restrict that because that was
really an audit with the
projects that were already
approved. They had already been
approved. So all of these all of
these projects
Are they all have to be there
all accountable to
It's 30. We oversee every Yeah.
Every everybody has to have
their audit in order before they
come. This was the audits that
actually went to the projects
that were already approved.
Perfect. Thank you so much. Mr
Speaker and General Lady that
cleared it up for me. And then
my second and last question, I
promise. Mr Speaker is on page
six. Looks like we struck some
language in section at the end
of Section two on 10. This is
and fiscal agent fees. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady. Why did
we strike that?
That language.
Um Ah. Um, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, we can't We can't
fund or we that New Mexico
Finance Authority can't fund
fiscal agents of these from the
severance tax bonds.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I kept it to two
questions, and I really
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen.
For the debate, the gentle lady
from Chavez representative as L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much
with the general lady from
Mama.
Rio Reba's Sandoval and Santa
Fe. Yield. Please, Mr Speaker, I
kindly I mean, I yield to thee,
kind lady from Chavez.
Mr Speaker. Now, I'm concerned
if she's just going to kind of
yield, Mr Speaker, we heard
this this bill in the House
Appropriations Committee. And I
mean the House AG committee
where it was heard first. And Mr
Speaker. There was lots of
projects come in this particular
bill that you carried
And
And I understand the urgency of
some of these programs are
really do Can you kind of point
out to the audio to the risk the
house members? What constant
toots the urgency on some of
these programs.
Mr Speaker, and, uh, kind,
Gentle lady from Chavez. Ah,
really? These water projects
have all been funded. Um not
excuse me. They've all been
approved by the New Mexico
Finance Authority. Ah, we try.
This is really a companion bill
to house Bill 4148.
Ah!
Ah, General Lady and 148. Is the
bill that really we passed
yesterday and that list all of
the projects that have been
approved What this does. What
this bill does is really
Remove. I mean, I want to tell
you the state engineer's office
and then, um if they worked on
this for six months, we've been
working on this bill for six
months to eliminate needless
bureaucracy that stands in the
way of these projects getting
funded as quickly as possible.
Mr Speaker in general lady. I
understand that because there
are some areas that are in great
need for these projects to get
done. Will there be local
assistance whenever an entity
does come to the water Trust
board?
And goes through this process is
their local help that is
available, especially to the
smaller
Very small entities that are
needing help.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
thank you for that question.
Yes what This bill allows the
New Mexico Finance Authority and
to do now is to hire contractors
who can who can help these small
systems access help in their
engineering and their financial
reporting that they have to do
so they now have the authority
with this bill to go out and
help these small water systems.
Um, prepare the application and
get ready for that.
Mr Speaker. It's imperative that
that does that. That help is
there that aid is there for
them.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady, Can you
explain?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Uh, the grants co
Mainly for organizations that
don't have enough ratepayers. So
you're talking about really
small systems. You know, people
who have less than 100 people on
their mutual domestic water
association, so so they couldn't
possibly pay off a loan. If they
got it. They're already already
maxed out with loans. Uh, so
they need a grant to sort of
help them. Uh,
Help them get this project
approved so that they can they
can then maybe regionalized at
other waterproof mutual domestic
water associations to their to
their organization through the
regionalization act that we
passed last year. So all of this
is kind of the culmination of I
would say my four years of work
on looking at how we help small
mutual domestic water systems in
our state.
And Mr Speaker. That's very
reassuring, especially to our
smaller communities that might
have listened.
Let I know far less than 200
members participating in this,
So I do appreciate that.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
With
With this particular bill be
able to help those communities.
There's even municipalities as
far as buying water rights.
Mr Speaker and General Lady s
water rights are eligible in
this process.
Mr Speaker. That is a big deal
anymore with the over inflated
prices of our water rights right
now due to what the Interstate
Stream Commission has done to
try to Mexico will be a
compliance with what we have to
deliver to Texas on both sides
of the state. I think it's very
important because
Those prices have got have
gotten way, way up there in
price, and it's really hard for
certain
Entities that are making
application to be able to come
up with a funding on the
purchasing those water rights.
It is more difficult than most
people realize it because there
is a vetting process. There is
well, they have to do a title
search on it. They have to make
sure that those water rights are
not encumbered in any way.
They do have to meet the
standards that are set by the
office of the state engineer,
and it is quite burdensome. So
is there also help on
From
The water transport on helping
these entities develop the steps
they need to be able to purchase
the water rights.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. It
would be part of the technical
assistance is provided when the
now that the enemy if they would
be able to hire contractors that
would be part of that process.
and Mr Speaker. That's a very
important aspect of what we're
trying to do here. That aid that
is available, even though our
district offices
For the office of the state
engineer is very helpful.
Sometimes they are inundated
with other other businesses that
go on, such as transfers from
one farm to another, or the
psyche associations. The
involvement they're trying to
get those water rights purchased
and that that is a struggle for
lots and lots of not just in
this bill, but just for
People in general.
Because it is quite burdensome.
Mr Speaker. One thing that I was
concerned about.
And and think I appreciate you
Accepting that amendment
changing the scope of this
project.
From five years back down to two
years. I think it's important
that the Legislature do have
oversight on what this money is
being spent up four.
And how fast people are reacting
to this and getting the job done
because I know that once these
grants or loans have been let
That they need to start working
right then, and they can't have
it drag on for years and years
and years, So we do want to see
the progress on what is being
done to me, That's very
important.
Another change, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, that was that you
It was amended.
Or that was a concern of mine.
Um
Mr Speaker.
I feel like the Endangered
Species Act has to be protected,
but I also think it needs to be
revisited.
Quite often.
Because we have done a heck of a
job in the state of New Mexico
as far as our endangered species
go, but whenever sometimes due
to nobody's fault.
But the man upstairs we do hit
Drought conditions.
And I know that over on our side
of the state where the Pecos
River runs through that that
river actually went dry for a
while.
And we were under orders. Then,
too. We had a little fish that
we had to protect. That was more
important than anything else.
And whenever we
Are overlooking that the
repercussions that can come down
can be
Very damaging to our state, So
I'm glad that
Some changes were made there, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
What? On Page three at the very
top of page three of your bill.
It's under Section B number
four.
And this is, uh what the duties
of the border, which authorize
qualifying water projects to the
authority that are for and it
list flood prevention.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
I'm assuming that even though
you have that listed that they
are also working with
Soil conservation districts.
That I know a lot of cases. It
also involves, uh, gusting the
Army Corps of Engineers.
Um, we do have to protect our
There's a big deal with the
erosion problems whenever there
is a flood.
So I'm assuming Miss Mr Speaker
and General lady that that
additional consultation with our
soil conservation districts is
in place. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker and General Lady from
Chavez? Yes, there are many, uh
soil and water conservation
projects that are already
approved in house Bill 148 that
we passed yesterday. So yeah,
that is a big part of this
landscape.
And Mr Speaker. Those are some
people with boots on the ground,
and that is very important
because they know
Especially working with those
counties flood controls.
It's a hand in hand.
Aspect of what we're trying to
get accomplished here, and I
think it's it's crucial that
there is cooperation between all
these entities and protecting
Mr Speaker.
Let's see, Uh
Can an entity apply for two
loans or grants on say they
applied for one for 2005, can
they make application again in
2006?
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. Yes, And
and many of these projects are
cost a lot of money. Let's be
frank and they span over years,
so, yes, they'll they might
apply for, uh, a loan or grant
in phases, and they'll compete
one phase and then they'll come
back the next year to complete
Phase two and then the next year
to complete Phase three.
Mr Speaker. That's important for
the body to realize that
Even though they have made one
loan or received one loan or run
one grant that is not going to
complete the project, so they do
have the capability of going
back, making another application
going through the water Trust
board and the Water Trust board
is able to go back and see what
has been done in the person's
face. Hey,
You know this is going to take
that project to the end.
Mr Speaker. Um, General Lady?
Absolutely.
Okay, Mr Speaker, And then I'm
gonna wind down with, uh, on
page six of your bill.
Under number B.
Two. It starts online 22
It says hire contractors to
provide financial administrative
capacity for development and
direct technical assistance and
water projects. Mr Speaker, I'd
need a little bit more
explanation on that. I think
Mr Speaker and General lady that
we were talking about this
before. Um right now.
They didn't have the authority
to hire contractors to help
people do these applications. So
a small water project, you know,
a small mutual domestic water
system with less than 100 people
and all volunteers. You have to
remember. These are all
volunteers. They had a lot of
trouble preparing these
applications. So now now the
Mm. FAA can hire contractors to
go out and help these people
while they're in the application
process, so this was really set
up to help small rural water
systems do these applications
which can can be very, um,
they're not easy. They're not
easy. You have to do a you know,
you have to do engineering
reports. Financial reports you
environmental reports. You have
to do a lot of things. Now they
will have the ability and the
method they will have the
ability to help these small
water users.
And Mr Speaker.
You're spot on there.
I do appreciate that response.
And whenever we do this, I'm
assuming that that technical
assistance from whatever field
it might be and whether it's to
jetting out of will drilling a
new will pipelines meters the
whole nine yards that we can go
ahead and use our local
contractors. Whether it's an
engineering firm, or
Ah!
Pump company.
And met Mr Speaker in general
lady that does stimulate our
local growth, our local business
growth, So I do appreciate that.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Thank
you for your responses.
Thank you. Alina, this for the
debates Lady from earlier and
Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from
Arriba County, please. Did I get
it right?
You did. I'm thank you, Mr
Brandy didn't have to look,
Taus, but yes, thank you. Kind
lady, Wonderful counties.
Mr Speaker. I had a question.
I'm sorry. I was trying to
listen because I believe this
was asked, but I wanted some
more specification on this.
Mr Speaker, So
We, um while prohibiting loans
and grants for projects that
implement Federal Endangered
Species Act Collaborative. So
can you tell me what it is
specifically that we're looking
at in that scenario when we're
looking at how it pertains to
water?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes, actually.
This really hasn't come up a lot
in about 20 years. But as the
general lady from Chavez with an
s stated, uh, occasionally it
came up and when they had to
pump water into the river next
to her farm, it also to protect
the endangered species. It was
also able to water all that
Farming country in that region
so occasionally it comes up, so
we amended it and we kept it in
to provide for
Really agriculture communities
that might be impacted by this
and and in times of, you know,
drought and climate change.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, the reason I ask this
because, you know, I was trying
to wrap my head around because
we want to make sure that we're
fair, right? We want to make
sure that we have lots of birds
migrate over but at the same
time, you know, in times of
drought. We definitely need to
make sure that we're also
Don't affect our farmers and our
ranchers said that they're able
to have the water that they need
for the farming and the
branching so I would hope that
when this plays out, it never
becomes an either orbit becomes
some sort of balance in between
the two and that's why I was
trying to ask for clarification
that Mr Speaker and General
Lady, the other question I had
and and I apologize because
again, I was trying to listen to
represent the two represents
already asked
Um
So when it hasn't here, we're
going to go two years without
approval. Approval from the
Legislature. What? What is the
What is the main concept on
that? Why are we looking at it
that way that we wouldn't come
back and every year and why is
it every two years?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Thank you for that question.
This, uh
House Bill 148 that we passed
yesterday, which is a list of
all of the projects that have
been approved for funding has
had unanimous votes in the House
and the Senate for the last 15
years. When I carried it through
yesterday's unanimous it's going
to be probably unanimous in the
Senate, it usually is.
Uh, so this was a way to delay
that and also so that they could
have time to work on things like
implementing the rules for the
wastewater treatment plant, so
this would just help the whole
process in general. Move faster.
Um, it originally We had five
Agricultural Sekiya and Water
In with all the members of the
Resources Committee, and we
A vast improvement from 5 to 2
because I like to
I don't like when things
Um, don't I? You hear me
repeatedly. I'm always big on
oversight. I want to make sure
that you know, we're not letting
something go off too long for
five years were like, Oh, shoot.
We should have been on top of
that. Instead of letting that,
um
Move forward for that long of a
period. Um, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. I had a question on
And and I apologize. It was
asked. I didn't understand the
explanation on Page three, we
added the wastewater.
Treatment. Why? Why has that?
Why are we expanding in that
direction on this bill? Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and General Lady That's
probably one of the most
important provisions of this
act. I can tell you for the last
two years I have I funded junior
money to study the aquifers in
northern New Mexico,
particularly in real Reba
County.
What we have found is we have,
um we have bacteria and a lot of
our wells. What That means is he
septic systems are leaking into
the aquifer and getting into the
wells. What we really need to do
is be able to fund wastewater
treatment and and everybody
wants to do this, but they are
expensive. But what this
provision allows is for the
enemy if they now to set rules
and regulations so that we can
do wastewater treatment under
the New Mexico transport.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generated for that great
explanation that this is
important and we just want to
make sure that the wastewater
because it all ties in right
with our water. And on that
point, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, is there anything else
that they're looking for? When
they when they look at
The sewer water that's leaking
into their because, you know,
and I am in radioactive waste,
and we're always looking at how
things leach into the system.
Are they looking at anything
else in this bill and
wastewater? Can you tell me that
I'm looking for anything else
other than bacteria, And then
also is there anything in here
to look at? Are we getting
things like typhus, which I
always say wrong, but the
chemical that's leaking into our
ground waters or anything that
looks or takes that into
consideration. Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker in general lady when
they When they apply for this
grant, they'll list what they
need to do to improve voice
water systems in their
community, So you know
In the north. We always have
arsenic. We have lithium. We
have a lot of different a lot of
different things in the north. I
don't know what it is in the
South, but but that's what these
grant applications will do. They
will look at that they'll trying
to find what they need to do and
what their problems are. And now
now the water trust board has
the authority to grant money for
these projects.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, which is important
because you know here in New
Mexico. I think it was an
Espinola where we have the dry
cleaning fluids are leaking into
the soil and a different areas.
Mr. Speaker Delaney, we have
various and Clovis. We had the
issue with that getting into the
groundwater, which is a huge
deal because then they had to go
and kill all the cattle there.
So that has become an issue, so
I wanted to make sure when we're
doing this, we're looking at all
the components because I would
hate for people to move forward
on a project.
And go. Oh, we've got all these
really bad forever chemicals.
Now we have to backpedal on that
project, and many has already
been spent Mr Speaker in general
Lady. The other question I had
was
Oh, and, um, it was on Page
four.
Um, we agree to properly
maintain financial records, but
we struck out the audit.
Can you explain to be briefly?
Why? Why did we remove the
audit and what's the other thing
that's going to take place for
that audit? Mr. Speaker?
Generally, e.
Mr Speaker and kind Lady. I did
answer this before, but that's
okay. It's not an audit of the
organization. It's an audit of
the project that this law calls
for. So so when these projects
are approved by the water trust
fund, you know they
They have seven agencies looking
at it, but you don't need an
audit on the project itself.
They have to adhere to the
executive order on audits for
the organization. But this
strikes out the audit on the
project.
Sorry, Mr Speaker to do a drive
by speaking really quick on
that, I think
Mr Speaker Deadly. I think
that's all the questions that I
had in that for now, Hold on one
second only just go through
this.
Oh, I did have one more on Page
seven.
The money and the water Project
fund might be used by the
authority. Um, so that's not by
local governments by the
authority. What? Why is it
worded that way, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady?
Mr Speaker. This just authorizes
the money and the water. Um, in
the what are
Trust board. I'm sorry.
The water Project fund to be to
be used by the by the FAA.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally it's all the questions
I had. Thank you for the debate
general men from Lincoln and
Observance.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and does
the general lady from Rio Reba
Sandoval Santa Fe and tells you
Yes.
Mr Speaker. I kind of year to
the, uh, whoops.
Gentlemen from
Otero and Lincoln. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady had a few
questions. One of them is
I'm not familiar with the
Endangered Species Act. So right
here in the bill.
Um
Born in my analysis was the bill
would also expand water trust
eligibility for water projects,
while prohibiting loans and
grants for projects that
implement Federal Endangered
Species Act.
Collaborative programs. Could
you explain that to me, ma'am?
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman. I
think the easiest way to explain
this. It's a rare day on this
floor when representative is ill
would be working to keep the
endangered Species act in and I
would be working to keep it out.
I'm just saying, that's an
unusual uh, political
Happening. Ah, I agreed to that
because we agreed to, um, the
Endangered Species Act being
kept in because of drought and
climate where we had some issues
where the water ran through it.
It's really this legislation is
really done by through the
federal authorities, and it is
really the interstate stream
commission. That really kind of
oversees the Endangered Species
Act. The FAA has very little to
do with it.
But once upon a time 20 years
ago, they did. So that's why
we're keeping it in.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. That's good to
hear, because I know that that
is a very cumbersome subject.
Um, I've got some people that
are in my district That's
working, actually is putting
them out of business. To be
honest with you, Um, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady, would there be
assistance?
For applying for this fund and
the reason I asked for that is
because a lot of my small water
communities
You know, I think they get
caught up in the paperwork. Mr
Speaker and General Lady and a
lot of times when they apply for
something, and the paperwork's
not right and it comes back, and
then the frustration start to
build, and finally they start to
throw their hands up.
And I would just like to make
sure Mr Speaker is in the lady
that
The water Trust board. From what
I understand. Do they have the
FTE s available to go out and
assist people with
Applying for these particular
grants.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, That's why we put in that
clause about the water
transporting, being able to hire
Contractors to go out and help
these people. I have the same
problem in my district. I have
45 of these mutual domestic
water systems most they're all
volunteers. Most of them are
volunteer. I'd say 95% are
volunteer.
And
And they, you know, it's a It's
a big job delivering clean
drinking water 24 hours a day to
the to the people in your
district. So yes, we set up a
system so that the enemy fake
could give them technical
assistance. And that's why
that's in the That's why that's
in this. Um this bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. I appreciate that,
because, um
I know of the volunteers. They
want to maintain their autonomy
and they want to keep their
systems up.
One of the things that
It's kind of irritating. Mr
Speaker in general Lady is is
these small water? Um,
communities. I think they need
assistance, and they need some
guidance on how to maintain
their water system. And through
that
They start maintaining their
system and then slowly but
surely it starts to go away. And
before you know what we're in
emergency crisis because now
they can deliver water to their
To their communities, and it's
because their water systems have
become dilapidated because
they're not taking care of them.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate your answers and
Thank you for bringing this
forward to debate the gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker will the
general lady yield
Mr Speaker. I kindly yield. I
mean, I I yelled to the
gentleman. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And generally just
one quick question. We're
talking about restoration and
management of watersheds. Can
you specifically tell the body
what type of trees we're going
after and
A little bit about that.
Um, Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman. It really varies. You
know, on the on the area that
you live in salt Cedar is always
a big one on the list. Um
Ah, the gosh.
I can't think of it right now.
Anyhow. Pardon?
Russian olives. That's that's
the tree on my property. Russian
olives are just hideous. You
just You know, you can't get rid
of them fast enough. So it
depends. It depends on the soil
and lots of water conservation
district and what area they live
in and what rivers they have, or
streams flowing through that
area.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady that that's the two trees
that are invasive and please
Don't plant those things at all.
Thank you Bet generated clues.
Oh, thank you, Mr Speaker. I
move that. Where am I am
Has Bill um, House go to 11 as
amended. Do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
agricultural Sick yes and Water
Resources Committee substitute
for house Bill 211 as amended.
The vote.
He is now.
Open votes about to close.
House agricultural sake, yes and
Water Resources Committee
substitute for house with 211,
as amended by a vote of 67 in
the affirmative zero in the
negative house, agriculture and
water resources could be a
substitute for house Bill 211,
as amended, has duly passed his
house to go to announcements for
one second to announce something
generated from Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business. Objection. So ordered,
folks. Um, let's see how this
goes.
All the leadership knows what
I'm going to do.
I just don't know how to say it.
House, Moyal 32 is currently on
the third reading calendar.
We have to pull it back to the
House Education Committee.
Because the committee
accidentally fell to adopt a
committee substitute. Everybody
knows about it. I believe
everybody's okay with it.
If there is an objection, it is
ordered generally from Burleigh.
Oh, Mr Speaker. I move. We
return to that order of
business. Third reading of
legislation objection to this or
ordered gentlelady from Italy or
representative Garrett, Are you
ready on item number 19.
Yes, I'm ready. Mr. Speaker,
Please take me to that point
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Bill 207, as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
general idea to explain the
bill, Mr Speaker House Bill 207
Public School Capital Outlay
grants makes a simple change. It
formalizes the current practice
but can have a big impact for
charter schools pursuing.
Facilities. It allows them
Excuse me.
How spilled 207 as amended.
Um, what it does it changes one
word from May to shell.
Which means that when they go to
get
Their loans. Uh
They have a greater advantage in
showing that these loans are
solidly backed. With that I
stand for questions. There is a
bit generated from Chavez
representative his own, Mr
Speaker. Thank you very much All
the general lady from Burnley.
Oh, yield, please. Yes, I'm
happy, Mr Speaker Teal to the
gentle lady from Chavez.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. I did
have a question for you whenever
this bill was heard in house
education, and my question was,
and I would like for you to
reiterate what your response
was. Why is the appropriation
two DF A instead of N m f a
Actually, Mr Speaker and kind,
gentle lady's appropriation was
removed. There's already money
in the budget.
That answered my question. Thank
you very much, You know, further
debate generated too close.
Mr Speaker. I now move a do pass
for House Bill 207 as amended
Final passage of House Bill
Tools seven as amended. The vote
is now open.
Boats about to close.
What is not closed by what have
64 in the affirmative, one and
the Native House Bill 207 as
amended as duly passed.
We have only past his house.
Gentlemen, from Sunday Violence.
Santa Fe represented McQueen Are
you ready on item number?
Three.
Mr Speaker, Would you give me to
the point that the record
reflect that election necessary
for placing house Bill 48? Our
final passage has been taken. It
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Mr Speaker. Hospital. 48 is oil
and gas future royalty rate.
I'm joined today by Mr Greg
Bloom, Assistant Commissioner
for mineral resources.
At the State Land office.
Mr Speaker, members of the body
household 48 would increase the
maximum royalty rate.
On certain state trust land from
20% to 25.
So it's currently a range. It's
18.75 to 20.
And we would increase the range.
We still have a range of B
18.75 to 25%.
It would make our upper royalty
rate.
Which we will charge on the best
parcels comparable to Texas.
And what private parties are
receiving on their leases.
It really would only apply in
the Permian.
That's that's where the best
parcels are What's left. It
doesn't apply to other areas of
the it would not.
Apply the other areas of the
state.
And Mr Speaker, members of the
body.
Over the course of the life of
the leases.
Let pursuant to this bill
pursuant to a higher rate.
When the land grab permanent
fund would receive approximately
50 million a year in additional
revenue, or a billion.
Over the life of the Lisa.
Mr Speaker, members of the body.
It's not, uh, it's a cap. It's
not a floor so we're not setting
the rate. We're still keeping it
range.
It only affects future releases.
So all the leases that are
currently in place.
Those are contracts and they
stay at their current royalty
rate.
And as I said, before, it would
only apply to the best tracks.
Um, Mr Speaker, members of the
body in committee. It was
suggested that we're running
this bill. We're only doing this
because Texas is doing it.
And Mr Speaker, members of the
body I want to assure you
That there is nothing I want to
do, because Texas is doing it.
Um, the rules in West site
Texas's That's evidence of the
market.
The market in the Permian is
25%, and we're currently below
market.
Mr Speaker, members of the body.
It was also suggested committee.
There. We already receive
enough.
For our for our royalty rate.
20% is enough.
And I've been thinking a lot
about that comment. Mr Speaker,
members of the body and thinking
in these terms like if you had
Say you had a used car that you
wanted to sell.
And not just like an old, an old
beater. But like
Yeah.
It's an F 150. It's a couple of
years old. It's got 30 40,000
miles on it in good shape.
When you want to sell your
truck.
Prices that something that's
enough
Price it at what it's worth.
You would ask a fair market.
Value for that truck.
And like, Maybe if you're
selling it yourself is there's a
little discount because it can
be hard to sell a used car. But
You want to get a fair price for
your truck or a house?
See you were selling your house.
And your house.
Was worth $300,000.
Which around San Phase an
affordable house.
You wouldn't price your house in
a hot housing market.
At 250.
And say that's enough.
You know you Whoever buys my
house, they can have the rest. I
only need 250 even though the
house is worth 300.
You just want to do that?
And Mr Speaker, members of the
body in this context, not only
should the save New Mexico and
not do that, but there's
actually worse.
Because while I will say that
the state owns these minerals
It's actually more complicated
than that.
The state owns the state holds
these minerals this asset.
In trust.
For the beneficiaries of the
Land Grant Permanent fund.
We have a legal obligation.
To maximize the return on these
trust assets.
So then they're not ours to do
with whatever we want.
So they're not ours that to sell
at a bargain price.
We hold them in trust.
Very required to maximize our
return.
So, Mr Speaker, members of the
body. What we are proposing
today is an increase in the
royalty rate on minerals we own.
It's not a tax.
It's not a fee.
It's not regulation.
Is charging a fair market price.
For these minerals.
There is debate the German from
Lee, representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
Well.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Very much like to hold.
This conversation in the
context.
Of the entire economic
Environment.
In the state of New Mexico, not
Just royalties.
How much
Of the revenue stream.
Developed by an oil company
going out and spending
100% dollars.
Can expect.
To get back from that
investment.
Mr Bricker and gentlemen.
Respect to this legislation.
We're going from a 1/5 maximum.
To a 1/4 maximum, is that
accurate?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Could you describe for me?
The other overhead.
Off the topics. Pence's that are
associated with all and gas
production.
Besides
In addition to
The royalty rate.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No, I
can't.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
It's beyond the scope of this
bill.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this bill
is setting a price for an asset
we own.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, if an oil
and car gas company doesn't want
to pay that price
They don't have to.
Its ruling buyer, willing
seller.
They can. They can factor in
their overhead, their expenses.
They won't They will make that
adjustment. They will make that
calculation.
When they decide whether or not
to bid on these leases.
Um Miss Speaker and gentlemen, I
certainly appreciate that, but I
think the overall goal here is
to maximize the revenue coming
into the state of New Mexico.
Including not just the royalty
rates, but the other factors.
And to the extent that this
Piece of legislation.
Is detrimental.
To those other factors. It needs
to be included in the
conversation.
Would you agree?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
I believe that the overhead
expenses of the oil and gas
company
Are the responsibility of the
oil and gas company.
We're not affecting those were
not dictating those
Yeah.
You know, I think that's their
purview. I think those outside
The scope of this bill, Okay?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Could you give me the ratio? Do
you know the ratio?
Of the revenue stream that comes
to New Mexico from all and gas
operations.
From taxes.
Federal minerals.
Or federal lands and state
lands. Could you give me those?
Those three numbers for the
sometime in the last year or
two?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I cannot
Okay. Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
would it surprise you to know
That taxes.
In this data is a couple of
years old.
With the taxes on that oil and
gas activity brought in.
$1.7 billion.
Would put that surprise you at
all.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, now
Okay? And let's speaker the
revenue from the federal
Minerals leasing program.
That is shared with New Mexico.
Brought in $500 million
Is that
Pretty much your understanding
is reasonable.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
generally accept your figures so
Okay. And finally, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, the last number
on my list, which
As
Is state.
Branch royalties and bonuses.
Was $690 million from those oil
and gas activities.
Also
Reasonable number.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, I
believe so. But But may I ask
you a question?
When when you're talking about
these different figures, are you
mixing
Income from taxes, which apply
broadly in income from
royalties.
Which only apply on lands we
own.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
taxes that were paid by the oil
and gas industry were
Servants, Advil or, UM,
Emergency school.
Answer vacation.
And also included the taxes paid
as a consequence of the economic
activity, which would be gross
receipts tax, which would be
personal income tax, corporate
income tax.
There is a whole host of other
revenues that the state enjoys
As a consequence of this
activity. Would you agree?
Mr Speaker. German? Yes.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Was that
a yes?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay?
Now.
As I
Through my research.
For this conversation, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
I found, uh, royalty rates.
On 11 states.
In the Western U. S.
Primarily the states that are
productive of oil and gas.
Are you familiar with any of
those numbers?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
have those numbers in front of
me. But Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
as we discussed in committee
There are oil producing states.
And then there's the Permian.
And the rates charged in
different areas vary.
Because of the nature of the
production.
And because the Permian is such
a productive area.
It supports the higher roll
royalty rates.
And that's what we're talking
about today so if another state
is charging less for royalties,
there's a reason for that.
But this new Mexico can charge
more in the Permian on minerals
owns.
It should do that.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, once
again.
Let me go back to maximizing the
revenue to the state with all of
the policies that we have in
place, not just
That
I mentioned just previously.
10 of those
Have royalty rates or below our
current royalty.
Would you?
Except that as a fact
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I
wouldn't accept that, and that's
consistent with the fact that my
guess is 10 of the 11.
Are in the Permian.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
would be correct.
Now, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe you have stated that
Texas
25% royalties and we are
attempting
To bring new Mexico up to that
standard with this legislation
is that accurate?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. I'm
not sure if you're not hearing
me, Okay. Thank you for that. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, can you
tell me
Again, and, uh, circumstance of
all things considered.
What New Mexico's direct taxes.
On this production would be
And compare that to those direct
taxes in Texas.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I can and
I appreciate that question I can
actually even go a little
further if that's okay, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I have in
front of me the effective tax
rates by state.
This is based on LFC study. It's
a few years old is 2016.
The effective tax rate in Texas
is 8.3%.
The effective tax rate in New
Mexico is 8.5, so a little
higher, But not much, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
The average of the states
surveyed was 8.8.
So are effective tax rate is
less than the average
The range is a low of 3.2.
In Oklahoma.
In the high
13.4
For
Those wacky tax and spend
liberals in Wyoming.
In this speaker, Gentlemen,
Would it be fair to say that the
direct taxes on a barrel oil or
an emcee of a gas in Texas is
taxed at 0.0522%?
Mr Speaker to him, and, um
Again. I generally trust your
numbers. I don't have those
figures in front of me. What
they have is the effective tax
rate and the effective tax rate
between Texas and Mexico is
point.
2% different 18.318 0.5.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would submit that difference is
actually a bit larger than that,
because the direct taxes on
every barrel of oil every EMC f
a gas coming out of the ground,
and that Mexico is about 9%.
Eight point
I believe you're
Your number would be pretty
close.
So let's
Described now.
How we might
Differentiate.
Texas and New Mexico.
Friend.
Not just taxes, not just
royalties.
But perhaps add in the costs
associated with compliance.
With federal and
State regulatory requirements.
Could you describe any of those
differences for the body?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I can
describe some of them. I if we
want to compare New Mexico to
federal costs, I think that's a
little different than comparing
New Mexico to Texas. But when we
look at the comparison of New
Mexico and Texas
The first thing that jumps out
is that
Texas, Um
Texas Tech charges They're
royalty.
On the gross proceeds.
And New Mexico charges on the
net proceeds.
And I have this chart prepared
by the land office.
And it's interesting is that you
will not be able to see it from
there, but we got we got red and
green.
In green are provisions more
favorable to the producer.
In red or provision less
favorable.
And the Texas column is almost
all red.
And then Mexico columns Almost
all green.
Because the reality is that we
compared to Texas, which is
charging 25% royalty rate.
Not only recharging less, but we
have more favorable terms. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen by charging
on the on the net proceeds
We are losing
In the order of $80 million a
year.
In revenue.
By that 11 change alone.
Speaker and gentlemen, please
excuse the interruption. There's
been a request for the gentleman
to remove their jackets. So
Thank you Jackets.
Mr Speaker. Would you say that
again, please? There's been a
request for the gentleman to
remove their jackets.
It's the sort of police
continue, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, could you describe
gross proceeds Forces? Net
proceeds, please.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So my
extra tells me in the Mexico
companies get to deduct the cost
of cleaning up the gas.
Processing and compressing.
So there are significant
deductions based on what's going
on in the production process.
Mr Speaker is this upstream
midstream or downstream?
Processing that we're discussing
here?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
have a good answer for you
there.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you don't
have an answer. I don't have a
good answer, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Okay. Uh, thank you for that. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, let me
Let me move on.
True to another point.
That
With this in the event that it
does raise.
They revenue that is predicted.
By the state Land office.
With this in your opinion and
crease.
Or decrease reliance.
On oil and gas with respect to
the state budget.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, That's
that's an interesting question.
Um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you know,
it's my belief
That they're the substantial
revenues are receiving right now
from the oil and gas industry.
Or
Essentially temporary.
That we know it's a boom and
bust industry. We know they go
through cycles, and we also at
least I see the writing on the
wall.
That renewables are becoming
more efficient. Um, and
eventually we'll we'll compete
oil and gas.
The way on gas. How competed
coal
Um
Break the revenue this piece of
the revenue. There's other
revenue that goes into
The state budget, but this piece
of the revenue
Goes into the Land Grant
permanent fund.
And that's important so
Wall. We continue to see the
this record production of oil
and gas.
In this paying into the land
Grant permanent fund.
We're building up that permanent
fund.
And that's good because that
fund is going to continue to pay
out well after the oil, the
current oil and gas production
fades.
So to me, this is it.
Well.
It's currently
You could say you were dependent
on oil and gas. We are
But because it goes into the
permanent fund
We're protecting ourselves for
the future.
And that that's a good thing.
You know, the more money we can
set aside now, the better off
we're going to be later.
Must speaker and gentlemen, we
have finally agreed on
something now.
With respect to these of land
revenues that are coming into
the state. Can you tell me what
they consist of? I'm sorry, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Good. Could
you give me a little more to go
on whether several components to
these land revenues Mr Speaker
and gentlemen coming into the
state
Can you describe for me those
individual components
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, Are you
talking about State Trust, land
or
No, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
And say the state.
Puts up a lease for bid at
auction.
What would be the terms of that
lease?
In terms in terms of revenue to
the state.
Ah, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So
what I think you're learning to
or the bonus payments. So when
less is put up for auction,
there is a there's a what they
call bonus payment. I
understand which is sort them
out of money. That producer pays
for the right to get the lease.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
that can be quite substantial.
Ah, in that is that goes into
Um
The maintenance fun at the land
office, and they use a portion
of the maintenance fund for
their operations.
The second element is the
royalty rate, which doesn't kick
in until there's production on
that person, And that might be a
number of years later. Um and
that's what we're talking about.
Today. It is anticipated, and
it's addressed in the F I, R and
other materials that
If we increase the royalty rate.
We can expect deduction
reduction in the bonus payments.
The the oil and gas companies
will be
Once been less upfront, since
they know they're going to pay a
little more down the line.
Um
When you compare the two,
though.
The benefits of increasing the
royalty rate in terms of revenue
greatly exceed the loss in a
little bit of the bonus payment
up front.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Might take exception to that,
given some of the least bonus
payments that have been
Uh huh.
Exhibited in the last few years
for some of these, uh
If I
From May call it desirable
parcel. So if at least comes up
at auction
And does not get a bid.
What are the consequences of
that?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. If if at
least it's but for auction does
not get a bid.
Saint Land office can take that
back can change the terms. So
again, we have this range right
from 18.752 currently 20.
hopefully 25 if if a person was
put up at, say, 25 and no one
bid on it.
That goes back to the land
office. They could repackage it
at 20 or 18.75, or another
royalty rate that they thought
was appropriate and put it back
up for bid.
And this speaker in the event
that at least doesn't
Get a bit
What happens to that land?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, like, um
You know, I suppose if it was
put up a second time, lower
rate, and that was for the sake
of argument, Let's say it was
put up at 18.75.
Which is the floor in the
current statute.
And it didn't get a bid.
Then it stays state trust land.
And, you know, maybe they
reconsider it or re evaluated
And maybe it comes back in a few
years. Maybe it doesn't but it
remains a state trust land. But
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
The net effect of that would be
no lease bonus paid on that
parcel is a consequence of the
auction. Is that correct?
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, could you repeat that
question? I said if no bids are
received, then there is no
revenue generated for the state.
As a consequence of that auction
Is that correct? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, as we were talking
If the
If you didn't get better at 25%.
Yes, that's correct if it was
repackaged and put back at the
current minimum current law at
18.75%.
And no one bid. You're exactly
right. There's no bonus payment.
But
But that would also be the case
under current law.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank during the course of this
conversation with demonstrated
As royalties and bonus payments.
Or a
Minority.
Of the total economic value.
Attributed to those activities
coming into the state.
And that
Oh, current system.
As provided an unprecedented
level of revenue. We can't say
for sure that it is the maximum
amount of revenue that we could
squeeze out of the industry.
But we can't say that it's not
And with that
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
going to close Do appreciate the
answers. Thank you, sir.
And thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is further debate The
gentleman from Berna, Leo.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Santa Fe yield
Mr Speaker to him, and I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. Um
And gentlemen, when was the last
time that the Legislature raised
royalty rates.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen in the 19
seventies.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, whose
responsibility is it to specify
the terms of oil and gasoline?
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
That's that's kind of
interesting question because we
actually have
The lease is set out in statute.
Which is which I think is a
little unusual. I mean, usually
you would give an agency
guidelines that it has to do
this. See that, But these leases
are set out word for word in
statute, so the Legislature has
has taken it upon itself to to
draft a lease.
And so, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
from Santa Fe, so it's us here
at the Legislature that has sole
responsibility for what we're
debating here today. That's
true.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it is
true because we made it through
some point in our past and Mr
Speaker and gentlemen and most
recently in the 19 seventies
from your previous answers, so
it's quite a time ago. Um,
according to the state land
commissioner, and I think it was
referenced in the previous
debate, but not necessarily
flushed out what would be the
estimate gain for the Land Grant
permanent fund if we were to
pass this piece of legislation
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Remember I've been using over
the life of the leases at the
higher rate is a billion
dollars.
Honestly could be more than
that.
Right. And thank you for that.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
and so from the Land Grant
Permanent fund, what sorts of
things does the Land Grant
permanent fund?
Find for us.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, as an
educator, you know it goes to
schools, hospitals in university
universities that beneficiaries
of the land Grant permanent
fund, including a big chunk of
that is the common schools.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm definitely very
much aware of of the the
benefits that the Land Grant
permanent fund provides has
provided for many years to our
students us and will for a long,
long time. So I appreciate you
humoring me and making sure that
we're all on the same.
Same playing field of
understanding here in this body
as to what we're talking about,
Um, and the state land trust, um
and part of the state land
commissioners. Duty is to
Earn the highest amount possible
for oil and gas for
Education. Is that right? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that's
correct in duty is the right
word. It is a legal duty.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
if it is our obligation as the
Legislature to set the rates for
oil and gas leases, and it's the
state land commissioners duty to
earn the most for education and
all of the public goods that we
here in the state benefit from
And if for In fact we are stand
to benefit in the billions of
billions of dollars for, um,
increasing the rates, which
would be on par with our
neighbor in Texas. Um I'm just a
Teacher of
Government economics. I don't
teach a 0.5 and personal
financial literacy, but
It seems like this would be a
great investment and we're
living up to our duty as the
Legislature and working with our
state land office to make sure
that we are
Providing the funds to our land
Grant permanent fund to ensure
that in this time of
Record gains in our oil and gas
industry that we are going to
bolster that fund and it can
continue on and on serving new
Mexicans like it has for years
and years and will continue to
for years and years. I think
this is a very easy
Elegant solution duty on us to
pass. So with that, thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you gentlemen
for bringing this legislation.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Chavez, Arian
Otero, representative 1000.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe please yield
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I yield
Um gentlemen.
Several interesting thoughts as
I listened to you so far. And,
um
I want to just kind of back up a
little bit.
This increase.
Back up even further how much
land is available today?
Ah!
Of state land that is, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Um
If I can make an assumption
about your question for talking
about the Permian sort of that
the prime spots it's currently
99% leased. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, there aren't a lot of
tracks left that that this
potentially applies to
So, Mr Speaker that I think
you're right. I think it's
virtually all the but if I
understood you to say that you
thought
This would have a billion
dollars worth of impact, and I'm
trying to figure out with 99% of
the land leased. How did we get
that kind of number?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, so my
numbers come from the F I R.
Um And you know, after a few
years, you adopt a new lease
rate it takes a few years again
Production.
But they say, frisky fiscal year
27 up to $50 million fiscal year
28 up to $75 million and then
these leases stay in effect as
long as there's production so
that royalty rate continues as
long as they're producing and it
doesn't it doesn't take long at
50 million a year, or 75 million
a year.
To get up to a billion dollar
impact. And Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if I may add for the
benefit benefit of the body, and
I know you know this, You know
we have. This is still in effect
from the fifties. You know,
these leases can stay in effect
for a while.
Well, Mr Chairman, That's where
I was going. I thought I heard
you say that this
This industry was, um
Short lived or boom and bust. Er
I forget what your terminology
Was, but on one side you're
saying this is not going to last
long on the other side. You're
saying it's going to last for
ever and I'm trying to figure
out which it is.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
That's a good point. I
appreciate that, because because
I think it's short lived my that
that's my opinion. But I also
know these these leases can be
long lived, and I also know the
oil and gas and she is looking
for other uses for these
products.
Right, so it's not just
necessarily fueling our
vehicles, which may be more and
more of our vehicles become
electric.
Um So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. I
mean, I think that's an
excellent point. Um, I
When I see the number of $50
million in fiscal year 27, you
know that's not that far off,
and that's still money.
Well, it caused me to think, and
it's kind of a little off the
subject and you may, uh
You may criticize me for going
this way. But if the
If the state of New Mexico
If our
Land commissioner.
Is tasked with deriving
The maximum they can for
Education, which they are. How
much do they drive?
Drive off of wind and solar
today in comparison,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, My
understanding is the
The mineral royalties that were
on gas in the order of 99% of
their income.
Well, my point, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is do they derive any
royalty from the production of
electricity from
When Mills or sour arrived on
state land today.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, the
contracts for for wind or solar
aren't set out in statutes as
the contract for oil and gas is
so the land office is free to
negotiate it in. My
understanding is that they do
receive a payment for an
increment of production. But as
We mentioned a moment ago.
You know, we're
Vastly different scales of
income.
Well, I appreciate that, Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think you are right. Um
I know they're different.
And they're treated very
differently, and that was my
point.
Today. If you have
A well producing off of New
Mexico.
Trust lands.
Every M C F forever money to go
to state coffers.
But with respect to wind and
solar, it's very different.
There is no generated income now
for the site. Yes.
But for generation no. And I
think
For a land office.
That is tasked with providing
Um
The most they can from the state
land. That was problematic. Let
me go on.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
we're going from 20 to 25% on
this 1%.
That is currently available. Is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
And MS Speaker. What about wells
or production that, um
Is released or is found.
For some reason, I mean, we have
existing
Production. There's language in
your bill that addresses that.
Can you go into that in any
detail, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
um
Some leases after the bonus
payment is paid, never go into
production.
In my understanding is that
there's have five years to put
at least into protection.
If they don't put the lease into
production.
Then that leases terminated
because back to land office, so
if there are leases that come
back to the land office say
there is a lease at, uh, 20%. It
doesn't get put into production
comes back to land off Land
office. It's one of these
premium tracks.
If they went to release that,
really put that up for bid, they
could increase that to 25%.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, for
what reasons can that occur?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, My
understanding is that typically
occurs for non production.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Is that specified in your in
your bill? Uh,
Or it being defined as only for
non production.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. The bill
doesn't change current law on
that issue. I believe that is
specified. In the the form
least, that is current law.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
your expert can correct me, but
I believe there are provisions
for
Compliance or is that true?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
can he expound on what reasons
for compliance? Maybe that
police could be terminated.
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen. He can't but he might
be able to whisper in my ear.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, my
expert is telling me other
grounds for termination of the
lease would be lack of bonding
violation of law basically
preach of the least so
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. You know,
my background is primarily real
real estate leases, a real
estate doc document and as you
know,
You know, And then he real
estate document you in contract.
You don't comply with the
contract.
The next contract can
potentially be terminated.
So Omar, speaker and gentlemen,
one of the concerns that I've
heard from many and industry
Is that this?
Um, with this incentive for
increase in and
Payment.
May incentivize the
State land office to go after
And create, um
Orders of noncompliance. Is
there any provisions to prevent
that from happening?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this this
question came up in committee.
Um, I'm not sure if it was our
committee or if it was in, um
Commerce.
In the discussion I heard from
my experts in committee where
they're allowed to discuss this.
Is that they work closely with
the producers, and they tried to
bring producers into compliance
that they're not out there. It's
not that gotcha operation or
they're not out there trying to
look for leases that they can
take back that they work with
the producers. And if a producer
is not in compliance doesn't
have the required bonds. You
know, the first step is to send
them a letter and say, Hey, you
don't have these bonds. You
gotta get these in place.
And try to work with him that
way, So there's nothing
specifically in the in the bill
that addresses that issue.
But it's my belief that the you
know the the culture and the way
of doing business at the land
office is one where the oil and
gas companies are partners in a
sense, and they're working with
them.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I I
hope that continues, and I think
many people would would have a
Would have some relief in if it
was addressed, but maybe the
testimony today that
Um one other question.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
We're talking about net proceeds
Does it include transportation?
Differentials from from the
wellhead to end user is that is
that a deduct for net Mr Speaker
down and looking at my list
proceeds, transportation
deductions allowed treating
deductions. Removal impurities
allowed.
Cost to place product in market
conditions allowed.
Processing deductions. NGL
extraction allowed. No cap.
That's that's what happened from
me.
Speaker and gentlemen, that's
that's exactly right. And that's
the point. I wanted to bring it
up when you're talking about
The viability of a least a day.
Mexico has, um
One.
Refinery I think left in the
state.
That is a consumer.
And they confirm about 100 round
numbers. 100 So most of our
crude oil
Um
The vast majority of our crude
oil heads to, um
The ship channel.
Um
And so producers and do you have
any idea what that tariff
Right might be for a barrel to
get it from.
From
Artists at the
To Corpus Christi or Houston.
Um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
have that number. I didn't know
that This bill doesn't change
that number.
Yeah, but my point was, it's an
inherent cost.
Of operating a system that's
that's further away from where
you can sell your product.
And the people in the Mexico
today I mean, the producers in
the Mexico or
You know, it varies from
50 cents to two bucks to get
that barrel to market.
So it is another burden that
anyone has that is remote from
there.
Market that whether you're
selling whatever widget it might
be, if you have to transport it
farther. It's a cost of doing
business. So
When
When you look at what's fair
with Texas versus New Mexico.
Texas has millions of barrels of
consumption.
Um, on from the
Houston ship Channel to Corpus
Christi of Refiners that are
working and they buy those
barrels so they don't have the
burden of that transportation
that
I think everybody has to think
about
Well, or should think about.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, have
you considered
Any negative.
Um
Aspects of bringing this bill
forward to the industry speaker,
Gentlemen, Um
Let me answer your question.
This way. Um, two points first
point is, the identified
negative would be reduced bonus
payments.
And that's that's been
identified and that's been
previously discussed.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, that
the second point I want to make
is
You know, I know there's been
concern expressed about
Um
You know profit margins.
Um we are in a period of record
production. I believe that the
current profit margins
Or substantial, if not record,
and I would just point out that
it has not been suggested that
for these premium parcels
The market won't support a 25%
royalty. So so we're not hearing
that people won't bid.
We're actually hearing that
they're still eager to bid on
these premium parcels.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think that's probably true. Um
Ended today's projections and
And quite frankly,
Um
I probably wouldn't argue the
point of whether that was
True or not, Uh, you know, the
market is the market.
But Mr Speaker
And gentlemen.
The value of
Going out.
And incentivizing production.
Is different from increasing
Roll Mr Speaker to him in that.
I mean, I do You know, I would
say it's the market that
incentivizes production
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I
I think the body um
Should remember that.
Passing this bill.
If used as we have talked about
today.
Will only affect relatively
small
Amount of acreage that is
currently who we think has
being, um
Permanent, but the message that
it sends
Is much different.
In the message.
I think
Would be
Less.
Caustic
If we saw the state Land office,
treating all
Energy producers.
In an equitable manner. We
talked a lot in this body about
being equitable.
You know, everybody plug
But I would tell you that that's
not what we're doing in the
Legislature has
Um, purposely, I think
Gone out of its way to end Zen
if I as one
Um
Industry.
In many cases with subsidies.
And on the other hand, we have a
Industry that's beginning to be
mature.
That is being
I don't want to say attack, but
I don't
Can use right now.
What are your comments on Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, I you know,
I think
You know, the the oil and gas
industry has been around for a
long time.
Renewable industry is newer. You
know, we have been providing
subsidies for the renewable
industry. I do think that's sort
of the future and we want to be
a part of that, and the Mexico
has remarkable wind and solar.
Um, potential.
You know, both wind and solar.
So so we have an opportunity
there.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you know,
in terms of providing subsidies
You know you could. You could
argue that this bill is taking
away a subsidy and then we're
currently selling tracks below
market value, and that's a
subsidy to the oil and gas
industry, and it's been a
subsidy for a long time. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand that argument, I
would
I would disagree that it's
valid, but I understand the
argument that
Any of us that
View one industry over the
other. We all we all can.
Think through it. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is there any
provision in your
Bill.
That
If prices still
The
Royalty would fall trying to
support the industry and a lower
Market condition.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, because
the royalty is inherently a
percentage. If prices fall, the
royalty payment falls, the
percentage doesn't change.
But the payment itself does
So, Mr Speaker.
I thought maybe it's your, uh,
your expert
Isn't there a provision on
either gas price or crude oil
price was set point. Like at $70
that changes
Is there. Some provisions? Um
For that today, Mr Speaker.
gentlemen, I think there's a
provision in state law that that
The Czech attacks. My, um shift,
but I don't think it's in the
leases.
I think you're I think
One question. Um
Do you know what? When? The last
time Texas royalty rates were
changed?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
know that I do according to my
little chart.
Um, their maximum Morial royalty
rate is negotiated.
In the vast majority area 25%
So it's it's possible that under
Texas law, they have a little
more leeway to negotiate that
royalty rate.
In your expert expound on that a
little bit. Um, we've been
saying that 25% was
The Texas rate, But what you
just told me was
Maybe it isn't all the time.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
guess the point I've been trying
to make is that 25% is closer to
the market right? And that's
what Texas is getting, and
that's a private parties are
getting so it can vary and even
under this bill, you know it's
remember. Still arrange. It will
still vary in New Mexico.
By the range and by the by the
tracks, so there are different
factors that go into go into
that pricing. So I think I think
it will states it remains a
range.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
when you say that's a market
Do you have a study that you
have the chicken?
Speak to this that define the
market condition at 25%. I mean,
we're
What market says that 25% set.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
You know, I don't have a study,
but I know when when leases are
being put up there being
snatched up right there. It's
not like they're pricing leases
a certain cost and they're
they're going wanting.
I think in the no. Ever read it
someplace.
It says Texas has had the hard
25% royalty rates that
Correct, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I I don't recall that from the
fire, But if you're looking at
the I R. I assume that's
correct.
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
as I as I wind up here
I am.
I want to express to the body
that
I think our kids deserve.
Um
Reasonable rates.
I'm not going to argue that, um
And I think that the income
streams coming into New Mexico
from the industry apparent.
And that the market has
Has supplied us and unbelievable
tool.
Um, of revenue. I would tell the
body one of the things my wife
and I, not too long ago had the
chance to have dinner.
With a person that
Was respond for much of North
America as a major.
And what we were told was was
that
Today we are only pulling about
10 to 15% of the
Oil out of the rock that is
Available.
So there is to your point that
this is a boom and bust.
We haven't seen the my My point
to tell you is we haven't seen
the boom. Yeah, that
Once a
Technology.
Is derived that will allow the
industry to sweep
The majority of the remaining
hydrocarbon from the rock.
That New Mexico sits.
At a point that they will have
great.
Return. This industry is a long
ways from
From the bus cycle.
Um
And I think more people should
Make their decisions based off
of
Of
Facts and knowledge of the
industry.
Um
Going from 20 to 25% on the
remaining one person of the land
is
Really no consequence. I mean,
it's not that big a deal.
But the message that you send
any industry
For example.
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen at
the state Land office.
Trying to derive the highest
return on their land. As you
have purported here today.
Did it for solar and wind.
And got one cent per kilowatt.
On production.
It would be a huge
Boom for New Mexico.
But right now, what we're doing
is
New Mexico taxpayers through the
I R B process and others are
greatly subsidizing.
Energy that's being consumed and
there is Ona and California more
than the Mexico and that's just
not fair. And so when I saw this
bill
That was
That was what kind of stuck in
my craw is an industry that
Um, I have enjoyed and supported
my family.
It would appear to many of us
that it's being singled out.
And attacked.
Trying to
Drive up the cost and drive.
Capital away from the Mexico.
And I don't think that's in our
best interest.
You know, we heard of Bill and
tax on
How if you drive the prices up
on the alcoholic drove people
away from alcohol, and I think
there is an intent within the
body.
To make
These renewables that are so
And don't get me wrong. I am not
anti Irene Renewal Energy. I am
not. I think.
It's great technology, but the
market that you talk about is
the market that we should let Dr
The industry, the energy
industry in New Mexico. And what
is
Best suited and most economical
and dispatch. Hable is what we
ought to provide to our
consumers.
And we're missing the boat
there.
And I think that's unfortunate.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
probably know shock to you. I
can't support this, but it's not
because we're increasing 1% of
the land of 25%. I believe the
message that we're sending to
the industry.
That's so so. My deletes
supports New Mexico is not a
good one. Thank you.
Representative. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
There is further debate The
gentleman from Dona Ana
representative Small
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker with the gentleman from
Sandoval and Santa Fe Yield.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Ah, I think we've covered most.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, of what?
I was on my mind. I want to do
sort of a quick trip back
through to make sure that I've
got it all straight, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. First, the state Land
office is constitutionally
required to maximize the revenue
they bring in
In order to support the
beneficiaries in the state,
especially school kids, right,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. That's
correct. Ok, Thank you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen and Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, is this area
that the gentleman from Berna
Leo talked about? Is this the
one area where we set a ceiling
but by that sort of limits the
state land office's ability to
make that revenue.
That is, we set a top level
royalty rate. Uh, when it comes
to production does that ceiling
exists in the other areas where
the state land office derives
revenue, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
not to my knowledge. Okay, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's um
Interesting and good to know.
there's as you said, this is
past the Legislature has chosen
to do this many decades ago.
We're revisiting it, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the
I want to move. I think the
gentleman previously from Otero
and, um, uh, Eddie covered the
fact that this covers sort of
that last premium part of the
land and primarily in the
Delaware basin that Mr Speaker,
gentlemen is perhaps the most
productive or is the most
productive in North America.
some of the most productive for
oil and natural gas production
in the world.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, That's
correct, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
and
Within sort of the Delaware If
I'm if I'm sort of imagining
that it's a little bubble starts
in Texas goes up into New
Mexico. More of that is in Texas
than in New Mexico. Is that
accurate? Mr Speaker? Gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay and Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
but they're similar areas if
you're going to be producing on
the Texas side
Or the new Mexico side sort of
the distance. You might travel
that those the production and
the liquids might travel to get
to a poor like Corpus Christi or
Houston. Where where the
majority of this is going that
distance is relatively similar.
Would you agree, Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes. I mean, we're
talking about the southeast
corner of the state, which
You know, it's pretty. It's
right there with Texas. Okay, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and so that
I asked that just so I can make
sure I'm oriented that, uh, when
we then get to Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the fact that Texas
charges of royalty on all gross
production that is everything
that comes up if you're on the
Texas side
You know, just south of Lee
County or Eddy County. Your
basically travel in the same
distance to Corpus Christi or
Houston. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, that same distance
you're paying a whole lot more.
You're paying for everything
that comes up without any of the
deductions. Is that accurate? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, That's correct. Ok,
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Ah, um I want to move now to
just briefly sort of on the
production side. Think it was a
very interesting conversation
Sort of the horizons. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I've spoken
about it on the house floor when
we are lfc projections predict
increasing volumes, although at
a slower rate.
Plateaus, Uh, sort of toward the
end of this decade into the
middle of the 20 thirties, or
those many of the same, Uh,
would you say that those are
accurate? Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
would you expert agree
Mr. Speaker Tillman? Yes. Okay,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, but that
that's a lot more production.
That's you know, way more than
10 times our historic production
for you know another decade.
Plus, would you agree, Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker
Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes, and and
there was echoed by, um
The program.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
in that even though we're
talking about a small relative
area for leasing the
productivity of that area and
the longevity that we're told to
expect, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I
think that really helps sort of
share why the fiscal benefit to
the state is so strong.
Um, would you agree, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes.
I think, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Now I want to just
briefly, um you in this surge of
production, although most I'm
five remember correctly, uh,
roughly 60% of increased
production has been on federal
land. Are we starting to see
that shift? Do we see more of
that production it state land or
is that
What do we think that split? And
what might your experts think
that split would be as we go
through the remainder of this
decade?
Mr Speaker to him, and I'm told
we expect current trends to
continue. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, I I want to share. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I guess from
my own perspective, uh and and
ask if you maybe agree, you
know, the are increased
production our ability as a
country, not just as a state,
but of course, we're a very core
part of the Permian in the
Delaware basins.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Would you
say that that's been beneficial
for nations like Ukraine as they
faced aggression from Russia,
Uh, and Russia's control of
hydrocarbons, the increase from
our region from our country has
been beneficial for, um those
nations that may have been
beholden to Russian
hydrocarbons.
In fact, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
they've had options because of
our increased production.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we're
shifting gears in a big way.
It's a global issue. But yes, I
do agree with that. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I think it's one of
certainly not the only but one
of the things for us to talk
about being mindful of and to be
proud and thankful for Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, when we see
our production increasing
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, also when
it comes to production,
particularly in New Mexico,
we've been able to reduce
emissions through some of the
executive asked actions methane
emissions, the like Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, and on state trust,
land, some innovative work about
water reuse and and water
disposal, Basically trying to
make it where
We re use some of that produced
water in oil field operations,
as opposed to just, uh,
disposing of it deep down in
salt water disposal bills. Would
you agree? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker Tillman?
Yes.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
don't want to go too far down
this route, but I do want to
share with the body that Mr the
the ability to look into
particularly as it relates to
precious minerals, perhaps
lithium and other components
that are part of some of those,
uh, deep underground water.
Reserves and part of the
produced water that comes up Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I would
think that our land office is
looking at opportunities there
for to develop new revenue
streams for the state and new
sorts of benefits for our
economy and the state and the
world. Is that right, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker Zelman? Yes, Uh, my
search taking and said yes, And
that's an important part of our
strategy of diversifying our
revenues thing, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Um and I,
You know, it's sort of been
shared, uh, that you know,
within the oil and gas industry.
There's there's been continual
work and refinement at taking
What have sometimes been waste
streams, finding a way for those
to be viable both commercially
and societally and Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think that we can
look to that with your
legislation. We can look to that
to continue. Would you agree? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker
Tillman. Yes. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I mentioned those
mainly because
As we continue as a state during
a time of really extraordinary
revenue challenging but times
filled with also really rich
opportunity that we see
ourselves as strong partners,
Uh and supporters and and
Yeah. Strong partners and
supporters of private industry,
including oil and gas
production, and that this bill
does not change that, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, it just
creates a perhaps a more level
playing for field for us as a
state as we mature in this sort
of new era. Would you agree with
that characterization, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, And
and it's it's
Charging a fair price for for
the resource we own, and it
doesn't change any of the
professional responsive nature
of the land office in working
with those partners that will
continue, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
that's great to hear. I've
certainly seen it one last
piece, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
we've talked about, um
Earlier in debate held by
production. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, if there was a lease
at a very low rate, say 12.75%,
That lease was executed many
many years ago. But if
production has continued within
that initial five year period
until now, that same lease is
still generating that 12.75%
royalty rate for the state.
Correct, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay. And so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm also here in
effect sheet that I've seen and
I want to ask your you and your
expert if it's true.
That least maybe that was done
decades. Perhaps scores of years
ago. Perhaps, you know more than
50 years ago. I don't know.
Could that least be privately
bought?
And then sold and as part of
that sale, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, whoever sold it on a
private entity that owned it.
Charges a higher royalty rate.
Then that 12.75% Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So, So we're talking
about this Transferring Alise
things you know, It's almost
like a sublease if you will, you
know the real estate context
charging more and still paying
the 12.75%. And that's exactly
correct. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen. I
think that shows that this is
happening now.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, for
that small percentage of land us
raising this feeling to be in
line with regional peers is, you
know is is just a good solid
move forward, not out of line at
all. And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
I think comes continuing within
the context of being a strong
partner.
Supporter and and in strategic
partner within this industry for
many years to come. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen, is further debate.
The gentleman from Chavez
representative Hembree.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe Yield Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, that you
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Um
I wanna
Flesh out a little bit on this
sort of high production area,
And what, um, percentage of that
has been
Ah is currently held by leases
and I think we've been saying
around 99%. I think it's maybe a
little higher like 99.2, but we
don't need to quibble over 0.2%.
Is that
And and and what I would like to
know, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is
of that.
Using that 99% is that 99% of
state lands in this high
production area, or 99% of all
lands in the high production
area.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the 99%
figure in your right It's 99.2
is of state lands. Okay? State
trust lands. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Sorry. Excuse me, Roughly. How
many acres are in that of state
lands are in that high
production area Do do we know
that Mr Speaker? Chairman? I'm
sorry. We don't have that number
with us.
Okay, uh,
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Um, so as I
understand the process of
determining which lease form the
state Land office users, there
is a process because we have
three different
Uh, statutory form leases is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
And so the first I guess part of
the determination is to
determine whether the lands are
restricted or unrestricted, and
I believe the restricted lands
are set by statute. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Gentlemen,
So the more technical we get,
the more I'm gonna rely on my
expert and he and he's telling
me that
The restricted areas are areas
of historic production.
So there, you know, we in
committee we discussed this in
might not have been house
energy. It might have been
commerce. Um and
It's a really that's a really
useful discussion to have an
expert seeing it your side where
the the expert can engage in
direct discussions, so I'll do
my best to answer your
questions. Sure. Thank thank
you, gentlemen and Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, and and
Um
I I believe
Restricted lands are sort of
historical production and
there's some there defined by
township and range in the
statute if I'm correct, But then
once we have figured out that,
okay, these are restricted
lands. Then we have to find out
whether their regular or premium
lands. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen? Yes.
And thank you and Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, there is a sort of a
Tear or a system to determine
whether they're regular or
premium. There's five factors
that have to be analyzed.
And I believe to be premium.
They They have to score
something over like 90% in those
factors. Is that correct? Mr.
Speaker? Tell me, yes.
So thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
What is the overlap?
Or, uh,
The premium lands.
In the high production area. Is
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, just
could you repeat the question?
Just so I get it, right? Yes, of
course. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Um so
The we talked about 99.2% of the
state lands in the high
production area being already
subject to leases held by
production.
Is
Or the premium lands.
The same.
As that high production area or
are they are premium more of a
core within the high production
area, So it is premium. Mr
Speaker, Gemma is premium subset
of high production. Is that the
question of essentially
essentially, yes.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um
I think that the short answer is
yes, that that
Premium lands or a subset of
high production it It's
complicated by the fact that
we've been doing this leasing
for many, many years, and
there's as as you acknowledge,
there's there's different
factors in a play. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. So if the
premium lands
Or essentially a subset of the
high production area.
And we know that 99.2% of the
state lands in the high
production area or held by
production.
What is the percentage of
premium lands that are currently
held by production, since this
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen that you
know, I
Yeah, I think what you're
getting at is
We are the 99.2% leased.
So we're not talking about a lot
of the land left and if we
reduce that to the premium
lands, it's even smaller than
that. 0.8%.
You know 99.2, Miles 100.8.
So we're talking about even
fewer lands. You know, I think
that's that's the point you're
getting at, and I appreciate
that point. We don't have the
exact figures. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Yes. That
That is sort of my point. It
would be
Probably and even higher than
99.2%.
Um
And I, I think
I want it. Sorry. I want to
shift gears just for a second,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Um
We've
We heard some talk about the
differences between net proceeds
and and gross proceeds on the
leases on the least forms
between Texas and New Mexico in
the development, least form
which we're looking at.
Is there the opportunity
For the state.
Do you charge?
Royalty on gas.
As a as gross proceeds.
Hmm. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. My
expert tells me they get net
proceeds.
And gas and all their leases, So
I'm
I know the least, language is in
statute. Um
He would take me a while to go
back and go through that answer
that question specifically, but
my understanding from my expert
is
Ah!
Let me put it this way. If there
is an opportunity, it's not
being it's not being used.
They're getting net proceeds.
Thank you. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, What I'm looking at
is on Page four, and this is the
existing language in the lease,
beginning with page or line 20.
Right. We have the subject of
free use without royalty, and
says, the option of less or at
any time and from time to time.
Let's see, shall pay less or as
royalty.
That fractional part of the gas
produced and say from the leased
premises, including Casing Head
gas period.
Then going on unless the option
is exercised. We get into that
royalty clause, which is the net
proceeds Royalty clause.
Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. I mean,
obviously you're reading from
the statute and that's correct.
I think this goes to
Um, issue we touch on
It's analogous to issue we
touched on earlier and that is
How does the state land Office
conduct business? How do they
conduct their operations and it
my belief and my understanding
and what I've heard is you know
the state Land office treats
producers
You know, almost as clients. I
mean, they're not beneficiaries.
Right. I mean, the state Land
office is more of a property
manager, and these companies are
akin to tenants.
But you know, the state Land
office has an interest in the
culture in the history of being
a good landlord of working with
these companies, So it's an
interesting point. You know, we
might have to go back to office
and think about whether or not
that that language that you just
read is that it has ever been
used is being used anything like
that.
I can't answer that right now.
But but I do know that the
practice as it stands now is is
net protein proceeds, not gross
proceeds.
Thank you for that, Uh,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um so
As I understand.
What was represented earlier
was, um, that
Generally.
If a lease has a higher royalty
rate.
The bonus.
Did.
Is typically lower for that
lease. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
And that bonus goes into the
maintenance fund. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker Tumin. That's
correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, What is
the maintenance fund used for?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. The
meetings fund is used for land
office operations.
But I believe it's subject to
appropriation.
So it's not
The land office.
Doesn't just get to do whatever
they want with it in my I recall
correctly, they use about a
quarter of it for their
operations, and the rest of the
maintenance fund is distributed
to beneficiaries.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
If
The least.
Bid.
Bonus bid decreases.
And then that
For whatever reason, Uh,
The less C
Has other priorities as
companies do.
And doesn't end up drilling and
there is no production on that
lease.
The lease expires.
The
Bid.
Was lower, so the state has
actually lost money on that.
Process, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
the state keeps the bonus
payment, So they make that money
and then they can put the parcel
back up for release.
So, um
You know, it's it's
Over the life of the parcel over
the life of the production. It's
not clear to me that they lose
money. If that happens, it is
important to understand, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen that
The bulk of the funds the state
earns on these
On these leases are the royalty
payments, not the bonus payment.
So the state in our interest in
funding the land Grant Permanent
fund and the beneficiaries of
the fund.
We have an interest in these
companies putting these parcels
in production, and that's why
presumably, there's a provision
in the least that says, if you
don't put in production, it
comes back to State Land Office.
We don't want companies.
Nursing land, locking it up and
not drilling.
Because it's the state land
offices constitutional mandate
to support this production and
earn this revenue for the land
Grant permanent fund.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I'm that. I
appreciate that a great deal,
and so and I That helps move me
to where I wanted to go next,
because, uh, as the gentleman
from Chavez, Eddie, you know,
Tero asked you and I think you
answered that for renewable
product. Uh,
Renewable leases projects. Uh,
those are not set in statute but
are negotiated.
On an individual project by
Project basis is that correct?
Mr Speaker Tillman? Yes.
Thank you and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and and so
I understand their project by
project and can look very
different.
But what
Is the revenue stream to the
state of New Mexico.
On those projects.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I can ask
my expert in terms of you know,
there was a question about are
we receiving percentage And the
answer is yes. I don't really
know what that percentage is, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Big picture
wise. The revenue from the other
projects is dwarfed by the
revenue from oil and gas
projects.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, uh,
Where does the money from these?
say? A win project, however,
that revenue generation that
wind lease Where does that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, the
maintenance fund. Okay, Thank
you, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So
it goes into the maintenance
fund.
For the operations of the state
Land office. Correct, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes, that's
correct, although with the
caveat that the state Land
office doesn't use the entire
maintenance fun for operations,
according to the FBI, are the
use about a quarter of it, and
the rest is distributed. Thank
you And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
so
None of that. Revenue from these
projects goes to any of the
permanent funds. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, that's correct.
Thank you and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So are we really
maximizing the benefit of those
lands for the school Children as
you, uh
Mentioned in your conversation
with the gentleman from Dona
Ana. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you
know, I think the goal here is
to
Uh, 1st 1st off as you as you as
you suggest, maximize the
benefit but from different
revenue streams, right, so not
not all of the state lands are
going to be suitable to
Oil and gas production. Not all
the seat lands that are suitable
to oil and gas production are in
the Permian and will support
this royalty rate. So the state
Land office is doing everything
they can to find different
sources of revenue on different
parcels to benefit those
beneficiaries. And it's um you
know, I think we're sort of
still in the infancy of
What can we do with state trust
land other than oil and gas
drilling because, like in the
past and even now in terms of
revenue
Well, Gas drilling is the vast,
vast majority, you know, so make
no mistake about it. But then
there are other projects.
They're when they're solar.
There's Mesa del Sol. There's
other projects here and there
that the state Land office is
looking for ways on parcels that
aren't suitable for oil and gas
production to generate revenue.
For the beneficiaries.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I appreciate that,
and I agree. There are a lot of
things we can be doing with our
state lands to to benefit the
state. Um, but, uh
My concern is
As as you mentioned.
You believe that the oil and gas
industry is on its way out.
And
Very way. Melt it Very well.
Maybe I'm I'm not a
prognosticator. If I was, I
wouldn't be here. Um, but
If truly oil and gas is on its
way out.
And we are not using the revenue
from these other projects.
To go into the permanent funds.
Then I think that's an issue.
And maybe one that the state
Land office needs to look at as
to how it's directing that
revenue.
So So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I think we're beyond the bill.
Um, you know, the bill certainly
doesn't deal with revenue from
renewable projects. My expert
handed me a note, which which is
a distinction, which which makes
sense, which I didn't realize.
The reason that the revenue from
the minerals go into the
permanent fund.
Is because essentially, it's
single use.
Right. So once you sever the
minerals once you extract them
You're done with that same
minerals. Now the gentleman from
Chavez, Lee and Eddie.
You know, just talking about,
you know, future technology, and
I don't disagree with that for a
second. Certainly. You know the
current fracking boom was the
technology we didn't have
previously, which is already
enabled, increased production,
and there's no reason to think
that we won't have
More technology in the future.
That doesn't also increased
production.
But that being said the
severance of the minerals is a
permanent severance.
The renewables.
Renewable.
And they can continue to produce
income and that's part of the
reason why
The severance of the minerals of
permanent severance goes into
the permanent fund that you know
that the way we're treating
them.
Because we can't re sever them
or reuse them. They were going
to set that money aside and
really use that money and said
those and said those minerals
It's a different treatment for
renewables because renewables
can continue to produce. Thank
you for that distinction. I
appreciate it, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so I want to now kind
of go back to
Uh, where we were talking about
99.2% or higher of these
premium lands.
Already being held by
production.
And and current leases.
And as we've established, I
think through the course of this
debate
Some of those leases maybe close
to 100 years old.
And still producing at the 1/8
Um
And while
I
I think there is concern.
Among particularly the smaller
producers.
Who are least equipped to absorb
A higher royalty that leases
although productive
Or being canceled for other
reasons.
In order to release them at what
it would now be a higher royalty
rate. Would you care to
Address that concern
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Sorry. We were looking for the
right note. The
The estate land office went
through a process of identifying
How many leases lacked the
required bonding.
In the once identified these
leases. They didn't they didn't
go out and cancel them.
There were about 6000 active
leases. There are 800 that
lacked the bonding. They
notified the producers. They
worked with the producers after
that, 800 that lacked the
bonding.
There were 24 there were
canceled.
There are 24 out of 800 out of
6000.
That can come into line with the
terms of the contract with
something they're required to
do.
In order to maintain the least.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
understand the concern.
I don't think we have any
evidence that the land office is
acting in bad faith and seeking
to cancel. This is in order to
re let them at a higher royalty
rate.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, um
I I understand, Um
That it that that
The process through which the
state land Office is going
Ah, um
I have concerns about
Ah!
The positions they're taking on
bonding. Because as I
understand the statutory
requirement for bonding on state
lands with the state Land
office separate from OECD
bonding.
Is that it is the lessee or or
the operator who are required to
have a bond.
But that the state Land Office
has been taking the position
that both
The less E and
The operator have to have so, Mr
Speaker, Gentleman.
Um
There's a little bit of
discussion with this in house
energy. Um
I have some material in front of
me that I don't like to read on
the floor read to you.
Um
That's an issue that maybe we
should talk about.
That's not an issue that's in
this bill.
You know that the bonding
requirements that compliance
with the existing contracts the
issue of lessee versus operator
You know if if these leases have
been transferred
And it's or if there's an
operator on the lease that isn't
named. In the least. I mean,
that's a that's a potential
issue.
You know from certainly from a
legal point of view. I know you
appreciate that.
Um, it's not
Addressed in this bill. It's not
affected by this bill is
something that I know that land
office is aware of, and they're
working on. Thank you and Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. Um, I
And I
Point that out because that sort
of feeds into some of the
concerns operators have
Of
The the state Land office,
potentially taking a position
that is not supported by
statute in order to cancel
leases and
That then an increase in the
upper rate.
Uh,
Makes it seem like
They would be more incentivized.
To cancel more releases find
other reasons.
That may not be supported by
statute.
To do that, and I understand you
said. It's a contract and if
you're not
Abiding by the terms of the
contract, it can be canceled,
and I appreciate that. But
sometimes it seems like there
may be some inconsistencies
between the positions. The state
land offices taking
And the actual contract.
And that is of great concern,
especially when you now you're
raising the royalty rate and
maybe incentivizing more
cancelations. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
I would like to acknowledge
that's a concern.
And reiterate that I don't think
The land office is acting in
that manner, but that would also
like to point out that there's
there's numbers. I just rattled
off the 6824.
Very worked their way through
that process without this bill
in place.
So that process has largely come
to a conclusion in terms of
making sure people are properly
bonded. It's not sitting out
there were not like trying to
get this.
This bill in place so we can
then go out and go after you
know, that's that's not what's
going on. They worked their way
through that process because
there was a legal requirement
it's largely resolved itself.
This is a separate issue, and
this is this is moving forward.
Thank you. And and Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, um, these these
leases
Currently
And rightly so. If there's a
cessation of production on the
leased premises, they terminate
I believe there's 60 day
provision. Um
To commence reworking additional
drilling things like that. And
it is my understanding that the
state land Office usually Sims
out. The 60 day notice gives
people time to cure and is very
good about that.
Um
To your knowledge. Do state oil
and gas leases have like a
severability clause or a puke
laws.
And sorry, Mr General was that
last term a pew clause.
Mr Chairman. I'm familiar with
severability and not familiar
with pew.
Okay. Could you explain that
term to me like a gentleman?
Yes, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So
Many, many fee leases have
provisions that's say if you
have a lease that covers 320
acres if there's only production
on 160 acres
Then, at the end of the primary
term, the least terminates as to
all lands, not in production, so
the lease would reduce to 100
Oh, they do not have that clause
in their lease.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Uh do you know of any
instances where the state land
office has taken a position that
because there had that that
there are productive lands and
non productive lands under a
state oil and gas lease, they
Uh, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
Again. We're pretty deep in the
weeds.
Um, no subject in the bill.
My expert is telling me is in
some circumstances where there
are their units where there are,
uh
Community ization agreements.
That there are some provisions
that non productive lands drop
out.
So
Depending on the the framework
of the production.
Different factors could be a
play.
And again, I just reiterate.
I know that.
Is addressed in the bill.
Thank you And Mr Speaker or
gentlemen, I understand that's
not addressed in the bill. But
again, uh, you mentioned 24
leases that were canceled for
lack of bonding. But then there
are perhaps many other leases
that the state land offices
trying to cancel portions of
Even though there is no
So So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I am learning things from your
questions. I'm learning things
from the from the
The experts answers like that.
The Pew Cola's I got to see what
that looks like. I've never used
one of those really curious
about that.
Um, we're way off rural way of
the bill. The answer to your
last question apparently has to
do with contiguity.
You know if at least if you look
at the surface, you look at the
you know the map of their
service management. There's
there's mineral estate and all
the little little boxes and you
know if you if you zoom in, you
get even smaller boxes. You
know, Um I have the statewide
mapping in my office because
because it fascinates me That
way. We've divided the surface
management.
Um, apparently constant
contiguity is one of the factors
they look at. If there's
production on one piece, but
there's another non contiguous
parcel where there is no
production.
There's that factor into
determination.
You know?
Again, Um
We're often the weeds, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, we are a little
bit but, um
I don't see where the contiguous
nature of the lands factors in
in the lease form.
So
Again. I am just pointing out
that there are other methods.
That
Appear to be
Used
Um, to cancel leases and again.
Ah, with
It appears that they are
currently being used and
This.
Only incentivizes.
Them to be used.
Even more.
So, uh, with that, Mr Speaker, I
have an amendment.
That I would
Yes, And I would like a roll
call vote.
Thank you, gentlemen. You'll
have your roll call vote. We
It looks like the amendment has
been passed out to everyone.
Gentlemen of you. Please read
the tour to number please on the
amendment.
Yes, Mr Speaker. It is 2 to 83
to 6.1.
Thank you gentlemen to explain
the amendment.
I was discussing with the
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe. And so it says that,
uh,
The the new the form with the
with the one quarter royalty
rate in it.
May be used after July 1 2024.
Except on leases that are issued
within one calendar year.
Of the date on which they were
canceled.
And that were that were held by
production but were canceled for
reasons other than cessation of
production. And so if and and
this is just really, too can
address the concerns of some of
the smaller producers who are
afraid that their leases will be
canceled for
Uh,
Reasons that may not
Be fully supported by statute.
Um and and and then those leases
If there were reissued within
one year, they would be at the
same royalty rate if they're not
released for more than a year.
then the the state Land office
could use whatever royalty rate
is prescribed in the form up to
25%.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Santa and Santa Fe. Is this
a friendly amendment?
Mr Speaker, May I ask them
questions of the sponsor of the
amendment?
Proceed, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Can can you so we've got a
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I guess I
would quibble that this is a
simple amendment. I see a 12
page. At least this is a couple
of billable hours. I would think
going through this. Um, can you
highlight for me?
Um, how this this specific
provision
In this proposal that are
different than the existing
statutory lease.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do not
believe we changed any of these
statutory provisions. Uh, in the
least other than
The one suggested by your bill.
And then just added at the very
beginning.
When it may be used.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I guess my difficulty is the
entire 12 Page amendment is
labeled new material so I can't
see what's the same and what's
different.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
That is
That is interesting.
Okay. Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um, it is, I guess.
It is entirely
New material, Although it is
Exactly what is currently in
law.
Except for the fact that, um
It does raise the maximum
royalty rate to one quarter.
And then it has the new
The different language. Um
The sentence on when it may be
used.
Okay, so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
it may be unfriendly just
because
I can't digest it on the floor.
But let me ask you another
question. If a
Police was terminated for
noncompliance.
And it was really let
Were the with the prior
Um, let's see people be bidding
on it. Or would there be a new
Hitter for that lease.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I would
assume that the old lessee would
be able to bid on it. It may not
be guaranteed that it would
Get the least Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if the older C is
bidding on it
I presume a requirement for
Into the least, would be to be
compliant with its terms and the
like if they lost the lease for
lack of bonding.
Simply bidding on a new this
Still lacking bonding. How does
that
Advance the noncompliance
situation.
Uh, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Uh,
The
If a lessee
Loses the lease.
Because of bonding.
That is not the exact
Um, situation that that
That I am trying to address.
What I am trying to address is
if there is an operator
Who owns the operating rights,
which is set which are several
from the lessee of record, But
the lease is canceled because
the lessee who may be deceased
or a defunct corporation.
Owns nothing but bare record
title.
And the state land offices,
taking the position that both
lessee and operator have to have
a bond. The operator had a bond
But less. He did not believe it
was canceled. That operator
would be able to
Bid on the new lease and be
compliant because it already had
the bond. It was compliant
before.
In Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
The news. I have a hard time
following, um
The new list would or would not
be at a higher rate.
If it was leased within one
year, it would not be at the
higher rate. It would be at the
same rate as the previously
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um, you know, obviously I don't
work for the land office. I
can't speak for the land office.
Um
If I had a piece of property
that
If I just hold onto it for a
year, I can double the rate.
Wouldn't I just hold onto it for
a year?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, perhaps,
um
Mhm, the the
Issue can be. I mean, the the
state Land office goes through a
process, uh, to to put a parcel
up for lease and that may take
some time. This is, um and I
think there have been a few
instances where
Um
A lessee of record who has bare
record title to the lease is is
defunct and
How has uh,
No.
So so the operator who owns all
the operating rights has no
notice that the leases even
being canceled.
And
It has happened where the lease
was canceled and released before
the operator even knew about it.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I
Increased portion of our debate
wanted to
Acknowledge the concern.
Um
I have heard no evidence that
The
The what The concern is is
actually happening that the land
office is acting
Yeah, in a manner that's
anything other than cooperative.
With the lessees with the
producers.
I have not heard that so because
of that.
I think
You know, I understand what
you're doing with your proposal.
You know, maybe this is
something we could look at
another session. Maybe this is a
stand alone bill. I tend to
think it's a solution in search
of a problem.
I don't think that concern you
expressed is a ongoing existing
or common problem in the state
of New Mexico.
And so because of that, I would
have to say this is an
unfriendly amendment.
Gentlemen from Sandoval
Incentive. I didn't hear he was
just It was just a friendly
amendment, sir.
Mr Speaker? No, this is an
unfriendly amendment. Thank you
For that. We do We have debate
on the amendment.
Representative of the German
from Lee, representing Scott.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Chavez yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I will yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Would be accurate to solve that
leases that are in question
here.
Journalist debates some of these
back 100 years.
Is that accurate?
Yes, it is. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Yes. There there are
leases that go back to the 19
twenties on state lands, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Or those old laces.
And
Development was
Hmm. Actually encouraged
By the state Land office.
Were the royalties and
provisions in those laces
substantially similar to the way
they were now.
Or
Were there significant
differences?
Particularly with respect to
royalty rates and puke clauses.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Uh, they
were
I would say significantly
different
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I believe I heard that 99 point
some odd percent state land in
primaries was already leased. Is
that accurate? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, that is, uh
That is accurate. And Miss
Speaker and gentlemen, some are
perhaps
Most
Of these leases.
What be
Very old.
Would that be accurate?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
believe, you know, as this is
sort of a core area that was
early on in the development of
the New Mexico portions of the
Permian Basin that yes, they
would be a great deal of them
would be
Older speaker and gentlemen.
This bill.
As
Is assigning a higher
Allowable royalty rate in those
core areas.
But
And those core areas.
And the vast maturity of the
circumstances.
Yes. Is more leases available?
Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes, that
is accurate.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
there was powerful incentive
before at the 20% royalty rate.
True, colonel.
Make every attempt to have the
eyes started test crossed on
these
Well, miss sometimes 100 year
old documents.
To look for.
Opportunities to cancel.
Is that accurate? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, that is
absolutely
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think that certainly is germane
to this piece of legislation.
Particularly Kevin.
That I
I am aware of anecdotal evidence
of producing leases.
That have been canceled.
Or are you? Do you have any of
that? Same information? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, I am
aware of a number of situations
that have occurred and I believe
that the state Land office may
be involved in either
administrative review, or
perhaps even litigation over
what may be the improper
cancelation of leases.
And Ms Speaker and gentlemen, it
was further my understanding
that that
Operator of that production,
Could you briefly explained, sir
for the body?
Operating rights versus Li See
of record.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I can
explain that I cannot guarantee
it would be brief. But, um
Ah!
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Uh, when
a state of New Mexico oil and
gas leases issued the original
party is the lessee, Uh, when
that there are a number of ways
that least can be assigned out
Uh, the state Land office has a
form assignment of record title,
which would make the acid me
under that both the lessee of
record and the operating rights.
But the assignment, uh
Or assignment of oil and gas.
Least statute which I believe is
19-10 Dash. 13 nm Essay Ah,
allows for the lessee to assign
just operating rights to a
portion of the lease certain
depths of the lease. Uh, a
number of different things so
that that person, the acid me in
that instance
Would not be lessee of record
but has the right to produce the
oil and gas under the lease.
So most of speaker and gentlemen
An operator as the owner of
operating Rights. And if Elise
is 100 years old.
Would it be reasonable to say
that that original list see
No longer with us.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, With the
exception of maybe a handful of
companies, Uh, you know, maybe
humble oil company that is now
Exxon Mobil. I would say most
are long gone. So Miss Speaker
and gentlemen, these have
changed hands. Um
On many occasions, multiple
times.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that
is correct. So an operator
acting in good faith.
Believing he had the rights to
produce those minerals with all
his bonds in a place, no
regulatory issues whatsoever.
Mhm had leases canceled.
Because of
And there was a question, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because the
state Land office has been
taking the position that both
lessee and operator are required
to have bonds when the statute
which is 19-10 Dash, 26 requires
lessee or operator to have
bonding.
It must Baker and gentlemen.
I believe you were and our
Amendment.
At least allows.
The operator or the owner of
those operating rights to have
some time to try to remedy these
situations before the leases
issued.
Is that accurate? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Yes. Um, it's it's
designed to do that, and to
protect operators who have no
notice of leases being canceled,
canceled out from
Beneath them.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen.
Even the powerful incentives.
On the part of the state Land
office to make this happen as
rapidly as possible.
It looks to me like this is
absolutely necessary to protect
those all operators from
Abuses if you will.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
I'll be proud to support the
amendment.
Is there further debate on the
amendment?
General lady from Benaglio
representative.
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House for Amendment number one.
Motion for the body's stable
house. Four Amendment number one
to House Bill 48
There has been a roll call, so
avoid a B s. And the amendment
will be tabled A vote of no and
the amendment will be adopted.
The vote is now open.
It is about to close.
The vote is now closed with 38
and affirmative 24 in the
negative house for Amendment
number one to House Bill 48 is
tabled.
The gentleman from, uh
The joint from Chavez still has
a four thank you, Mr Speaker.
Uh,
Gentlemen from Santa Fe and
Sandoval. Um
What? What is the current?
Royalty rate on federal lands in
New Mexico.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, My
understanding is 16.67.
Ah, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, is that that is on
that will be on newly issued
leases in New Mexico. Correct,
Mr. Speaker. Tell me, yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. What is the royalty
rate on existing federal leases
in New Mexico? So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um
So
Existing, uh, lord royalty
rates. It depends on the lease,
of course. And like new Mexico,
like the state. We have these
older leases with lower rates
and new releases with higher
rates. Most of the police the
federal leases, or 12.75.
Most of them, but not all of
them.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I believe they're 1/8
12.5% not
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tillman,
Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
The state lands in this highly
productive area or the premium
area.
Are somewhat interspersed with
federal lands. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker Tillman? Yes.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if
and operator was
Looking to maximize its value.
And has a
State lease at 25% and a federal
lease at 12.5%.
Which least would it be more
inclined to develop?
So so, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
this goes back to the discussion
I had with the gentleman from I
believe Lee.
About. It's not just the royalty
rate.
Right. There are other factors
at play.
And Mr Speaker. Gentleman, So my
understanding is the state Land
office can get you a permit to
drill and 10 days.
It will take a year.
365 days.
If you're going to drill on
federal land, you gotta comply
with Nipah National
Environmental Policy Act. You're
subject to a variety of
additional lawsuits.
Um, you know that.
My understanding is the entire
BLM lists.
Operation.
It's currently suspended.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
It depends.
But just because the new Mexico
rate is higher doesn't mean that
we're less appealing in terms of
someone to do business with.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, would you see a I
guess what you're saying is that
on the federal land, you have
some additional costs of doing
business. Does that equate to at
12.5% difference?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Again and it's all you know goes
into the mix. And you know,
because of the lateral drilling
technology, often your least
will include both.
You know, so it's not just where
you put your rig. It's where
you're extracting the minerals
from
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, um
As I
Wrapping up, um
I
I I know that you said earlier.
You're taking the $1 billion of
increased revenue to the state
from the From the F I R. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen that the
FBI are only goes out a couple
of years and then she says
recurring, but we know from
experience that we know from the
discussion that these leases are
held by production, and we've
had testimony that we haven't
even hit the boom times yet. So
you know, we'll see, but we
expect the leases to be around
for a while. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I just say
I given some of our discussions
in the discussions with other
people, and and you just said,
you know, it depends. A lot of
things depend on where someone
is going to produce. What that
intersperse in is when you have
a community ization agreement,
it may have 120 acres of federal
and only 40 acres of
State or some other makeup, and
so so much depends.
I find it difficult to
Except
Um
$1 billion as the
Potential financial
Impact to the state. Um
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. Gentlemen. Just
elaborate on that point. So in
the IR
And I don't know Page two.
The market value of the
permanent of the permanent fund
could grow by 1.5 billion.
2.5 billion by 2050 so might
actually be more
There is a debate. Did you live
from San Juan Representative
Lane?
Thank you, Mr Speaker as a
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe Yield, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, a yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from Sandoval and
Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Centerville and Santa Fe heard
some discussion earlier and from
a couple of members that I think
part of
Um, the constitutional
obligation of the state land
offices to maximize
The use of these types of leases
in order to generate as much
revenue as possible for public
education system that I
understand that debate.
Mr Speaker German. I apologize.
I missed the question at the
very end.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from Santa
and Santa Fe. I'm just trying to
make sure I captured the essence
of that debate. Previously of
this this idea that that they
have a constitutional
obligation.
To make sure that we're
maximizing that revenue for for
our educational system. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that's
In essence, yes.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe. What
which constitutional provisions
are we talking about?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um, so
looking at
Land Office analysis
commissioner Public lands has a
fiduciary responsibility to
ensure stew trust.
Receives appropriate value for
resources being leased.
Um
In accordance with the enabling
act. Mexican Constitution
Article 12 Section two
And also in the essay section
19-1 this one
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa phase so
I have read Article 12 Section
two.
Also direct the body to article
24 Section one
Can you show me any kind of
language that talks about the
land commissioner having a
constitutional obligation to
maximize the revenue on public
land for the benefit of our
educational system, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, because the the
fiduciary duty to direct your
attention to
State X Rail Highway Commission
versus Walker 1956 and the
Missy.
MSC 80, Mr Speaker.
You know as well as I do that
the Constitution is a general
provision and from the
Constitution, our courts
interpret that language and
elaborate on what that language
might me.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It's very
clear that the land commissioner
has a fiduciary duty.
And that the land commissioner
manages these lands that the
Lincoln Mr holds these lands in
trust.
For the beneficiaries of the
Land Grant Permanent fund.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe. I don't
doubt that there is a fiduciary
obligation. But when we use
language sort of as this trump
card that it's this
constitutional obligation to
maximize revenue, I think it
misses the mark of what's really
happening.
And so, and the reason why I
bring it up is because I guess
I'm curious. Why the
25%. If that's the rationale,
why not make it 100%?
Ah, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So so
two points on that, first of
all, Obviously, 100% doesn't
work. No one will produce if
they have to pay all their
proceeds over so
So that argument is facetious,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, there's a
there's a good argument.
To be made that there shouldn't
be a cap.
It's a land land commissioner.
In in her discretion should be
able to negotiate the market
value of the royalty rate.
The cap we're proposing.
Is closer to what we believe is
the current market.
Right?
There's still a cap. It's still
limits the land offices
authority.
And there's some question about
whether that cap
Is, in fact, constitutional.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe would
request that you're not
Label. My arguments is
facetious. They're not intended
to be that way. What I heard
earlier was a debate that we let
the market set the mark the
rates
And so you might have premium
land down in the in the Permian
Basin, where it would easily go
for 25%. And maybe in a older
basin in the San Juan. Maybe it
goes through 12 or 15. So my
point is, if that's the
rationale, then why make a cap
at all? Why not have it 100%?
And so I I'm getting at
something that I think is deeper
here, which is
I think we're missing the mark.
When we say that this needs to
be at 25%, and I can't support
it, not because I don't support
more revenue for the state.
But Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
From Sandoval and Santa Fe. I
guess why are we
Why are we going at the profit
of an industry?
When we're already at 3.5
billion in excess revenue. We're
not hurting.
For revenue. So why are we going
after
The revenue of this particular
industry.
Mr Speaker Zelman. So
Perhaps when it goes back to
you, you could explain to me how
100% royalty rate would work.
And it certainly sounds.
Untenable to me.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, in terms
of are we getting enough
already?
I tried to address this in my
opening.
The question isn't enough.
The question is, Is it a fair
market rate?
The question is, are we
Using our state trust lands.
That we have this fiduciary duty
to maximize the benefit of
In a way that meets that duty.
And the idea that because we're
already getting a lot of revenue
from the oil and gas industry
We should subsidize their
operation.
By listening parcels below
market.
It just it doesn't it doesn't
hold Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, the
issue isn't enough. The issue
isn't the total amount. The
issue is whether or not we're
getting a fair return.
And Mr Speaker Town and all
indications are right now.
That we're not
Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval and and Santa Fe. It's
wild to me that you would use
the word subsidize.
Of an industry that every turn
we look to destroy.
And so it's a bargain for
exchange, right? That's the
point of the lease. How is that
a subsidy? The state is
literally receiving 25% of your
proposal.
For doing nothing other than
executing a lease.
That's hardly a subsidy who's
taking on the risk Who's taking
on securing capital who's paying
employees whose having do
Ah, comply with regulation.
Harley of subsidy and you want
to talk about an issue of
subsidy. Then let's talk about
your favorite subject, which are
renewables. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen from Sandoval, I think
you're missing the mark in the
question that you're asking
Which is we should have a fair
market rate.
There is already a fair market
rate. And I think the reason why
I bring this up is because
again. It's not like we're in a
situation where as a state
We're desperate for revenue.
We're sitting on 3.5 billion of
new money.
That's just in this year alone,
not even what we did the
previous year and the year
before that.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from
From Sandoval and Santa Fe.
What fuels innovation in your
opinion.
Mr Speaker. Dillman. Um
I would be remiss if I didn't
answer address your comments.
The subsidy.
Is leasing laying below the
market rate.
Yes, you see, it's bargained for
exchange and yet we have an
artificial cap.
In statute.
It limits that bargained for
exchange again. It would be
really interesting to have no
cap.
Constitutionally compliant.
To have no cap.
And said, We have a cap.
And so working within that
framework
We
Are trying to raise the cap.
To approximate what we believe
is the market.
It may not be sufficient.
As I said at the outset, we're
still talking about the range.
And we're still talking about
Visit premium, Mrs.
Primarily in the Permian.
So not the San Juan, Not other
areas that won't support this
leave.
As for your question, what
drives innovation?
Yeah, I would say the profit
motive. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
So it's It's interesting me that
we complain about there being an
artificial cap in the statute,
but you're actually running an
artificial cap in the statute.
You have the power to lift the
cap right now. Right? So I don't
understand that piece of it, And
I appreciate your your spot on
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Sandoval. When you say what
fuels
Innovation. It is absolutely
profit.
And I would submit to the body
That is actually a very, very
good thing that we should
encourage.
That kind of innovation.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from from Sandoval and Santa Fe.
So when we talk about profit
driving innovation
Innovation, then in turn leads
to new and cutting edge
technology.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Sandoval and Santa Fe.
You look at this industry and
over the last 20 years.
The innovation and technology
that has made a difference in
this industry, not just in terms
of increased production, but I
think equally important
Is the increase in innovation
when it comes to clean
technologies.
Whether that's exploration
Whether that's refinement,
whether that you're talking
about the up the mentor the
downstream.
That innovation and technology
has made a big difference for
the state of New Mexico in terms
of the environmental impact, but
also in terms of the revenue
generation. You talked a little
bit earlier about fracking, for
example, and how that that sort
of re sparked
The the industry down in the
southeast part of Mexico again
because of
Innovation and technology, which
ultimately comes from profit
motives. And so I'm curious. Why
are we trying to interrupt that
cycle?
Of profit leading to innovation,
which internally is the better
technology, which in turn leads
to better results for New Mexico
when again
We're sitting on 3.5 billion of
excess revenue again if we were
searching under every couch
pillow.
For coins.
Why would we be doing that?
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
disagree that we are
And I disagree that this bill
doesn't
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe. So are
are we not taking an additional
5% off the top?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we are
allowing the state land office.
Which has a fiduciary duty.
To charge the market rate.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if
anyone thinks that's unfair
They don't have to bid Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe again. I'm
not I'm not
Going to the argument of what's
fair versus unfair and this idea
of setting the market rate again
is the wrong question.
Being asked. What I want to know
is why would we
Interrupt the cycle of profit,
leading innovation and what I
understand this bill to do is it
would allow the state land
office to take an additional 5%
off of the lease. If that's what
the bitter submit, is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Gentleman, I
continue to disagree with your
premise that we're
Interrupting a cycle or trying
to interrupt the cycle, and I
also disagree with your premise
that
Returning a fair market rate or
that that's not the right
question.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we're
talking about a return on assets
we own.
Okay. The state of New Mexico
hold these assets interest for
the beneficiaries.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
It is our legal obligation.
Whether you like it or not.
To maximize the return on those
assets.
There's on the question of
enough.
There's nothing it doesn't
relate to the other revenue that
Steve New Mexico receives.
This money goes into the land
Grant Permanent fund. It's a
permanent severance of these
minerals.
We set this money aside.
We take money out of the fund
after it's grown hopefully
According to a formula
To pay for expenses of schools.
Hospitals, universities.
The permanent fund is, you know
This question about how
permanent the permanent fund is
right? I mean, we're on this
earth for a short while.
But the idea of the permanent
fund is we're setting this money
aside.
To shortchange that fund now.
Because we're seeing other
revenue.
Is not only a fiscal mistake,
but it runs contrary to our
duty. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe. So again,
I
I struggle with
The argument that I see that you
you want to hide behind.
The fact that there is a
artificial cap on the market
rate yet you control the bill,
and so you want to argue from
both sides. What I see here is
we're potentially taking an
additional 5% off the top of
these premium leases, which I
believe is really going to
happen. Otherwise, why would
your expert from the very agency
be here, pushing it?
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Sandoval and Santa Fe.
It is going to impact profits
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Santa Fe, we have this push
right now to allow OECD to
increase the stringent nous of
the regulatory environment.
That's a bill that's been
floated in this chamber.
And yet we want to at the same
time, lower the profit margins
of this industry.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from San Juan.
Excuse me, gentlemen from
Sandoval and Santa Fe.
When you when you combine those
two, when you increase the
regulatory framework and make it
harder to comply. When you
reduce the profits of industry,
it's going to lead to three
things. In my opinion, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Sandoval
and Santa Fe, it's going to lead
to fewer employees.
Anytime you impact the bottom
line.
It's going to lead to fewer
capital for research and
development, and that's going to
stymie our ability to continue
to have these technological
advances. Whether that's for
increased revenue or whether
that's for better cleaner
technology.
And it's gonna make for
Increased risk on these
unexplored lands, which
ultimately is going to lead to
less revenue for the state of
New Mexico.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Sandoval and Santa Fe. I
don't see any of these as being
beneficial to the state of New
Mexico.
Particularly in a time when
we're awash in revenue. I don't
understand the need for this
bill.
The only thrashing All that
makes sense to me when I listen
to debate is that there are
unfriendly leases that currently
exist, and we need to find a way
to increase those to which I
disagree. So those are my
comments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen for the
debate the generated from Santa
Fe Representative Luhan. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Santa Fe
And I think a couple other
counties
Yield.
Mr Speaker, General Lady I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm
rather enjoying this debate and
getting a little bit more
information on How are royalties
work in our state? Can you tell
me who benefits from?
The royalties that we receive in
the process of our revenue
gains. Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Tell any In this
context, it's the beneficiaries
of the Land Grant Permanent
fund. I believe there are 22
beneficiaries of Land Grant
President Fund. It's a lengthy
list. Primarily it's schools,
hospitals in universities.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I just I find that
Those those beneficiaries and
how we work towards
Um, getting our budget through
and the whole process of
everything. It's really
important to keep them at
In mind as we're working through
this this bill and through other
types of legislation, but
particularly this bill, and I,
and I wonder how how much more
would they benefit if we pass
this piece of legislation, Mr
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, General
Idi According to the For our
beginning in fistic Allow year
27. It's up to $50 million in
fiscal year 28 to 75.
That's recurring. It continues.
At some level, it might decrease
over time for the life of the
lease.
Um and
The analysis in the F I, R
suggests it's 1.5 to $2.5
billion, and Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, I was also add that that's
money going into the land Grant
Permanent fund, Hopefully, the
land grant permanent fund itself
continues to grow from from
investments and interest. And so
that the multiplier effect can
be also be substantial.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
That's that's just wonderful. I
think that's that's something
that we as an extraction state
really need to.
Look at how we can benefit even
more from from the proceeds from
what your bill does, and
actually very excited that you
decided to carry this bill. This
is something that is interested
me since I began or even before
I was a legislator myself. Mr.
Speaker. I think that this is
something
That's maybe answer. Answer. My
next question wasn't when was
the last time we changed or
looked at the changing of, um
the percentage changes in
royalties, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
They're not been changed since
the 19 seventies. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Is it
true that they that we even
lowered those percentage rates
at one point
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Hmm. Mr Speaker. Generally the,
uh, the statute there is an
existing range over time. They
have generally gone up. Um, this
would
Um
We wouldn't lower the range it
would. It would widen the range
if you will. Thank you, Mr
Gentlemen. Um
Mr Speaker.
Um
So I heard.
Through this debate about
But bargain for exchange and an
artificial cap it and I heard
that we are we have an excess of
$3.5 billion in our revenues and
I'm just asking. Do you know
what the outlook is for our
revenues? Moving forward, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Tell lady I know you
sit on HFC, and you probably
heard those presentations better
than I am the word that the
chair has used is plateau that
we expect those 11 those
revenues to be plateau owing.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, that's true. And
Would you agree? Or is it true
that this industry that we
received royalties from is is a
volatile industry? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Um
Mr Speaker. General 80 is very
volatile. Um
Right? I think we're always
optimistic that
The current boom times will
continue. And you know, we know
they won't continue forever.
But, you know, we say, Oh, well,
at least five years at least 10
years you win win the bust
happens. Um, I think it's
We're never quite ready for it,
and there was sort of manages to
catch us off guard.
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's true.
It's a very volatile industry
and
Um, I think maybe some of us
have been here or remember when
there was a bust and what that
meant for us and and all the
programs and all the all the
devastating effects that had.
Can you recall any of those
mystical gentlemen like what
would it mean if we were to all
of a sudden all of a sudden
happen happen to have a downfall
and those those proceeds are
those royalties. How would that
affect us? If that happened?
And I'd say maybe in the next
five years, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So So, Mr Speaker. Generally, it
kind of goes to I mean, we've
been talking about the revenue
we received from the oil and gas
industry that doesn't go into
the permanent fund because we do
have other revenues the makers
into the permanent fund.
Um, you know is invested and
then we take it out, according
to a formula, But in terms of,
you know, that's not all the
revenue we get from the oil and
gas company by any stretch, and
Mr Speaker del Lady. You know,
I'm in my 10th year I started in
tough economic times.
Um and we were scraping money. I
mean, that was
Scraping was the word they used.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, that
the part I remember most were we
were scraping money from
schools.
So so that really the very bad
fisheries. We're trying to help
with the land Grant permanent
fund whenever, like if they had
reserves in excess of think we
got maybe down to 3%.
Never taken that money back.
From school, so schools who had
practiced sound fiscal
management had a little money in
the bank. We said thank you very
much. We're going to take that
now because we need it. And Mr
Speaker, tell lady that was
painful. That was unpleasant. We
don't want to go back to that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Again. I do want to commend you
on this. This piece of
legislation. Um
So
I think other things I'm hearing
about it or how this industry
has
Is, um
What is the word innovative and
bringing new technologies and,
you know innovation, too.
Two.
Oh, I'm not sure who Mr Speaker
as far as it be having sound
environmental type of policies
with those technologies or
innovation. I'm very clear about
that. But concerned about it as
well. I feel like we in through
this piece of legislation. We
are going to be able to prepare
for the future better if there
is a bust, which
Predictably, there is going to
be at some point. I think that
this is this puts us in a place
where we are meeting some of the
demands from the E T A that we
have in place and I feel like
this is this is this is really
sound this, but this is in a
better place as a state and and
as
You know, being fiscally
responsible, Mr. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, would you could you
expand? Maybe on
How those, Maybe the innovation
of what this bill does for our
state. If if you will, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady this
bill
Hmm. In a sense, it's an
approximation.
So, Mr Speaker. Generally the
gentleman from San Juan
Question the need for a cap.
Um
To question the need for a cap.
And you know if the gentleman
from San Juan brought the
amendment
Removing the cap. You know, that
might be a friendly amendment.
Um, what we're doing here is
we're allowing one of our
constitutional officers, the
state land Commissioner.
To fulfill her legal
responsibility.
To maximize revenues from state
trust lands.
The extra state trust lands go
into a permanent
Fun fund.
For the benefit of the
beneficiaries, which are
Schools.
The common schools, the school
for the Death the University of
New Mexico hospitals, the state
hospital Kerry Tinley Hospital
that the New Mexico Miners
hospital.
In universities already
mentioned the universities.
The this This permanent fund is
important and we're trying to
Facilitate the constitutional
duty that is imposed not only on
The land commissioner.
But on the legislature itself.
We are also subject to this
mandate.
And we have restricted the
ability in the past.
We're trying to fix that now.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
As that was great. Thank you. I
really like those answers. Um,
during this debate, also heard
about profits.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Will the increased royalty rate
be a significant hit to the
industry?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
The gentleman from Lee Chavez.
And then he said, it's not that
big a deal.
There's more about the industry
than I do. I'll admit that
And he said, it's not that big a
deal to the industry.
It's a big deal to land Grant
Permanent fund.
I mean, I you know.
Well, hello proposals this
session because we have all
this.
Revenue that
You know, we're gonna start a
program with 40 million or 100
million.
That's a lot of money.
And this number starts with a B.
A billion dollars to the Land
Grant permanent fund.
That's significant.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. I couldn't agree with
you more.
I think that their lives when
we're talking about profits, and
those
Those that have been in the past
Before we had the permanent fund
in place. There were big winners
and losers when it came to
profitability. I think the
permanent fund being in place
and having the
That his has created a balance
for us. In a sense, they're
still winners and losers. I
still feel like
This industry has huge profit
margins.
But within the industry there
are bigger.
Companies and smaller companies.
So
Would this affect the small the
small companies or the smaller
businesses? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker, Giulini,
first off, it doesn't affect any
existing list.
Right. The existing lease has a
rate written into the lease and
that that leans if it remains in
production. That rate.
We'll continue. Mr Speaker
generally in terms of does it
affect smaller producers.
My information is that on these
premium tracks
Most of bids are coming from the
big operators. You know, it's
not the smaller producers in the
big operators. They recognize
that this is a fair price. They
recognize that this is what
they're paying in Texas. They
recognize that this is what
they're paying on private land.
And it's a cost of doing
business.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think this is a
very sound, bill. I think that
this is this is direction, and I
think it's a long time coming
that we actually are enacting
this and again. I might have
missed this. I think I heard
something Mr Speaker that there
are other states that are
already doing this or we're not
even in line with with
There. The percentage amounts
that they're working with. Is
that correct? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker.
Generally the there are, um
there are a variety of royalty
rates across Western states. We
heard about the study of 11
Western states. Um, what This is
really aimed at is the Permian
Basin, which exists in New
Mexico and Texas.
And so if we if we
Don't focus on really even all
of New Mexico. So we're not
talking about the San Juan
Basin. We're not talking about
others in New Mexico. We're
certainly not talking about, you
know other Western states. We're
really talking about the Permian
Basin between Texas and New
Mexico, the best counties for
production that happened to be
in New Mexico even though a
majority of the basin is
situated in Texas.
That's what we're talking about.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
again.
This is this is very sound and
you have my full support.
And my vote on this piece of
legislation. I feel like if we
could do even more, um
In regards to some of the work
that needs to be done to address
some of the needs from our
state. I fully support that.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker. Thank you for the time.
There is for debate. The other
gentleman from San Juan, the one
with the best hair for real this
time represent every Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr.
Speaker. Um
I know you resemble that remark.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
from
Sandoval and Santa Fe. Do you
yield
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I yield
Ms Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
The
Uh, just looking at the range.
Of, um
The royalty rate. We're looking
currently we're at between
18.82.
To 20%.
But now we're gonna be 18.8 to
25%.
So we've been talking mostly
about the premium leases.
But I'm wondering now with
there's been very little
discussion as to what's going to
happen.
To the other.
Uh, the other end.
I'm concerned that the low ends
18.8.
And I know that will be
available.
As a lease rate. But what
changes will happen between the
18.8 and 25%. That's a pretty
big gap. That's a
Six point
A 6.2% gap.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um
So, uh,
One of your colleagues, uh,
corrected me. I was saying that
99%
The lands are leased and he
corrected me and said it was
99.2 so I feel I must specify
it's it's not 18.8. It's 18.75
for the record.
Um, that that rates these that
that bottom rate stays in place,
So we're not raising that We're
not increasing that.
They're still tracks that they
may go for that rate.
In that is the
That's a development track.
There are other tracks. There
are exploratory tracks at 12.5.
There are discovery tracks at
16.66.
So
What we're doing is expanding
the range. We're not lowering
the body. We're not raising the
bomb of the range. We're
expanding the upper end of the
range and we're not changing
these other types of leases for
for lands that aren't um
There were not as confident will
be big producers and Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the other gentleman
from San Juan suggested that we
were charging this rate on
unexplored lands.
And that's not the case.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
guess the question I have,
though, is it appears like now
that there is a possibility.
Because of the expanded rate.
That all of those that qualify
But even those that might be on
the lower end could now go for
22% 23%, and not that high the
highest 25%. I'm just wondering
how many of the new tracks
potentially would be affected.
not just the premium or not just
the highest
Level.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I guess I
see your point that
Instead of capping out at 20.
There could be a 21% leased or
something like that in Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I think it,
um
You know again, it depends on
the factors involved. It depends
on the location of the land. It
depends on the size of the land,
Apparently larger tracks go for
more than than smaller tracks.
Um, it depends on other geologic
factors known to the land office
that they put into a in
assessment and they come up with
a proposal.
And they put once they once they
run the numbers.
They have a proposal they put on
a website.
Energy that
And they see if anyone wants it.
And in most cases
They're sought after
You know if there was a case
where no one wanted it at that
royalty rate.
They could take it back, and
then just that royalty, right?
So thank you, Mr Mr Speaker and
gentlemen is at the expectation
that that
If a rate is out there and
And no one bites that we would
go back out with a different
rate Is that do you believe
that's the likelihood?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
My impression is and this is I'm
not an expert on this. It
doesn't happen very often.
But it does happen and it can
happen. So so they're not, um
They're not putting out
potential leases, thinking
they're not going to be least
let's put it that way.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, there was a little
bit of a discussion about market
rate. I guess that's been
discussed a few times by a
couple of folks.
But
I believe in your presentation.
You were stating that
Um
That the
The federal rate.
I believe 12.2 or 12.6. Is that
is that correct? 16.67, Mr.
Speaker, Tom. Okay, Thank you,
16.67.
And then
Private lands. Was it at 25%? Is
that correct? So so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, you know my
information is that private
lands again in the Permian are
getting 25%. There are none of
these restrictions placed on the
private lands so they're free to
negotiate that rate.
So thank you for that, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I guess
I guess that's what I'm saying.
I think
Outside of government.
That would be considered.
Market rate. I would assume if
that's where we're at, and
that's where the people are
generally free to to negotiate.
Then they're they're they're
around 25%.
But I believe in your
discussion. You stated that when
we're looking at the federal
leases were there's a much
higher cost to do business with
the federal
With the federal government
because, frankly, the turnaround
time and other restrictions on
federal lands were greater than
that on state lands. Is that
correct? Um, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes.
So it is my understanding.
That it's even easier to do work
with.
Private landowners.
A lot of these restrictions and
a lot of things that that that
happened on state lands that
there's even less restriction on
private land. So it seemed to me
that
If we were setting the rate
properly, it should be somewhere
between
Where it's easiest to do
business on private lands where
it's hardest to do business and
more restriction and more cost
to do business on federal lands.
It seems like we should be
somewhere between
25% and
17%
And that's where we are
currently.
I'm just if we're if we're going
to look at the cost to do
business, it's much less
expensive to do it on private
land. Would you not agree?
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
You know, I don't know that I
would say that, um
For a couple of reasons. One
when you're dealing with the
state Land office.
You're dealing with a team of
professionals who do this day in
and day out.
And I think that there's a
benefit to that if you're
dealing with a private
landowner.
Like. Maybe it's a prime parcel,
but it's their only one. And
they haven't been through this
before.
And you know they don't have the
forms. They don't have the
experience and they're sort of
muddling through. That might be
difficult.
Second, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
they're still costs involved.
You know, there's still
There's still bonding
requirements such as they are
there. There's other compliance
rules there. You know there is a
regulatory regulatory framework.
That exists in the oil and gas
industry separate and apart from
the land office and what makes
the land office different.
Is that, like the land office is
not the O. C D right there, not
the regulatory agency.
The land offices. The landlord
We own these mineral rights, you
know, so it's a different
relationship is different.
Again, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
My understanding my belief, my
hope.
Is that the land office?
Is professional and courteous
and responsive. And as my expert
mentioned to me earlier
Pick up the phone.
You know, if someone has a
question they can call him and
talk to him and talk to a real
person, Mr Speaker, German that
that might not be possible.
With the federal agency and Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, it honestly
might not be possible with a
private individual.
You know who's not in this
business and not, you know,
sitting there by the phone
waiting to answer it.
So I appreciate that Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, maybe I Maybe
it's a little bit of a apples
and oranges discussion here. So
let me go. Maybe two more of an
apples to apples comparison.
Um, the
State of Texas. We also during
this debate we know is also at
25%. But Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, are you aware
Of the reputation of doing
business in Texas versus doing
it in New Mexico.
Speaker and gentlemen, are you
aware that
People in the industry view
working in New Mexico is more
difficult than working in Texas
with Texas Land office.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. You know,
I'm not aware of that I do. I am
aware of the difference between
the state and the feds.
And I think that's
I think that's widely
understood, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I would note that
production is growing faster.
In New Mexico, then is in Texas.
So even if they may still be a
producing US, I think we're
getting close. We're growing.
Because we're successful. We're
successful not only because we
have this resource which is
just you know, that's
It is what it is. It is. It is
where it is.
But because we're managing it in
a way that facilitates again
going back to the constitutional
duty.
Um, to to put these lands to use
And in my senses, and I haven't
Talk to the people in the
industry. You comparing Texas,
New Mexico, But my sense is the
land office is doing a good job.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, I would suggest that the
folks who
Tell us that it's harder to do
business in New Mexico are still
doing business in New Mexico
because of the 5% difference
between New Mexico and Texas.
That they're willing to put up
with more that they're willing
to be threatened by the
governor.
They're willing to.
Frankly,
Because of the that difference
in profit.
Is the only reason Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, they're still
doing work in New Mexico. And I
guess if we pass this, uh we'll
see they'll just they'll make
that decision with their
pocketbook. They'll make that
decision that will be a business
decision.
And we'll see if it's if we now
are gonna in that one area where
Texas that one area Texas
charges more than New Mexico.
Even though we charge more in
many other areas than Texas.
Um
Well, see, I believe when this
passes out, the governor signs
it.
We'll see. We'll see if they're
still willing to be taken up to
the governor's office and
threatened in the positions they
don't want to take.
Threatening the positions, Mr
Speaker that, uh, that put the
the homegrown producers against
the bigger producers who can
afford it. So anyhow, I
appreciate the debate, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
For the debate. Gentlemen from
Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Santa Fe and
Sandoval
Yield.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I yield
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um
Would you agree that Texas and
New Mexico
Do you have a competition when
it comes to the premium basis,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I suppose it depends on what you
mean by competition. You know,
11 thing that we're clear on,
you know, with these resources.
Um
You can't move the resource. You
know that the premium
You can pick up and move the
Permian.
The There's been some discussion
about renewables. Um
You know, I know there are maps
like I have this map of its the
land office. But it's also
different types of land that the
land office
Controls. I've seen maps of like
the best wind areas in New
Mexico. You know, they've
They've done the stay. They've
meant that you know that So
there's some premium places to
do. Wind and other places aren't
as windy.
But I will say, like the solar
potential of New Mexico.
Is pretty substantial and pretty
widespread. So if you're
thinking about doing a solar
installation, that's a section
or more.
You know you have a lot of the
flexibility about where to put
that.
If you're doing oil and gas
drilling, you don't have that
same level of flexibility.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I'm actually
talking about what your build
deals with.
And that's raising the royalty
rates on
The extraction on state land.
Um, so my question is
Raising the rates here in New
Mexico just to meet
The rates in Texas.
When
Right now. Texas has the highest
rates in the country.
Mexico, still at 20% has a
Mexico, still at 20% has the
second highest in the country.
There are other states that are
down around 16%. Would you agree
with that? Mr gentlemen from
Santa Fe and Sandoval?
So
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I guess
the reason I was giving you the
answer that I did was
The idea that in terms of
competition that you can't just
go to a different state.
And get a better rate because
I guess, In a sense you could
You can go to
Wyoming or Arizona. Arizona
doesn't have oil production. You
feel some other state and get
lower rate.
But you're not gonna get the
same protection. You're not
gonna be in the Permian.
And so that's why I was trying.
I was trying to answer your
question about competition that
the competition is limited
because of
The resource involved and it's
sickening fixed nature and Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, it's also
been discussed at some length.
That these lands owned by the
Land office. These premium
tracks.
Are 99.2% leased already.
So massive demand. We're not.
We're not out there wondering
where all the lessees
Like you put these leases up on
The website.
And they could least
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm glad you
clarified that it is not that
that's important.
The my point. Gentlemen from
from Santa Fe and Sandoval.
Is that we should be doing more
into Mexico to attract
businesses. Even at 99.2%. We
should be doing everything we
can to keep those leases in New
Mexico.
And I think raising the rates at
this point where we're flush
with cash.
I think, in my opinion is a bad
idea.
And I would argue that keeping
the rates at 20% would attract
those businesses when those
leases do go up for auction. We
need to be doing everything in
New Mexico.
To keep those leases going here.
Because
There was argument earlier or
there was there was discussion
earlier about how how
Great of a job.
The state Land office does about
managing these lands and how
much money we put into schools
and hospitals. We need to make
sure
Even with the fluctuation in
prices that we keep that level
of state land State trust land
leased out. So my my point, Mr
General, gentlemen from
Because we need to
Be as friendly as possible to
the industry that funds so much
of what we try to accomplish.
As a government and supplying
roads in hospitals and schools
and
Even the capital outlay that we
Uh,
All want to be able to take back
to our districts.
Raising these rates would they
affect? Uh, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, would they wouldn't
affect the leases.
In place right now, but we have
to look to the future.
When those leases do if they do
come up.
We need to make sure that we're
attracting those businesses to
New Mexico and that they don't
go to Texas. And that was my
point about the competition with
Texas.
Um, my argument. Mr Speaker
Kind, gentlemen. Is that raising
the rates right now?
Um, is a bad idea.
We're talking about billions and
billions of dollars that were
already taking in. We need to
keep that money here in New
Mexico.
Um, it's not a question. It's
just a statement.
So I appreciate your time. Kind,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Gentle lady from Bernard Leong.
Mr Speaker, this matter, having
been under consideration for
three hours, I moved to close
debate motion to close debate
All those in favor.
Signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed name.
The ice habit debate is closed.
Back to the sponsor, Gentlemen
from Sandoval and Santa Fe too
close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, members of the body
in our our political discourse
today.
Um, Sometimes we obscure
Nuance and complexity and we go
to extremes. We have
Yes, my way or the highway or
you're either with us or against
us.
You know, there's most of all we
do is complicated in nuanced.
This bill. You know, Mr Speaker
members about you? I really
struggled to find the nuance in
this bill.
This bill is oil, oil and gas
companies.
In school kids.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, Liam
I'm a parent. I have school age
kids.
You know they were using the
permanent fund to fund their
education.
All of our kids.
Both now and in the future.
And I think that's really
important.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, members
of the party. I want to assure
my colleagues on my right
I get it like we appreciate the
gas companies.
They make what we're doing
possible.
They provide good jobs.
I get it.
But this this isn't a
regulation. This isn't something
new. This is. This is these are
mineral rights that we own.
That we hold in trust.
This is it's not a tax.
It's not a fee. It's not a
regulation.
This is a fair and reasonable
bill.
That
Needs are legal duty.
Two.
Braised money for our permanent
fund.
Four kids.
Now and in the future.
And Mr Speaker, members of body
I urge everyone to vote for this
bill. I think this is a great
bill.
And with that, Mr Speaker, I
move the hospital 48 do now pass
on final passage of house Bill
48. The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is now closed by a vote of
39 in the affirmative 28 in the
negative house, Bill 48 has only
passed his house members point
of personal privilege, please,
Your point. Mr Speaker. I would
like to explain my vote. What
this bill will effectively do is
put our small producers out of
business. They are bringing in
money to our state and our local
economies as well.
Whenever we see bills like this
come up, even though this
industry does provide over 50%
of the state's budget, we are
spending it like there's no
tomorrow pun intended. Mr
Speaker if we want to keep New
Mexico viable, with all the new
departments that have been
created and all the new money,
new monies that come from the
oil and gas industry have been
spent, folks
You are telling the industry we
really don't want to hear,
Especially the small producers.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you very
much. Just a quick housekeeping
announcement. We're going to go
back to messages and then
committee reports. We have a
bill that is ready to go up to
the fourth floor, its judicial
salaries, so we're going to make
That, um, take care of and then
Also, there will be dinner
served for all members of the
house and all of the staff.
It will be adjacent to the
lounge. I believe at about 630.
I believe it's LaChiusa.
So there you go generated from
Burnley. Oh, Mr Speaker. I move
to go to that order of business
messages. Objection. It is so
ordered to read message from the
Senate. Mr. Speaker. I'm
directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate Bill three as amended and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Sheri Dillon Johansson and Chief
Clerk message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 169 as
amended. SENATE Bill 236 Senate
Bill 241 with the emergency
clause and requests the
concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry D.
Luhan. Senate chief message will
be entered message from the
Senate. Mr Speaker, I'm directed
to inform the House that the
Senate has passed Senate Bill
142.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 190
request The concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted.
Sheri Dillon Wan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House Bill 141 as amended
by the House and return. Same
here with respectfully
submitted. Sheri Dillon, Senate
chief clerk.
That's it from Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I hope you go to
that order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr Speaker you're enrolling in
and grossing committee to him
has been referred. House Bill
141, as amended has had it under
consideration in reports that
same has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory signing by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair.
Adoption. Mr Chair. Adoption of
Federal Committee report on
House Bill 141 as amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
House Bill 141 as amended All
those in favor xenophobia C nine
possibles knee, The Ice Havoc
Committee report adopted that
the record reflect that the duly
enrolled in the girls' copies of
House Bill 41, as amended, were
signed by the officers of the
House in Open session.
Generally from Borloo. Mr
Speaker. I move we go to that
order Business third reading of
legislation. Objection is
ordered.
Gentlemen, from Cibola, McKinley
burn Leos and want to Valencia.
Representative Garcia, Are you
ready?
An item number 33, Mr Speaker.
But the record reflect that
election is served, replacing
House Bill 298, as amended on
final passage has been thank
apologies, Speaker Hold on, Hold
on
Gentlemen from early Are you
ready? An item 23.
Give me that point, Mr Speaker
that the record effect that
election is safer place in house
Bill 302 on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate Amendment of
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. But before I end do the
bill. I would like to introduce
my expert witness. Uh, the
gentleman's name is Bob Carroll.
He's United States. Marine
Corps. Vietnam veteran
And ironic that 55 years ago.
We're both in Vietnam and those
he plays seems same location in
Vietnam. I was there about nine
months before he was so I really
round them up and he's here. My
extra witness for the small
world, Mr Speaker.
Welcome to the House room. Mr
Speaker relating to military
providing exemption from state
licensure requirements. Mr.
Speaker. This bill does three
things. It's a bipartisan bill.
Exempt child care programs
certified by the Department of
Defense from also needed New
Mexico certification Number two
at speech force to
Definition of armed forces and
three as Notre status.
To Human Rights Act Speaker I
will stand for any questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from
Those counties to the West
Yield.
Yes, I will. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I want to stand in
support of this bill.
This bill is extremely important
to veterans spouses to the
active duty military every time
there is a base Realignment
commission that
Is put forward.
Because New Mexico has such a
small state has
Three basis.
We are automatically on the
list.
Department of Defense will look
at legislation like this to see
what type of support those bases
or active duty military and our
veterans have in this state. So
I stand in full support, and I
would urge the entire body to
think about how important those
bases are not only to your
districts, but to this country
and vote. Yes, Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you for the
debate. The gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Torrance.
Representative Lord. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
from Burnley another can
Please please yield.
Yes, I will.
You have to think about that for
a minute, Mr Speaker.
I'm standing to tell you that I
support this bill fully and one
of the things I appreciate The
Coast Guard is, um included,
because oftentimes you get left
out and a lot of the branches
and mainly, I wanted to tell you
Thank you so much. Both of you
for your service. And my
question for you. Um, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, Should I vote?
Yes for this bill.
Well, Mr Speaker and
General lady. Well, if you know
any better voting on it.
I think I've just been schooled
Mr Speaker, and we're voting.
Yes, for this bill. Thank you
for the debate the gentleman to
close
Mr Speaker. I want to thank you
each and every one of this body
for supporting veterans number
one. You know, these issues are
very important to everybody, not
just to our veterans, but just
two people in general because
they provide a good service.
And they come out of the
military with expertise and
allow these bar deals and it's
it's a good deal. I thank you
and every one of you, uh
Mr Speaker. Uh,
Speaker. I will move the house
Bill 30 to do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
What about the clothes?
What is not closed by vote of 65
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house, Bill 302 has
17
Yes, Mr Speaker. Will you get me
to that point that election
necessary for placing house Bill
102 s twice amended on final
passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. House
Bill 102 as amended those two
things, principally one change
the Magistrate court from a
court of to a court of record
except in cases when the
landlord tended ax is implicated
or the mobile Home Act is
implicated.
And it also makes the court of
appeals. The forum to which
appeals will be had, except for
those two exceptions, Mr Speaker
and with that I'm available for
questions. There is the
gentleman from Otero
representative Block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind gentle lady from
Los Alamos and a couple other
awesome counties. Please yield.
Mr Speaker. Gentle moment from
my old Otero. I will yield
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady. I just had a few
questions for you. I had a few
concerns. Just reading over the
bill. Mr. Speaker, General Lady.
I like the idea. I do, but I'm
wondering Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Um, have we considered the
funding for the local magistrate
courts?
Because, Mr Speaker General Lady
I know in areas like mine. We
have multiple openings right now
for administrative staff, and we
have had a hard time filling
those positions. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I know if we're
going to go to a court of record
That it will require more
manpower or woman power to do
the administrative costs of of
uploading the the audio and
things like that. So, Mr
Speaker, General lady, have we
taken those things into
consideration, especially for a
smaller counties? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, we have. And in
fact, most of the magistrate
courts already have recording
equipment and the like.
Because I believe it's their
criminal arrangements have to be
recorded so much of the system
is already in place for the
magistrate courts, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. I appreciate that.
Do we know which which courts do
not have that Mr Speaker,
General Lady out of out of all
the courts that we have in the
state. How many of them do not
do that Mr Speaker? I know of
none that do not have that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and then also
regarding these cases with the
law enforcement personnel and
the folks that we will need to
come in. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, I'm wondering, I I know
that a court of record has a lot
more scrutiny from my
understanding because, you know,
after all, it's a quarter of
record. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Well, we need increased.
Job training and other things
like that for these proceedings,
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Otero. I'm not completely sure I
understand the question.
Um, Magistrate Courts, of
course, are trained through
various processes that the
Supreme Court has implemented
and I don't and there may be
some additional training Mr
Speaker, but I don't believe it
will be a great imposition. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady, and then I see
that there's an appropriation on
your bill.
I believe it was 300,000 in my
my correct in that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the appropriation was
think the word is stricken.
Um as one of the amendments that
or it was referenced in
originally with the bill.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, And then was this
Was the 300 included in the
house built to that we passed or
was it just stricken entirely
exist? Unnecessary. Mr Speaker
Generating speaker gentlemen it
was stricken because it's
largely unnecessary at this
point, as I noted the recording
equipment and the like, is
pretty much in place in the in
the Magistrate Court says it is
There may be one of just all or
two additional staff members
necessary for the court of
Appeals, but that appropriation
as being put off to a later
date, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady that does help me
with that question, and then
regarding the Court of appeal, I
believe your bill changed that
Mr Speaker generally. Could you
just go over that for me? Real
quick.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Currently the Magistrate court
decisions are appealed to the
District Court and what we call
de Novo. That means the case
that is at issue can be tried
like it never was tried once, so
it's a brand new trial and then
again, it can be appealed to the
court of appeal, So that's three
bites at the apple. Mr Allen in
theoretically, depending on the
type of claim it could go to the
Supreme Court, so that's three
or four bites at the same case.
In this instance Except for the
two exceptions that I noted Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, the
appeal will go directly to the
court of Appeals. It will be
what we call the record, meaning
it will. Um, the appellant will
have to show error at the
magistrate level, not get a
brand new trial, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady that
that is just one question I had
from folks in my area they
wanted to know which court they
would be appealing to. So that
that does help me with that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, and then
do you know currently I don't
know if you might have these
debts how what percentage of
these cases are indeed appealed.
Currently with the non
Record of record Magistrates
right now.
I have some information. Um
gentlemen.
If I'm reading my information
correctly, it looks like it.
It's fewer than 200 cases. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady And I guess this
this court of record we're
requiring this because we want
to make sure that those 200
Would indeed be able to be
appealed directly to the
Appeals court. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker? Generally, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, that's
one of the benefits, but
frankly, it's good. I think,
just practice to have, um,
courts recorded so that if
there's a question about what
was said in any kind of
situation, we have a record of
it, and we can always follow up
to make sure that
Uh, whatever happened is can be
defined appropriately, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and I do appreciate
that. I think probably security
wise. It's good to have like a
video, at least of the
proceedings. If that's
available, Mr Speaker, General
Lady does this specify what kind
of recording we're looking for.
Is it just audio is it is it
transcribed? What are we looking
for? In this, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I believe it's audio
recording that we're talking
about.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, And then would it
later be transcribed or
Is it just audio like a wave
file or or MP three or whatever,
Mr Speaker? General Lady, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there is the
ability for someone to have it
transcribed if they so choose,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady. So then I guess
These are court records, so I
doubt they're Ipra Bull. But Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm just
wondering if someone requested
this. This data they wanted it
transcribed that would I believe
Incur costs. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, have we spoken to
the Magistrates on the local
levels to see if that
Could be a concern of theirs
regarding the cost
administratively.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
My recollection on that is if
one wants a copy of the
recording. There's one has to
pay for it. And I can't give you
the details on that, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but I believe there
is a fee associated with getting
recording.
Understood, Mr Speaker General
waiting. But could I could I
then asked for a transcript as
well, Or would I only be allowed
to get the recording? That's
kind of what I wanted to know.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't know
the answer to that.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. I appreciate the answers I
still had. You know some
concerns regarding
administrative costs and sing no
appropriation.
I really want to understand a
little more about how this will
affect our local Magistrates,
especially in places like my
county where we're really
looking for staff right now. And
so, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
just really hope that this will
help, but I do not want it to
negatively impact our our local
counties. Magistrates, So I
really appreciate the answers.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker
and General Lady.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
still debate the generated from
Burnley or representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and with
the general lady from Los
Animals Yield, Mr Speaker in
General Lady from burning Well,
yes, I yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady, um
A magistrate court is, um
Magistrate Judges don't have to
be lawyers as I'm sure, you
know.
And they are throughout the
state of New Mexico except in
Burnley, Oh County and except in
Um Dona Ana County as far as I
know.
And they serve a purpose. Mr
Speaker, General Lady to be a
people's court.
Um, Would you agree with that?
Um, Mr Speaker in General Lady.
I know that people sometimes
refer to it is that it's a
score, Mr Speaker and all the
appropriate safeguards and due
process requirements I believe
are as applicable there as it
would be in any other court, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, but
parties come into the Magistrate
court.
Ah frequently and represent
themselves. They are not
required to have an attorney
and, in fact the magistrate
judge himself or herself is not
required to have an attorney. Is
that right?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Um,
many people appear pro SE and
Magistrate Court just as many
people appear proceed in
District Court.
Madam speaker, Mr Speaker and
generated
Madam speaker. I'm
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady, um
At least when I was active and
practicing and trial courts.
there were very few people ever
who appeared in District Court
by themselves, and certainly
Ah, the process. That's Mr
Speaker General Lady that's
envisioned here, which is
instead of a child, The novo in
District court. The party's
Anybody who wanted to appeal the
decision would go to the Court
of Appeals. Um and there's I
think it's probably pretty fair
statement that there's very few
people who appear pro se.
Before the New Mexico Court of
Appeals.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I'm I'm concerned that accepting
criminal cases and
I actually wouldn't object to
this proposal in criminal cases
because the cost of the record
and other things, Mr Speaker,
General Lady in criminal cases
is going to be borne by the
state.
But in civil cases
Mr Speaker, General Lady, the
party whose appealing is going
to have to bear that expense,
and it's been many years since I
practiced as a child lawyer, but
even back then it was incredibly
expensive to have a transcript
prepared. Um, recordings are
An awkward way to do it because
they're often not very good.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Often the courts don't even have
really real recording
experience, or, uh,
Equipment.
Um, And so I'm concerned that we
are creating a barrier for
people.
Of low income to be able to come
into a court and have their case
heard reach a decision and if
necessary, take it up to the
next level.
Ah, that in civil cases, this
will be quite a financial burden
on litigants. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, I've just I have
Carl Rice thick ice strict rice
trick.
Where the administrative offices
of the court This is a Supreme
Court bill. He informed me that,
um, CDs is what is the mechanism
that is used in there? $3
A. C D.
Mr Speaker, General Lady CV.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, yes as
a recording.
Or C D.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes, A
C D. Sorry. Sorry, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I misunderstood
the last letter.
Um
Well, again. I having having
tried cases in which we were
using that kind of, uh
What do you call that? That kind
of technology often lead to
rather bad.
Recordings and
Um
I guess what I hear you saying,
Mr Speaker, General Lady is that
the New Mexico Court of Appeals
is now willing to have CD
transcripts as opposed to
written transcripts. And what
about the briefs where they was
that done?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, uh,
The current practice of the
quarters of hills. Is it
expected?
To accept CD recordings, not
transcripts, so just to clarify
a lot has changed since I
stopped practicing in terms of
how appeals and whatnot have
happened, so I think we need to
take that in account and not
perhaps reference back to when I
was practicing because things
have changed.
So that that's one point in
terms of briefing the cases that
arise, Um Mr Speaker and General
Lady from Berna, Leo is the
issues are relatively simple as
you might imagine Mr Speaker and
generating so that that in terms
of preparing the briefs, it's
not what one might expect in
terms of an extensive
Legal analysis. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
I think any lawyer who doesn't,
uh,
And I don't think that this has
changed. Any lawyer who doesn't
do a complete job.
Ah, representing their client,
and I'm assuming that at the
court of Appeals, they are going
to require that an attorney be
representing the party and so
let's first just clarify that if
you would please Mr Speaker,
That assumption is incorrect.
There is no expectation that the
person appealing would have to
have an attorney. Of course, Mr
Speaker General Lady may have an
attorney.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady for that
clarification.
Um
What's the average time since
you have an expert? There was he
average time between the filing
an appeal.
The notice of appeal in
Magistrate Court. I'm sorry in
the Court of Appeals and the
completion and a decision and
actual decision by the Court of
Appeals.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, We
don't have a number for you.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Do
you have the number of cases
that are now coming from
Magistrate Court and going to
the Court of Appeals?
Ah, for appeal. Mr. Speaker,
General lady, Um no, because
under the current process, the
appeal goes to the district
court and there is a don't do
Novo trial.
And you all right?
Um, Mr Speaker, gentle lady. And
after I did Novo trial can the
party still appeal to the Court
of Appeals? Yes, they can, in
the same kind of expense would
be associated. So what we're
talking about Mr Speaker is
someone having a trial in the
Magistrate court appealing to
the district court in their
costs associated with that?
And then a transcript required
from the district Court to be
filed with the appellate court.
So we're multiplying the level
of expenses. Mr Speaker and
gentle lady by at least one
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. That
wasn't my point. My point is how
many cases are going that
started? Magistrate Cord Go to
dinner oval trial in the
District court and then go on
up.
To the court of Appeals. Mr.
Speaker. Um my expert does not
know because the district court
is a de novo trial, so it's
treated as the first level from
which the appeal is heard. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Fair
enough. Um so
Uh, it
And I'm not sure. Dental
General Mr Speaker, General
Lady that, um, I think I asked
what was the average time?
For the Court of Appeals. And
let's just take appeals from the
district Court whether or not
they started a magistrate. I'm
curious about how much time it's
taking for the quarter appeals
to resolve
A an appeal from the district
court.
That's made to the court of
Appeals. Mr. Speaker Generating
my expert does not know.
Um
Mr Speaker, General Lady. My
recollection and again, things
have changed, but I don't know
that the court system has become
faster, but often it would take
several years.
Certainly a year and possibly
even longer than a year to get
decisions.
Would your expert disagree with
that?
Yeah.
Mr Speaker. My expert says it
varies and of course, it would
depend on the complexity. So the
complexity of a magistrate
appeal to the court of Appeals
would be much different than
let's say a securities and
exchange type case that is
appealed from the district Court
to the Court of Appeals.
Mr Speaker, General lady, Uh,
And what is the going rate if
your expert nose or you know for
a and a pellet lawyer to present
a case in the court of Appeals
Misters, Mr Speaker. Generally,
the question you asked was, what
does it cost for a person to
engage a lawyer to go to the
Court of Appeals?
Mr Speaker at yes to represent
him before the court of Appeals.
Mr Speaker again that that would
vary, but it would be the
similar to an appeal from the
district court to the Court of
Appeals.
And Mr Speaker, General Eddie,
could we agree that often those
attorneys fees run well,
probably always run into the
thousands of dollars. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I can't
answer that It could be and I
don't know what into $1000 over
$1000 means it could be $5000 or
it could be $2000. Mr. Speaker,
or it could be 10,000. I'm not
sure what
What? You're asking me, Mr.
Speaker. Generally, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm just simply,
uh
Referencing the fact that we are
imposing an additional cost a
substantial cause because
appellate
Lawyers are not cheap.
Ah, um on what should be a
people's court, and I just think
that we're putting a burden on
people on people who have not
the ability to pay a lot for
lawyers. And I think that that
is, in a sense, a denial of
access to the courts, and that's
my concern.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
appreciate your concern.
But as I said,
It removes one level of review,
so the expense will be less. And
I say that Mr Speaker, General
Lady because
The individual who would have
been appealing to the district
court now may go directly to the
Court of Appeals. We have
removed one step, Mr Speaker,
General lady and there is
expense associated with trying a
case Do Novo in District Court.
I think we have to acknowledge
that fact.
Mr Speaker, General Lady and one
additional point misdemeanors
and Magistrate Court the
individual if we're talking
criminal law because there is a
criminal component to magistrate
Receive a public defender and
those as you know, Mr Speaker
and generally are absorbed by
the state. Thank you.
Mr Speaker, General lady, And as
I noted, I don't have a problem
with this before.
Criminal cases because in fact
the state will pay for the
record and they will pay for a
great There's public defender
and so we're not creating a
barrier.
To the court system in a
different in a civil case, and I
appreciate your answers to my
questions. I I think it's not a
good idea to create.
Economic and artificial
barriers.
If we can avoid it.
Between the people and the
judicial system. But thank you
for your answers. There's
further debate. The gentleman
from San Juan representative
Lean
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
generated from Los Alamos,
Sandoval and Santa Fe. Yield Mr
Speaker.
Gentlemen from San Juan, Coney.
I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
generated from Los Alamos, So I
listened to debate from the
generally from Bernard, Leo. And
and I I I think she makes some
great points on the civil side.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, generated
from Los Alamos, where I where I
part ways with the generated
from Benaglio as I think,
actually the criminal piece.
Is actually more concerning for
me, frankly. So, Mr Speaker,
generally from Los Alamos, can
you explain? Why are we
exempting the tenants and I
don't disagree, But I don't know
the rationale.
Why are exempting the tenants
within the Landlord Tenant Act
and the Mobile Home Park Act? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because
there are very short statutory
deadlines for which to file a
case for evictions and the likes
and we needed to get them, you
know, to provide access to a
court that could address those
Cases quickly and as I'm sure,
you know, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from San Juan, the
district courts are a bit more
cumbersome. Mr. Speaker,
generally from Los Alamos, want
to make sure that people are not
of house and home, right? I
think that's I think that's
admiral and I don't disagree
with that rationale.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
from
Both Selma's Can you explain the
rationale, though, for removing
The de Novo component for the
criminal pieces for the criminal
cases that magistrate courts
have jurisdiction over Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Because we are
Attempting to streamline in the
following way, Magistrate Court
You're entitled to a jury.
In the full, you know, um,
trial, of course for due process
purposes, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
De Novo. You go to District
Court. And remember if you want
to have attorney Of course you
can sew their expenses
associated with that.
If if you if you don't qualify
for a public defender, and then
Mr Speaker, you go to district
court.
Yet again another jury another
trial.
Witnesses and police officers
have to return again. So it is a
redundant
Process. We're not trying to
deny anyone due process, of
course, but two separate trials
is excessive, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker generated from Los
Alamos, So I would submit the
reason why Magistrate courts
have jurisdiction to begin with
over any criminal cases. I think
the civil makes sense for under
10,000, but for any criminal
case, that's because
Some of these issues if it goes
to a trial.
The right decision is made and
we can. We can call those cases
out. They don't get appealed. I
think that makes sense for your
level of lower level offenses.
But Mr Speaker generated from
Los Alamos. That's not always
the case. And so I'm concerned
about the standard of review.
When it comes to findings of
fact.
So Mr Speaker generated from
Alice Elmo's. If it's a It's a
conclusion of law.
Then the Court of Appeals and
the Supreme Court are going to
look at that with essentially
what we might commonly call it
had been over. They're going to
They're going to make their own
conclusions about
About a conclusion of law. Um
Independent of the magistrate
Judge. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, I think
that's generally correct, right?
Mr Speaker, generally from Los
Alamos, But when it comes to
findings effect, and I
understand that I have the right
to a trial by jury.
Right. But within that context,
the judges the referee, and so
he or she is going to make
evidentiary rulings on
objections, he or she is going
to make motion rulings that
involved findings of fact, and
so that I think fundamentally,
is my concern.
Is when it comes to the standard
of review when it comes to
findings of fact. So can you
explain the body? What is the
Standard review on appeal for
findings of fact, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from San Juan on in
terms of findings of fact that
deference is given by the
appellate court to the fact
finder. That's typical in both
Magistrate
And District court and that is
currently the case Now.
Currently the case now the rules
of evidence apply Mr Speaker and
gentlemen in magistrate courts
and the judges are trained and
retrained and how to apply those
rules and find appropriate
facts Mr Speaker generated from
Los Alamos, Can you explain to
the body of the difference in
the requirements?
To hold the district judge seat
versus a metric
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
for a district court seat. You
have to be an attorney and for a
magistrate court, See, you may
be an attorney, but you may not
be an attorney.
So, Mr Speaker, generally from
Los Angeles just to be clear
that what what are the statutory
and constitutional requirements
to be a magistrate, Judge, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, you have
to be over 18. I believe Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, generally from
Los Alamos, just so the body
understands this. This is a real
difference, right? It's nice to
have a trial by jury, but the
judge has a very
Influential say in the process
because, as a lawyer
If I stand up to object to a
piece of evidence being offered
And I'm the defendant in my
civil liberties or potentially
being taken away.
Do I want someone who's trained
as a juris doctorate who has
trial experience as an attorney.
And this is not a knock against
master judges. But it's just the
reality. Or do you want someone
that the only requirement is
that they want a political
education election and they're
over the age of 18 to me.
It's way more important that we
have a backstop to protect
people's civil liberties from
being
Can find and right now,
currently that backstop is Isa
defendant if I'm found guilty
I can appeal the addition court
and get a brand new bite at the
Apple.
And I understand that that takes
resources from prosecutors from
public defenders and from the
system in and of itself. I I
understand that
But we're talking about people's
civil liberties. And so I think
when you talk about the
difference in training for the
referee
It's a huge difference, and I've
tried cases in both district
court.
And in the magistrate court
level and again. This is not a
knock against the metric court
because they have a role to
feeling they do a very good job
of filling that role.
But where there is a difference
in how those trials are handled.
And so, Mr Speaker.
General lady from Los Alamos. I
I understand.
What we're trying to do here,
but
I'm concerned about again. The
liberties piece of what we're
potentially taking away from
individuals. So, Mr Speaker,
generally from from Los Alamos,
can you share with the body?
What are the what are the
potential penalties that I could
face as a defendant and
magistrate Court for a typical
misdemeanor offense?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, just to
clarify a point of our previous
conversation. Um
Individuals are entitled to a
jury trial and magistrate Court
just as they are in District
court, And in that case, the
jury would be the fact finder
in. So we've been talking about
the judge just to clarify for
the body. It isn't always the
judge and in terms of and also
we mentioned the right to a
public defender as appropriate,
given income levels, so
In many cases, the individual
is represented in Magistrate
Court. If it is a criminal case,
and they are tried by a jury, so
just be clear about that. And in
terms of your questions about
penalties, someone could be
sentenced to up to 364 days in
Jail.
Mr Speaker, generally from Los
Alamos and or $1000, Fine is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
from Los Alamos we're talking
about basically a year of your
life that's on the line here and
end up to $1000. So to the point
that was spoken about re
clarification.
Yes, I can request a trial by
jury. I can be given a public
defender because I'm facing
potential jail time. That's not
my issue of concern.
My issue is the referee right to
put it in layman's terms. That's
the rub here is not the fact
that the jury is going to miss
the mark. I actually trust the
jury system quite a bit.
It's the referee.
That when I stand up and make an
objection on behalf of my
criminal defendant client
And say, Mr Speaker generally
from Los Alamos, I object to
this line of questioning. I
object to this document being
admitted into evidence.
The referee that makes the
decision that's going to impact
the evidence that the jury
hears.
Only has to be 18 years or older
and want to political election.
That's my point, and I'm facing
up to a year of my liberty being
taken away. The reason I would
submit that we need to keep the
De Novo stand there in there for
a criminal trial is they don't
always get that right. And when
we talk about the standard of
review when I now go from the
magistrate court
To the court of Appeals, and
this is why it matters.
Court of Appeals to say we're
going to defer to the finder of
fact.
We're going to assume that there
were they got it right. Unless
you can prove the contrary,
That's a very hard thing to do.
Whereas the current system that
we have which I would submit, Mr
Speaker generally from Los
Alamos needs to stay intact is
if I think the magistrate judge
messed up on the finding fact
maybe they let a piece of
evidence in that I disagreed
with or the lower the line of
questioning that I disagreed
with. I can go to the District
Court and get a brand new bite
at the Apple.
And then when the prosecutor
tries to introduce that line of
questioning, I can stand up and
object and the referee is
someone who has actual
experience and has has training
as a J. D as a lawyer to make
that decision, and I think
that's vital.
And so, Mr Speaker, general
lighting from
From Los Alamos, Y appreciate
wanting to be efficient while I
appreciate wanting to save
dollars, that's typical, the
typically the conservative
approach. I have a greater
concern about taking away
people's liberties. I think that
should be paramount over dollars
and cents, particularly at a
time in our state's history. We
were awash in cash. And so I
think this is one of those Those
pieces where
We need to make sure we're not
doing anything to lock people up
unnecessarily. So you've got the
criminal piece of this bill that
I think is very, very
problematic.
The generated from burner. Leo
raised the other side of the
coin about the civil peace.
That's very problematic how
you're creating these additional
barriers and additional expenses
for proceed. People who are
representing themselves and
civil issues, and when you
combine both of those like
again, I understand the
efficiency and I don't mind
making a quarter of record.
My problem is with the de Novo
part of this bill, and I think
it introduces a whole host of
issues. And so for that reason,
I would encourage the body to
vote against us. Not some
gentlemen, there is further
debate. The gentle lady from
Chavez, Curry and Roosevelt
representative Riebe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Will the
general lady from Los Alamos
Yield Mr Speaker, General
General Lady from
Corey and those other wonderful
counties. I happily yield to
you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Unlike my co worker here, the
gentleman from San Juan County I
actually really like this bill.
I've seen seeing this happen and
being abused so much in the
magistrate level. Where
I feel, madam, Mr Speaker and
General lady that I see these
individuals just going to trial
just because they can and then I
also see a process. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, where there's a
lot of unprofessionalism because
everybody knows it's not a court
of record and I wondered Mr
Speaker, General Lady, have you
Thought about that issue when
you were looking at this bill
that it's not a court of record,
so
Attorneys, as I have seen in
Paul, some pretty, um different
types of moves in Magistrate
Court because they know that
they're not going to get caught
doing it. Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Certainly
That was one of the motivators.
I think that the courts wanted
to, you know, create a court of
record at the magistrate level
because, frankly, if there's no
record
People can say and do things
that are very inappropriate, and
they're much more conscious of
following protocols procedures
and so on when it's recorded,
and it's also a mechanism to
ensure that the judge and jury
is acting appropriately in the
context of the trial as well. Mr
Speaker in general Lady
Mr Speaker, General. Thank you
for that, because I have seen
that so many times as a
prosecutor, the abuse of the
Magistrate court system because
there is no court of record and
you can get away with pretty
much whatever you want to get
away with. And magistrate court
because, you know you're gonna
get a brand new trial. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. I like
the idea of this because I've
seen I understand it.
I totally understand the
gentleman from San Juan's
counties argument, but I see it
just a little different because
I've watched these individuals
say Let's just have a trial. Why
not? I mean, we get another bite
at the Apple as soon as we go up
to district court, so
Mr Speaker. Generally, you're
about six months in in a
magistrate court trial.
And then you have your trial, Mr
Speaker, General lady, And then
there's an appeal filed brand
new trial, and a year later,
they're clogging up the district
court docket because you can't
get your big felonies on there
because you're doing these de
novo dw eyes and driving on
revocation trials, you know,
misdemeanor cases, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and I think
That would you agree that it
clogs up the district court
docket in addition to the other
issues discussed, Mr Speaker
generally? Absolutely it does.
You know it creates more work
for the district courts. People
are frustrated Mr Speaker,
generally at the speed by which
Judi cations are occurring at
the district court level.
As they should, and this is just
one more element that compounds
the lack of, um
Prompt resolution in the
district court. I would say Mr
Speaker generally and thank you,
Mr Speaker generally, and I've
seen these trials happen and
there'll be a conviction. And
then, as you stated, we go up to
District court and saying people
come back again at the same
evidence generally, while there
might be an actual city District
Court judge, it's now quarter of
record and then
The conviction generally happens
again, Mr Speaker, General lady,
So now they've had two trials
and there's no point not doing
the first one because you might
get lucky. Get an acquittal. Mr
Speaker, General lady, So why
not do that first one, and then
they go up to the next one. And
then you go to your appeal, and
it just is this long, drawn out
process that I've seen just drag
out and drag out that I believe
is unnecessary.
Mr Speaker generally, so I
actually like this bill. I would
support this bill because I
think it it really does do what
you've been describing. And if I
may add, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen into what you said.
Think of the witnesses.
In the victims who are asked to
appear in Magistrate Court.
And testify and go through the
jury process. And then again
when they're when, if, if it's
appealed to the district Court
lady, they have to go through
the trial all over again and
really have all that experience
again. So it's it's not just
about, um you know the people
who are litigating. There are
many others who are involved in
It really adds to a lack of
You know, resolution for those
who have been victimized, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and Mr
Speaker. Generally, I do agree
with that because all the
domestic violence cases are
handled in Magistrate Court.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Most of these victims are
Not very cooperative or
recanting or in that cycle of
domestic violence. So, Mr
Speaker, generally you have to
put him on the stand. Pull this
information out of them or put
them in that awkward situation
because you know you're doing
what's best for for the city or
wherever you're you know,
whoever you representing, and
then you got to drag him back in
again and often.
You know, the the relationship
has changed with the abuser
during that time frame, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
defer to you on really absolute,
you know, intimate knowledge
about what's going on in the
magistrate courts vis a vis the
district courts and you know the
kind of the traumatization that
some of the victims suffer, So I
think we need to be mindful of
what Two trials means for those
who have been victimized, Mr
Speaker and thank you for
Sharing your insights on that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady, um and thank you for the
debate. I actually really like
this bill, so I just disagree
respectfully with the gentleman
from San Juan County, and I will
definitely be supporting this
bill.
Thank you generators for the
debate. The gentleman from civil
McKinley representative Alcorn.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
generated from lists. Adam
Museum Yield, Mr Speaker
Gentleman from Cibola in
McKinley, I will yield to you.
That's the one question general
lady from left side. The most.
My understanding is when, um,
the appeal is done.
To the court of Appeals.
The court of Appeals were
basically decide whether there
was anything wrong in the
decision made by the magistrate.
Does that what we're looking at
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
McKinley and Sibila. That's
basically whether there was an
error in the application of the
law is really kind of the
standard. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
So basically, I ended up I do. I
guess I didn't. It's more than
one question with the same
question More than one ways. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, So, Mr
Speaker, if then, the Court of
Appeal finds, therefore, that
the magistrate somehow earned in
his or her decision. Well, the
case go back to the Magistrate
Court.
Um, Mr Speaker? Uh, gentlemen.
Yes, it would be much like what
the district court processes now
there would be a finding of
where there was error and there
would be a new trial in the the
the The Magistrate Court would
have gotten guidance, Mr Speaker
from the opinion directing them
where the error had been, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And, uh,
I think that would have been
brought up at the beginning. I
think everybody's questions have
been answered. Thank you, Gentle
lady. Criminal side. Almost
thank you for the debate,
gentlelady from Eddy and Lea,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady from Los Alamos,
Sandoval in Santa Fe. Please
Yield. Mr Speaker, I gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
Eddy and Lea.
Thank you very much. General
lady, Mr Speaker, So I've really
enjoyed the debate on this bill.
Um, we heard it in the house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee of the second Stop for
the bill, Mr Speaker.
And I think the debate here on
the floor has really flushed out
some issues with the bill that I
think deserve some
consideration.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady
General Lady, Could you tell us
what the amount in controversy
is for a magistrate court matter
if there is one
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady
$10,000 or less.
Thank you very much. And and Mr
Speaker. Generally, I think
that's kind of important
information because it's for
smaller amounts in controversy,
And typically, these are local
people trying to resolve a
problem locally without having
to travel too far.
And that is why, um, I think the
magistrate courts are so
important. And Mr Speaker,
General Lady I did mentioned in
appropriations. I know we're
more about the dollars of a
bill, but we also did have some
discussion on the terms and
conditions.
Under the bill and I made the
point. Mr Speaker that you have
to travel for an appeal would
actually probably, uh,
Cause fewer cases to be
considered at the next level,
and I think that is an issue.
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, would you for the sake of
the body and everybody
listening? Tell us where the
appeals court is located. Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, um to
clarify one can participate
electronically in appeals.
So I I don't think we should
assume Mr Speaker, General Lady
that someone has to appear in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe for the
appeal that as I'm as many of
you, I'm sure know, um, based on
hearing the appropriation
requests a lot now, Mr Speaker,
General Lady is done virtually
in the court system as many
other kind of formal hearings
are done. Virtually Mr Speaker
General any? Yeah.
Thank you, General Lady and Mr
Speaker, So that is correct.
However, we know there are a lot
of people it's just like taking
online classes in college.
They'd really rather do it in
person and think there are
advantages to that. But for
those who would choose to travel
to be in person, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I think we do need
to think of the travel costs
that would be involved. Probably
lodging for those who travel
from a distance for distance.
So I think In some respects,
this might actually, um because
fewer people as I said, to
pursue something at the next
level.
Um, Mr Speaker in General 80. I
think the question was asked.
How long does it take the Court
of appeals to take a case from
start to finish?
And I'm trying to think what I
heard on that. I believe Mr
Speaker. Generally, we don't
have a figure on that. Is that
correct?
That that's correct. We don't
have a figure on that.
All right. Thank you.
I think that's an important
matter. Actually, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, um
Justice Delayed Is Justice
denied? We've all heard that
phrase. And if the case that is
such that it would you know
quite a while.
For the court to hear an appeal
at the appellate level, then
I think that that could be a
true issue. So I wish we had the
number for that Mr Speaker.
Um, general lady, um, it came
up. The question was asked about
the uniform owner, Relation
Owner Resident Relations Act.
And those are landlord tenant
cases, and the question was
asked Mr Speaker, Why are they
exempted under the bill? And the
answer was that some of these
have short statutory timelines
and therefore being able to
handle it quickly locally would
be important.
Mr Speaker in General Lady. I
think there are probably a lot
of cases.
Where time is of the essence.
Maybe it's not a statutory
deadline, but there's some other
reason that has to be resolved
quickly. And so I guess my final
comment on the bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I wish
that
This was more of a may rather
than a shell.
Um, some flexibility, I think
would be good here where people
could
Um, and it wouldn't be as
streamlined as as envisioned
under the bill, but I think
having some leeway would
actually be very helpful.
Basically, let people choose
which route they'd like to go.
And and I do value. What? Um,
the representative from Curry
County had to say about
Some abusing of the system. I
think that does happen, too. But
basically, I think I'm more
persuaded by the gentleman from
San Juan, who explained the
personal liberties that are in
view here and why it's important
to perhaps be very careful about
how we vote on this bill. So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady,
Gentleman from Brutally your
representative Ream.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady from last Salomon's
yield, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Brenda Leo? Yes, I yield Mr
Speaker and General Lady. I see
this as professionalizing
magistrate courts and
I'm in strongly supported this.
It's long overdue and
You have my vote. I want
everyone to understand this is
just professionalizing
Magistrate Court. Thanks.
Thank you, gentlemen. This with
the debate, the gentle lady from
burden
You're out of Garrett. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yield to her neighbor next
door, Mr Speaker, General Lady
from Bern, Leo and dear friend
happily.
Mr Speaker and gentle woman.
First of all, I want to
compliment the LFC analyst daily
for doing a terrific job of
making what could be
complicated. Very simple.
Secondly, I want to say, um,
this makes the magistrate courts
quarter of record so
An appellate record is credited
for review by the Court of
Appeals.
Only in the event that there's
an appeal. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Generally? Yes, that's
correct. And Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, what percentage of
Magistrate courts? Ah, trials.
actually are appealed. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, Lady.
Less than half a percent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
Lady.
And then, um, this means for us
non lawyers of which I am a
proud non lawyer. This means
that if a magistrate court
decision does go to the higher
court, it doesn't have to start
all over again because it saves
administrative time and
resources because this recording
this taken place is that
correct? Mr Speaker, General
Lady? Yes, that's correct. And
you You don't have a second
trial in the middle.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
Finally, Um, I think that
representative really made a
good point about the
professionalization of the
magistrate courts because it
means according to the review
that and on record proceeding
will promote professionalism and
actually improves the
performance of Magistrate
judges.
Because it's all being recorded.
And as we all know, when were
recorded, we tend to do and
improved.
Ah, more careful job would you
say, Mr Speaker, General Lady?
Absolutely.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you for the clarifications.
Gentle lady Debate generated
close, Mr Speaker. Um, I want to
thank the body for the lively
debate, and I just would like to
underscore
That this professionalizing the
magistrate courts.
It eliminates redundancy.
It streamlines the process,
though, that there is a prompter
resolution of cases.
It's respectful of the witnesses
and protective of them as well
as police, prosecutors and the
person who is the plaintiff or
defendant in a criminal case,
and I would urge the body to
support and I move that house
Bill 102 as twice twice amended
Do now. Pass Mr Speaker. We're
on final passage of house Bill
102 is twice amended. The vote
is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is that closed by a vote of
35 in the affirmative, 27 in the
negative house Bill, one or two
is twice amended as duly passed
this house, gentlemen from
Berna, Leo representative
remarked You ready on item 37.
Mr. Speaker, Would you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing house Bill
316 and final passage has been
taken and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr Speaker, and, uh, members of
the house. This is felon in
possession of a firearm. This
legislation deals with violent
repeat offenders.
And what we're going to do. A is
raised the penalty from three
years to five years for first
offense and nine years for
second offense. I want to thank
the Mr Speaker, uh, represent
day Hodgman v. Hill,
representing Charlotte Little
For working with me on this and
coming to a compromise bill, and
now it's bipartisan. And with
that, I'll stand for questions.
Debate will go first, The gentle
lady from Dona Ana Sierra
Zokora representative had to
meet you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Berna Leo yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
General Lady Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from Berna, Leo. I
stand in support of your bill.
And I thank you for bringing
this forward. This bill appears
to narrow to be narrowly
tailored to hold criminals
accountable.
And for their actions, and they
are already given notice there
that they are not to be in
possession of a firearm. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, General Lady at the
time of their sentencing for
their felony conviction, they
are told they cannot possess a
firearm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and so in these
cases, these individuals who
have already been told that they
cannot possess a firearm, then
are found in possession of a
firearm and possibly committing
violent crimes in our
communities again. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, That
is correct. And how many times
have we heard across the state
here is another criminal with a
violent past history committing
this crime and that's what we're
going after.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, far
too many, And I believe like you
believe that it is time that we
put a stop to this and we move
forward Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
with meaningful crime and gun
bills that detour, hurting our
communities and putting their
communities at risk. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen,
Thank you. Thank you for
bringing this forward and
keeping our communities safe. I
rise in support of your bill and
appreciate you so very much.
Thank you. Generally, there's
further debate gentlelady from
I'm sorry. Excuse me. Gentlemen
from Lee Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does
gentleman from Berna? Leo, you
Mr Speaker? I yield to my
colleague from Lee, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm I'm happy to
see this. Make it back through.
And bring it. Bring it up this
way as you're aware, aware, as
supported this bill for several
years, I'm excited to see this
happen. And I'm excited to see
real change. Thank you. Debate
General Lady from Benaglio
representative Little
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise as
a co sponsor of this bill.
General lady asked to yield,
please. Yes, sir.
Well, there's a gentleman from
really Oh, please Yield. Mr
Speaker. I yield my friend from
Bergoglio County.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
I rise.
As a co sponsor of this bill.
As the body knows me and my
family have been deeply
affected.
By people who believed there
were little or no consequences
for their actions.
I am a firm believer in second
chances.
I believe this body has
recognized
The importance of addressing
root causes.
And it has been argued that
increasing a penalty is not a
deterrence.
However, at some point
We have to expect to be held
accountable for our actions.
In this case.
Consequences for a convicted
felon who is found guilty of a
second.
Of a second offense of using a
deadly weapon.
Passing. This bill will support
our law enforcement and courts.
To hold accountable.
Violent repeat offenders.
Voting? Yes, for this bill. I
believe.
Will help to close a revolving
door.
Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Let's go next to the generator
from Brasilia and Torrance,
representative Lord
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Berlin County
please Yield Speaker I yield to
my colleague from Bergoglio
County.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
Well, I agree with increased
penalties. I wish it would have
been more. I'm just gonna be
honest about that.
Because if somebody is a violent
offender, we need to keep them
locked up and away from society.
But understand that this is what
we're going to get.
Because I look at five years are
going to get halftime and be out
in three.
I hate to say
But well, I agree with you on
the bill. I disagree that were
vilifying a firearm.
Because we keep saying on our
side of the aisle that it's the
heart that what's matters.
And I feel that if somebody does
something so horrific if they
rape somebody, I don't think it
matters whether it's with a gun.
Or with a knife.
I think it's something gets
murdered. I don't think it
matters if it's a gun or with a
knife.
And Victoria's Martin's. There
was no firearm used.
So my point being in this I will
support the bill. However.
I would rather see it for all
violent felons, whether they
were using a knife, their hands.
They strangled somebody, they
beat them to death.
I don't want to just pick on one
thing, which is the firearm.
And
At the end of the day if we
don't fix the revolving door
Because we keep letting people
out if we don't do the all the
all the other great bills that
you presented before, and we let
people out on halftime and we'll
let people out and we stop.
If we don't be consistent and
keeping people behind bars and
charging them bail and keeping
the worst the worst I see this
is still we're going to have
more people out, so it's nothing
against your bill at all. It's
just my personal conviction that
I feel like we're blaming it.
inanimate object instead of
saying no matter what you do, if
you're a violent person, you
keep doing crimes. You should be
behind bars.
But I do support your bill. So
thank you. That's all at the
same Mr Speaker. There is for
the debate The generator from
Dona Ana representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And while I stand in
00. I'm sorry.
Doing the same thing for the
gentleman from Burnley. Oh,
please Yield. Mr Speaker. I
yield my long time friend from
Dona Ana County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
While I stand in, Um great grief
and support for all victims of
violent crimes.
And especially representative
Little.
Her family.
Um, can you tell us
Um, how this since we have
doubled since 2020 the penalties
for
Felony and, um, violent crimes.
Can you tell me how many, Um,
deterred incidences have
happened since we've doubled.
Doubled the penalties.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
can't answer exactly that. But I
can give you some data from our
burn Leo County District
Attorney's office.
This is from January. 1 2022 to
December 31st 2022. They looked
at 1st and 2nd degree murder.
And of those cases, they found
that 40%.
Of those individuals, the
offenders.
Were convicted felons with a
firearm.
If they looked at
Had the offender ever been
charged with a felony that goes
to 63%.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there is no research that shows
that this is an effective
deterrent.
And I truly believe that this is
just going to put more people,
um into incarceration in some
that might have just, um
fentanyl in their possession at
the same time as having a
weapon.
A gun.
This bill was not passed in, Um,
my committee. Um
CPAC.
And this bill was brought back
and circumvented. Our committee
went to judiciary.
I don't feel this is right that
this bill is coming forward
again. And I feel that, um
Our process has been denied.
And that this bill will just
make it so we have more people
who will be in the jails and and
putting more people, um at risk
that don't deserve it, and we
already have, um, penalties that
should be, um, effective, but
it's not a deterrent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Lady, Next up is the
gentleman from Bernard Leo
Representative Delacruz.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from our county yield
Mr Speaker. I yield my longtime
friend from Berlin, Yo County.
Mr Speaker. I'm gonna preface
and gentlemen my preface first
by saying I wholeheartedly
support this bill.
Gentleman, Mr Speaker has a
unique perspective that I don't
think anybody else in this
chambers has and
Having known him for many, many
years, and he hasn't been a
friend for many, many years. I
knew him when he was a deputy at
the brutal county Sheriff's
Department. He was always well
regarded and well respected.
This is a good bill, and I think
it's a step forward.
I don't disagree with General
Lady from
Braulio and I think Torrance
was, she said that other weapons
could be just as bad. And I
agree with that as well. And but
I think this is a good step
forward. Gentlemen, I would like
to hear from you briefly,
though. What are you hearing
from cops? What are you hearing
from D D s particularly on this
bill. Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
from Bern Leo. All the D A s are
saying we need this.
Because when you listen to what
they say, we're trying to take
this case. Federally. Now these
penalties aren't exactly what
are the federal standards.
But let's talk about the federal
standards for a moment.
Under the federal law. Um the
judge is not given any
discretion.
To allow probation or
suspension of any of the of the
sentence.
In this legislation. We still
allow the judge to have
discretion.
But until we get tough on felons
with guns and believe me, they
know what the penalty is.
They will go ahead and say, Hey,
I can't have that gun.
I'm going to have to do
something else and, frankly,
that's what I want him to do is
put down the guns.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, What are
you hearing from deputies and
officers.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, from
Bern. Leo. I hear the same
thing. We've got to get these
violent felons off the street
and we have to lock them up to
make our communities safe and
that our laws are lax. I want to
use an example that you'll
remember.
August of 2021 here we have a
individual who came to New
Mexico from California.
A convicted felon.
A convicted felon that had he
stayed in California. He would
have ended up on this three
strikes penalty. So we came to
New Mexico because we have lax
laws.
He robbed a juvenile.
Juveniles walking down the
street and he confronts him and
robs him of his backpack.
This juvenile called in
Four police officers responded.
A gun battle in Soo's. Not only
is the offender shot, but four
police officers are all shot in
that gun battle.
And what did the D a do? We need
to take this federally, and
that's what they did. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
There is free to debate the
gentle lady. Excuse me, The
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
presented Vincent.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Bernie Leo you Mr
Speaker? I yield my colleague
from Redondo. So
Take you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you, gentlemen.
We're talking about felons
correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes.
convicted felons who were told
they cannot possess a firearm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, we're talking about
felons.
That's been told that they
cannot possess a firearm.
Do you think that that deters
them at all?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from Rio
does so right now? No, because
we see them. Repeat and repeat.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So if you have a
felon that is in possession of
fentanyl, and he's got a weapon,
Do you think he's learned his
lesson by going to court and
being becoming a felon, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen know
and what we see is he has that
firearm, and if he has fentanyl,
he's probably dealing drugs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I guess I would have to agree
with the the gentle lady from
Valencia.
Because I don't think we're
tough enough on crime and if we
could set a precedence and show
people how tough we are on
crime, I think that we would be
able to clean our streets up a
whole lot better. And I
appreciate you bringing this
legislation. I will fully vote
for it. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Next up is the generated from
Belinelli your representative
Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Burnley l yelled
Mr Speaker. I yield my friend
from Burlington County.
Thank you, representative Ream.
Um So, representative Ream, you
know that I served on the City
Council.
Of Albuquerque.
Mr Speaker in General Lady from
Burnley. Oh, absolutely. And
also you worked with the city of
Albuquerque, and that's where we
first met.
It is and I was happy that I met
you.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I will
tell you having served on the
Albuquerque City Council. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, Um, you
also know that I served as the
City Council president.
Mr Speaker. Generally the yes.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
and the reason that I bring that
up to you is because having
served on the Albuquerque City
Council, uh, one of the things
that I had in my possession,
having served in that role, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, as I had
a city phone
And every time there was a crime
committed in Albuquerque, my
phone dinged and many people
probably don't know this, but I
was aware of every crime in the
city of Albuquerque at during
that time that I served as
president of the City Council,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, and
the reason that I bring that up
is because
You know, you see things
sometimes that you don't want to
see or hear or experience, But
you do. And the reason that I
bring that up, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is because I was
exposed to as a result of having
served in that role.
Um, knowing where
Crimes. Violent crimes are being
committed and the type of crime
because there was a summary on
my phone That told me exactly
the type of crime that was being
committed and the location.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Um
And I think that Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, this is probably
something that you have
experienced firsthand. And I
applaud you for that for having
served as an Albuquerque police
officer, Mr Speaker Gentleman.
Um, but
In knowing that information, you
know, Albuquerque, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, is about 600,000
people. And that was a couple of
years ago, actually on the
census data.
But if you think about the
population now, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um do you think that
with the surrounding communities
we are almost a million people.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes. When you start looking at
Rio, Rancho Torrance, the
mountains of burning Leo County.
Yes, we are.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um, one of the things
that I that I, um I'm concerned
with Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, is that, um, the type
of violent crimes that are being
committed in our larger cities
these days are often very
heinous crimes would would you
agree, Mr Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
agree.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Um, oftentimes these crimes that
are being committed these
heinous crimes are they start
out as smaller crimes. Would you
agree with that? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, General lady
sometimes, But when you look at
some of these murders, you know,
like some of these murders are,
um robberies.
Well, when you have a firearm
and you're going to commit a
robbery, you've made a decision.
I may shoot somebody during this
robbery, so I'm not sure that
all of them were little crimes.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen in
in those crimes that are being
committed.
But you not agree that, um, a
felon and I think in your
legislation to basically says
that a felon should not possess
a firearm.
Mr Speaker, Generally the you're
correct.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
one of the reasons that we are
looking at getting tougher on
crime, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
is because many of these
firearms are stolen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, you
are correct. I have some cases
from the Bernalillo County
District Attorney's Office and D
A. Bregman is supporting this.
He's given me data D A Bregman.
One of them is And here is it
was a
Drug rip off as what we would
call it. The intent was to rob
the seller of the drugs. The gun
battle ensued. We end up with
the murder.
And that offender took the gun
to a Dallas and Zuni is actually
where he took it.
And gave it to a person to sell.
So that gun went right back
underground and was not
recovered at the crime scene.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do you
not agree that our job is
legislators is to protect the
health safety and general
welfare of the public. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Absolutely.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do
you think that this bill does
that?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Yes,
it does. It goes towards the
violent felons who are using
firearms in our community.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I Well, I I
empathize with my fellow
representative, Ms.
Representative Little and the
difficulty that her family had
to go through. There are
families throughout our
community that are dealing with
this on a on a regular basis.
Would you agree with that? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr Speaker, General lady? Yes.
And we've seeking several groups
form of family members grieving
over the loss of their loved
ones.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, one of
the issues that came up earlier
was with regard to
rehabilitation of criminals can
that be done in our jails? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Yes,
it can. And I agree that we need
to work on advancing that area
as well.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, with
that, I'll wrap up. Um I would
love to work with you on getting
more funding for rehabilitation
in our jails. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I applaud
you for bringing this bill
forward lady. There's where the
debate Your Lady from Katherine
Sierra Valencia, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Benaglio yield
yield to the general lady?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, how
many times have you brought this
legislation?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
It's probably been about the
last 10 years.
You said Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
the last 10 years.
Mr Speaker. General Lady? Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
gentleman. I applaud you for
being diligent.
And I applaud you.
For being a great member of this
body, and, uh, I'm I stand in
favor and will be voting for
your legislation. And I applaud
you once again. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
The debate, Gentlemen close.
Mr Speaker. I now move that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 316 do
now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 316.
The vote is now open.
The water's not closed by water
50 trillion negative in the
affirmative 11 in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee sub
Super House with 316 has duly
passed his house.
General lady from Bernie. Leo.
Are you remember? Are you ready
for item number? 29? I am Madam
Speaker. Will you get me to that
point?
We're on final passage of House
Labor veterans Military compared
committee so
Give us one second ladies and
gentlemen.
Sorry about that. Let's try
again. We are on final passage
of House Labor. Veteran Military
Committee community substitute
for House Bill 236 is amended
General lady to explain the bill
thinking Madam Speaker, Ladies
and gentlemen of the house. What
Hospital to 36 does it's aimed
at increasing public safety,
allowing some former employees
who retired before December 31st
2023 to return to work on a very
limited basis before we begin
discussing the bill, and there
is a technical correction that's
necessary because in house
judiciary
We put two separate amendments
on it in order to include two
other professions and rather
than having them both in one
Amendment.
By putting 21 We ended up with a
lettering problem in the list of
the eligible individuals, state
police officers and protective
services investigators. Both
were letter M. So all this
amendment does is correct that
so that's the technical
amendment that House Floor
Amendment number one which I
will move now.
And I'm guessing it's going to
get passed out really quickly.
That's what it will do.
Thank you, General lady. We will
wait to make sure everybody gets
a copy of the amendment.
Let me say that what that
required was to strike the House
Judiciary Committee amendments
and then just make it all one
amendment and get the lettering
correct.
Also Madam speaker, I think,
while the um it's being passed
out, I could introduce my
experts. I have Carter banding
from AFSCME and Catherine coach
IATA, who is who represents New
Mexico counties.
Thank you, gentle lady. Can you
also read the 202 number? Just
to be sure. Absolutely Amount.
Speaker. It is
The last three numbers 296.1.
Okay. Is there any debate on the
amendment?
Okay. Is there objection to
adoption of the amendment?
Okay, There is debate on the
amendment Gentlemen from Bernie
Leo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the general lady yield
Speaker. I'm thinking about it.
Yes, Madam Speaker. Does the
gentle lady have her squirt gun?
I probably do. But do you have
the
Pancho. I gave you for it. Madam
Speaker in General Lady. No.
Who are both out of luck, Madam
Speaker.
Madam speaker and General Lady,
there's actually another
technical layer.
And the amendment that I just
dropped up there will create
act The lettering nearer that
you're trying to correct and one
other air and let me explain
where this other air is.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I think you have to be on my
amendment.
Okay. Um, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, Your amendment
Suggest to be clear, Gentlemen,
are you moving? Second Amendment
or are you just asking for
correction on the general lady
from Benaglio's Amendment First
Amendment?
Madam speaker. You know what we
probably should do is go into
conference where we can talk
offline and, uh,
Ah fixes if they want to do that
Otherwise we're going to have to
adopt her amendment and then
strike her amendment and then
adopt mine to correct the other
problem.
German, I think just for, um
Proper process and decorum. It
brought it would be best for you
to go and draft another
amendment and bring that
Formally as part of the process.
We've already we're on the bill,
We can't stop. And so if you
wouldn't mind working with your
drafters to do that, Um, Madam
Speaker, My amendment is up at
the desk up there.
And my amendment is
Is
Is 228309.1.
Gentlemen, before you continue
that again, we have a procedural
problem. We have to deal with
the amendment that's in front of
us first. So, um, General Lady
We're going to see if there is
further debate on this
amendment.
And then we will deal with
The second Amendment from the
gentleman from Burnley, Ill.
After we have gone through your
amendment, okay?
So, gentlemen, from Benaglio,
you still have the floor for
debate of this amendment.
Madam speaker. I understand that
this amendment is correct to a
correct one of the problems that
doesn't correct the bill. So
whether we want to adopted and
then me come up with another,
you know, delete part of what My
amendment is, but we need to
correct another portion of this.
Okay, gentlemen, Do you have
further debate on this
amendment? We can let the leader
respond. Madam Speaker, I'm
done.
Is there further debate on the
amendment? See? No further
debate. Okay. Gentlemen, from
Otero, Representative Block.
Thank you. Madam Speaker. I move
to table the amendment. We're on
a motion to table House floor
Amendment number one to House
and Labor Veteran Affairs
Military Committee substitute
for House Bill 236 is amended.
All those in favor say Aye.
All those opposed nay, the
motion feels back to the general
lady.
To close on your amendment.
Madam speaker. I think I
explained the amendment. So I
moved. House Floor Amendment
number one to House Bill 236.
The House Labor Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee
Substitute for hospital to 36
accident.
We're on a motion to adopt House
for Amendment number one to
House labor veterans affairs.
Uh, substitute for House Bill do
36 as amended All those in favor
say, Aye. Nay,
the eyes have it.
We're back on the bill
generally still has the floor.
Madam Speaker. Let me tell you a
little bit more about the bill,
and then I want to yell to a
couple of my co sponsors.
As I said it will allow some
former public employees.
To return to work on a limited
basis. Qualified retirees would
be permitted to fill vacancies
in introductory public safety
frontline positions that are
currently difficult to fill the
qualifying positions are adult
correctional officers, adult
detention officers courthouse
security officers.
Emergency medical dispatcher
emergency emergency medical
technician or paramedic
firefighter Juvenile
Correctional Officer, Juvenile
Detention officer, Municipal
police officer.
Apace, Officer. Public safety
Teller Communicator Sheriff's
deputy state police officer and
protective services
investigator. The bill would not
allow retirees to return to work
to fill more advanced or upper
management positions, because to
do so would be a disincentive to
retirees filling the position.
Of which there is a great need.
It would reduce opportunities
for the advancement of and
create low morale among current
employees and preclude building
and experience and qualified
upper level workforce. So this
is a three year window. 36
months is the length of time
they can receive their pension
while returning to work.
They can return to work for
longer than that, but not if
they collect a pension. My co
sponsor. In addition to Senator
many Stewart Proton in the
Senate, on include
Later, Ryan Lane and represent
the gentleman from Sandoval
represented Martinez and the
gentleman from Catherine Grant
Hidalgo, representative terraces
and at this point before I real
to debate I would like to give
either of those cosponsors the
gentleman from Sandoval an
opportunity to say something if
he would like to do so.
Gentlemen to rise.
Madam chair.
Representative from Burnley, Ill
Generated friendly
I was gonna
Madam speaker. I called on him,
so I definitely nations said I
and I'll yield in the process.
I got a little tongue tied. I
was going to ask your
permission.
I do stand in full support of
this bill. Um
We saw several of these bills
come through labor and veterans
Last year, I fully supported
them then.
Um and I'm glad we're doing
something.
Um, that's going to help. I see
it is a morale issue.
These people who
Retired, had the badge want to
go back to work?
When you send somebody out on a
call, and you know that
There's not going to be somebody
there to back you up.
That's a serious morale issue.
So being able to get people with
experience to back you up.
To mentor some of these younger
officers to fill some of these
positions that have been vacant
for a long time.
I think this is a great bill. I
supported it last year and I
stand in full support of it this
year. Thank you, madam. Madam
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Madam
Speaker. I would like to yield
to the gentleman from Catherine
Grant Hidalgo, representative
cirrhosis.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you very much for yielding a
gentle lady. This is, uh
It is a bill that I appreciate
you and the other sponsors for
bringing this forward.
It is definitely madam Speaker.
Gentle lady. A bill that has
Uh, had a long time coming down
to the floor. I appreciate the
work and for people coming
together. Finally, to protect
those. There's a long list of
people here and then and
different entities that are
going to benefit from workers
returning back to work and
feeling many, many vacant
positions.
And so, um, for this is a great
bill for well, let me back up
here, Madame Speaker. Generally
we have we have detention
centers and other places that
are very, uh, under
They don't have enough employees
on the floor, and as we know
it's a dangerous situation and
for safety reasons. I think this
is a wonderful bill. In my in my
area. Madam Speaker General Lady
we have, um some of our smaller
departments that at times have
not had anyone.
Be able to respond to a call and
puts a lot of pressure on our
state police and our sheriff's
officers, which also in the
Sheriff's office office are
understaffed. So for those
reasons, I appreciate all your
hard work and for us coming
together and passing this today
or working on passing this
today.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
There's further debate.
When I go back to the gentleman
from Berna, Leo representative
Ream
Okay. Next, we will go to the
gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley. Representative
Malcolm. Thank you, Madam
Speaker will not
Well, our mighty leader of the
gentle lady from Bernard Leo
Yield
Madam Speaker? Yes, reluctantly.
Come on, Madam speaker. Gentle
lady from Vandalia. You know
where I stand on this bill.
And I just want to bring up a
point. Okay? I just want to
bring up a point or two or three
or four.
But Madam speaker, Gentle lady
from Berna, Leo.
Not too long ago returned to
where it was open wide open.
Everybody that retired could
come back to work and keep their
pension.
Everybody. Lot of people did it.
But what happened during this
time when we were hiring all
these people, bringing them back
to work?
What happened to the workforce
that should have been coming in
at the bottom.
We ignored them. We did not hire
young people.
He said. If we do it this way,
we said it before we will be
able to not have to do this
again.
Every are not even two years
later.
Coming back trying to fill in
this positions. And that is why,
because we never hired any young
people because we relied on the
fact that we were bringing in
people that should have been
retired. And we didn't hire any
young people. You understand
what I'm saying is, I said it
twice.
And now we're planning to do the
same thing right going to go
out. We're going to bring in
these people that are retired.
Bring him in, and this positions
with the new people should be
coming in where we should be
hiring and training new people.
Everyone to hire these people
rehire him didn't work for three
years.
And what's going to happen in
two years.
We're going to be in the same
situation because
How hard does the county How
does the state save money?
They saved money because they
don't train new people They
don't have to pay for training.
So if you don't have to pay for
a training class for new people,
you save money If you don't have
to.
Hire new people from all over
again. You save money, the other
thing that we're doing. It used
to be a fact it just to be a
fact. Ladies and gentlemen,
politicians made their day by
getting jobs for state
employees.
Because state in ploys had come
to work for the state of New
Mexico, and they would have good
jobs with good benefits those
benefits have gone out the door
in the years that we've gotten
here we have cut we have made
people pay more for their
insurance is giving them less
retirement benefits.
So how are we going to hire new
people if we are not taking care
of the younger generation that
will need to bring in to take
these jobs.
Again. Speaker General Lady from
Brenna Leo. I stand opposed to
this opposite are opposed to
this legislation, and it's very
simple, very simply because I
know that it's not gonna work.
We're going to come back again
and again and again, and we're
going to keep on bringing in
these people and till they all
fade away.
They're hiring new people again.
What are we doing for our
younger generation? Ladies and
gentlemen of the house, we are
leaving them behind. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.
It was further debate The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, representative Vincent
Madam Speaker and does the
gentle lady from Burnley will
yield Speaker I yield.
Madam Speaker, General lady. I'm
glad you brought this. I still
lost my voice. I'm not sick.
It's just from yelling at
referees.
I'm glad you brought this
legislation and
I never thought that I was going
to sit next to the union guys
and agree with them and we can't
We come to an agreement.
And I appreciate that. This is a
long time coming and I
completely disagree with the
last statements that were made.
We are doing good for our young
ones. And when we bring back
some of the experience, we're
going to teach the young people
even more.
And
Madam speaker, general Lady.
I'm not running anybody down,
but I'm gonna tell you right now
The young guys are not as tough
as I was.
And I think that I have a lot to
bring back to the table if I
wanted to come back as a beat
firefighter
I think I could teach people in
specially some of the stuff that
I regret.
I have lots of regrets. I could
have been a whole lot easier to
get along with whenever I was
younger.
And and, you know, I wish I had
somebody like me that could
mentor me along and say, you
know, don't don't be such a
jerk. You know, I mean,
Work with people more
It generated
Madam speaker and gentle lady. I
just have a few things because
you do have a good bill.
If you would have brought me to
the table, you would have had a
great bill and Madam Speaker,
General Lady, um
Why? Why were their limits on
the positions that we're
feeling? Madam Speaker, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, this this
the narrow category was
community safety.
Public safety.
Okay. Thank you and Madame
speaker in general Lady.
If I wanted to go back to work,
is there Is there a certain
percentage of vacancy that I
have to, you know, say it's 10%
Do I have to do I can't apply if
it's 10% vacancy. Correct, Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, That's a
really good question. Each job
classification has to have at
least a 10 per cent vacancy.
To bring people back under this
law.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, General Lady from
burning Leo. And the reason I
asked that is I'm not trying to
hurt the bill at all. I just
When we get into crisis mode,
and we have to bring people out
of retirement.
And I want people to understand
one thing, especially from my
perspective. I do not want to
come out of retirement and go
back into, uh, firefighter
position. You know, you have to
have be fit for duty. It.
There's a lot of work that goes
into that, and a lot of people
don't want to do it. There's
going to be a handful of folks.
That do and I do. I'm trying to
wrap my mind around how it would
be a morale problem, and I I get
it. Um, you know, maybe
intimidation guy coming in there
was a retired, say, fire Captain
or something, and he comes back
and he's got all this knowledge
and the new guy sees them as a
threat. But
I think we could bridge that up
to where it don't look like a
threat More of a mentorship, and
that's where I would like a lot
of these positions. So if you've
got 15 or 20 years when you come
back in, Madam speaker and
general Lady, you know you're
coming into a mentorship. Yes,
you have to pull your weight and
you have to do your job.
But, you know, mentor these
these guys that that wanted and
Jen, Madam speaker in general
lady, Um, it also looks like,
uh,
So the pension the pensions
could you explain how the
pensions are gonna work? If I'm
a retired guy, and I come back
in? Would you explain that to
me, please? Madam Speaker and
gentlemen from Lincoln. They
There's a 36 months window of
time where the return to work
worker can still collect his or
her.
Pension.
Well working and earning a
salary.
But if the individual is
enjoying it so much
He or she can decide to stay on
but moving, not collect the
pension and the other part you
talked about regarding morale is
that these individuals who
returning to work don't get to
count all their previous state.
Ignore itty when they come in,
so they don't become the ones
who get the top bids on the
shifts and everything so they
don't
Is placed. The younger workers
who are are potential workforce
for the next decades, so that's
another part of the narrow
confines of the bill so that we
actually try to do what the
gentleman from massive blows
concerned about. And I
understand that we try to build
a future workforce while we have
36 months.
Of this window.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady, so
I've heard it stated before, and
I just want to state it again
and
You know when when you retire
out and you get your pension?
Finally, um, it feels good to
have always called it. Mailbox
money. You get your mailbox
money every month and you know,
working as a beat firefighter
all the way up to the you know,
Until you finally become a chief
officer, you don't make that
much money.
And when you come back to work,
and you're actually making
you're getting your retirement
Plus, you're getting a paycheck.
Now you're starting to live. Now
You're making the money. And if
a person is making 100 to
150,000 a year good on them. We
shouldn't. We shouldn't. Uh
Oh, discount that we should
promote that because it's good
and they're not going to be
there for a real long time,
Because if there are 4550 when
they're retiring, they're only
going to stay till they're 50 or
55. Roughly somewhere around the
5 to 10 marks, so I just wanted
to make sure uh, Madam Speaker
General lady that I was
expressing that because
They deserve that extra money.
And if we don't pay them at the
municipal level or state level,
they're going to go somewhere
else. Like I did, and I drew my
mailbox money and I drew a
paycheck and finally got to
start buying some toys and
enjoying myself.
And
Madam Speaker, General Lady,
That's all I have. I stand in
support of your bill, and I hope
that you and representative
remarked, going to be able to
make a deal so we can make this
go through. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we go
to the gentleman from Otero,
representative Block.
Thank you so much. Madam Speaker
with the kinds of the lady,
please yield I yield.
Thank you so much. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I
couldn't pass up an opportunity
to table an amendment Madam
speaker, But I did. I did yell.
Nay, So there we go. So Madam
speaker, gentle lady. I just
wanted to say thank you so much
for bringing this bill forward
and it looks like it was a very
careful placement of all the
different stakeholders and
people who would be involved
from the unions to retired L EOS
to retired firefighters.
And so, Madam Speaker, General
Lady. I really appreciate this.
I did have a question regarding
the rink that they would come
back, as would they just pretty
much come back as
A
I guess just a rookie, so to
speak, Madam speaker, general
eating
Um Madam Speaker and gentlemen
from Otero. They are coming in
as frontline public safety
employees now if they want the
current law, and this doesn't
change it, and I just learned
this a moment ago would allow
them to go into management, but
not if they were collecting
there.
Pension.
So if they wanted to suspend it
Then they could otherwise
they're coming in.
Rank and file rank and file and
so that's true for all of them.
So that they don't displace the
younger workers.
Okay. Thank you so much. Madam
Speaker in general lady that
that does help me to know a
little bit about what they will
be doing when they get in there,
And I really I just wanted to
say once again, thank you for
the collaboration on this bill.
I'm really happy to support it.
It's not often when you and I
both are supportive of a great
piece of legislation. But Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I really
appreciate you for bringing this
forward in.
It's really awesome. Thank you
so much.
Next we go to the general Lady
from Berna, Leo, representative
Morago. Thank you. Madam Speaker
Will the general lady from
Burnley will yield Yes, Madam
Speaker I yield
Um, Madam Speaker and General
lady, Um, I'm torn on this bill.
And, um, I'm going to explain to
you why.
Um and I and I actually
literally have not made up my
mind on this bill. Um
Madam speaker, you know,
oftentimes I do that. And
general lady, um, I try to get
as much information as I
possibly can.
Um, before I make a decision,
and sometimes that's not the
most popular thing to do around
this place. I'm finding out
Um, but Madam speaker and
General Lady, um
Do you know that I served as the
chairman of the P E. R. A board
for two years in a row?
Madam speaker and Lady from
Burnley. Oh, I'm not sure but
I'm certainly take your word for
it.
Madam speaker in general Lady I
served on the P E. R a board for
eight years and I served as the
chairman of the board twice in
2009 2010.
Um and Madam speaker in general
Lady the reason that I bring
this up
Is because having served on the
P R a board I remember when
Madam speaker and General Lady
when we had returned to work.
And Madam speaker and general
lady. One of the issues that we
had was we had, we had opened up
the return to work, Madam
Speaker and General Lady, um for
public safety.
And in fact, um, I You know, I
definitely see the need Madam
Speaker and General Lady for
police and public safety. Um,
employees throughout the state,
but at the time we saw the same
need
And Madam speaker in general
Lady, Um
Having done that one of the
things that happened was
eventually and I'm not exactly
sure how this happened. Madame
speaker in general lady, but the
Paris system was opened up to
the entire
Workforce.
And Madam speaker and generating
We had
We had people that were in fact.
Taking advantage of our system.
And Madam speaker and General
Ladies when it was opened up
from public safety and to the
entire work force. We had people
that had retired at
Oh, I don't know, 100 and
$50,000 a year amount speaker in
general lady and then they came
back and they were making over
$300,000 a year on our
Paris system and Madam speaker
in general 80. The reason that I
bring that up is because I just
want to know in your
legislation.
How do we prevent that from
happening again?
Speaker lady from Bern, Leo.
The the narrow confines of the
bill should prevent that Sarah
is neutral on the bill.
Officially, but they have
estimated that this bill has a
positive effect on the fund
because there's only a 36 month
window for people could, um,
received the pension while
employed.
After that, if they want to
continue in the job because
they're having so much fun, and
there were bored being retired.
They can do that without their
pension without receiving their
pension.
So, Madam Speaker and General
Lady, um
I am, uh, understanding that
there are some guardrails. Is
that what you're saying? That
would prevent that?
From being open again to the
entire workforce. Madam speaker
and different burn. Well, yes,
because it's only for these
public safety positions that are
listed in the bill, and they are
The ones that I read. If you
Want me to repeat, Madam Speaker
and General lady. I heard what
you said earlier. I just want to
be somewhat assured, I guess And
I know there's no guarantees in
life but definitely want to know
that there is some assurance
that these
That this bill would not
Down the line be opened up again
to the entire work force of
government.
And Madam speaker and lady from
Burnley will also the fact is
that they really are not meant
to go into management positions,
which I think is what happened.
One of the things that happened
when we're talking about the
I've never made that close to
that much money. But when people
are making hundreds of thousands
of dollars a year
If they go into management.
Under our current law, they
don't get to receive their
pension at that time now.
So that's a change from 2009.
And Madam speaker in general
Lady.
One of the
Which actually brings me to my
second question, Madam Speaker
and General Lady and that is
required with regard to, um, a
compression issue with regard to
sort of the career ladder and
new high res. I mean, well,
these newly re hired, I guess.
Individuals and whether there is
in fact going, it's going to
create a compression issue
within the classification
system. Madam Speaker and Lady
from the Burn, Leo, I'm told
that this is only for frontline
positions, so it's not pushing
people up. There's not a
compression issue with this.
Okay. Madam Speaker and General
Lady will. That definitely helps
me for my opinion regarding this
bill.
And Madam speaker in general
Lady I was just thinking out
loud of while ago is when we did
my firefighter bill, we actually
rolled the bill so that the
amendments could be worked out.
But Madam Speaker, general lady,
Um I guess that's not how we're
doing this. We're going to have
a combined amendment.
Um, Madam, Speaker and lady. We
have amended the bill.
According to just the changing
the lettering on the list of
professions.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady.
Folks. I have good news. In case
you haven't smelled it. Already,
Dinner has arrived. It is by the
lounge. Please go get something
to eat.
Next. We have the gentleman from
Colfax, Curry, Harding Quay, San
Miguel and Union counties. That
can only be one representative.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Does the general lady yield
yield gentle lady, I just had to
rise in favor of this bill, and
I appreciate all the people that
you've worked with the
parameters you put on it. People
live longer. They stay healthy,
longer and a lot of them still
want to work and there is no
Occupation.
Where experience matters more
than it does in the area of
public safety. It keeps
everybody a lot safety er when
you have experience, and it
helps the younger off folks to
learn how to react in any
situation, So I really
appreciate this bill.
I've actually
Just supported it all along. And
I thank you and thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we go
to the gentle lady from Berna,
Leo, representative Corolla.
Thank you, Madam Chair and made
the gentle lady from Ben Elijah
Hill Speaker. I yield
Um
I've been talking about manager
gentle lady about this bill back
and forth in asking questions. I
appreciate all the provisions on
this bill to prevent retirement.
make sure that is filled with
the positions that are needed. I
have a couple of concerns. Um,
this has been happening in the
past.
How can we assure that we are
not come back in three years
trying to make an amendment and
change this bill because we
didn't do enough to provide for
staff in those areas that are
needed?
Speaker and Lady for Burnley.
Oh, I think that's a good
question. It's a fair question,
and I could never say that once
we're passing a bill, there will
never be any changes to it. But
the gentleman from um Stabler is
right. When we first opened up,
returned to work, it was just
wide open.
And then we had people going
right back into the top
positions and the yelling people
at the lower positions didn't
have room for advancement. They
had no career path.
This is for front line workers
in public safety positions
without giving the return to
work Individuals.
An advantage over them, so
they're going in and they return
to work. People don't get to say
Well, I worked 25 years, so I
get to bid for the best shifts,
So I would say that's what the
narrowness of it is. Then
there's also the 36 months they
can't receive their pension.
Those returning to work
Beyond 36 months, so they
either, um
Cool. Retire again and they're
they're gone, leaving more room
for people to enter the field.
So I think those are the main
safeguards and it's it's a new
approach. And it's something
that the counties and the labor
unions negotiated, and they
tried to make it as narrow and
To have his view. Um bad effects
as we have experienced in the
past.
Thank you, Madam chair, gentle
lady. And and that's why I
supported on the on the
committee.
But I'm still concerned about
doing what is enough. Are you
aware rather than shared and the
lady any policies that are
accompanied this bill who are
going to help us or help these
areas of need have enough staff
so we don't have to go back to
this type of procedures of work.
Um, speaker and later from
Burnley. Oh, I'm hearing from
the
The Mexico counties that they
have raised continuously. They
starting salary for detention
workers, and they can't get
them.
So they're hoping this works.
Because they can get some people
in who can get their pension and
their mailbox check and their
salary for three years and
hoping that they'll still need
to hire more new people.
So they're hoping that it will
work. I don't know that we have,
um, anything to look at.
And what I was asking is where,
there if there were other states
that have tried this kind of a
model, and apparently, we don't
actually have that. But there
are other states that have some
level of return to work.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
lady and and I am not so sure
that raising the salary will be
enough. That's what I'm
concerned that this is not going
to be enough and showing any
improvement. I guess the part
that is convincing me a little
bit. Is that training part
right? It will take time to get
the people train and prepare,
but we definitely have to be
creative and finding ways.
Besides raising the salary to
Richard Personnel
Madam Sharon and the lady and if
we could have any of these
things accompanied this bill, I
think it will help us.
Making sure that in the future
we don't have to come to rely on
this type of policies to have
the people that is needed in
these areas.
Um, none. Speaker and Lady from
Fern Leo. I was I hope I heard
everything because I was hearing
from many Mexico counties that
the Legislature has created a
retention bound, and they also
are paying for training.
And
There are going to put all of
those reset resources together
to try to make this work and I
guess what? Um
What we're hoping is that this
is gonna work, but quite
frankly, at some point, maybe we
Are going to have to appropriate
more money.
And I know we've done things
over the years we've offered
earlier retirement for detention
workers we offered raises.
But maybe it's not enough and
maybe we need to be paying them
more to entice the young people
to do it. These are tough jobs.
Now the speaker
is speaker and gentle lady. Yeah
is difficult and its safety
where we need here, and I think
we need as by we need to start
looking in creative ways to find
and fill this position beyond
this type of incentives right
now, and maybe that's something
that we need to start looking
and in other ways just outside
of that.
Of that box to find how to
fulfill these positions,
because, really, that's my
biggest concern that we're going
to come back and we are not here
to say No, We did it already and
didn't work. We're gonna falling
for the same thing. Thank you so
much. Madam Chair. Thank you so
much. Gentle lady. Next we go to
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
representative, representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the general leader from Bern Leo
Yield Now I'm speaker, Are you
Thank you. Um, you alluded to
this just a moment ago about how
we had changes to the
retirement and, um, that's one
of my concerns. If we change
this, will we make it so we have
another mass exodus and people
going to retire so that they can
come back and make more money
for the 3.5 years.
Um, Madam, Speaker and Lady from
Dona Ana. People already have to
have been retired.
Under this. They have to have
retired by December. 31st of
2023. So they didn't know about
this. And they retired now this
if if this is passed and signed
into law than they can
Rethink their decision. Okay,
that, um, General Lady from
Berlioz's Thank you. Um, that is
a big relief because that
diabolical before was very hard
on our system. Um, well, this
also make it so that we can, um
continues sustainability of the
P E. R a retirement fund.
Speaker and lady from Dona Ana,
as I'm I'm mentioned to the Lady
from Burnley Will PDR is neutral
on the bill, but they are
estimating that it has a
positive effect on the fund.
Okay. That's all I had. Thank
you very much. Next we go to the
general Lady from Bernard Leo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the gentle lady yield Madame
Speaker I yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
general Lady. I have seen so
many great things in this bill.
I want to make sure they are
highlighted for the body and I
haven't missed any
Madam speaker in general Lady in
Five years on the investment and
pension oversight Interim
Committee. It has been drilled
into me that we cannot
Create a return to work Bill.
That upsets the viability of the
pension, so I think the previous
questioner
Madam Speaker in general Lady
addressed this, but
One more time.
What are the protections in this
bill for the viability of our
pension? Because if we create a
rung on retirement
It will change the actuarial
analysis and we will lose
funding viability in our pension
amount. Um, speaker and Lady
from Bern, Leo, the guardrails
here. First, People have to have
been retired already. They're
retired now.
They can if they're public
safety, frontline workers.
They can come back under this
law, if if it becomes law.
But they can only collect
Their retirement funds for 36
months.
Then.
If that's what they wanted the
double salary or the the mailbox
check and their salary. If
that's what they wanted, then
may retire again and just
receive their pension as they
had and they're not building
into that. They're not
And and they are not for the 36
months. They're not earning a
higher level of a pension for
when they get out. So you see
that protects the fund as well.
Um, they can stay.
Beyond 36 months, but they can't
collect their pension.
So that protects the fund.
So I think that's all the
protections
Thank you, Madam Chair and
gentle lady. I think you're
right.
Um, by setting that they must
have been retired by December.
31st of 2023.
That prevents the run and
retirement and this bill
Um, Madam Speaker. Gentle lady
does specify that the employer
continues to pay into the
pension.
While the return to work
individual does not accrue
credit and does not increase
their eventual pension benefit.
So all of those critical pieces
are built into this bill, and I
really appreciate that. Um Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
There are three other important
elements that you have put into
this bill, and one of them is
meeting the federal
requirements. So word is the I.
R s requirements regarding the
separation of work.
And then returning to work.
That you have built into this
bill.
Madam speaker and Lady from
Donald Leo, the IRS or the
Federal Retirement requires 90
days, but
People had to have been retired
by December. 31st 2023, and this
won't go into effect until
July 1st of this year so that 90
day requirement will have been
met by the confines of the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
So you've met the federal I R s
separation of work requirements.
We have protected the pension in
this bill. Madam Speaker and
General Lady, you've also built
some really tidy guardrails.
And time limitations, and I
appreciate that Madam Speaker
and general lady that there is
that 36 months in which the
person can collect that pension
benefit, though they could
continue working if they choose.
But you've also set an end date
to this whole procedure. Madam
Speaker and General Lady,
There's a kind of sunset in this
bill.
2027
Yes, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady from Bern Leo on page 11.
Line. Um Oops. I have a copied
without line numbers, but it has
under subsection 11. Subsequent
employment begins prior to July.
1st 2027, So that's the end.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
General Lady. We've also heard a
lot tonight about how this is
targeted with the list on page
nine of the very specific
shortage areas around public
safety in which the need is so
great that we would consider
this measure.
Um
And last, but not least the
fourth thing that is built into
this bill, and I think it's the
most difficult, Madam Speaker
and general Lady you have tried
to address all of the things
that went wrong with our first
experiment in returning to work
around the 2009 time period.
Um
Madam speaker in general Lady.
One of the issues that I heard
most often.
About
The failure of that experiment.
Was the morale. The compression.
the effect on the work force.
So in this bill, Madam Speaker
and General lady you have built
in several elements to address
that.
And one of them is dealing with
seniority.
And Madam Speaker, General Lady
I don't have the page number in
front of you, but I know the
bill says there's no seniority
based on the pre retirement
work.
For shift requests. Could you
explain a little bit about why
you included that madam speaker?
Now the speaker and lady from
Bern. Leo. This is part of the
motivation to try to get young
people to come in.
And have the incentive to stay.
And make a career at this
agency. Whether it's a detention
center, um whether it's in the
state police but not leave and
and see a an actual career
ladder ahead for the individual.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. That is really
important because other folks
have spoken tonight about the
fact that we need to build the
workforce. Madam Speaker and
General Lady. My greatest fear
with this bill is that we will
see it as the silver bullet. The
answer to all the problems and
we will fail to build and
recruit.
That younger worst workforce.
These are retirees coming back,
Madam speaker in general lady
that automatically has a time
limit built in and if we don't
address the other issues around
recruitment and retention of the
younger workforce.
This measure won't work, so this
has to be the first step towards
solving our workforce problem,
but not the only step.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
So we've met the IRS
requirements.
We narrowly targeted the fields
in which people can return to
work.
We have built in time limits
around when and for how long
they can collect a pension.
We have built in all the
guardrails to protect the
funding of the pension.
Madam Speaker and Chantel Lady.
And we have addressed the
workforce morale issues.
That came up in our previous
experiment.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I appreciate the work you have
done with so many stakeholders
to fine tune this bill to meet
those requirements.
Um
I hope we continue with the
other steps necessary.
To raise those salaries.
To address the work, environment
issues and training for the
younger workforce as well. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady.
And folks. Unfortunately, we're
gonna we need a few more
minutes while the amendment is
improving, so we're going to go
ahead and roll this bill for a
couple of minutes and come back
to it. We're now going to go to
the gentleman from McKinley and
see Ebola and Island 33.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
you get me through that point
record reflect the all action
necessary for placing house Bill
3298, as amended has been taken
gentlemen to explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. My
witness in my professional is
sitting behind me,
representative Cherry Garcia.
And, uh, that speaker member to
the house, Uh, House Bill.
98
Pretty basically in Akst,
service members and veterans
towards Suicide Prevention Act
within the Veterans Services
Department. Uh, so it provides a
responsibilities.
To raise awareness regarding
suicide within the population of
service members and veterans in
the state of New Mexico and Mr
Speaker with that, I will stand
for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentleman from similar
yield? Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Gentleman from
Uh, send well, I will yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker
Gentleman from Cibola. Thank you
for bringing this forward.
We know how important this bill
is.
We understand the the rates of
suicide amongst veterans, and I
think this will go a long way to
saving lives. So I stand in full
support of the bill. And I think
The gentleman from seawall for
carrying it.
Thank you, gentlemen. I was
really happy to see you
supported to build a community.
There is further debate The
general lady from Bruno Leo
Representative Abrego. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Gentlemen
from
Sibila and McKinley County, will
you yield Thank you generally
related to the general lady from
NALEO.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and,
uh Gentlemen, I am in full
support of your bill as well. I
think anything we can do for our
veterans, especially when it
comes to saving lives is really
important after they've served
our country and I stand in full
support of your bill.
See no further debate. Gentlemen
too close.
My apologies. The gentleman from
All of those counties
representative Garcia and my
vice chair. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and chairman with the
gentleman. Please Yield. Madam
Speaker, I will yield to the
gentleman standing behind me.
Thank you, sir. Um, you know,
there is JAMA body as you want
to.
Reason for concern.
You know, there's uh
Mexico is the second highest in
suicides for veterans.
You know, it's even hire people
that are in the military
suicides in New Mexico
representative I'm glad you
brought this piece of
legislation up. Just put
awareness to people and what's
going on around here?
Communities because we shouldn't
be second in suicide in the
state of New Mexico.
Call first, Unreal and again,
Madam Speaker representative.
Thank you for bringing this up.
Thank you gentlemen from Brown.
So you know for the debate,
gentlemen to close Thank you,
Madam Speaker with that, Madam
speaker. I do want to mention
that I did not do anything
illegal a lot. I had put it in
appropriation, but in, uh,
finance the house appropriations
and finance. They took the
appropriations part out, and
they figured they could do this
bill.
Without an appropriation, so
therefore I am legal. So with
that, madam chair, I moved that
Has Bill 98 do now pass this
house. Madam Speaker.
You mean you didn't do anything
illegal this time, gentlemen.
We're on final passage of house
The vote is not closed. Why
would have 63 in the formative
one in the negative?
House Bill 298 is amended as
duly passed this house.
Is there an amendment?
Your lady from Santa Fe replace
Arado. Are you ready and item
number?
22. Yes, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point, The record
reflected election is certain
Replacing House Bill 271, as
amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, the Public Finance
Accountability Act as two key
things. It codifies the
executive order that was passed
under Republican governor that
says that all fiscal agents will
be up to date on their audits
before receiving capital outlay.
And it puts that in a statue
something that we've already
been practicing, as is
But then second of all, it
creates the public finance
Accountability of Fund, which
will be used to support entities
that maybe not in compliance
with the act and ensure that
their audits are up to date. As
we know there's more than $3
billion and unencumbered Capital
outlay funds sitting there and
not serving our communities and
what this money can do, and this
fund does is puts that to work.
They actually had a smaller
program under the office of the
State auditor that if $500,000
special appropriation to assist
small public bodies that
resulted in $2.4 million
In capital outlay being used and
put to the community, which they
saw and we see as a 381% return
on investment. And so it's
effectively been in place since
2013. This just codifies that
role and really offers the
opportunity to assist small
local bodies.
Who may be having trouble
getting up to date with their
audits with that, my expert
today is Andrea Andrea Salazar,
who is with the state auditor's
office. And with that I stand
for questions. There is debate
the gentlemen from
representative blog.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker
with the kind gentle lady from
Santa Fe. Please Yield. Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Otero County.
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker
in General Lady. I appreciate
you for bringing this bill
forward. I did have a few
questions here. Number one Did
we have an appropriation, either
in House Bill two or somewhere
else. And what was the amount on
that? Mr Speaker? General lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm glad you
asked that question. It was for
a million dollars to go into
that fund. And yes, it is in the
HB two.
And it directs the state auditor
to assist small local public
bodies and engaging in attaining
financial compliance.
Great. Thank you so much, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, So I saw
the I see the figure now A
million dollars. Do we know
How old how this will be
distributed to help these
people, or is this merely just
for staff and the auditor's
office? Mr Speaker, General
waiting
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It's for
everything that helps them
complete the audits and so one
of the big things that auditor's
office found was that you had a
lot of small public bodies. They
were out of compliance, and they
had been for years and so they
couldn't afford to bring an
auditor out to them and all by
themselves and what this would
able to enable them to do is
have one auditor assist multiple
small public bodies and to get
up to date and also teach them
along the way how to keep their
audits up to date.
Okay. Thank you so much. Mr
Speaker. Generally that actually
brought me to my next question,
which was regarding, how do they
stay in compliance? So, Mr
Speaker General waiting with
these funds. I guess we're
trying to not only get them into
compliance, but also teach them
how to stay there. Mr. Speaker.
Generality. Is there some kind?
Of course we're going to bring
forward to the counties and the
municipalities and
Who's going to do that? Mr.
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So it's not a course
that occurs. It's the auditors
that are sent out, helps them
and assist them get up to date
and helps them put into place
accounting practices. They will
make it easier for them to
complete their audits in the
future.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General, Ladies. So this million
dollars is this just to fund in
new position in the auditor's
office? Like I just want to know
what what This goes toward Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I was
just conferring with my expert
and so in order to get the
auditors that they need they put
out our FPs contract for those,
And so this would pay for that.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. That's awesome. Do
we know how many folks or how
many entities are not in
compliance at this time? Mr
Speaker, Generality.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I believe
it's 2000, which are also under
half a million dollars that they
believe that are out of
compliance. I'm just gonna
reconfirm with my expert and she
may check as well so I might
come back to that, but I believe
it's around 2000.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. But if
you did want to continue
questions, we're happy to
continue as well.
All right. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. General Lady. Yeah. I
appreciate that. I think that's
great that we at least know the
amount technically so
It's really late, and I have no
idea how to do math at this late
hour. So, Mr Speaker, generally
how much per municipality with
this then focus on because I
know an RFP process is pretty
expensive. Are we going to start
with 1015 different
municipalities first, Mr
Speaker, General lady, or are we
just going to try to go?
For across the board.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. So of course they
range you know, some have been
out of compliance for a decade
or something like that. Right?
So for a while, some have been
out of compliance, not as long
and so and then some again, like
I said, can share a single
auditor to address those. So
it's somewhere between
So it ranges significantly, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I was just
confirming anywhere between
$2000 and $30,000. That is that
range. I did get an update,
though. It's about 200. So it's
2000 or under a million dollars
that do it separately. But it's
200 that they estimate that are
out of compliance right now. It
is hard to tell because some
things are late and are coming
up to speed as well. That was
the answer for your previous
question.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady So then regarding
these smaller or I guess I would
ask. Is this just smaller
entities or does this include
cities like Santa Fe, Cruces,
Albuquerque, Uh,
Will they be eligible for this
as well? Mr Speaker, Generality,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so the
part in which it requires them
to be up to date on their audits
is required for everyone and to
be and I should be clear to be
in compliance with the audit
act And that statute, um and
then, and there are some that
have a different kind of process
for certifying their up to date,
Um, in terms of the funding that
we're using for the public
Accountability or Finance
Accountability Fund.
That in the in the budget
specifies that has to be small,
local public bodies.
Okay, So thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally. Could you point to me
in the bill where it says that I
apologize. I'm just looking at
it, and I want to make sure I
see where that is. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. It's actually in the
appropriation, um, itself.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lydia, That is interesting. I've
never seen that before. But I'm
brand new, so
That's good to know. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I will look at the
appropriation so
Just do we know if they define
that by population or the amount
of money that comes in, Mr
Speaker, General lady. How is
that?
Quantified.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Small
public bodies are typically a
sec years. Oh,
Soil conservation districts and
other very small entities like
that.
Okay, So thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady that helps me.
A little bit, so I'm sure that a
lot of these public bodies that
we're talking about are kind of
volunteer positions. Mr.
Speaker, General lady like a
steak keyboards, for example. So
Mr Speaker, General Lady with
this
I just I just want to make sure
like if we put this forward and
we tell them we need to be in
compliance. We want to have a
clean audit. How do we ensure
that with these boards? A lot of
them are not paid their
volunteers. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. And that
that is actually the problem
that the state auditor's office
has sorry. Think, Mr. Thank you,
gentlemen. That is the problem
that the state auditor's office
has already been handling with
their initial $500,000 special
appropriation they received last
year.
And so we worked with. I mean, I
was working with him over the
past summer a little bit and and
the Otter had done a lot to
reach out to the secular
associations in the north to
really help them. Get up to
date. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
Now, as I mentioned, this is
codifying an executive order
that already exist. So there's
already an expectation that any
fiscal agent, including the
small public bodies are of today
before they can receive their
public their their capital
outlay.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. This
ensures with that second part
that we're not only demanding
that they be up to date
responsible to our constituents,
Ensuring this money is getting
out, but they're also able to do
that for the smaller entities
And one thing I did want to
mention Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
is that, um that that small
public and body or small local
bodies it's really on it. It's
also on a tear basis, so they're
looking at how much revenue that
body brings in versus how much
capital outlay they have
existed. So thank you, Mr
Speaker, Generality.
So then the capital outlay
they've already gotten. Let's
just say they already got a
million dollars for a water
project. So Mr Speaker, General
Lady would would that million
dollars being limbo currently or
until they're clean on their
audit? Can they still go forward
with the project that's already
been approved? Mr. Speaker,
General lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
As it stands right now, they
cannot use those funds until
their up to date on their audits
and in compliance with the audit
act.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and then few few
questions. Sorry. Um, Mr
Speaker, General Lady regarding
the current program. Do we know
how many entities we have been
able to get into compliance with
that $505,000 that we previously
appropriated? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. They believe I
was talking to an expert. She
believes it's about 20 or 30
that they've been able to get up
to date and compliance. Um,
yeah.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker
generally, and then last
question regarding the auditor's
office. Does this give the
auditor any other special
authority or duties powers,
Whatever other synonyms are,
therefore that Mr Speaker,
General Lady just to be able to
ensure clean audits. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen. This is focused on
clean audits. I will. And if you
look at, um, you know, Page
Two. It also explains that if
they are into fit deficiency or
if they have concerns on there,
it does allow the to to work
with those entities to ensure
that they can disperse those
those funds otherwise, so there
is efforts. It's it does not
give the auditor any more power,
but it ensures that we're able
to work with these bodies to get
the capital outlay into the
community like we all want it to
be.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally. Well, I sure hope
this helps and works to get
these entities back into
compliance. But I do. I do have
some concerns. Maybe not with
the bill, but just with the
process because I know a lot of
these places are indeed
volunteer. And I do want to make
sure that those have continuity
If they say I'm quitting. This
is too much work for me for
free. You know, I've heard that
before Mr Speaker, generating
So it's good that that this is
bringing being brought forward
and I will listen to the debate.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, there's debate. The
general lady from Chavez
representative is L
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much
for the general Lady from Santa
Fe. Yield and speak slowly,
please.
I knew that was coming. Mr
Speaker, and I was preparing
myself to yield slowly to the
gentle lady from Chavez County
and Mr Speaker. I certainly do
appreciate that because you talk
fast, and I can't hear that
fast. Okay, Mr Speaker. I
noticed on your bill that the
there was an amendment made. Let
me turn back over. Your fingers
are real dry right now.
An appropriation Finance
committee that struck the
appropriation because it was
already placed in house Bill
two. Is that correct? Mr Speaker
and General Lady? Yes, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, That is
true. Okay, I see a problem with
the bill on the very first page
then
And it's online. 15. Would you
take a look at that? Yes, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Okay. It is making an
appropriation. That wording is
still in there.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen or late,
gentle lady. We were advised by
H A F. C because it is in the
budget that it should keep that
line in there. Still, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
Okay, well, that that surprises
me, Mr Speaker, General Lady
whenever we're talking about
where you're trying to establish
right here.
Many, many years ago whenever I
first came up here, and that was
back whenever everybody didn't
have all the wrinkles and gray
here that we have now
But Mr Speaker in general Lady
There were several little tents
in my district and all the
little town surrounding that.
That they were not in
compliance, even though they
desperately needed the help from
Capitol outlay.
We
But with all those little towns
See what the problem was, and
there was not an auditor did
that had gone before the state
auditor auditing board.
That wanted to do the business
for these little bitty towns.
They were not in compliance.
Finally, one of my small towns
was able to secure an auditor.
The prior to this
And the auditor came in, took
the books and everything and
said, I'll return and they never
heard from the person again.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
I understand what this bill is
trying to live alleviate. It
helped a lot whenever the former
state auditor got involved with
and said, This is what we need
need to do to correct and they
set up a not necessarily a pool,
But one auditor who would take a
grouping of small tales like
that that we're kind of within
the same.
Area.
And do all their books for one
set price.
And it got everybody out of the
gym. It brought them all back up
into compliance where they could
go ahead and apply for or get
capital outlay. Funding CBD
grants of, say Kia loans
That type of stuff some Mr
Speaker. Why are we going back
to revisit this again? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General lady, in truth with this
is doing is codifying that
process and codifying that
process to make sure that we
have a fund that's able to do
that regularly.
Okay, and Mr Speaker.
Tell me some of the other
entities. Besides, our small
villages are very small villages
that this would benefit.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Small towns, Small villages.
Uh, soil and water conservation
districts, um, really looking at
those smaller entities is the
focus of this.
Okay, Mr Speaker. More often
than not. Those are the small
entities that do need the most
help. Whenever that auditing
situation does take place. The
problem is a lot of these people
are like they throw their hands
up going. Oh, no. What are we
going to do? We don't have the
means to be able to pay an
auditor on that.
And it's very important that
these entities do realize that
there is help out there that
they don't have to just put
their hands over their eyes and
say it'll go away.
They have to be in compliance if
they're not in compliance. Guess
what? That funding does go away.
So who? Who will they be? Who
should they be turning to Mr
Speaker and General Lady?
If there is a situation again
like this
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. They should
be working directly with the
office of the state auditor to
help them get up to date.
Mr Speaker. I disagree with
that they need to call their
state representative.
That is the first step that they
need to take or the county
manager and have that county
manager get hold of state
representative or the state
senator and say, Call these
people they can help Mr Speaker,
General Lady. That's our job. I
thought we were here to help all
of our constituents throughout
the state. So whenever I say no,
they have to call now. They
didn't who they need to call.
If there's a problem.
They need to be calling us and
Mr Speaker. It is our job to
ensure because we are the ones
that do delegate the money for
capital outlay.
That our money is going to go to
the entity that we want to
support back home because it is
that they're taxpayers dollars
that came up here to go back to
work for them. So, Mr Speaker, I
disagree with you. Don't call
the state auditor's office.
As people that are in need of an
audit need to be contacting us.
I hope everybody understands
what I'm saying. That's our job.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you very
much. Appreciate your sponsor is
to debate generated from Santa
Fe Representative Luhan. Thank
you, Mr Speaker with the
generality yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the General Lady from Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had
Number of questions when
This bill is before us in HFC.
And I appreciate and I recognize
Ah, um, the good governance
behind this, but is the
appropriation attach this bill
contingent upon the
The language created through the
act to codify the executive
order, Mr Chair. I mean, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. No.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
Um
When Mr Speaker generally does
this bill going this act go into
effective if we pass it.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. It
does not have an emergency
clause on it. So June, 30th was
would be what I would expect,
like Oliver bills.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
Um
So my concern with that day
enacting that day under this if
this goes into
Um, law is that we have a lot as
you mentioned. Correct me if I'm
wrong, Was it over 200 in
compliant local governments. Mr.
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Generally, yes.
And Mr Speaker Generator did you
not say only with only 500.
$1000 the, uh state auditors.
Office was only able to help 20
or just over 20 small
communities or
Um
Yes, Mr Speaker. Generally I
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady that was with
that first part of money. And as
I heard from my expert, those
are expected to be around 2000
anywhere from $2000 to $30,000.
so there is a range and what
they'll be able to accomplish
with the million dollars. I'm
sure we'll be hearing back from
them on that. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Generally, thank you,
Mr Speaker. I'm not questioning
that It's been helpful and that
they've done a really successful
job. I think that
I was one of one of the
legislators that helped get that
money and that funding last year
than for the good reason good
cause in which it's been used. I
think it's been really
successful. My issue is that we
still have so many small
communities and local
governments are out compliance
and they would need more time
and they would need more funding
to get into compliance.
And
I would ask if you wouldn't
mind. Mr Mr Speaker did July
Don't have
Amendment prepared, But if you
would like to maybe extend that
date to a later time maybe
If I'm looking at the numbers,
right, maybe two years out, or
you're out so that they could
work or the auditor's office
could help to work to get them
into compliance otherwise.
It could. I mean, I would just
Looking on the side of caution
and looking at the work that
needs to be done. Um
I would ask if that was
something you consider Mr.
Speaker generally.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I talked with
my expert from the state
auditor's office, and they feel
that they are ready to put these
dollars to use in the community
as soon as June. Speaker
generally, I'm not questioning
the dollars or the work
questioning the other portion of
your bill that codifies the law.
Mr. Speaker generally.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady that is still
in executive order and so
delaying that a year or further,
it would still be an executive
order. This just codifies it.
Thank you, Mr General Lady. I
just fear well, okay. The other
question. I had Mr Speaker,
general ideas.
And I asked this in the auditor
responded at the time, um, and
understanding when these
communities are under, um any
type of emergency and if that
emergency is lifted technically
by the governor and we have
fundings in place for them to
expand, and they're not able to
because they're out of
compliance with their audits.
Then they have a harder time
getting to those funds are
spending those funds is
something that I personally Mr
Speaker generally experienced
this last year. Would you look
at any language to put into
effect that if there is an
emergency, or, um, some kind of
language that would exempt those
communities so that they could
have
Access to those funds. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General Lady, And so in the past
when that's come up, the state
has the Our body has worked with
our friends on the Senate side
to ensure that people could
access those funds. But I do
think that in this bill on pages
three and four, but it does give
the flexibility necessary to
address those emergencies
specifically that if they need
help, remedying those concerns
that the state agency can help
them identify another fiscal
agent, or that they can impose
special grant conditions.
Adequately deal with that, so I
do feel that in the bill right
now we have that flexibility.
Thank you, Mr Speaker generally,
and I understand that you're
trying to cover all the things
with the fact of the matter is
that this is something that has
happened and I fear that what
will happen again and the remedy
wasn't through the state
auditor's office is through the,
um
Through the FAA. Um, would you
be working through this bill? Mr
Speaker, General ladies with DFA
and tandem to help remedy these
These concerns that I brought
forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. The
bill has the state auditor's
office working with DFA as it
stands, and they would, of
course work with him through
this. The objective of this bill
is to ensure that anybody that
needs to get up to date is
accountable to our communities,
and we're getting the money in
the account community as soon as
possible.
Thank you, General Lady, Mr
Speaker.
So
Do your through this piece of
legislation and codifying this
into law. Um
And I would I would agree and
recognize some of the concerns
that we brought forward with our
other.
Members on the other side of the
aisle and how
We are how communities reach out
to us and
Ask how
What is the capacity because
there are some concerns here and
some of the in the FAA are some
of the information received.
On the amount of work that it's
going to take to do this work.
Are we going to cover those FTS
and other expenses?
With this money with just a
million dollars. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. Um, these,
This does not create any new FDs
because the state auditor's
office doesn't feel that it
needs new FTE s, However, what
it does is, it allows them to
put out the R F. P s and get the
auditors in the community as
quickly as thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, so
What would happen if the so
there's a list of over 200
communities and they're out of
compliance?
Is it not in the purview of DFA
to do this work and to help them
to their local government? Um,
Division and
So with this bill, then put that
obligation of
Working into compliance at the
state auditor's office. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Ladies. So what
This bill does ensures that the
state auditor can help small,
small public bodies get up to
date with their audits, as
described in the Auditing Act,
which oversees his office. And
so this is those those
amendments will be made in
there.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and
Is it guaranteed to this to the
language here that they will be
working with the FAA?
In their division of local
government to get that done, Mr
Speaker. Generally, I'm just
trying to trying to grasp this
because
I just heard and worked with
many communities in our small
communities in northern New
Mexico, and I just want to make
sure that
That there is
That they are going to be, um
They're not going to be met with
Um, conflicting information, and
they're going to be reached out
to in a very informative and
indirect way. And I don't
question that from the auditor's
office. I just think that
there's two different things
happening. And again, Mr Speaker
and generally and bringing this
up because this is what I've
been experiencing and trying to
help local communities for quite
some time now, Mr Speaker,
General lady, so I'm just trying
to clear this up.
And get to understand that this
is what's going to happen. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So So my question is
There's not going to be a
confusion of for these
communities when they're trying
to figure out especially
emergency situations and how
they can. There's not gonna be a
big workarounds. There's not
gonna be confusion so that they
can get their needs met very
directly in in a timely way. Mr
Speaker, General Lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you Generally know, Um, already?
This has been in place since
2013. So, um, this is something
that they've already been
working through.
Thank you, Mr because generally
that's that's not what I was
asking. But I understand what
you're saying, Um And so with
that, Mr Speaker, I think that
Ah!
There's some more so many things
that we need to do and so many,
and I feel and I see the need
with this bill, and I compliment
with the state auditors done. I
think there's more to do with
that. And
I hope to maybe work with you
all off line to get you to
understand where some of my
concerns are. Maybe make this a
little bit better and easier for
smaller communities. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General.
Ladies, gentlemen, from Colfax
Very hard and quick. So Miguel
Union informally, Guadalupe
Representative Chatfield. Mr.
Speaker does the General lady
yield Mr Speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Colfax Khoury.
Hey, Artie in quay, San Miguel
and Union
Thank you.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady with
this
Apply to a mutual domestic water
system. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Yes.
And I just Mr Speaker noticed
that that was one of the smaller
entities that you left out
there.
I really Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. I appreciate you.
Doing this bill. It's just good
business.
We've complied with the
governor's executive order for
years. It's long time that it
should be codified.
Ah, and I would just add that
It's not always
That someone's audits are are
just out of whack that they're
they're incompetent. Uh, In the
case of a salt water
Conservation district, for
instance.
They received 1000.
$700? No, they received 17,000
sorry about that $17,000 per
year.
As their base.
Uh, if they reach Tier three.
This is a three tiered system if
they reach three tier three, the
lowest level the simplest.
Audit at Tier three probably
will cost them around 7 to
$10,000.
So that leaves practically
nothing.
To pay their secretary to do
whatever else they have. So for
many of these
Small
Entities.
It's easier just to do nothing
because if you do something, it
takes all your money away.
And just the money that was
That the auditor has has been a
huge help a huge help.
There are still a few that maybe
just have books but not
Audits in compliance, but many
many of them do. But in order to
stay in compliance, you have to
be audited every year, so every
year
It takes all your money, right?
So, uh,
Much needed that this be
Codified much needed that
everybody gets hot. It'd much
needed that it doesn't take
It doesn't It doesn't incentive,
FYI, doing nothing.
Uh, so I appreciate the both
aspects of this bill. And I
thank you for bringing it and I
certainly supported. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
Lady from Bernardi, Your
representative to go.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady from Santa Fe.
Would you yelled
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the General Lady from Bern,
Leo.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that.
You brought this bill forward.
Um, I I do believe in audits. I
think audits are very, very
important. It helps us to
understand what's happening in
an organization and where, and
it's not necessarily Mr Speaker
and General Lady.
Looked at as a as a bad thing.
It can be looked at as a very
good thing. In fact, when I
worked for the city of
Albuquerque, and I ran the
redevelopment of office prior to
my becoming the division
manager, Um I had an audit of
the redevelopment office and I
know it's not a state agency.
It's a city agent. It's actually
a quasi
Judicial or quasi governmental
agency. And, um what? What came
out of the audit, which was
really good for me. Actually,
When I took over that division
was I gained a F T E. I gained a
fiscal accountant and that
person actually helped the
office.
Um, you know, just stay relevant
and stay in compliance. We did
have some federal grounds. We
had a brownfield.
Grant that was for environmental
cleanup, which I managed, which
was a million dollar grant. And
what we did was we low, um
We loaned money to, uh,
developers at a very low
interest for cleaning up
environmental contamination, and
we had reporting requirements
and those reporting requirements
were very stringent, Mr Speaker,
and, uh um, Madam General Lady,
Madam Representative.
Um And but the good thing was
that, you know.
As a result of these audits that
you're proposing here? Um, I
think it will help these
agencies.
Determine whether they need to
come to the state and ask for
FTS and ask for the needed. Um,
um, positions that they may
require in the future and you
know that sort of you know that
That whole cycle is really a
positive things. So I am really
support your bill.
Seen over the debate generated
close. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
appreciate the conversation and
the thoughts from all our
colleagues. Mr Speaker. I now
move that house Bill 271 as
amended Do now pass house, Bill
271 as amended the vote
Hey, smell.
How open
What about the clothes?
The voters are closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative zero in
the negative house, Bill 271 as
amended as it passes house.
Let's go back to the generated
from burning Leo on item number.
29 House Bill 236.
Generally I'm gonna go to the
German from Burnley Representive
Ream.
For an amendment.
Mr Speaker in General Lady, will
you yield? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, I yield Mr Speaker in
General lady. So when I reviewed
the bill, what I saw was if we
look on page 11 the description
of a courthouse security officer
is a private security guard.
And what the problem with that
is
It is a statutory duty for the
county Sheriff to supply
District Court with police with
sheriff's deputies.
The real problem lies in when
the judge says, take that man
into custody and go book him.
The private security cannot do
that.
And so what we have done? Uh and
when you look on page
13 at the description of a
deputy sheriff.
You see it did not include
A, um
An officer who had worked in the
court.
So what does amendment does is
add, Uh, a courthouse security
deputy in the definition of
Deputy Sheriff.
Mr Speaker. This amendment is
228335.1
And I move adoption of Amendment
number two to House Bill 236.
Let's hold off on that motion
real quick. Here we all have the
amendment, The amendment
explained. Let me go to the
gentle lady. See if she deems it
friendly Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I don't see this as
an unfriendly. I just want to
point out that AOC has been
backing the bill all along.
With the assumption that
everything was covered regarding
court security and I don't mind
further clarifications so I will
not object, so it sounds like a
friendly amendment.
If there's objection to adopting
the amendment.
The amendment is adopted.
Gentlemen, you still have floor,
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
would you yield she already? Did
you have the floor? Mr Speaker
and General Lady, you know, um,
for about 10 years I've
introduced this type of
legislation. In fact, this year
I had house Bill 154.
Um
I noticed that some of your
experts there were in the room
at our pension oversight
committee.
And they did not come up.
To work on the bill that the
committee endorsed by concept
and why I say concept because we
did not have the exact language.
So I'm surprised that they came
to you because in about 10 years
I've introduced this
legislation you've never signed
on.
But I want to answer a few more
questions that came up.
Does this hurt the fund?
And I asked Sarah to go ahead
and give me an accounting of
just the police officers who
returned to work.
And under a similar plan is this
And with no future benefit
increase as of January last
year, That was 32 million.
Let me repeat that 32 million
into the Para fund with no
future benefit.
So this is something we need to
look at and encourage. We don't
have people going into these
areas.
Um, And with that minister
speaker, That's all the
comments. I have to debate your
little clothes. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I move that house Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee Substitute for House
Bill 236. As three times amended
Do now path We are on final
passage of House labor veterans
and Military Military Affairs
Committee. Substitute for house
Bill 236 s thrice amended.
Boats about to close.
No running in the chambers
generated from burning Leo.
The boat is not closed by a vote
of 56 in the affirmative seven
in the negative.
House Labor Veterans Military
Affairs Committee. Substitute
for has about 236 is three times
amended as we passed this house
Generally from Burleigh. Oh,
The great movie go to that order
of business.
Introduction of legislation.
Rejection of disordered
Senate Bill 175, as amended,
introduced by senators had
Emilio Cervantes and Hemphill.
An act relating to law
enforcement, requiring the
Department of Finance and
Administration to establish a
program to distribute funds
appropriated to the Department
for state and local law
Enforcement Officer,
Correctional Officer and
probation and parole officer
requirement making an
appropriation Senate Bill 175 as
amended, introduced by senators
had Amino Cervantes and
Hemphill.
Senate Bill 175, as amended have
made right to US by title is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 176 as amended,
introduced by senators Mestas
and representative Dela Cruz and
act relating to athletic
competition and ending and
enacting sections of the
Professional Athletic
Competition Act, adding
definitions, adding and
increasing fees, adding weight
classes requiring state
champions extending the
termination dates of the
Professional Athletic
Competition Act and the New
Mexico Athletic Commission.
Senate Bill 176 as amended,
introduced by Senator Mestas and
representative Dela Cruz Senate
Bill 176 is amended have been
raped twice by title is order is
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee. Already, Senate Bill
201 introduced by Senators
Neville and Worth an act
relating to transportation,
clarifying duties for the
Department of Transportation
related to the regulation of
railway companies.
Transportation network companies
and motor carriers changing the
appeals process by making
department decisions. Appealable
to District court, updating
definitions and other provisions
of the most motor carrier Act,
repealing sections of the NMC
1978 relating to carrier
inspection fees. Senate Bill 201
introduced by Senators Neville
and Worth 201, which was my
title is referred to the House
Transportation Public Works in
Capital Improvements Committee,
then House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 15 as amended and act
relating to insurance, enacting
the Healthcare Consolidation
Oversight Act requiring review
of proposed hospital
acquisitions and other changes
in control of hospitals.
Granting the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance and
the Health Care Authority
Department, the authority to
review proposed transactions
authorizing the approval,
disapproval or conditional
approval of transactions,
providing confidentiality
assessing costs. Repealing and
enacting sections of the enemy
1978 declaring an emergency
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Senate Bill 15, as amended, have
been written twice by title.
It is.
Referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill three introduced by
Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to employment, enacting
the paid family and medical
Leave Act, creating the paid
family and medical leave fund
providing for the paid family
and medical leave program to pay
an eligible employee a
percentage of the employee's
wages to allow the employee to
bond with a new child or to care
for a family member.
Limiting the time allowed for
paid family and medical leave
accepting certain employees
providing for administration of
the program by the Workforce
Solutions Department preempting
similar programs, creating a
temporary advisory committee.
Senate Bill three introduced by
Senator Stewart Stewart and
representative Chandler, three
immigrants was by title is
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee.
Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. I object to the
referral of Sanibel three. The
Health and Human Services
Committee.
And requests instead of referral
to the to the Commerce
Committee.
Mr Speaker. As you know, this
bill greatly affects business
more so than I would submit it
does the health committee
And the health industry. And so,
Mr Speaker, given that we've
historically sent a similar
bill to commerce, including the
two bills introduced in this
chamber, I would request that
that is the committee referral.
Objection noted, Gentlemen.
Senate Bill 1169, as amended,
introduced by Senator Stewart
and Neville.
An act relating to finance
amending the state, supplemental
Land and Water Conservation
Fund, removing the political
subdivision fund matching
requirement, removing the
incorporated municipality
population cap, amending
eligible recipients of funds
requiring prioritization of
funding requests of Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos,
removing a reference to a
defunct entity.
Revising citations making an
appropriation Senator 169 as
amended, introduced by Senator
Stewart and Neville.
Senate Bill 169, as amended, as
referred to the House, Rural
Development, Land Grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 236, introduced by
Senator Hamblin and
Representative Paragon and Act
relating to the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Code, amending
procedures for determining gross
receipts tax increments used to
fund metropolitan redevelopment
projects.
Delaying the effective date of
laws. 2023 chapter 112 Senate
Bill 236, introduced by Senator
Hamlin and representative
Paragon 236 100 twice by title
is referred to the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
Senate Bill 241, introduced by
Senator had a meal and act
relating to criminal history,
record checks and acting a new
section of the aging and Long
Term Services Department Act
requiring criminal history
record checks for certain
department employee or
employees, Applicants or
volunteers providing for
procedures for conducting
criminal history. Record checks,
ensuring the confidentiality of
the criminal history records,
providing penalties declaring an
emergency.
Senate Bill 241, introduced by
Senator had a meal to build 241
have been read to us by title is
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 142, introduced by
Senator Munoz and Act relating
to the heavier health requiring
residential behavioral health
facilities to allow patients the
opportunity to notify the
patient's family that the
patient has been admitted to the
facility. Prescribing penalties
Senate Bill 142, introduced by
Senator Munoz
Senate Bill 142 have been read
towards my title is referred to
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 190
act relating to driving while
under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs and
acting the DW I act amending,
repealing and acting and
recompiling sections of the
motor vehicle code. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 190. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 190 haven't been
read to US by title is referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 58 introduced by
representative Sanchez Memorial
requesting the energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources Department
to study and recommend
legislation for establishing
setbacks for oil and gas
facilities. House Memorial 58
introduced by representative
Sanchez has more than 58 have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
How's Memorial 59 introduced by
representatives Ferrari Thompson
Cates, Robot, Cavallero and
Herndon Memorial requesting the
creation of the substance and
alcohol abuse task force to
study and develop a
comprehensive approach to
address substance and alcohol
abuse. House Memorial 59
introduced by representatives
Ferrari, Thompson, Cates, Roybal
Caballero and Herndon 59 have
been written was by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee.
Your lady from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I go to move. We got to
that We're this is messages is
ordered to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in and gross copy of House Bill
141, as amended, has been red
and full and signed by the
officers of the Senate and open
session return. Same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
Dearly want Senate Chief clerk
message will be entered.
House executive message number
51 Speaker Martinez and members
of the House I have this day
signed House Bill 141, as
amended, enacted by the 56th
Legislature. Second session
2024. Respectfully yours.
Michelle Hunger, some governor
Generated from polio.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business
Ordered gentlemen from Burnley.
Oh, thank you, Mr Speaker. I
noticed and House education on
Friday when I said it might have
been our last meeting all the
long faces, so it's lucky or
vice chair has a couple of bills
up on Monday, so your House
Education committee will meet on
Monday morning at 830 breakfast
will be provided.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Message will be entered.
Any other announcements. Your
lady from Los Alamos, Santa Fe
and Sandoval. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your House Judiciary
Committee will be meeting on
Monday afternoon as well. 15
minutes after the floor session,
or 130 room. 309. Thank you.
Take note. Any other
announcements? Gentlemen from
your Eva Sandoval and something
in San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Your
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee will meet Monday. 830
in the morning. Thank you. Thank
you, gentlemen. And we allowed
everybody remove their coats.
Except for you. So please put
your coat back on any other
announcements.
Well, I have a good
announcement. You guys want to
hear this?
We're going to be off tomorrow
for Super Bowl Sunday.
Go Eagles.
Any other announcements.
Generated from burning Leo.
Mr Speaker. I'm away at the
house stand in recess until
Monday morning at 10 A.m..
10:30 a.m. Monday.
February.
What's the Super Bowl Sunday,
the day after Super Bowl Sunday?
10.
Alright. The houses stand in
