Um I have.
Retired air force veteran uh.
This house joint resolution is
for the legislator took
legislature to accept the
federal government government
retros.
Parts of land to concurrent
state and federal jurisdiction
care currently now for space has
a seventy acre parcel land near
gibson and carl that is being
converted into a commercial area
the released with a private
developer with a concurrence of
the state and federal there is
jurisdiction the federal
government has coordinated.
Have the shares department
respond to all enforcement
related events in this area the
federal government has entered
into agreement with alba kirkian
burning account for fire
suppression emergency medical
services utilit.
Was this came from request for
this land.
And then it went to the governor
who okay it.
Now it has to come to the l.
Commercial yeah it has a name
called max cue a research park
this area will be.
The space rapid capabilities
office all currently but those
specific
it will bring jobs that only
support that was not only
support the mission but.
Will support the people there
will be as we get more missions
in with especially with the
space force will have hotels in
restaurants and retail there for
this area of the basis.
This is great for currently
therefore space it's great for
albuquerque and new mexico
specially in the jobs area so as
a member of the legislat.
Solution eleven and without I
have.
For a long hand to be here thank
you for allowing us to be here
lieutenant cold acting jackson
so i'm the staff to debit it so
the head lawyer for current
liner.
Few years now and.
Open up the space that we h.
On behalf of the partnership
committee in the gr.
Of defense for the five
military discip.
Thank you.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Good morning can you hear me.
Yes I paul cassidy member the
current when partnership
committee and the military based
planning commission and state
strong and standard very strong
support of this measure thank
you.
Thank you.
And thank you.
Quick question.
What what is the
you know a lot of ho.
No is there is not the case with
this it has gone.
Yeah.
Representative so we're just
transferring t.
Entitled to the city of.
So that the federal government.
What we're doing is we're
changing over the jurisdiction
so all of currently.
We've already moved the fence
lined back to allow the
developments to begin but that
just means that limits.
So this is essentially changing.
Sure so.
Madame chairman in
representative does this.
And sir can you be more specific
about it so
environmental
so it's.
There there's no change it still
the jurisdiction now even
exclusive federal jurisdiction
we are beholden to the that laws
and the policies of the state in
which we reside so all of those
things still apply to us and if
anything this is giving the the
states more authority in the
space that was previously
exclusive federal authority okay
and madame chair and presenter
expert witness will that
so so none so.
None of the liabilities.
Effect.
Madame.
I was only going to make a
motion.
What I promise and like many of
my bills and energy but.
Yes.
Floor leader chasing.
Thank you ma'am.
Alright let's mov.
The.
Madam chair members of the
committee
let me first just an.
Energy doctor chris more whose
professor at santa fe institute
and member of the inner
disciplinary working group on
all grove m.
With me and might.
And I am not the experience on
this bill i'm the third or
fourth sponsor on
that reversal side you know the
has a
has to be in a house
appropriations unexpectedly this
morning it's a straight forward
bill designed to collect
information about the extent to
which state government is using
the technology of artificial
intelligence or aid and as we
all know it's growing in use.
Field for us
in we had represented signing on
it is the chair of the interim
the science and technology
committee and I served on that
committee and we had some
hearings on an artificial
intelligence also the court's
corrections in justice committee
of which i'm a member hand heard
from a multitude of experts over
the interim on artificial
intelligence and although we
know it's being incorporated
into tools used by governmental
entities it became clear to
legislative members in the
interim that we don't know the
extent to which are agencies.
We don't know the extent to
which our agencies are using the
tools and even some of the
agencies may not know the extent
to which they're using their
tools so we're trying to help
them catch up to determine how
to insure that it's used
efficient responsibly and fairly
and still provides the benefits
for which is promoted it's a
conservative first step to get a
baseline structure for the
transparent transparency and
state government issue that
state government uses of a I
with borrowed components of
legislation from other states
primarily connecticut but while
other states are taking action
to regulate the users of
artificial intelligence this
bill doesn't this not a
regulatory
mechanism new out to be i'm not
yet I mean it's not in that
design to be were not taking
that step yet it's not an
attempt to regulate alliance and
mechanism to gather the
information and truck provide
transparency.
The bill in its current form has
a general services department as
the point agency for inventory
and assessment processes
and we had originally selected
gst to serve those roles based
on their existing role in the
procurement process that after
discussion with folks such as do
it and.
We think that it would be more
appropriate to have the
resources and expertise
on that department does to
and would entertain a friendly
amendment to substitute do it
for just and represent the
signiano
is also sponsoring.
Senate bill one thirty sponsor
was senator michael pedea and
what it does is it creates an a
I work group to develop
legislative proposals and
recommend.
Of a eye upon request so this
bill one eighty four and senate
mill one thirty.
So with that will stand for
questions.
The answering.
The.
The audience.
Think you madame chairman think
you representative and both of
you esteemed individuals who
can't come to our committee I
had a few maybe more than a few
questions about the bill it's
kind of very detailed so i'll
try to be quick about this so
matter to representative.
I mean it's just start on p.
And I just want to make clear so
is this creating a new.
What is this creating is a task
force is that a department is at
an office what what are we
creating with this legislation
madam chair.
The.
Sure representative walk I I
wouldn't see.
So I don't think.
The.
Representative okay that that
helps me out they heard creating
something in it.
I didn't see that in the bill so
I wanted to make sure that.
It was a clear some medicare
representative experts do we
know currently how many new
mexico state departments use
artificial intelligence do we
have.
I know we we watch everything we
do in state go.
We do not currently
have established an inventory
out what agencies are using what
uhm
types of a I
because there is.
Even that term.
Artificial intelligence and the
capabilities of the artifici.
That is one of the reasons for
be talked to
the chair of their signs and
technology committee.
Ah
look at creating that work force
are the creating the world group
so that we can bring and all
those basic elements the
foundational blocks up defining
what it means to us so that we
can take out of.
Thank you risk elements.
Of any artificial intelligence
of the responsible ai as they
call it that talks about the
buyers that talks about the
transport and see the integrity
the security
because there's a lot of
components including privacy.
That needs to be addressed
before we can do right without
those foundational basic
elements defined.
Collecting the inventory is good
to have like because then we
know who's using what then we
can look into the integracy
south okay does this board well
for bias are best this take a
good stands on transparency and
thinks of th.
Madame chairman think you
represented in mister secretary
that helps me a lot regarding
that and so with what we're
talking about here the a work
group that's the other bill but
this is just merely mandating.
Just an interaction medicare
members of the committee all
right manager representative so
then on page two we have
artificial intelligence
definitions starting on six did
we obtain this definition from
any kind of
national organization where did
we where do we come up with this
verbit's manager representative
experts
representative it comes to
remotes date
a number of states are into work
group and it.
But the work group was looking
at that as a.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representatives so this is
pretty much trying to mirror
what connecticut and other folks
who are already doing this
they're kind of definitely after
a madam chair representative
after the uh csl meeting there
was a work reformed what it may
have been for.
But there have been regular
meetings of the states that are
trying to just get a handle on
it.
The.
Demand and chairman think you
representative in its it's a
blifting to hear that other
states are also looking at this
kind of thing.
Representative on page two.
We're talking about the kinds of
systems starting on line
thirteen down to sixteen.
And do we know if this would
cover less to say madame
chairman representative someone
in state government who decides
to create their own program that
may or may not.
Matter
sure
madam share representative yes
but I want.
Yeah.
Will internal.
So
going back to their fundamentals
right now you know there is a
close to loops this demand a w.
As the doctor mentioned here
and.
It's a open look system that can
go fetch information.
But in a close loop system we
will use data point.
The sources that we like if we.
Administrative god.
The ability to tailor it so if
there's dead work to go to do
something for specifically for
policy making an.
Anything else once again those
are all being evaluated at the
process.
Thank you
you madame chairman thank you
for that mister secretary
representative so.
I just want to be clear on what
we just spoke about so if I let
you see I use I know google then
I have an ai program in google
right so if I google something
like what is enemies a thirty
days something or other and it
brings up something with a would
that be tracked then or would
that not be tracked since that
is indeed using a i.
Medicated members of the
committee and representative
the public publicly provided a I
products and tools you've been
wet to procure that on a stead
dime then we would include that
in our inventory that this bill
is proposing.
But if it is available for
anybody to use like a google.
Search engine as an example then
it is available for everybody
unless the policy says all the
blocked those featu.
Then we can block those features
okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative
estimate hope you don't go
blocking google down that out is
that once again that is why I
can be explained madame
chattered members that the
computer this is an example
right because.
We take the outcome of the law
at the legislation and then be
interpret that and then if it
prohibits
you know outside the use of
these products and features then
we need to implement those
filters sort of speak.
If it is unclear than you don't
have a mechanism thank you
madame chairman members of the
committee and representatives
and manager it does it this bill
would not prevent the use of
that anybody got it okay thank
you madame chairman thank you
representative that that cleared
it up a little for me I was kind
of getting scared there are my
google search is now going to be
it brought in stolen for the
public use you know
me looking up and say thirty
dash something or other so that
manamentar representative okay
i.
That that kind of makes sense to
me so when we're talking about
something the state is indeed
procuring right through the
procurement code.
I see that there are some
requirements here I think page
three starts that regarding anti
discriminate unlawful
discriminatory practices so
madam chair representative I
know that.
That could be little hairy when
it comes to trying to get
correct information for example
as you say i'm looking about.
Like a biological question right
and madame to representative if
that biological question may or
may not.
Fall into a discriminatory
answer even though it's the
truth right how would we
prevent.
This kind of ai from being.
Precluded from giving.
Relevant and fact based
information that mayor may not
be quote unquote discriminatory
madame chairman.
That's a great question and of
course the what discriminat.
I can see that what it means to
me as a computer scientist is
that a a system be equally
accurate on different groups.
So that we want to make sure
that a system which is trained
on for instance data from other
states and the cities around the
country which is not trained on
new mexico's unique.
I've seen it happen that are on
part of the new mexico.
It's simply because it had fewer
fewer folks like that.
So this is the kind of thing
we're watching out for but no.
Okay thank you madame chairman
think he represented so I just
want to make make clear though.
It's his bias right bias means
consequential decision results
that may come to unlawful
discriminatory practice so are
we saying that this a I must not
have that bias is that.
Can you just.
I madam sure representative well
again this is really just an
information gathering bill so it
doesn't prohibit.
To see if they are accurate and
if there.
Whenever th.
Thank you madame chair
representative thank you for
that answer and yeah I did I did
see that during the interim but
i'm still a little confused
about how the
companies that are producing
this how they give that
information to the state which
may be proprietor information
and then how does the state make
If I was an a I company I
wouldn't want to be giving out
my proprietary information to
his state so how are we being
going to get a bid is mike my
qu.
I.
Madam.
Number of demands.
Some of them really are black.
In the same.
Spaces they're often different
business models that they tell
you how it works but they also
give you great technical support
great you know gis linked.
Yeah.
And mountain also.
Our current procurement code can
al.
That are only available in
through methods that don't
disclose and so we're using the
sound like with in the crack.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative I just
will point you to page five
line.
Fourteen of fifteen cause we say
here.
The actual sell including
requirement for transparency by
the vendor so.
What is that transparency do
they have to say here are core
files that were using to make
these determinations in the
system this is how we've trained
In the sense madame chairman
repres.
Do that we need to understand.
But this doesn't mean.
Subsection be.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative so.
Yes I I see that on section be
here and it talks about myth
methodology employed to correct
errors so i'm just wondering how
would we how would we get that
methodology without asking them
what you're doing to correct
that right how do we how do we
know how they do it without the
back and knowledge of what.
Representative having.
The data.
My experience there is this is
not.
The proprietary need.
The time the product.
Certain mathematical thing.
And.
Okay thank you madame chairman
think you represented I still
have a.
A little harper and with that
and i.
I appreciate those answers i'm
gonna continue on we're just.
For the mean main bill itself
right we're asking compliance
with state agencies.
To give us this data rate some
adams are represent of eight.
I find it difficult to try to
get that data from these
agencies because I know certain
agen.
I'm just gonna talk about
something totally.
Help care authority
all the mcos that they contract
with they tried to get data
regarding their their
clients and none of them would
even give most of the data and
they only just pay to find of a
thousand dollars or something so
how do we ensure that the
government agencies are indeed
producing accurate and timely
data if they're producing it at
all.
Madame share representative just
to be clear we're not asking for
raw data were.
An explanation of the system
that takes in that data.
So we're not asking for data
about.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative and yes I see
to find person here in in here
and it would not wouldn't be the
aa so I agree with you there
madame chairman representative
mother question I think you
brought it up was putting this
under do it instead of ages
human gsd gs yes one of those
fund departments
made into representative yeah
that's one of my concerns there
and i'm glad that you.
The.
I cannot wrote all over your
bill manager I apologize I have
so many questions i'll stop
there but I still some concerns
regarding some of the data.
This is.
Yeah.
So many.
And i'd like to move the
amendment for discussion on page
three line fifteen.
Strike department part me strik.
And then throughout the rest of
the bill.
Not g.
Department of in.
And and page five.
Line twenty three
the exact.
The.
And in search
do it department of information
techn.
That is on page
twenty three.
And amount
indicated that's a friendly
amendment.
Certainly believes that that's
the proper.
Thank you.
Adopted.
Representative I don't know yes
representative of block no sir.
Florida chasi.
Representative hocken vehicle
representative little.
Representative ring.
Representatives.
Madam bice chair figure
yes
met and based her johnson.
Thank you manager and.
The.
The.
With house memorial ten.
Bill two four two.
Specifically HB two forty two it
aligns our laws to prevailing
practices by allowing a couple
to select a judicial officer a
religious officer or any other
person over the age of twenty
one to perform a marriage
ceremony.
Mexico into the majority of
nations that have out large
child marriage by making
eighteen the minimum age for
obtaini.
It adjusted me for marriage
marriages from twenty five to
forty dollars with a county
option to double the fee if
neither party has an address in
new mexico.
And number four it permits
deployed service members to
marry by remote means so that
there is retrobed can travel and
get on a base this bill has the
support of county clerks the
health service affiliate the new
mexico county's board and is
supported by the unchained at
I wanted to introduce my expert
witnesses my co sponsor senator
daniel I said though and.
The.
Yeah.
And a little bit of money to.
Members.
Really just here in my capacity
as a former county clerk and
colleague.
Okay richard
morning madame chair members of
the committee my name is richard
millionaire number the new
mexico veterans are not very
families caucus we stand and
support this bill it would allow
military couples unmarried who
are deployed separately to be
able to be married even though
they do not physically reside
new mexico
for that reason in many others
we stand as supported as still
thank you.
Okay amber.
Good morning my name is main
hall and the health care
services director no terrible
county and the vice chair of the
new mexico county is health
services affiliate then I speak
in support of this bill as well
most specifically we do support
that changes that well and child
marriage in your mexico
since child marriage
specifically
overwhelmingly affects young
children who are girls in quite
these children at risk of sexual
physical psychological and
financial abuse and has
potential to increase the rate
of psychiatric disorders for
women who have married young
compared to those who have
married as adults
so and we earns passage of this
bills and the number of child
marriages will never be zero
without this legislative action
thank you.
The.
And so.
So.
Moving the microphone because in
a very disorienting thing.
But
yes
so
madam memchair and
representative ream so first of
all this section is in the bell
because we're removing on line
six were moving husband and wife
and replacement was spouse
subsections b and c.
The
or really odd.
And they were put in so they
affected something that
happened.
I'm not sure what happened
Property that's acquired during
the marriage is community
property property it's quite
right to the march is all in
separate if it's acquired during
the marriage and it is and it is
inherited property it remains
solemn separate unless you make
it committee.
However there's this it was
incredible.
Provision that we have.
Which is being struck out here
right property reading interest
acquired there and during a
marriage by a woman by an
instrument of writing and her
name alone or in her name in the
name of another not her husband.
Is presumed to be separate
property of the married woman if
the instrument in writing was
delivered and accepted prior to
july one nineteen seventy three
allows fifty one years ago.
The.
The out there's also suggests
that that so the person is
married.
It's received them during the
marriage.
We're overwriting the community
property this were overriding
the community property rules.
By the section by striking it
was saying the community
property rules should apply.
As they normally did.
So we're taking out the
exception to community property.
And this was that exception that
was put in fifty one years ago
it seems for a specific
situation and that specific
situation i'm pretty sure has
now lapsed.
Fault madam chair and and
represent a rim so the problem
with trying to fix the section
is because the section actually
overrides the rules.
Of.
I'll community property what
this would allow if we were to
simply strike the date.
And and and say in the name of
of of either spouse right.
Is that that would allow me
while married.
To without my spouse's
knowledge.
Purchase a property.
In my name and not put her name
on it.
Using a bank account with my
name on it but because we're
married unless that's inherited
money that would be community
money.
And it would allow me to get
around the community property
rules so that them in the case
of a divorce then I could say
well no.
Look at section forty that's
three dash twelve
that's mine that's not yours the
policy of the state of new
mexico is we don't permit that
actually if that was acquired
during the marriage that is
committed to property.
Referred to the state.
And we don't want to overwrite
that I don't think we want to
override th.
Yeah.
Yeah.
What I was thinking more about.
The.
Right but but madame share
representative exactly people
could hope to print up they can
do a solemn separate
and during the merge if they
want to I don't think we should
by statute though give people
get out of free jell card to get
around it without the knowledge
of the spouse.
Because the thing about a print
up or a sole separate is that
that is with the knowledge of
the other.
Thank you.
The.
Agreement chair think you both
just just to clarify your still.
Separate property and inherited
property
and this doesn't change that
you're j.
Madam share madame leader that
is correct okay.
Thank you madame chairman and
first of all I want to
congratulate you senator on your
very tiny bill compared to your
other legislation that i've seen
that the time so thank you
my name is on it for exactly
representative
shorter bill
thank you thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative and senator and I
did like many the portions in
here like the child marriage I
don't know why that.
The.
Military spouses I think that's
important.
I did have some questions
regarding some burbage though
and I did speak to the senator
previously about.
This.
Starting online's twenty three
twenty two.
So many representative senator
we we added this language in the
new build it says
the state gives its full faith
in credit and he marriage
between two individuals
solemnizing it and any and
another state or county comment
regardless of sex sexual or
interesting gender identity etc
manager representative I kind of
find this to be a little
redundant from the current law I
don't know why we have all these
regardless of because in the
future if we if we legalize
something else or we we
normalize something else we are
to have to add another
regardless of and then have
another thirty six page bill
from our good friend the senator
so madam to represent a can you
just tell me why we added that
certainly absolutely better
share and representative block
so this language.
It exists here where we're
talking about.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is on page eleven which is.
Where we have that.
Top of page eleven which where
we have identical language so
that language comes from about
fifteen months ago congress
passed a bill where they
provided for non discrimination
of.
As well as religious liberty of
marriage license and sold the
language with regard.
To religious l.
Just above the place.
Outlines three through eight
although we also include in the
nations tribes and published for
the religious liberty language
and I think it's appropriate to
include sovereigns in the in
the.
That comes from federal.
So we adopted new mexico then be
the non discrimination langu.
From in in mexico now we did
make and you would I discuss.
Two changes from federal law
went out in this bill and that
is federal law says sacks it
does not say sectoral
orientation in federal arses
gender.
Given our human rights act in
the mexico we added it was that
it was a choice and the
sponsor's choice to add.
Sexual orientation and ch.
But the rest of the of the
structure of that regardless of
and the listing.
Necessity national origin of
those individuals that all comes
for being from federal law we.
The.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative and I
appreciate that I I do but.
From what I am understanding
it's already protected right
it's already protected in
federal and state law so I don't
see why we're being redundant
and having to repeat it with the
regardless of since authority
enshrined in our state human
rights act and then federally
with the marrijack that they
passed a couple years ago some
adams are representative if it's
already protected I just don't
see why we're being duplicative.
Certainly matter chair and a
representative block because we
were we were bringi.
Which we felt was necessa.
Applicable not only.
Number school innovation.
Because we were doing that.
Thank you madame and think you
representative and.
He answered.
Passed out a section by section.
Okay thank you madame chairman
think you represent.
To eighteen a finally found the
page and it's talking about a
dissolution.
Of a marriage on the grounds of
income
and the district court show
except the pleading of
incompatibility to be sufficient
evidence that that exists so
madame chairman representative
can you just tell me what
currently goes on if if there is
a plead of incompatibility and
they would like them marriage to
be dissolved and then what would
this change madam to represent
it certainly matter.
If you look actually above to
the very top of.
You have the current three
reasons.
In compatib.
The.
And and so and and I will know
by the way that I I did have a
come from
the court.
Excited.
Law because she does have a lot
of people particularly proceed
that against who will want to
plead.
And what the court tends to do
is the court.
The.
Because what the court is
interested in doing is not
putting more.
Gas on the flame.
But when it comes to
incompatibility if you think
about it and compatibility means
we can't get along.
The fact that somebody asserts
we can't go along is in fact.
And so and so it doesn't seem to
make a lot of sense then to have
well I say we can't get along no
really we can get along I want
to prove that we can get along
let's have a hearing and i'm
gonna establish evidence that we
can get along no really we can't
get along it that that just
doesn't make a lot of sense and
and not in a court setting it
might it might be.
And so
and so that's where
working with some of the family
court experts it just.
The pleading of incompatibility.
Is in another top proof that
incompatibility excess.
Thank you and think you
represent senator for that very
thorough answer.
Other questions I think we're
answered and I just still had
concerns regarding that
definition because I would hate
to come come back years later
and have to amend this again and
lord knows how long you've been
working on this social I
appreciate that thank you madame
certain.
Yeah.
The.
Oh yes okay.
More and then well.
Thank you madame chairman it's
very brief this question is for
the county clerks and what was
the head count on the county c.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee
on our calls of the affiliate
our account was twenty four
four.
Twenty four in support we had
six that were.
Who are not on the call.
We had to do a little bit of a
shuffle on the vote because I
had
counties who had not paid their
dues so they were not.
We had a problem with.
So when we adjusted for the ones
who technically couldn't vote we
still had twelve and support and
for that we're against but the
original vote was a very strong
vote for our philly at we
normally have some who are never
on the call so to have that many
on the call that day to voice or
opinion was a very strong
standing.
And since circulating the bill
i've had no opposition.
With any concerns or issues with
not wanting.
So madam chair and.
Can you tell us what counties
were again.
I'm doing this strictly from
memory at this point
and that's okay so so then
we raised the amount from twenty
five to forty dollars a madam
chair.
Representative and is that
enough for the finally fear or
where to the county sit on that
I will tell you that we
originally.
I had a couple of counties that
were concerned that that might
be a bit of.
Because we don't have some
counties that are very
economically challenged.
So the compromise was to back it
back to forty dollars instead of
fifty and everybody was in
support.
In this builders also provision
that if a county posts that on
their county website and in
their offices they can charge
double that amount to eighty
dollars and the reason why there
are some counties that do a tr.
Okay yes so let me clarify that
the increase be is for anybody
who comes in and that both
parties are from outer state
neither one of them live in our.
And they're doing basically that
destination weddings in my
county I get a lot of people
come through their going to red
river ancient fire to get
married they stop in my county
get their driver get their
marriage license.
The.
I would personally love to take
advantage of.
Because again i'm a small county
with not a lot of resources this
is one of the few ways that we
have.
Cause we're also test with
preservation.
And we don't have a lot of
source of income to perform
preservation it's a very
expensive task and this is a way
for us to get some extra funding
into our coffers in order to be
able to do that preservation so
I can tell you that in my county
I will be tak.
Out of state people come.
So so madam chaired and.
Render green brenda so so miss
miss green so.
The.
Or maybe this ought to be more
directed to.
What why did we hit on forty
dollars white why were we not
at.
About that forty dollars since.
And as far as i'm concerned it
ought to be like five hundred
dollars
and that'll.
But some reservations I get
married real quick and then
finding out about
it I think if if we had a bigger
investment there we'd look at
our at our commitment a little
closer you know there is an
argument we could we could we
could try to under fifty and if
you state married for more than
five years you get twenty to the
back okay
by madame chair we might be able
to mean this bill here today and
and and
yeah it's not you know this this
seemed to be a people like as as
as the chair of the the philly
was green I put it up this there
was there was a diversity of
opinions this seem to be the the
sweep spot.
Not everybody was an agreement.
I will also let you know in
terms of the senate that the set
of major.
When there was a discussion
about a higher fee he he was
expressing some real concerns
about bringing up for a vote
when when the consensus was
reached at this level and I had
a conversation with them about.
Okay and and madam chair that
concludes my questions and thank
you.
Representative I know
yes representative black pa.
Floor leader chasing yes.
Representative happened via
representative little yes.
Representative ring.
Representatives of more yes
representative block yes and i'd
like to explain my vote.
Madame based chair figure.
Madam chair johnson.
Income and i'm sure thank you
senator representative and this
is a hard boat for me to take
you know a lot of lot of ivy
sort of bills make me go in two
different directions and it's
hard to start to make a decision
so much.
And of course it's okay goes
bill so I guess it's a little
easier to make that determine it
is
to represent I just had concerns
about those regardless of I
think those were unnecessary in
the bill but I did really like a
lot of portions so it was a hard
boat but thank you both pretty.
Think you made a.
A I am here representing a.
Ah to another committee meeting
I am here.
House memorial ten which
convenes task joint task horse
by the children youth and
families department and the
health care authority to help
remedy the minimal behavioral
health services and residential
treatment.
Today i'm joined by.
That in chair members of the
committee hello I broke to and
i'm the executive director of
new day youth and found.
And we work with young people
are eleven to twenty five who.
And predominantly in the child.
Lifeskills development and drop
in center in street at reach
services i've worked for over
twenty five years.
And
I grew up in farming ten I hold
a master degree in social work
from washington university and
st los and i've devoted the last
For older years in our state.
I would like to start by reading
just an excerpt from the cavenas
Well las vegas and albert he
officers have occurred
consistently for more than a
year in reviewing critical
instant reports provided by cyfd
over the last six months in
addition to what we've heard
from staff during our meetings
we believe there are conditions
now that are unsafe for children
and unsafe for staff the co
neutrals lettered cited needed
for immediate action as c wife
demanded your supervisors and
staff repeatedly reported that
offer stays are a direct result
of new mexico not having
developed an appropriate
adequate rate of community based
placements and services.
Ultimately we know that cyfg is
in a state of crisis and our
children child welfare system is
in a state of crisis and that we
require everyone to come
together to try to meet that it
is not see where if these so
responsibility but the task
force provides.
Providers and others to join
together to think of any
innovative and creative ways to
address the immediate and long
term challenges we cannot arms
use stop get measures only we
must address the immediate but
also think of the ways that we
are going to
transform our entire system and
so that I hope that we would be
able to leverage a joint task
worse to come up with those.
Let's go ahead and make her
comments quickly and maryla.
Yeah.
Step.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That work is on.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And if you were worse stopping
those and working with those.
And.
That group that.
CYFD.
Way those are my suggestions for
this memori.
Madam chair and and if I may
direct us question to secreta.
The.
So so in your testimony you said
that we're duplicating something
that you're already doing and my
my question is to you and change
secretary is.
What kind of supporter you get
when when you tag on these uh.
Are you are you getting support
and and getting some of this
down.
Yes.
Thank you thank you for that
thank you.
If they come out of chair and
parliament after the
representative little
and i'm really happy to meet the
director of new day I represent
it.
Yeah.
And I had one one young man who
was.
Just
a wonderful story but
I have represented a number of
youth who had to be moved on an
emergency basis.
And.
It is what I know is that it's.
Really really difficult.
To find on an emergency basis
and appropriate.
Placement for them I am not
suggesting what should be done I
I think we all know what.
Agree with representative I
don't really think we need to
put any of the bad results that
led to this because some of
those are out liar and some of
those are routine but when
children are al.
If they don't want to.
The department in a mind but
they have the legal authority.
To say no I don't want to go to
this spot and.
State to keep the community safe
we have that obligation.
This.
The.
Desi.
The.
It it is really tough and and
III would I hope I i.
This memorial wouldn't be.
Yeah.
Well this is all wrong this is
all.
I.
Animals.
Really.
Excellent.
Yeah.
After you got adopted.
The more we ca.
The.
The minimum chair I move a due
pass.
So.
