As close we have a court.
Please rise for today's
implication led by the gentleman
from grants representative there
assess thank you miss- thank you
mister speaker.
My regard as we gather today we
left up our state in our country
to you
we hardly ask for your blessings
that your hand be over us to
help us guidance in the right
direction.
Open our ears that we may hear
and know your voices so we will
not get lost on the path you set
for our lives.
We pray for the safety of those
in this country or state and
this great nation.
Closest close us daily in the
armor of guard so that meaning
stand firm in the face of
adversity
we ask you to protect us from
one needed division that
distracts us from the true
calling and the love we have for
one another.
Give us a strength to defend the
wrong the vulnerable and the
voiceless and bring justice to
those who have suffered in
justice.
We ask a special blessing on our
military our officers our
firefighters or first responders
or nurses are teachers and our
minors and all those who work so
hard to make the beautiful state
of new mexico what it is.
Please provide the appointed
leaders of the state with wisdom
and discernment to make that
make decisions that honor you.
Care for your people and improve
their lives we may not know what
to morrow will bring but help us
to rest in you really nestly
trusting in your perfect plan
thank you for your kindness
mercy in your divine love
granted peace that passes all
understanding imports out your
many blessings of part grand
county new mesco and the united
states of america i'm in.
What you like from a killing
percent of lunch from leaders
and the pledgeable legislators
please.
And all the gentlemen.
From son wine representative
don't be relisten to pledge the
new mexico.
The.
Generated from believe mister
speaker I regard that order of
business
introduction of legislation
objection it is ordered.
How some oriole nineteen
introduced by representatives
teraces and senators brantley
and hemphill and memorial
proclaiming january twenty
fourth two thousand twenty four
the forty eighth annual grant
county day in the house of
representatives house memorial
nineteen introduced by
representative tarassas and
senators brantley and himpile.
As a moral nineteen amendment
twice my title is order not
printed in place on the speaker
stable generally familiar.
Mister speaker I will go to that
order of business announcements
in this lanes business in
objectional so ordered lady from
mckilley representative lens
from thank you mister speaker I
rise to make.
State emotion.
Thank you mr speaker I rise to
make motion to ask that house
memorial sixteen become the next
order of business.
Same objection it is ordered
that the record of fight that
election is served for place in
house memorial sixteen and final
passage has been taken in it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
The general lady to explain the
memorial thank you mr speaker
and I good morning everyone
today is a big day for myself
representative john son
represent gracious
representative i'll come today
is gallop mckinley county day
and legislature and that is what
house memorial sixteen is about
mister speaker what i'd like to
do is just simply go through the
highlights of this memorial
representative johnson and I
have a couple people without
like to recognize also so today
is proclaiming january twenty
fourth twenty twenty four gallop
mckinley county day in the new
mexico house of representatives
while the the city of galban
minute kentley county are in the
northwestern gateway to new
mexico and reflect a rich
cultural recreational and
economic diversity
we have the greatest number of
native american residents of any
new mexico county it's the home
of members of the navigation the
public suny and is the site of
the largest annual gathering of
native americans the inner
tribal indian ceremonial we
hosted I think it was a hundred
and first last year
we are mckinley county
incorporate incorporates the
continental divide which
separates the water sheds of the
pacific and the atlantic ocean
we have a historic downtown is
an is recognized are both as a
main street in arts and cultural
district
it wasn't too long ago that the
legislature declared the city of
gallop to be the adventure
capital of new mexico
and we boast that we are the
most patriotic small town in
america in his home to the state
national veterans cemetery
now therefore a bit resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of new mexico that
january twenty fourth be
designated gallop mckinley
county day in the new mexico.
Think you generally
their debate on the memorial.
The gentleman from a killing and
similar representative welcome
thank you mister speaker I just
want to stand and support this
memorial
luckily I am part of the
delegation that the represents
machine we count luckily I don't
have any of the city a gallop
but I still spend the latter
time there thank you mister
speaker thank you
thank you gentlemen for the
debate on elsewhere we're all
sixteen the gentleman from
balance your representative.
Thank you mister speaker in the
with the general ideal actual
need to you know but mister
speaker generally I want to I
had the privilege of going to
gallop as part of the eleven c
and I was truly impressed with
the hospitality with the better
memorial what was done there as
far as honouring eventuals and
also with the renovation of the
downtown area so I I stand and
support this memorial the
necklace in the gifts from this
are so very much appreciated and
I thank you for bringing this
memorial forward thank you
mister speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Jane lady from some one of
mckilley generally from santa fe
and then we'll come back here
figure his figure I too want to
stand and support of this
memorial and having visited this
part of our state many many
times when I worked for then a
congressman better rate luhan in
cd three and the hospitality is
true and genuine as a gentleman
from valentia has said
the but it's a special place we
got to visit red work the red
rocks there and some of the the
events there were the bloom
yesterday they have and others
and it's just an incredible
special spiritual place and I
want to want to think the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and recognize and say
thank you to all of our
or people all of our new
mexicans from galip new mexico
it's it's very special place
thank you mister speaker thank
you lady there's for the debate
generated from aculians and hon
representative johnston thank
you mr speakers mister speakers
mr speaker carbon house and gas
everyone here I just want to
thank you for celebrating
mckinley county day with this
thank you for all of my family
my friends and colleagues from
gallup attending today with us I
was born and raised in mckinley
county and I left to a ten
calage and have careers here and
there my last stop in washington
dc and then I moved back to
gallop and it's been a pleasure
and an honor to be back home and
with my community so at that I
just want to say thank you and
have been mackinly county day
think you're later there is
further to be delivered from
better leo representative
thompson mr speaker I too m a
child of mac in the county
representative johnson and I
both grew up in crown point
she's much younger than me she
is to hang out with my younger
sister but uhm the whole county
is wonderful crown point is
wonderful gallop.
Was the big city where we had to
go for a restaurant or a movie
or a swimming pool sixty miles
away so so we much appreciate it
gallup to be to be able to go
and do some things that crown
point could not be us thank you.
Thank you generally for the
debate the during from san juan
representative else
thank you mister commissioner
will be dealing here
I yield
mr speaker I am a product of the
gall mckinney college school
system they must have done a
good job because i'm here with
you twelve today I I honor the
memorial as well thank you.
Thank you german.
Did you leave from any.
And lee representative brown.
Thank you mister speaker will
the general lady please yield a
yield thank you mr speaker
generally I just want to stand
and commend you for all of the
work you have done so tired of
listening to it
the county and the city both are
and uh mister speaker general
lady had been a real example to
I think every member of this
chamber on how to advocate for
infrastructure improvements and
just quality of life so thank
you so much mister speaker
general lady kitchen lady
further debate on the memorial.
Can you see your per debate
generally to close thank you
mister speaker i'd like to thank
the members for their kind words
it means a lot to all of us from
gallopin mckennelly county and
mrperiod speaker today is the
day that we have our corn
necklaces everyone should be
wearing one and i've got extras
around my neck if you didn't get
it also our beautiful pins that
for the last twenty four years
are community as brought forth
for all of the members of the
house without mr speaker and
members I now move house
memorial sixteen do now pass on
I ask that um this be done by
nation.
Thank you generally there's been
a motion to show all members of
the house president voting in
the affirmative scene objection
it is ordered we are a final
passage of house memorial
sixteen the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a word
have seventy in the affirmative
zero in the negative house
memorial sixteen has duly passed
this house.
Thank you mister speaker for
allowing us a little more time
here on the floor this morning I
have someone i'd like to
recognize a distinguished
individual from mckinley county
and gallop in the gentleman's
name as mrperiod kent wilson if
you would please stand sir
if I may where else can't will
soon as the founder and owner of
four corners welding and gas
supply in gallop his served as a
member of the board of directors
for the economic development
corporation is the current chair
of the city of gallop planning
and zoning commission is has
more than forty years of
experience as the owner and
operator of a major gallop
company and as an employer with
a wealth of knowledge in
business and retail operations
manufacturing fabrication
construction zoning and finance
during the time that he served
with economic development he was
very very instrumental in
setting up what's called an
industrial economic workforce
program the greater gallop
industrial workforce program
provides a twelve week training
in the building and construction
trades awarding stackable
national center for construction
education and research
certificates and occupational
safety and health administration
certificates
that includes things like heavy
equipment operation
instrumentality pipe fitting
welding and other programs which
I think we've all recognized are
critically important in new
mexico
so where is
through twenty two the greater
galip industrial workforce
program was a successful
threedashyear pilot program in
and now has been awarded our
funding from the uperiod.
Member of the economic
development corporation member
of planning and zoning and for
his founding of the economic
industrial workforce program
signed today by of your martinis
speaker of the house lisa
mccutch and chief clerk and
myself please help me recognize
count congratulations can take
your general lady.
We will deserve to thank you for
your service your community and
the states
let's go to the gentle lady from
mckinleys and a wine
representative johnson with an
announcement thank you mr
speaker I also have a very
special guest to introduce today
I am proud to introduce mr
gregoria he was born in gallop
new mexico he graduated from
gallop high school in nineteen
fifty six and graduated from the
university of san francisco with
a degree and marketing in
nineteen sixty one he entered
his family business with his
father
in nineteen sixty one he is
married to christine and they
have four wonderful sense
patrick gino mark dant and nine
grandchildren d gregorial served
on the board of directors for
the chamber of commerce as
president for six years in the
nineteen sixties jose's father
also served as president giving
the family the distinction of
having three generations to
serve the chamber of commerce
there are many wonderful
accomplishments and accounts to
mention
one of them is a great highlight
joe got to throw out the first
pitch at a chicago cubs game in
ringley field in chicago on
august twenty third two thousand
and one and it was a perfect
strike
and one of the special
highlights of my legislative
career and that i'm very
grateful for is I have worked
with
mr de cricorio and accomplished
building all of a park which we
named after his wife for
children in east gallop.
And we are continually thankful
and appreciative of that
accomplishment uh joe donated
the lan and we funded the
project so with that mr speaker
i'd like to have the cheap clerk
read the certificate on behalf
of mr gregoria thank you thank
you clear to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of new mexico
recognizes joe de gregorio
whereas joe de gregoria was born
gallop on october fifteenth
nineteen thirty eight and
whereas joe graduated from
gallop high school in nineteen
fifty six and graduated from the
university of san francisco with
a bachelor's degree and
marketing in nineteen sixty one
and whereas joe entered the
family grocery business with his
father facility in nineteen
sixty one and whereas joe served
as president of the board of
directors for the galip chamber
of commerce for six years in the
nineteen sixties and were as
jose father and son also served
as presidents of the gallop
chamber of commerce board of
directors giving the dear
gregorial family the distinction
of having three generations
serving as president and whereas
joe also served on the board of
directors for new mexico food
dealers during the nineteen
seventies and nineteen eighties
and also served on the governing
board of the national
association of retail groceries
during which time he was very
active in representing the
association and national
government issues and whereas.
Joe served on the new mexico
state government commission as a
member of the advisory group
under governor gary johnson.
And whereas joe has devoted much
time to raising funds to support
the group home for the
developmentally disabled in
gallop raising more than three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in a twelve year period and
whereas joseers on the council
of national trustees for
national jewish health of denver
colorado and whereas in two
thousand four john receive the
new mexico ethics and business
award from the samaritan council
and the large business category
and whereas into in july two
thousand eleven joe was
appointed to the board of
directors for the new mexico
partnership for economic
development and served until
october first two thousand
twenty three and whereas joe is
a founding member of the new
mexico family business alliance
and whereas joe has served on
the city of gallop economic
development commission and were
as joe has served on the board
of directors for the mckinley
county smart growth commission
and whereas a highlight of
jose's life was when he got to
throw the first pitch at a
chicago cubs game at rigley
field in chicago on august
twenty third two thousand one it
was a perfect strike and whereas
joe served as president of
california super rama
incorporated abrading four
supermarkets in the gallop and
window rock arizona areas for
sixty seven years and whereas
joe is currently the president
of six d incperiod a real estate
management company in gallop and
whereas in twenty twenty joe
helped coordinate a project to
deliver fresh water to the nava
ho nation using special
containers and whereas joe is a
founding member of the secret
sound of baskets working with
lowest growth we supermarkets
and she and timarious montana to
deliver growth who baskets to
those in need of food assistance
starting with fifty baskets and
twenty twenty and increase into
one hundred sixty baskets in
twenty twenty three and whereas.
Joe married christine which in
nineteen sixty four and they
have four sons patrick gino mark
and dante and nine grand
children and john christine
enjoy traveling to visit
grandchildren and a ten sporting
events now therefore beer
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
new mexico that recognition be
extended to joe de gregoria for
his many years of service to
gallop and makingly counting
signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of santa fe.
Thank you thank you generally
for bringing the certificate for
it and and mister de gregoria
I i'm wondering if it was a
perfect strike I heard it about
three different times i'm
wondering
it was a perfect strike he says
welcome.
The.
Three fingers in bar love it
welcome to the house and and
thank you.
The.
Members also in the gallery I
was guessed of representative
johnson and less from we have
folks from galler please rise to
be recognized we've got the
gallop city council the mechanic
counter commission the gallop
chamber of commerce visitors
from older gallop as well as
dignitaries from the nabo nation
welcome to your house or
representatives.
Gentlemen from.
Looking at you gentlemen from
catering.
Grant that.
I hear your fast police as good
as your criminal
thank you mister speaker who
will talk about the baseball
before I want to the memorial
everyone should have received
AAA baseball mister speaker you
should have one we contemplated
whether we should do bats or
baseballs
we decided to do baseball so
it's almost and so and then we
so we're trying to get baseball
and soccer mister speaker back
into
into western uhm it's a it's a
wonderful sport it's a big sport
in southwest new mexico it's
something that we want to see
back in western and so
you know I appreciate I hope you
guys get to take this homeplay
ball with your kids your
grandkids or just put it on the
shelf the other thing is free
port it's great candidate mister
speaker is you know and you know
free port has helped us uh
you've got a pen here in a in a
lapel pin that is on your desk
and everyone's desk and so we
want to thank our our copper
producers the number one and
only copper producers here in in
new mexico free port and we want
to but all the prospectors and
all that mister speaker mister
speaker i'd like to united to
ask for unanimous consent that
house memorial nineteen be
removed from the speakers table
sin objection it is so ordered.
Thank you mister speaker that
the record of flick that
election necessary for placing
house memorial nineteen and
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
general lady the german excuse
me to explain the memorial thank
you mister speaker the more that
I have before today is for grand
county day mister speaker in in
my co sponsors that apparently
aren't on their mister speaker
our center hemphill instead of
diamond brantley and so we want
to thank them we all came
together to to put this out this
house memorial together to uh
support grand county rent carry
d and the importance of our
mining are ranching uh the cold
if I trail health and national
forest we've got for
the four bid site there and we
also have uh a national cemetery
there we got a beautiful we ah
downtown that has been uh there
has a big arts district it's
just a beautiful place to spend
a spent a weekend come and see
us
toward the mine and of course
that's where our university in
south west michael mustard of
mexico university is where we're
trying to get based ball back in
the mister and we're trying to
play ball we're trying to pitch
this right now mister speaker
and so uhm mister speaker i'd
like if all possible if the
clerk would please read the
memorial
good to read.
House memorial nineteen
interdeese by representative
teraces and senators brantley
and him hill a memorial
proclaiming january twenty
fourth two thousand twenty four
the forty eighth annual grant
county day and the house of
representatives.
Whereas ground county is known
for its mining branching and art
communities blind of hispanic
native american and anglo
cultures bliss guys with three
hundred sixty five days of
suntime per year fast mountain
landscapes and small town
atmosphere and whereas grant
county is the gateway to the
vast healer wilderness and.
Whereas grant county's largest
city and county seat silver city
is the only minicipality in new
mexico still operating under the
territorial charter issued by
the legislative assembly of the
territory of new mexico in
eighteen seventy eight.
And whereas grant county is the
richest county from mining and
new mexico producing numerous
precious metals including copper
and essential element of green
energy and electric vehicles
which is mind from the third
largest open copper mind in the
world and whereas grant county
is home to western new mexico
university established and
eighteen ninety three as new
mexico's only applied liberal
arts and sciences university and
whereas western new mexico
university leads the state and
designing education and training
programs specific to the
evolving needs of a globalised
economy and as one of the
original hispanic serving
institutions in the united
states western new mexico
university is a southwest's herb
of hispanic traditions languages
and music i'll providing life
changing education and training
opportunities to hispanic
students from across the globe
and whereas grant county is
known for its true worst history
that includes pre historic
native americans that you are
cover a patchy including
geronimo and victoria two famous
apache leaders and I kind of
wild west figures such as billy
the kid lawman dan tucker and
madam millie and whereas grant
county is wear in eighteen sixty
six company be of the one
hundred twenty fifth united
states colored infantry regiment
known as the buffalo soldiers
was established at fort baird.
And whereas ground county is
honoured as the home of many
veterans and grant county
showers new mexico's heavy
burden of the members of new
mexico's two hundred coast
artillery regiment many of whom
were subjected to the baton
death march including the late
representative thomas foy and
whereas grant county straddles
the continental divide national
scenario at six thousand to
seven thousand fit providing
cool summers as well as
uninterrupted views of the
mexican border to the south and
whereas.
Grant county house the annual
tour of the new mexico's premier
cycling stage race which
attracts national and
international teams and boosts
awareness and use of the trial
of the mountain spirits national
scenic byway and whereas grant
county is home to significant
outdoor recreate recreation
areas including the cat walk
recreation area city of rock
state park trial of the mountain
spirits national scenic byway
barricanian reservoir and like
roberts and whereas great grand
county has many well known
festivals including the blues
festival clay first of all tamal
fiesta emass festival of the
written word and southwest print
fiesta and whereas new mexico's
current lieutenant governor how
immoralised is from grant county
now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of new mexico that
january twenty fourth two
thousand and twenty four beep
proclaims the forty eighth
annual grant county day in the
house of representatives and be
it further resolved that copies
of this memorial b transmitted
to the members of the board of
county commissioners of grant
county.
House memorial nineteen
introduced by representative
terace and senators brantley and
him hill.
The.
Mister speaker I now move that
uh house memorial nineteen now
do not do now pass and.
Uh did generate their there
might be some debate before we
get to the vote i'm sorry about
noise there is debate when I go
first to the.
Generate from chavez
representative
mr speaker thank you very much I
don't have any questions but I
didn't want to point out that
that is a very historical area
and I appreciate this memorial
come and forward appreciate the
sponsors of this particular
memoir
many years ago we went over
there for committee meetings but
prior to that the history is
going way back in that part of
the world.
Mister speaker my grandmother
went to western mexico
university.
Probably starting a nineteen
twenty eight.
She had lost her husband while
she was still pregnant with my
dad
and she to be able to hold on to
the form that we still have in
our family right now she had to
continue to make a living
somehow and she ended up getting
her teaching certificate from
western new mexico university
go a little bit further forward
and whenever my dad and my
mother in of all of his kids
were little beating where there
is a bad service but we had so
much fan because our vacations
were spent travelling the mexico
and my dad's favorite place to
go was over in your particular
area and we explored runs we got
to see all sorts of stuff of
there it was a great time I love
that the challenger still ended
the territorial charter that was
created seventy eight that's
remarkable
mister speaker there uh story
past is also
showing up did show up and
russell with miss met and with
madam milly who was very famous
over there in that area for we
won't go into that aspect of it
but she was also franchised in
russell she did have a business
in ross will bright their own
blames to eat
for buyer it is remarkable
mister speaker the history
that's behind all that and
everything that went on is truly
outstanding it really is mister
speaker the people over there
are probably some of the best
people's second to mine ok
we have the renting community
over there that does take care
of god's creations and they are
the bar farmers and ranchers
throughout the state are best
conservation is that they are
unfortunately you'll have a
problem over there down to and
mister speaker the issue i'm
bringing up regarding those
ranchers over there is the
mexican gray wolf and the harm
that they have done to those
families that have been there
for.
Generations and generations
there takes to the united states
fisher wildlife service under
the direction of the mexico game
and fish the mexican garage wolf
is a predator that is putting
those fine folks out of business
and mister speaker we do have to
address that problem I
understand that the pushes there
to preserve this they are not
pure breads any more mister
speaker they are hybrid
mr speaker I have to solute
representative torosis in the
fine senators for carrying this
memorial and fish
all of your continues success
and representing your home
county so mister speaker thank
you very much think your ladies
are for the debate on the
memorial the gentleman from
tonian and not that
representative
thank you mister speaker thank
you representative assessors for
bringing us a memorial to us i'm
also from the neighborhoods out
of you and that can tell you
that look at these young folks
down here in the front it
represents ourselves and our one
assure story is we all have a
little bit my stories about
willow creek you guys know where
we're looking
up there it's one of the more
famous creeks that you have I
was this was some people the
other night in which we're going
to redevelop will a quick and
put the exclusive hale a trouble
back that area so those are the
things that you really have to
recognize that we have in the
southern is a really remarkable
exclusive peace of history of
particular first that I love the
first
back in the day we can only
catch a release but to see their
their colours and the vibrants
of the south is an essence of
what makes up that beautiful
area of grad for me I live a
little bit east of your but the
temperature or so h.
But that I appreciate there's
going a few hours to the to the
west and having some comfort in
the evenings along with a
history of the historical parts
of town that you all have so
again representative to russia's
thank you for bringing this it
is a two representation of
ourselves in one corner of the
state thank you thank you
gentlemen there is further
debate to german from beneli
representative they like rules
thank you mister speaker I spat
I stand in uh show my
appreciation for grad county and
representative the russes and
center him
uh I am also a proponent a
supporter of expansion of
college at sports and so this
recognition of the need and
western is is appreciated by
myself and i'm sure many others
uh the only thing representative
that I saw the speaker is that
he left off wrestling there I
know that we need to include
wrestling
mr speaker the reality is with
all jacularity aside is that
for many many student athletes
were not for sports they would
not get post secondary degrees I
am a beneficiary of that I know
many are and had not been for
that i'm i'm very confident i'm
not be here today so thank you
represent the russia's center
thank you speak gentlemen are
you challenging the gentleman
from grant to a wrestling match
later mister speaker thank you
for that it would be a no
contest
but thank you.
The generated from santa fe
representative looking thank you
mister speaker I choose then in
great support of this memorial I
want to welcome our senator him
say him feel to our chamber mr
speaker and I just want to say
what it amazing community
in silver city that i've
frequented but all of ground
county and I just want to say I
have some of the best people
that I know that I keep in touch
with live in grad county and
are walking around our halls
today so thank you for all the
service and thank you for
everything that you do for your
your district uh senator and
representative.
And welcome to the chamber in
here's two ground county day
thank you
they could ladies general for
motel representative block.
Thank you mister speaker I would
be remessed if I did not see how
much I love grant county and all
the good things that offers you
know I I travel a lot around
this state these days haven't
gone to the interim for silver
city yet but mister speaker
while i've been in silver city
in that area i've seen so many
awesome things one would be the
our lady of got a loop and
monastery they have up there
it's a beautiful driver's kind
of kind of rocky you got to
really watch your car who will
driving up there mister speaker
but it's it's a great track on
up there for their beautiful
traditional latin mass which is
beautiful and they have the
gregorian chance it's amazing so
I would recommend anybody out
there in grant county definitely
go check that out on sundays and
then I believe mister speaker
the the monastery actually meets
at representatives of us
chapel at his funeral home for
folks who can't make it up that
crazy crazy mountain that they
have up there so mister speaker
I would just suggest everyone
going there to see that and then
also to see for beard the
historic district uh that for
beard is one of the great
historic pieces we have in our
new mexico history and we're so
blessed to have such a ris- rich
history in grant county so
mister speaker I just want to
also echo all the great things
that we've spoken about today
and give it up for grant county
thank you mister speaker thank
you gentlemen the general from
some representative
i'm thinking a speaker does my
office make you.
Yeah I do miss thank you miss
speaker
I also
really appreciate what remains
there in in your community
misspeaker and that is that
compromise which uh if
rebecca down will still with us
here on the floor as a member
she would be going on and on
about copper I just want to go
on and on a little bit about the
mining industry and the hard
workers and
how that industry has greatly
affected the economy of that
community and so appreciate that
with everything uh that is going
electrical and digital that
copper mine is going to be
important for years and years
and years to come speaker I
would also like to talk a little
bit about uh hopefully
reintroduction of baseball back
at western uh misspeaker
baseball I is the
one sport in new mexico that has
provided more professional
athletes from new mexico than
any other uh right now with alex
bregman who is playing
for the astros and also for
world champion astros uhm I
would just like to say I really
am interested in western getting
a baseball back in the school so
that more new mexico athletes
will have an opportunity to go
and represent the state in
mexico so I appreciate your
memorial and mister speaker I
hope that western successful and
getting baseball reintroduced.
Thank you gentlemen there is
further debate that you'll the
gentleman from sunday while
representative
thank you mister speaker and I
also stand uh in support of this
memorial I have fond memories.
Of the veterans community and
grant county
soon after being a point of the
departy secretary of veteran
services I was invited to a
memorial.
Day celebration
in grant county and as I was
sitting up on the day as I was
informed that I was the key note
speaker.
So I learned to speak on my feet
very very quickly delivered a
nice ten minute speech
and then I got invited two years
later
and thought I was the keynode
speaker in them was informed
that I was just a guest but the
veterans community and grant
county is very very very
important to me I have fun
memories of them
and they are one of the counties
that have a more active veterans
community so I stand in support
of this memorial and think the
veterans of that community.
Thank you gentlemen the general
from some wine representative
dunkin thank you mister speaker
I too would like to uh think the
sponsor of this uh stand in in
full support of mining without
mining in our state and our
nation we would have uh we'd be
wearing a lot of lot less items
we'd be using a lot less items
and so i'm grateful for that i'm
waiting for um
you know I played a little
baseball in the day and and when
he said he was handing out
baseball so that we could throw
him in the whole way but it be
under hand for most of us
because we don't wanna heard
anything so
i'm also waiting for their race
to come down to a reasonable
amount for most of us who can
get on a bicycle still
I am false poor lewis and thank
you for bringing it forward
thank you gentlemen the
gentleman from sun miguel and
torrent torrents represent
casinos
german renewal I yield mister
speaker thank you sir I haven't
had the opportunity to visit
source city I mean wanting to
get out there but I hear they
got a great mortition out there.
Thank you mister speaker thank
you gentlemen shameless plug in
alright.
Delayed from the
war in luna representations
thank you mr speaker and I too
standard support of this
memorial and I can't pass up the
chance to celebrate grant county
day they are our next neighbors
um there just to the north of us
we have many strong friendships
our counties are intertwined in
many ways and a I I appreciate
uh especially western new mexico
university and the uh the
satellite campus they are
building in deming for nursing
uhm also the minds many of my
constituents work at the minds
mines are very important to my
district uhm also
my I have four of my children
there and grant county so it is
personally very special to me
and
in other ways affected my family
forever my grandparents met
there so very special in lots of
ways
I also my future mortition lives
there if if if I if you outline
outlives me
so I I when I attended there
western right out of high school
we had a baseball team and I
hope to see when they're in the
future as well so I would just
like to say happy grant county
day thank you mister speaker is
going to search offering
discounts let's not come on too
much.
Further debate on the more
the general from chavez ad
representative mason
thank you mister speaker with
the representative from you I
will be speaker mister speaker I
do want to stand in support of
great of the this memorial and
the mining industry something
i've been trying to learn more
of
it resembles a lot to me
without it
nearly everything that we have.
Could not exist you know where
you are we've destroyed the
economies that a lot of these
places with this different
industries and the mining
industry is one that we need to
really get behind in a great
economic
boost for the state in the
mexico thank you mister speaker
they are the individually
different billion representative
hockey
very much much just figured as
my gentleman the friend yield I
do mister speaker
think mister speaker at this
memorial mary is to my favorite
things that that's great county
and I believe baseball so
grant county as a one of the
first two places I spent a a
large period of time when I was
going through america ray after
her college and I met some
wonderful people there and I
also got to play baseball for
the first time since high school
and the high school I was
gonna brag on myself a little
bit here I was the one time
champion for a fast pitch
software I had the only note
hitter pitched for ten years and
that league and
baseball such software changed
my life it made me better person
certainly made me a better
driver and I I love the fact
that we're celebrating both
grant county and I and hope that
i'm a baseball team western
thank you so while we're gonna
amend the memorial on the floor
to have an annual baseball
softball game instead of
basketball.
Maybe the senator can take back
their message.
Seeing no further to be before I
go to closing gentlemen I do
have to add my voice to this
memorial my grandfather
they need to martinez who was a
but I said o and migrant worker
are working the minds in civil
city for long time
i've not i've traveled every
corner of the state i've never
been to silver city so that will
change this summer and I will go
visit my grandfather's old
stomping grounds thank you for
bringing his memorial forward
since really meets the general
thank you mister speaker you
know thank you for bringing up
the the minds again in your dad
being a migrant worker there my
my dad also mister speaker
was from excorner migrant came
over at twelve years old and so
the mind that your dad worked at
uh was your grandfather so I can
follow gentlemen your
grandfather was a santa rita and
we just saved myself in another
gentleman by the name of william
the solar saved the shrine there
was it was on that on the verge
of possibly being taken down and
so we bought it and to preserve
it for the people of green
county
are beautiful santa rita shrine
but uh you know I welcome you
mister speaker and I welcome
this body when you're traveling
come to sovereignty the people
are just beautiful good people
are there they're very welcoming
the red chile in the green shows
amazing
our restaurants are are
wonderful or mine is just a
wonder to look at from the from
the from the oversight it's it's
a incredible uh the size of of
the mine and the mines that are
there but uh mister speaker I
have some some.
Ah guest here there with us and
uh some of these mister speaker
from corporate high uh we've got
the corporate high cheer leaders
who were in the macy's deparate
uh mister speaker this this is
young ladies were sec- selected
all american and we're not
produced his deparate and so I
want to introduce some we're
gonna start with genosa although
she'll please stand and she was
a corporate high cheerleader
there on a forty week just by
the way mister speaker uhm uh
cobra does corporate has forty
week and so this clip schools
are in in my district and then
we have lay longing
uhm markets you please stand and
then we have is about the one
are there none this
alia silence those are those are
our cheer leaders okay that that
representative one of three
teams in new mexico that went to
the depot parade welcome to the
house.
The.
Behind their mister speaker
we have uh some people from some
young students from all the
opportunities school wonderful
school that you know that I
asked him when you like about it
all the they loved the outdoor
activities that they that they
are have in the community the
they're more of a hands on
school to different uh
alternative type learning but
those students are body baker
you'll split stantles to hear in
kevin peterson
who we have says sorry.
Lucy montana.
Jesse cracker.
And they drink their dreamer is
that I hope I pronounce that
right she told me how to say it
and i'm I don't know if i'm
turning this up the delina
dedone let's try that a beta I
do that the spanish is real easy
for me but but the they're all
with us that representative
although the upon mister speaker
and last but not least is my to
my left here
is my wife uh who stays home and
we have five children of course
and she still has we have two of
them speakers still in school
one in in the middle school in
one in in high school and so
just like myself we all have
spouses and in in partners that
stay home and hold down the fort
while we're out here trying to
help new mexico so I just wanted
to uh introduce these people
mister speaker and welcome
everybody to grant county day if
you if we get real royal real
quiet
you can hear the mariaches plan
in the middle of the rotenda
that are playing right now
welcome to the house everybody.
The.
Do you mean you made a premotion
I am going to just introduce my
wife business for speaker by
name I didn't see her name I
mandy the russians and so
yesterday I want to.
What were we doing next mr
speaker I got to into the you're
gonna ask you to consent of the
house that the record show that
the role has been called in on
members president.
Yes sir
it is ordered there's been a
motion to show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative.
See an objection it is.
One last thing mister speaker we
have a a certificate in
recognition gentlemen let let's
take the vote on this first and
then we'll get there
certificate.
We're on final passage of house
memorial nineteen
the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by vote
of seven and the affirmative
zero in the negative house
memorial nineteen has duly
passed this house
congratulations.
Thank you mister speaker the
general member for the
certificate thank you mister
speaker thank you for your
patience I do want to uh ask a
clue to read a certificate that
recognizes the village of
something platter uh and for
their hard work at four bared
and so I just would like to
clear to read that moment that
certificate to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of new mexico
recognizes the village of santa
clara.
Whereas on august twenty first
eighteen sixty six company b of
the one hundred twenty first
united states colored infantry
regiment arrived at a place that
their commending officer first
lieutenant james m care
described as beautifully
situated on the southern slope
of the penios out those
mountains with wood water and
live stock feed in abundance and
whereas the one hundred twenty
fifth regiment christian to the
place for
an honor of united states army
brigadier general george de
debard who died while serving to
preserve the union and the
americans of a war battle of
federal virginia in eighteen
sixty two and were as the one
hundred twenty fifth regiment
was composed of african american
volunteers known as buffalo sir
soldiers many of whom were
formally in slaved and were as
the mission of the one hundred
twenty fifth regiment was
established a new fort that
would provide a permanent united
states armory army presence in
the mineral rich area of
southwestern new mexico and
whereas fort bayered was an
active military base until
eighteen ninety nine when the
united states army converted the
facility to a tuberculosis
hospital and sanitorium a role
it served until nineteen twenty.
And whereas in nineteen twenty
the united states army
transferred the facility to the
united states public health
service which in turn
transferred it to the nineteen
twenty two united states with
veterans bureau which
established it as the united
states veterans administration
hospital number fifty five and
whereas fort baird was the
united states veterans
administration hospital and till
nineteen sixty six with the
united states conveyed ownership
of the facility to new mexico
with the exception of the
fortbaird national cemetery and
were as in two thousand four
fort bared was designated and
national historic landmark
district and were as the village
of santa clara is contiguous to
fort bared and has been
associated with fort bayered
since the four establishment in
eighteen sixty six.
And whereas the leadership of
the village of santa clara
recognizes the benefits of
preserving the tangible remains
of the historic buildings and
district of fort beard.
And whereas although for beard
is owned by the state the
village of santa clara has
expended approximately three
million dollars in funds
obtained by the village the
federal and state grants and
private donations to conserve
maintain and reasonably
developed the historic fort
bayered military reservation and
were as the fort bayered
national historic landmark
district supports the grant
county economy by attracting
tourists who visit the site
throughout the year and a ten
guided tours of the museum and
historic landmark district
conducted by the fort bayered
historic preservation society
now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of new mexico that
recognition be extended to the
village of santa clara for its
commitment to the preservation
of the historic buildings and
district of fort bared signed
and sealed at the capital in the
city of santa fe.
Thank you german we do have some
more guests to introduce
generally from san francisco
speaker like to introduce as
part of grant county day uh
friend of mine for the last five
years been a pleasure to know
this gentleman he is the city
kirk for bare new mexico and is
a former senator gabriel ramos
if I could speak if we can have
that members recognize welcome
to the house.
May found out he is not a
dodgers
nobody's perfect.
Dinner from berlin thank you
miss speaker I have some guests
up in the gallery they're from c
s g the council of state
government the western division
and I really want to encourage
our members to uh attempt their
conference it is the western
states and so we're looking at
you know texas new mexico call
rather right up and west and we
have common interest that are
not shared with the eastern part
of our US uhm
they're the conference this year
will be july ninth through
twelve important oregon
but it's a little smaller than
cs
and so it's easier to go ahead
and meet people and in iraq and
then you know of course we have
committees you ought to join one
of the committees that you have
a special interest in a mister
speaker would you
I I announced my guests up
there.
Surely general we've got.
Edgar and marta castanian in the
gallery from the council will
state governments west to
welcome to your house.
Before all the good grant county
people eggs at the gallery we do
have other guests up there we
have the corporate it true
leader squad coaches katie
markets and and to a net mother.
The.
We have the laplout middle
school in the house jason
chadwick lorele halfman.
Tiana or this entire concern is
welcome to house.
We have school and your egg
eaglestone zackery eagles look
also haily best welcome to the
house.
We have.
The.
Silver high school katelin
montana kiana moody you are the
iron but although in ali sanda
montinos welcome to house.
The.
And we have clive high school
sponsor missus agnew welcome to
the house.
General from some point
thank you mister speaker um
happy report that I state a
holiday in express last night
not really the white coat
obviously is in honor of the
many white coats that are in the
the gallery today mister speaker
they've gathered from all
crossed our state and and
they're here to participate in
the legislative process mister
speaker as as you are aware we
are having a real challenge as a
state
both attracting and retaining
health care professionals and so
we want to highlight that this
morning to the body and
recognize that they're still a
lot of work to be done we want
new mexico to be one of the
leaders in our great state and
in our great country um when it
comes to opportunities for
health care practitioners and so
they're here today to make their
voices heard and it's an honor
for me to be able to to where a
white coat alongside them even
though I am not a doctor just a
juice doctor but uh don't come
to me for any health exams so
mister speaker I think you have
a a list of guests if you would
recognize them certainly
gentlemen we have up in the
gallery we've got the president
of the new mexico medical
society doctor todd williams
welcome to the house.
Doctor and helina vija.
Adams who is a president elect.
And we have doctor taught under
would advise president of the
new mexico medical society we
all come to that.
The.
Generating from sent a fair
percent of romeo mister speaker
this is the most exciting time
of the day because we have all
these amazing people in front of
us in these brightly colored
shirts who have been so patient
with us
while we've made so many
announcements and they are with
ndi new mexico they are
celebrating thirty years of
teaching children excellence and
thank you for getting your
answer to your pants because I
was waiting to introduce you
guys thanks for standing up and
the eye is a steat wide use
development organization each
year serves children from three
to eighteen years old some have
been in there for their entire
uh lives there are down space in
school outrage program is
provided in ninety public
schools and thirty two
communities
after school dance classes are
offered at a free or low cost in
albuquerque and santa fe and in
our northern parts of our
district in northern santa fe
county espinola and earning
twenty twenty three twenty four
they delivered over two hundred
classes per week and over two
hundred thousand instructional
hours across program serving
over eight thousand students for
the last twenty nine years
they've served over a hundred
and fifty five thousand children
and we are so proud to have them
in our state were so grateful
for teaching their our kids
confidence health and academic
achievements and the average ndi
student has better school
attendance higher gpa's and of
course significantly higher
standardized test scores so
please join me and welcoming
brussels baker the executive
director of ndi and um we have
supporters in the gallery and
ndi new mexico super wonderful
advanced team so what and that's
who's on the floor today mister
speaker welcome to the house.
Yeah okay.
Well.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And india new mexico we believe
that if a child can be uh in
control of their body and time
in space they can be in control
of what happens to them in their
lives we also believe that it
takes energy and effort to do
anything with excellence whether
you are learning a danster
taking a mouth test raising a
family or applying for a job we
couldn't reach a thirtieth
anniversary milestone without
this help of a lot of supporters
partners including the state of
new mexico we would like to
thank you for your past current
in future support the indian new
mexico brings community together
around the achievement and
health of children we believe
that in engaged and a confident
youth is the future of our state
at the end of every ndi class we
do one last thing we say thank
you and goodbye it's a way to
uhm build respect between
individuals and generations and
we want to show you here's how
we do it the india.
Thank you
they do audience
afternoon
and.
Yeah.
Beginning
of mexico thirtieth anniversary
things all the staff border
directors parents and of course
dancers i'm an appointed
committee of three percent of
chat field latin romero to leave
the house in a days routine
before the end of the session.
That.
German from san han said of
allison with announcement.
Thank you mister speriod
to my colleagues this morning on
your desk and found a no book
with a pin courtesy of never who
prepared to wait
uh i'd like to share also just a
bit of information with the
whole preparatory school it is
the only whole sanctioned
college preparatory school for
native americans.
Never hope opportunity school
recruits some of the best and by
the students of the never who
nation look at other fature the
school offers students are
challenging innovative
curriculum in science math
computers and other traditional
academic subjects in harmony
with the past it steeps the
youth in a deep appreciation of
the level language culture in
history
with this impressive balance
education standards graduate
with the scale to succeed on
college in on understanding of
the world around them and will
become holders of their people
and rule models for future
generations additionally the
international back a lord
program is an integral part of
never who preparatory school the
purpose of this program is to
provide students with academic
challenging high school
education which might wise
standards and criteria and
sanction by the international
back alone organization thank
you mister speaker thank you
german
generally from earlier present
of chase with announcement think
I minister speaker we've had a
celebratory morning here and I
will just take a few minutes
here to extend that we have a
new football coach at the
university of new mexico and his
his boss are the athletic
character any unions said skip
my reduction skip the
introduction of my deputy
director dave williams ingo
straight to bunch of men in hall
I knew head coach for the UNM
I first thing I wonder now is
how bronco got his name his
father dealt with horses in the
state of hita and his sons are
doing cutting cutting horse
competition now he's.
Bill to her now so it's a
welcome home for him he was the
defensive coordinator from
ninety eight to two thousand and
two under rocky long and served
as by an earlier position coach
so we all know
brian airlocker those of us who
were old enough and uh bank of
ways with him and unprecedented
track record of success he's
selling among active coaches in
williams with a hundred and
thirty five wins here's the
fifth time all fifth all time
now in west win coach and
winning percentage in seventy
and seasons as head coach his
teams have been both eligible
sixteen times so we're really
happy to have him and they thank
uhm
the vice president in the
director of atlantics and
williams more recruiting him
and
glad to have you look forward to
football games at you and i'm
welcome coach men and all.
Books they do have a few other
guests in the gallery of we've
got alberta city counselor book
person and the our meda little
league welcome to the house can
take it easy on north valley
didn't leave next year okay.
The.
General lady from sand wilder
and from bed in the leader
circuits thank you mister
speaker so that there's the that
was my guests in the gallery and
I just want to bring to uh the
bodies attention that the alami
baseball league I mean they're
just like all the little leagues
uh they are uh building
community on such commitment
from the families and the
players uh this little league is
not the flashiest you'll see a
fires on your desks asking for
capital outlay there getting be
matched by the city we're trying
to get the fields up and I would
just say I just this is all
heart and base while we know
baseball creates the community
and this league also prides
itself and offering
opportunities for people with
all abilities and so thank you
thank you welcome to the house
alamina league gentlemen from
kolfax curry hard in question
mcgellin union representative
chat field thank you mister
speaker mister speaker I have
not danced on this floor but
many years ago the entire house
was forced to listen to my
rendition of el roche grande if
you will recall so I have saying
on this floor when I came in
with a requirement for the all
freshman the same song if you
remember we should bring the
back in.
So
misspeaker this is school charge
week so while one day I was in
my restaurant most good on my
phone ring and there was a
lawyer from new york in and he
wanted to move his family to
moscow I said why.
He said I have researched your
school I want to I want my kids
to go school there.
And I didn't really think he
would do that but he did he
showed up he bought lan brought
his family straight a student
he's a lawyer he's able to
practice remotely.
The.
My son so that was a school
choice for him to bring his kids
to moscow to a small rural
school my son lived in houston
doing quite well had a driving
business owned multiple homes.
Picked up everything moved into
mexico to bring his children to
school here in a small rural
school.
Four day week.
We often times have a hundred
percent graduation now that
might be one child.
I'd be five children but we know
them we know their family and
we're not going to let him drop
out or fail.
That fifth day allows them to go
for groceries go to the doctor
so we have a low rate of
absenteeism so for many many
reasons.
We see these children in these
small schools thriving not not
only academically but in life
you know they have a a support
system and so I just want to put
a little shot out there for
small row schools for the four
day school week and I appreciate
time thank you mister thank you
gentlemen can lady from earlier
set of handon
thank you mister speaker mister
speaker it is my underindistinct
pleasure to introduce the
president of the screen active
she is with us and the gallery
in the rostroom today she is
none of the bentalia poorer she
was elected in twenty twenty
three since originally for a mo-
canada and she is a sanity based
actress and playwright she
wishes to thank the members of
the legislature for their
support during the historic
actor strike last year she says
as the screen actually skill
wises so does the economy in new
mexico so let's welcome her
tally about
welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from donator
representative letter thank you
mister speaker I have I have
some great use from southern
doing anna county picon week
that no there are sixty weeks
will be cheves our similar
pineless for the jews beard
award for a best chef of the
southwest and possibly not
garcilasso of chorpes barn
continue is one of the finance
this is amazing I I want to
congratulate I want to
congratulate her in all the good
folks in a message this is huge
for us that is wonderful
congratulations chop is that's
the quite an accomplishment
thank you gentlemen generally
from something.
Thank you mister I just wanted
to make it in mount announcement
in today the aging and long term
services department is
recognizing and celebrating
new mexico's seniors for today
is ageing well in new mexico day
I was pleased to attend this
morning and inspiring an
uplifting event hosted by the
department that unbelled its
intend to make new mexico blue
zone bound this will help our
states age in population of
today and it's seniors in the
future listens is a movement
that brings to like simple
lifestyle changes such as diet
and exercise and sleep the
correlates to longer healthier
life I applied the leadership of
the department for their
commitment to bring innovative
and you strategies to our aging
population
and I want to say thank you to
all those who attended in an
incommendation
of all of us working to make new
mexico a blue zone thank you
mister speaker thank you
generally generated from
catering sierra and so and also
violence yet representative
thank you mr speaker if you'll
bear with me I know we hear a
lot of stories every day and
summer repetitive but my forty
school week life began in second
grade when I drove a hundred and
ten miles one way to score
in second grade and I did that
all through high school for many
years and I just want to applaud
for a school weeks I want to
bring to attention that camara
high school has achieved ninety
eight percent graduation in for
four year graduation they also
have a a four day school week
and that's my almost modern and
i'm proud to stand with a
districts making good choices
thank you mister speaker thank
you gentle lady generally from
berlin representative chase.
This is speaker I hope we go to
that order of business committee
reports in objection it is
sorted.
Clerk to re.
So quiet.
The.
Mr speaker.
Your agriculture a sake is and
water resources committee to
them has been referred house
bill one thirty has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
susan care at a chair.
Somebody make.
Mr speaker move adoption where
an adoption of a favorable
committee report in house but
one thirty all those in favor
seen if I by say nine.
Opposite the isabet committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker your agriculture is
sake yes and water resources
committee to has been referred
house bill one forty eight has
had it under consideration
reports same as recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted susan care at a chair
mister speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in house but
one forty eight those in favor
of overseas no opposite the
issue of a committee report
opted mr speaker agriculture as
they give them water resources
committee to has been referred
house bill one sixty four has
had it under consideration
reports there was recommendation
that it do pass and that's
referred to the appropriations
of finance committee respectless
of minutes is in care at a chair
mr speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee reported husband sixty
four all those in favors and if
everything I force me the isabel
committee producted.
Mr speaker you're agriculture is
sake yes and water resources
committee to him has been
referred house bill one seventy
three has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendations that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully some is
it submitted to the care at a
chair mr speaker move adoption
we are not option of a favorable
committee reported one seventy
three all those in favorites in
if I was saying I
thought the as I have a
counterproduct.
Mr speaker your role development
language and cultural affairs
committee to miss been referred
house bill eighty two has had it
in a consideration report saying
with recommendations that it do
pass and then refer to the
appropriations in finance
committee respectfully some
christina or test share mister
speaker move adoption for an
adoption of a favorite will
commit a report on house bill
eighty two all those in favor of
publicity now oppose me the is
have a committee productive mr
speaker in rural development
language and cultural affairs
committee to has been referred
house bill one seventy four has
had it under consideration
reports single as recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
some christine or testure mister
speaker rubert option were an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on husband one
seventy four all those in favor
city probably now opposed may
the as I would commit put it up
to
mr speaker your rule development
language and cultural affairs
committee to whom has been
referred house bill one seventy
seven has added under
consideration report sim with
recommendation that it do pass
and this referred to the
appropriations of finance
committee respect with medicare
senior test chair mr speaker
move adoption we're on adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house bill one seventy seven
all those in paper scene if I
bsn I oppose may the isabet
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker in the rule
development language and
cultural affairs committee to
has been referred house joint
memorial one has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully some christine or
test share mister speaker move
adoption we are on adoption of a
favorable committee important
house joint remoral one all
those in favor seen if I say no
opposite the isabec committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker you're energy
environment and natural
resources committee to me has
been referred house bill seventy
three has had it under
consideration reports there was
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then referred to
the taxation and revenue
committee respectfully submitted
mathematically share mister
speaker movement often we are an
adoption of a favorable
committee reporting house
seventy three although in favor
center publicity not post me the
isolated committee reported
adopted mr speaker energy
environment natural resources
committee to miss and referred
house bill ninety one has had it
under consideration reports in
with recommendation that it do
pass and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respect the submitted
mathematical venture mister
speaker move it off we are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on household
ninety one all those in favor
significantly now opposed name
the esaver committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your energy
environment natural resources
committee to has been referred
house bill ninety two has added
under consideration reports stay
with recommendations that it do
pass and that's referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectly submitted
mathematically share mister
speaker with it often we're an
adoption of a favorable
committee report in husband
ninety two all those in favor
center part by saying I oppose
name the asaver committee report
adopted
mr speaker your energy
environment natural resources
committee to has been referred
house bill one zero eight has
had an under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then it's
referred to the appropriations
of finance committee
respectfully submitted
mathematically chair mister
speaker move adoption where
adoption of a favorable
committee reported house bill
one zero eight all those in
favor saying if I were saying I
oppose may the is have it come
to report adopted.
Mr speaker your energy
environment natural resources
committee to has been referred
house bill one forty has had it
under consideration reports sing
with recommendation that it do
pass and then refer to the
taxation to revenue committee
respect with smith and math in
the queensir mister speaker move
with option we're on adoption of
a favorable committee report on
housemate one forty all those in
favors and if I were saying I
pause may be a saving can you
report adopt.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works in capital
improvements committee to him
has been referred house bill
three has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted day and hockey he'll
chair mr speaker move it often
we are on adoption of a
favorable committee reporting
house bill three all those in
favorite city poverty nine
opposed meet the ice habit
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works in capital
improvements committee to has
been referred house bill ninety
has had a learn consideration
report same with recommendation
that it does pass and that's
referred to the appropriations
of finance committee
respectfully stability and
hockey field chair mister
speaker but option we are an
adoption of a favorable
committee reporting house bill
ninety all those in favor if I
were saying I oppose me the
isabecum reported.
Mr speaker your consumer in
public affairs committee to him
has been referred house bill
twenty seven has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for house bill twenty
seven due pass and then refer to
the judiciary committee
respectfully smith at you and j
for our chair move for adoption
we are on adoption of an
unfearable common important
house will twenty seven but a
favorable committee report on
house consumer public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill twenty seven and all those
in favor said if I was an eye
opposed may the eyes have it
committee reported off.
Mr speaker you're consumer and
public affairs committee to him
has been referred house bill one
fourteen has had it under
consideration reports same as
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house consumer
public affairs community
substitute for house bill one
fourteen due pass and then refer
to the judiciary committee
respectfully smith you and you
for a chair mr speaker move for
adoption we are an adoption of a
non favorable committee report
on hellsbill one fourteen but a
favorable committee reported
house consumer public affairs
committee subset to for house
but one fourteen although the
papers in the purpose and I
was need the eyes have it coming
to report adopted
mr speaker you are consumer in
public affairs committee to him
has been referred house bill one
twenty has added under
consideration reports similar to
recommendation that it do pass
and then three for to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
you and you from chair mr
speaker move red option we are
an adoption of a few committee
report and house bill one twenty
all those in favor saying if
everything I oppose me the
sabbath committee reported off
it.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to has been referred house bill
one nineteen has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
respectfully submitted alice
earlier conscious speaker with
the report.
We and adoption of a final local
leader report on house bill one
nineteen all those in favor
seeing if I by saying I
although suppose may the ice
habit committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to has been referred house bill
one seventy two has added under
consideration reports same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
a cellular conscious speaker
more than report where an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one seventy two all those in
favor seen if I by say nine
although supposed may the eyes
have a committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to missing referred house
memorial one has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted a little
sale contrary speaker more than
report we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
housing more on although in
favor seen if I were saying i.
Others oppose need the
isavically reported offered.
Mr speaker your government
elections in indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill eight has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the judiciary committee
respectfully submitted d wanted
johnson chair
mr speaker move adoption we are
an adoption of a few committee
report and house believe all
those in favor of signified by
say nine although supposed to be
the eyes have a committee
reported up.
Mr speaker your government
elections in the indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill one twenty
two has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and this referred to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
wanda johnson chair of adaption
we are an adoption of a
favorable committee reported
house bill one twenty two all
those in favor of scene if I
want to say no other support the
I save report adopted
mr speaker your education
committee to has been referred
house bill thirty nine has had
it under consideration reports
similar to recommendation that
it do pass and that's referred
to the appropriations of finance
committee respectfully smither g
and restaurant or chair.
I mr admister speaker moving
option and adoption of a
favorable committee important
house bill thirty nine all those
in favor and if I was an eye of
positive yeah it's about
committee report adopted.
General lady from berlin sort of
chac.
Mr speaker I moved we've got
that order of business messages
so you know chechen it is so
ordered click to read.
House executive message number
thirty three speaker martinez
and members of the house
pursuant to article for section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of house bill
one eighty six a bill raising
the apparent damage amount for a
vehicle accident that requires a
written report of the accident
to the department of
transportation for five hundred
dollars to one thousand dollars
respect where yours michelle the
hungarian governor message will
be entered.
House executive message number
thirty four.
Mister speaker martinez members
of the house presuming to
article four section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature's second session
submission of house bill one
nine zero a bill enacting
sections of the procurement code
to allow public partners to
contract with private partners
for the performance of public
projects under certain
circumstances and require the
board of finance division of the
department of finance and
administration to promulgate
rules for review and approve
public private partnership
agreements respectfully yours
michelle the longer government
message will be enter.
House executive message number
thirty five speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuing to
article four section five b two
of the new mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
forty four a bill creating the
office of gun violence
prevention and intervention
creating the director's
selection committee providing
powers and duties and requiring
annual reports respectful years
michelle the longer show
governor message will be under.
House executive message number
thirty six speaker martinez a
members of the house pursuing to
article for section five b two
the nerexita constitution I am
authorizing for your consider
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
eighty five a bill in acting new
sections of their health care
purchasing at.
The public assistance act the
new mexico insurance code the
health maintenance organization
law and the nonprofit health
care plan law to establish
guidelines relating to step
therapy for prescription drug
coverage and eliminate step
through therapy requirements for
certain conditions respectful
years michelle language and
governor message will be
entered.
Generating firm earlier
representative chassis.
This your speaker I moved we go
to that order of business
introduction of legislation in
the objection it is so ordered.
House build two hundred and
twenty six introduced by
representatives luhan ream
herndon and ribe.
An actually into canada's
regulation providing for state
criminal history checks and
national criminal history
background checks as a condition
of eligibility for license house
bill two hundred and twenty six
introduced by representative
luhan ream herndon and rib
house bill to twenty six have
been read twice by title step
by.
Four section five b two.
Seller executive message
eighteen it is ordered printed
and referred to the house
consumer public affairs
committee then the house
traditionally committee.
The.
House bill two hundred and
twenty seven introduced for
representatives later and
mirabamoia and act relating to
public schools feesing in
maximum class load limits for
elementary school classes
replacing average class load
limits with maximum class loads
allowing waivers requiring
school districts to report class
load waivers on their websites
requiring school and charter
school educational plans to
report class and teaching loads
requiring the public education
department to create a maintain
an online portal to receive
confidential reports of
classload violations making an
appropriation house build two
hundred and twenty seven
introduced by representatives
latter and middle balance
house bill two hundred and
twenty seven have been retwelved
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to house rules
committee.
Okay.
House bill two hundred and
twenty eight introduced by
representative latter and
actually to public school
finance providing for school
based instructional programs for
students who are death or heart
of hearing or require the use of
american sign language as a
receptive or expressive form of
communication creating the
disability language program unit
allowing school districts and
charter schools that develop an
implement school based
disability language
instructional programs to
receive distributions generated
by the disability language
program
instructing the public education
department to review and
evaluate school based disability
language and structural programs
house bill two hundred and
twenty eight introduced for
representative latter house will
two hundred and twenty eight
have been it was by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
The.
House bill two hundred and
twenty nine introduced by
representative latter and act
relating to public education
amending sections of the public
school code by providing certain
specialised support services and
still are read as special and
education including medical
behavioral health or adapted
physical education services
providing that school districts
and charter schools include
specialized support services and
department approved educational
plans house build two hundred
and twenty nine introduced by
representative latter possible
two hundred and twenty nine have
been read was by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee
that has over three gentlemen
that is he strike out in baseb.
Two hundred and thirty interdues
by representatives pedagree and
jones and act relating to the
legislature creating the interim
transportation committee making
an appropriation house built two
hundred and thirty interdees for
representatives pedegrou and
jones.
Has been two hundred and thirty
have been read to us by totally
general main pursuing to article
four section five b one order
printed and referred to
the house government elections
and in the universe committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
Two hundred and thirty one
introduced for representative
brown and act making an
appropriation for road
construction reconstruction
improvement and maintenance a
new mexico highway one hundred
twenty eight and lee and eddie
counties house fill two hundred
and thirty one interviews by
representative brown has been
two hundred and thirty one have
been read was by title is
dingering pursuing torticle four
section five b one order
principle and referred to the
house transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and
thirty two introduced by
representatives dixon armstrong
and hockman vehicle and act
relating to executive
reorganization creating the
infrastructure planning and
development division of the
department of financial
administration reorganizing the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration transferring
functions personnel
appropriations money property
contractual obligations and
statutory references house bill
two hundred and thirty two
interdees for representatives
dixon armstrong and hop
i'm sorry
how's bill two hundred and
thirty two have been read to us
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill two hundred and
thirty three introduced by
representative luhan and senator
or tease epino.
And act relating to criminal
procedure providing for the
determination of competency
providing a process for raising
the issue of competency
establishing competency
restoration programs requiring
additional reports providing
definitions requiring the state
to pay for mental examinations
house build two hundred and
thirty three interviews but
representative luham institute
or tease epino house will two
hundred and thirty three have
been it was by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
Two hundred and thirty four
interdues for representative the
hutman vehicle and actually to
insurance establishing a program
to provide medical malpractice
premium assistance for certain
health care providers creating a
fund making an appropriation
house build two hundred and
thirty four introduced by
happening representative hockman
vehicle.
House bill two hundred and
thirty four.
Haven't been right wise by title
is ordered is interesting
personal into article force
section if everyone ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and
thirty five introduced by
representative saraniana senator
ivy sodo senator pope
representative allen martinez
and representative harry garcia.
An actually into the military
providing exemption from state
licensing requirements for child
care programs or facilities
licensed or certified by the
united states department of
defense or united states coast
card providing portability of
professional licenses for a
member of the armed forces were
a member spouse who relocates
from another state two new
mexico amending various
commission and council
memberships to include a member
of the armed forces or state
defense force a spouse of a
member of the armed forces or
state defense force or a veteran
amending sections of the inmsa
nineteen seventy eight to add
space for us to the definitions
of armed forces and uniform
services that involve programs
and services for which members
of the armed forces of the
united states are eligible.
Providing for concurrent
jurisdiction on violation of
laws by a child in military
installations.
House bill two hundred and
thirty five interdues per
representative saraniana
senators ivy soto and pope
representative alan martinez and
represent harry garcia.
House will two hundred and
thirty five have been read was
by time is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee
house bill two hundred and
thirty six introduced by
representative of chassis
senator stewart and
representative lane and actual
relating to public employees
retirement amending the public
employees retirement act to a
tallow certain public safety
employees to return to work
under certain conditions house
bill two hundred and thirty six
introduced by representative
chase senator stewart and
representative lane house bill
two hundred and thirty six
hundred militaries by title is
changed remain pursuant to
article four section five seven
executive message twenty seven.
Is ordered printed in referred
to.
The house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee.
House bill two hundred and
thirty seven introduced by
representatives dixon or tests
and small and act relating to
the environment and acting the
climate energy and water
authority act creating the
climate energy and water
authority providing the powers
and duties of the authority
establishing a decarbonization
technology program creating the
climate energy and water project
fund making appropriations house
bill two hundred and thirty
seven introduced by
representatives dixon or tests
and small house will two hundred
and thirty seven have been
returns by title as ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill two hundred and
thirty eight introduce.
By representative brown sender
gaygos senator mccutchen
representatives mason and peter
group and act relating to
roadways providing the the
department of transportation and
eddie county may enter into a
joint powers agreement making an
appropriation two hundred and
thirty eight introduced by
representative brown senators
gaygo and mccutchen and
representatives mason and peter
group two hundred and thirty
eight have been it was by
totally deemed remain pursuant
to article four second five b
one or a printed and effort to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House fill two hundred and
thirty nine introduced by
representatives xamora and ribe
an act relating to corrections
including canabas and the
definition of contraband.
Prohibiting canada's in places
of imprisonment providing
exceptions house bill two
hundred and thirty nine
introduced for representatives
as a mora and reab two hundred
and thirty nine have the benefit
was by total as dim tremendous
pursuing to article four section
five would be too solid
executive message eighteen order
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then the house
judiciary committee
house bill two hundred and forty
introduced by representatives
vincent alan martinez terrace us
chat field and jones.
And act making an appropriation
to the veterans services
department to contract with a
veteran police and first
responder post dramatic stress
disorder therapy program house
bill two hundred and forty
introduced for representatives
vincent alan martinez tarasses
chat field and johns house bill
two hundred and forty have a
minute was by title as tamed
remain pursuing to article four
section five b one order
princeton referred to the house
labor veterans and military
affairs committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
one introduced by
representatives peter grew
townsend brown and dunkin and
actually to counties increasing
the salary caps applicable to
elected county officials
providing for a consumer price
index escalator house built two
hundred and forty one introduced
for representatives peter group
towns and brown and dunkin house
will two hundred and forty one
have been a twist by title is
deemed remain pursuant to
article four section five b one
order princeton referred to the
house.
Refer to the house rural
development not excuse me house
labor veterans with terrific
committee then the house
government elections and indian
affairs committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
two introduced by representative
gay goes and senator ivy sotto
and actually too domestic
affairs clarifying the process
of solemnization licensure and
contracts for marriage providing
definitions allowing appearance
by remote communication
technology for the issue and of
a marriage license for uniformed
service members who are deployed
or on act of duty providing
forums providing for disillusion
of marriage on grounds of the
marriage being void voidable or
invalid amending fees.
Prescribing marriage recording
and index and guidelines
amending penalty is revising
terms that describe parties to a
marriage clarifying property
rates amending repealing and in
acting sections of chapter forty
in msa nineteen seventy eight.
House bill two hundred and forty
two interdeals by representative
gay agos and senator ivy sort of
two hundred and forty two
hundred million towards by title
as ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
Two hundred and forty three
introduced by representatives
saturday on a and arnana.
House two hundred and.
The.
House will two hundred and forty
four introduced by
representative brown terace us
and thompson.
And act relating to public
education providing that career
and technical education courses
offered by high schools shall be
a part of a series of at least
three courses that are part of a
single program of study that is
relevant to a career field or
industry certification house
bill two hundred and forty four
introduced by representatives
brown taraces and townsend house
bill two hundred and forty four
haven't been returned by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
five interduced by
representatives himbry isle
scott brown and ribe.
An add making an appropriation
to the aviation division of the
department of transportation for
construction and improvements to
the roswell air center for the
purpose of hosting error racing
events house build two hundred
and forty five introduced by
representatives himberry is
scott brown and reap has been
two hundred and forty five
hundred minutes was a title is
damed remain pursuing to article
four section five b one order
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
six introduced for
representative brown and after
letting to public education
amending graduation requirements
requiring one half unit of
financial letter receive prior
to high school graduation house
built two hundred and forty six
introduced but representative
brown has will two hundred and
forty six seven minutes was by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
seven interdues by
representative chandler and act
relating to property tax
amending form requirements for
notices of valuation sent to
property owners repealing a
section of the property tax code
that requires property to be
presumed classified as non
residential property house bill
two hundred and forty seven
introduced for representative
chamber I was will two hundred
and forty seven have been rich
was by title is ordered not
printed for the house rules
committee.
The.
House joint resolution nine
interdues but representatives
montoya and allen martinez a
joint resolution proposing a
mement to article four section
five of the constitution of new
mexico to provide that each
regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed
forty five days remove the
restrictions on bills that may
be considered in even numbered
years and provide for
consideration of governor veto
overrides for bills of certain
special or extraordinary
legislative sessions house joint
resolution nine introduced by
representatives montoya and
allen martinez as jet resolution
nine have been read twice by
title is order printed referred
to the house government
elections and indian affairs
committee then the house
judiciary committee.
House joint resolution ten
interdeals for representative
figure.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of new
mexico to provide for the
creation of an independent
redistricting commission to
develop an adopt redistricting
plans as provided by law for a
congressional districts state
legislative districts and the
districts of other districted
state officers house joint
resolution ten introduced by
representative figure out has
your solution ten hour been read
to us by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in in
the difference committee there's
a house judiciary committee.
House memorial eighteen
interdues for representatives
montoya block brown and lord.
A memorial condemning antimatism
and supporting the jewish
community and the state of
israel house memorial eighteen
introduced by representatives
montoya block brown and lord
house moral eighteen have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house judiciary committee.
House memorial twenty introduced
by representatives g andreas
from around corolla lara
haramiel and parahon a memory
i'm memorial requesting the
legislative education study
committee to study class size
reductions for kindergarten
through twelfth grade classes.
House memorial twenty interdues
per representatives g undress
remember corolla lada haramio
and pedahon.
Has more twenty one minutes was
by totally sort of princed and
referred to the house education
committee.
House memorial twenty one
introduced by representative
luhan.
A memorial declaring january
twenty fifth two thousand and
twenty four santa fe county day
and the house of representatives
how some orille twenty one
introduced by representative
luhan.
As moral to anyone have been
retired by title is order not
printed and pleased on the
speaker stable.
House memorial twenty two
introduce.
The.
By representative dunkin harper
alan martinez hernandez and
allison a memorial requesting
the public education department
to convene a working group to
study and make recommendations
for the provision of mental
health care providers in
secondary schools.
Past memorial twenty two
introduced by representatives
dunkin harper alan martinez
hernandez and allison.
Has royal twenty two have a
minute was by title is ordered
printed for to the house
education committee.
The.
Still in a favor.
Joint memorial too
introduced by representatives
by representative dixon center
padea and representative
haramiela joint memorial
requesting that the department
of health study the impact of
multi system families on state
agency budgets and social
service outcomes for those
individual family members and
families house joint memorial
two introduced but
representative dixon senator
padea and representative hotel
meal how was joint memorial to
have been read twelve by title
is already printed and referred
to the house health and human
services committee.
Generated from a layer set of
chassis were almost done I
promise.
Is the speaker I moved we go to
that order of business messages
really so ordered.
House executive message number
thirty seven speaker martinez
and members of the house
pursuing it to article four
section five b two the new
mexico constitution I am
authorising for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
six five zero seven a bill
clarifying the process of
solemnization licenser and
contracts for marriage providing
definitions allowing appearance
by remote communication
technology for the issues of a
marriage license for uniform
services members who are
deployed or on active duty
providing forms providing for
disillusion of marriage on
grounds of the marriage being
void voidable.
Um and invalid amending fees
prescribing marriage recording
and indexing guidelines amending
penalties revising terms are
described parties to a marriage
clarifying property rates
amending repealing and enacting
related sections of chapter
forty ms nineteen seventy eight
respectfully yours michelle
hungerson governor message will
be entered.
House executive message number
thirty eight.
Speaker martinez and members of
the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven five five two a bill
creating the election offences
of disrupting election results
and falsely acting as a
presidential elector and
prescribing penalties respectful
years michelle hunger some
governor message will be entered
house executive message number
thirty nine speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five b two
within a mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature's second session
submission of house bill two
zero nine a bill removing the
match requirement for regional
councils of planning and
development is stricts to
receive grants and a from the
department of financial
administration and providing
that matching functional not be
required for receiving a granted
aid respectful years michelle
language and governor message
will be entered.
The.
House executive message number
forty
speaker martinez a members of
the house pursuant to article
four section five b two mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session.
Submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven four one five a bill
amending an enacting sections of
the sex offender registration
and notification act to comply
with federal law respectfully
yours michelle the language of
governor message.
Generation from berlio.
Mister speaker and we will go to
that order of business
announcements.
And also mislenious.
And how about miscellaneous
business as well mr speaker
nothing my entire time here have
never had miscellaneous business
only announcements but.
So nobody should disordered
announcements committee meetings
still lady from bunana
representative thank you mr
speaker your community and
public affairs consumer in
public affairs committee
will be meeting tomorrow at one
thirty year after we're off the
floor and also we're going to be
meeting saturday at one thirty
room three fifteen we're going
to help here bills thirty eight
one sixteen one twenty eight one
ninety one and one ninety eight
members take note the lady from
better than europe said
everybody by yet
speaker your house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee will not be laboring
tomorrow we will not be meeting
tomorrow we have no bills to
entertain so the chair and I
wish to wish everybody in the
committee happy non laboring day
ride happy non laboring day
those members of the labor
committee.
To lady from burnedly a
representative thompson thank
you mister speaker just a heads
up that helped them human
services what we regularly on
friday in three second
at nine o'clock on saturday in
three o seven so
saturday folks member stake note
gentleman from.
Gentle lady from santa fe
thousand i'm sorry joy from
santa fe and the value of
salamos representative channeler
thank you mister speaker your
house judiciary committee will
meet at three o'clock today in
room three oh nine and I would
like to advise memories that
they should plan on meeting on
saturday at one thirty and room
three oh nine
from the pina gallery we need to
be working
number signal lunch on the
minority leader on saturday.
Gentlemen generated from towers
to visit a speaker in our
houseworld development language
and cultural affairs committee
will be meeting at seven thirty
tomorrow morning I will bring
breakfast spurridos so sorry
so please come room through nine
seven thirty shirt
but yes members of the rural
development committee tomorrow
we'll see there member signal
generated from earlier percent
of an unanimous.
House commerce and economic
development committee will be
meeting immediately at least
after floor and room three
seventeen immediately have to
the floor immediately
members take note and hurry up.
Right before but it leaves hold
your horses i've got a few
announcements we've got
executive messages that came in
for bills that were prior they
were previously referred to the
rules committee someone got
through these other very slowly
somebody can follow.
House bill one eighty six
introduced by representative
sanchez.
Is deemed remain pursuing to
article forest section five b
two.
House executive message thirty
three
we will pull that from the rules
committee
