Roll call is now closed we have
a quote.
Welcome back members
I was lunch.
Generated from really your
present ch.
Mrperiod speaker I moved we go
to that business announcements
and miscellaneous business
gesture it is so ordered.
Any announcements
she remember himself what.
Generally different house thank
you mr speaker your house rural
development landgrad and
cultural affairs committee is
meaning tomorrow morning at
eight thirty there will be no
food
bring your own
great incentive in room three o
nine
you can bring me food members
think not ring food for the
chair if you want to build the
pass.
Anyone else mates.
Members we can do a little bit
of bill intro tonight it
shouldn't take too long I don't
foresee the prison how fast or
reader reads.
Um and then will break for
dinner and for the evening.
The.
Speaker
leader familiar it now being
eleven fifty nine am I moved we
adjourned until twelve or one pm
to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those president
this morning session are
president this afternoon
it is ordered mr speaker asking
animals concerned that the rules
be suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to the revision and
approval of the rules in order
of business committee if there's
an objection it is ordered
generated from earlier.
Mr speaker I hope we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Seen objection it is ordered.
Your lady from earlier.
Mr speaker I move on to that
order of business messages
action is ordered folks we have
service some messages just to
get him out of the way and they
will get into the bill
introduction click to read.
How's the executive message
number sixteen speaker martinez
and members of the house
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the new mexican
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature's
second session submission of
house bill twenty five a bill
making housing discrimination
based on a renters or buyers
source of income and unlawful
discrimination discriminatory
practice pursuant to the human
rights act respectfully yours
michelle hungarian governor
message will be entered.
House executive message number
seventeen.
Speaker martin is the members of
the house pursuing to article
for section five b two the new
mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature second session
submission of house bills
seventy one a bill in acting the
student loan bill of rights act
providing for a student loan
services license delineating the
duties of a student launcer
reserve giving administrative
responsibility and enforcement
power to the financial
institutions divisions of the
repub- of the regulation and
licensing department.
Providing for a discharge of
private education loans upon a
showing of permanent disability
requiring that alternative
repayment options be offered to
borrow borrowers equally.
Providing rights of for co
sonners including notice and
axes to inform providing for
coast on a release prohibiting
certain acceleration of private
education loans creating the
position of student loan ombud
defining certain violations of
the student loan bill of rights
act as unfair and unconscionable
trade practice practices
creating a private right of
action and creating the student
loan bill of rights fund
respectful years michelle
government.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
eighteen speaker martinez
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature's second
session submission of house bill
thirty three a bill in acting
the prescription drug price
transparency act to increase
transparency transparency across
the prescription drug supply
train requiring prescription
drug manufacturers pharmacy
services administrative
organizations health insurers
and pharmacy benefits managers
to report prescription drug
price trends to the
superintendent of insurance
requiring the superintendent of
insurance to collect and
publicly report aggregate
information on prescription drug
price trends and prescribing
civil penalties we speculate
yours michelle hungarian
governor.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
nineteen speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
nineteen a bill requiring at
least two persons for the
operation of a railroad train or
local motive that is used in the
movement of free respectful
yours michelle hungers on
governor message will be entered
house executive message number
twenty pursuant to article for
section five b two of the new
mexico constitution I am
authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of house bill
one oh one a billion acting the
firefighter and emergency
service provider per support act
allowing state local and
regional public fire agencies to
create peer support programs for
their employees and volunteers
making pure support services
confidential and limiting
liability for the provisions of
pure support services
responsible yours michelle
governor message will be entered
house executive message number
twenty one pursuit mister
speaker a members of the house
pursuing to article four section
five b two then mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of house bill
eight a bill declaring the
public policy of the state
regarding conduct of current and
former legislators and public
officers and employees
clarifying and clarifying
provisions of the governmental
conduct act and prescribing an
increasing penalties for
violations of the governmental
conduct act respectful yours
michelle longer some governor
message will be entered.
House executive message number
twenty two speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article for section five b two
of the new mexican constitution
I have authorising for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill ninety
eight a bill amending the
accounts for persons with
disabilities act to expand the
eligibility for an account and
repealing and reinacting section
six dash eight a dash sixth nmsa
nineteen seventy eight being
last twenty sixteen chapter
forty section six to create an
exemption from medicaid recovery
respectful yours michelle
governor message will be
entered.
House executive message number
twenty three speaker martinez
and members of the house
pursuing to article for section
five b two within mexico
constitution I am authorising
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two six eight six four a
bill amending an enacting
sections of the professional
athletic competition act.
To add definitions add an
increased fees remove
professional wrestling at weight
classes requires day champions
extend the termination dates of
the professional athletic
competition act and the new
mexico athletic commission we
spoke for yours michelle
hungarian governor.
Message will be entered.
Has executive message number
twenty four mrperiod speaker and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five b two
within mexico constitution I am
authorising for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill five a
bill creating the work force
development and a prettice
apprenticeship trust fund making
annual transfers from the trust
fund to the public works of
apprentice and training fund and
annual appropriations to the
work for a solutions department
for the purposes of the
apprenticeship assistant
act requiring that appreciate
the apprentice ship programs
have no unresolved complaints or
violations of the public works
minimum wage act or the
construction industry's
licensing act before receiving
funds per certain pursuit to the
opportunity assistance act and
the public works apprenticeship
and training act and clarifying
that the work for solutions
department administers the
public works of partnership and
training act and the
apprenticeship assistant act.
Respectful years michelle
hungarian governor message.
Generally from berlie.
This would speak removed to that
order of business introduction
of legislation in objection it
is so ordered.
House bill twenty three
introduced by representative
mcqueen and act relating to the
state game commission.
House bill thirty seven
interviews per representative
chandler and act relating to
taxation limiting the capital
gains deduction pursuant to the
income tax act house bill thirty
seven introduced by
representative chandler.
House bill thirty seven haven't
been rare twice by title is
deemed german pursuing to
article four section five b one.
And referred to.
The house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill thirty eight
introduced by representative
hernin and act relating to the
executive reorganization
creating a task for us to study
the feasibility of creating an
african american affairs
department making an
appropriation house build thirty
eight introduced for
representative house will thirty
eight have been retired by title
is order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill thirty nine
introduced by representative
good.
An act making an appropriations
to state institutions of higher
education tribal colleges and
the public education department
to comply with the courts
rulings in the consolidated
martinez and yassi.
The the state of new mexico last
year by improving educational
outcomes for certain public
schools and higher education
students and families house will
thirty nine introduced
representative gorola I was
built thirty nine have been rich
was by title that seemed remain.
Under article four section five
b one of the constitution and in
order printed and referred to
the house education committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill forty introduced by
representative heard in an act
willing to transportation
creating an interstate airline
task force providing duties
requiring a final report making
an appropriation house bill
forty introduced by
representative hernin.
I was bill forty have minor
twice by title is nod to me i'm
sorry it's ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill forty one interviews
where representative or tes and
act relating to the environment
authorizing the environmental
improvement board to adopt rules
and to establish an assessed
fees for a clean transportation
fuel standard house before and
introduced by representative or
tests.
House bill forty one haven't
been read twice by title is
deemed remain under article
force section five b two.
Of the constitution.
House executive message too.
And it has referred to the house
energy natural resources
committee then the house the
sheery committee.
House bill forty three
introduced by representative
ream.
An act relating to motor
vehicles providing the new
mexico state police division of
the department of public safety
with four hundred thousand
dollars to purchase tools
designed to engrave numbers onto
a catalytic converters and to
learn these tools to law
enforcement agencies or motor
vehicle repair or service shops
in exchange for the agencies or
shops providing a no cost of
residence the service of
engraving the vehicle
identification number on to
motor vehicles catalytic
converter.
Providing loan requirements
making an appropriation house
bill forty three introduced by
representative ream house will
forty three haven't been read
twice by title is in german
under article force section five
b one of the constitution.
Order printed and referred to
the house reducer committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill forty four interdees
by representative ream.
An act relating to pu- pre trial
detention establishing a
presumption that the prosecution
has proven by clear and
convincing evidence that a
defendant is dangerous and no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community allowing the
presumption to be rebutted in an
adversarial hearing declaring an
emergency hospital forty four
introduced by representative
ream bill forty four hundred
twice by title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill forty five interdeese
by representative ream and act
relating to crime.
Clarifying that embezzlement
includes embezzling for
another use house forty five in
a despite representative ream as
well forty five hundred minutes
by title is order not princeton
referred to the house rules
committee
house bill forty six introduced
by representative ream and act
relating to criminal providing
the penalty for a felon in
possession of a firearm or
destructive device is five years
in president increasing the
penalty for a serious violent
felon in possession of a firearm
or destructive device to a
second degree felony house bill
forty six introduced by
representative ream.
The.
Stand by.
Have been requires by title is
order not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill forty seven
interviews by representative of
ream and act relating to
criminal law creating the crime
of unlawful carrying of a
firearm while trafficking a
controlled substance providing
penalties house bill forty seven
introduced by representative
ream
standback.
Have been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill forty eight
introduced by representative
mcqueen and act relating to
public lands setting the royalty
rate on future oil and gas
development leases on state
trust lands to enhance revenue
for beneficiaries house bill
forty eight introduced by
representative of macqueen as
well forty eight have been read
twice by title
is deemed remain under article
four section five b one
in a disorder printed and
referred to the house energy
natural reasons as committee
vents the house commerce and
economic development committee.
House bill forty nine introduced
by representative costiano.
An app relating to public
schools acquiring a school
safety communication system in
public schools including school
safety communications system in
the definition of building
system in the public school
capital outlay act house will
forty nine introduced by
representative customer.
Possible forty nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill fifty introduced by
representative castiano and act
making an appropriation to
support integrated substance use
disorder programs for north
eastern new mexico house fill
fifty internets for
representative costiano.
House will fifty home in retwice
by title is deemed to rein under
article four section five b one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
The.
House bill fifty one introduced
by representative block.
An act relating to taxation
providing a gross receipts tax
credit against the state gross
receipts tax for taxpayers that
received no more than one
million dollars in gross
receipts in the previous
calendar year including the
amount of gross receipts for
which the credit may be applied
in a calculation for a
distribution to municipalities
house bill fifty one introduced
by representative block.
House bill fifty one have a
minute twice by title.
Is deemed remain under article
four section five be one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill fifty two introduced
by representative allen martinez
and act making an appropriation
for domestic violence training
and sand of all county.
House bill fifty two interdeals
by representative allen martinez
has bill fifty two have
minorities by title and because
he's my pretty more.
The.
Just kidding.
Is the man under article four
section five one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house consumer
and public affairs committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill fifty three
interdeals by representative
dunkin.
An act relating to motor
vehicles requiring the motor
vehicle division of the taxation
and revenue department to apply
for a license to use a smoky
bear image and name providing
for the issuance of a smoky bear
fired prevention special
registration plate providing for
sessation of issues based on new
issues and renewals making an
appropriation house bill fifty
three introduced by
representative dunkin.
House will fifty three have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill fifty four interdeese
by representative scott.
An act relating to taxation
creating the all cities and
count is fund to transfer a
portion of gross receipts tax
revenue to minister palodies and
counties distributing a portion
of gross receipts tax revenue to
all the other cities and count
is fund.
House bill fifty four introduced
by representative scott I was
will fifty four hundred minutes
wise by title is deemed remained
under article four six or five b
one of the constitution ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill fifty five introduced
by representative mason an act
relating to motor vehicles
creating the oral fluid roadside
detection pilot project to test
for the presence of drugs when a
driver is stopped for suspicion
of driving under the influence
of intoxicating liquor or drugs
collecting data to determine the
magnitude of the problem of
driving under the influence of
drugs and the sets in a success
of the pilot project specifying
areas of participation in the
pilot project making an
appropriation house bill fifty
five and it is but
representative mason.
House bill fifty five have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill fifty six interdeals
by representative brown and act
relating to crime clarifying
that trustpass includes persons
who knowingly enter without
prior permission or a main on
the lands of another knowing
that the owner or a lawful
occupant did not provide
permission increasing the pillar
to the penalty for trustpass in
certain circumstances house bill
fifty six interdues of a
representative brown
husband fifty six have been
retwised by title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee
house bill fifty seven
introduced by representative
lord.
An act relating to criminal
sentencing providing for
chemical castration treatment as
a condition of parole for sex
offenders providing that refusal
to undergo chemical castration
treatment is a parole
violationhouse bill fifty seven
introduced by representative
lord.
Has will fifty seven have been
read twice by title sort of not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee
house bill fifty eight
introduced by representative
lord.
An act repealing section thirty
dash seven dash seven point one
in msa nineteen seventy eight
being laws two thousand nineteen
chapter forty five section one
to uneliminate the background
check requirement for sale of a
firearm house bill fifty eight
introduced representative lord
elsewhere fifty eight have been
read twice by title is order not
printed or an effort to the
house rules committee.
House bill fifty nine introduced
by representative lord and act
relating to quail.
Creating an exception and the
definition of game birds for
domestic streams of quail
allowing people to raise quail
without a permit house built
fifty nine introduced by
representative lord.
As well fifty nine have a
minorite twice by title is what
are not printed and referred to
the house rules committee.
House bill sixty introduced by
representative lord and act
relating to crime creating the
crimes of criminal desecration
of a dead human body criminal
sexual contact with the dead
human body and criminal sexual
penetration of the dead him and
body prescribing penalties house
bill sixty introduced per
representative lord.
House will sixty have minorites
wise by titles or are not
printed for the house rules
committee.
House bill sixty one introduced
by representative reeb.
An act relating to crime
increasing the penalty for
aggravated battery upon a police
officer correction a piece
officer.
House bill sixty one introduced
by representative reab as well
sixty one haven't been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill sixty two interdues
by representative reeb and act
relating to traffic offences
providing for testimony by
interactive video providing for
implied consent to a laboratory
analyst appearance by video
house bill sixty two interdeese
by representative reeb house
will sixty two haven't been read
twice by title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill sixty three
introduced by representative of
ribe.
Relatingto and act relating to
health and acting the canada
school use prevention resource
act.
Requiring the department of
health to develop maintain and
overseas a canaba school use
prevention resource program.
Allowing the department of
health temp to promulgate rules
house dollars sixty three
introduced by representative
reap
as well sixty three have a minor
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill sixty four introduced
by representative rib and act
relating to canada's product
safety clarifying canama's
packaging requirements
pertaining to children's safety
house bill sixty four introduced
by representative reep.
House will sixty four hundred
minute twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill sixty five introduced
by representative reab and after
relating to canada's regulation
amending the canabas regulation
act removing limitations on what
may constitute rate reasonable
suspicion of a crime involving
canabas declaring an emergency
house built sixty five
introduced for representative
rib.
Has will sixty five have been
read twice by title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill sixty six interdues
by representative rebe an act
relating to children amending
sections of the canada's
regulation at to include
canada's force profession and
production by a minor as a
delinquent act amending the
definition of delinquent act in
the delinquency act to include
canada's use possession and
production hospital sixty six
introduced by representative
rib.
Has ruled sixty six have a
minute twise by title.
Is ordered not princeton
referred to the house rules
committee.
The.
House bill sixty seven
introduced by representative
allison.
An act making an appropriation
to the department of health for
county and tribal health
councils state wide house bill
sixty seven introduced by
representative allison bill
sixty seven haven't been read
twice by title is deemed remain
under article four section five
b one of the constitution
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
and indian affairs committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill sixty eight interdues
for representative allison and
act making an appropriation to
the department of transportation
to clear cattle guards on the
new mexican native american
nation tribe and public lance.
How still sixty eight introduced
by representative allison sixty
eight haven't been read twice by
title that seemed remain under
article four section five b one
of the constitution ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections and
indian affairs committee as the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill sixty nine introduced
by representative dunkin and out
relating to crime creating the
crime of organized residential
theft prescribing penalties
house bill sixty nine interdues
a representative of dunkin as
will sixty nine have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
Yeah.
How spill seventy interdeese but
representative dunkin and act
making appropriation to the
state equalization guarantee
distribution of the public
school fund to provide school
based mental health counselors
in public metal and high schools
house bill seventy introduced by
representative dunkin as will
seventy have been read twice by
title is seemed remained under
article.
Article four section five b one
of the constitution.
Order printed.
In reference to the house
education committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill seventy one
introduced by representative
chandler.
An act relating to financial
institutions enacting the
student loan bill of rights act
providing for a student loan
servicers license delineating
the duties of a student loan
servicer giving administrative
responsibility and enforcement
power to the financial
institutions division of the
regulation and licensing
department providing for
discharge of private education
loans upon a showing of
permanent disability.
Requiring the alternative
repayment options be referred to
borrowers equally providing
rights for cosigners including
notice and access to information
providing for cosiner release.
Prohibiting certain acceleration
of private education loans
creating the position of a
student loan ombud defining
certain violations are the
student loan bill of rights act
as unfair and unconsciouable
trade practices creating a
private right of action creating
the student loan bill of rates
fund
making an appropriation house
bill seventy one introduced a
representative chamber has been
seventy one have a been read
twice by title is deemed remain
under article four section five
b two of the constitution and
house executive message
seventeen.
Therefore it is ordered printed
and referred to.
The house education committee
the house commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill seventy two
introduced by representative
saraniana an act relating to
cyber security creating the
cyber security fund directing
rule making to establish
requirements and procedures for
disbursements from the fund
making an appropriation.
Husband seventy two have been
read twice by title is deemed
remain under article four
section five one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill seventy three
introduced by representative
saraniana act relating to
taxation creating the energy
storage system income tax
credit.
House bill seventy three
introduced for representatives
saturday and.
House bill seventy three hundred
minutes was by title as you
remain under article four
section five b one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house energy
environment and natural reasons
committee then the house
accession and revenue committee.
House bill seventy four
interdees per representative
armstrong.
An act relating to public
schools clarifying that local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools shall
determine the total number of
instructional days per year and
the number of instructional days
per week that students are
required to be in school
programs.
House will seventy four
introduced by representative arm
strong.
House bill seventy four have
been read twice by title is
ordered not considered referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill seventy five
interdays by representative
saraniana.
An act relating to schools
providing school districts the
option to replace school buses
with electric or zero emission
alternative fuel school buses
allowing school districts to
inter into agreements for the
use of their electric school
buses as electrical energy
storage for providing grid
services or for used by schools.
Tasking the board of regions of
the new mexico state university
with conducting a statewide
study on the feasibility and
cost for each school district to
transition to electric school
buses and providing a report
detailing the necessary steps
and costs for each school
district to most optimally
transition to electric school
buses.
Making an appropriations house
seventy five introduced by
representative saraniana seventy
five and been read twice by
title is ordered not princeton
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill seventy six.
Introduced by representatives
townsend scott and montoya.
An act relating to the
environment prohibiting the
adoption of certain rules
relating to the production and
delivery for sale of zero
emission vehicles.
House fill seventy six
introduced by representatives
townsend scott and montoya house
bill.
Has been seventy six have been
right twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill seventy seven
introduced by representative
block and act relating to
capital felony sensing
reinstating the death penalty
providing sentencing procedures
providing mitigating
circumstances requiring
automatic review of conviction
and sentenced by the supreme
court providing procedures for
execution prohibiting execution
of certain persons requiring
execution by lethal injection
making appropriations house bill
seventy seven introduced for
representative husband seventy
seven have been read twice by
title is order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill seventy eight
interdues for representative
block and act relating to
firearms providing for the
permitless carry of firearms by
adults repealing sections thirty
dash seven dash two point two
through thirty dash seven dash
three in mse nineteen seventy
eight being large nineteen
ninety four chapter twenty two
she sections to and three last
two thousand three.
Chapter two fifty three section
one and last nineteen seventy
five chapter one forty nine
section one as amended.
House bill seventy eight
introduced by representative
block.
Has been seventy eight haven't
been right twice by title is
ordered not princeton effort to
the house rules committee.
House bill seventy nine
introduced by representative
block an act relating to
taxation providing a partial
gross receipts tax deduction for
the sale of far arms and
ammunition creating a
distribution of the state growth
tax receipts tax.
To hold local governments
harmless for the deduction.
House bill seventy nine
introduced by representative
block.
Has been seventy nine have been
read twice by title is deemed
remain under article four
section five b one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house taxation
and revenue committee then the
house appropriations on finance
committee.
House bill eighty interdeese by
representative black and act
relating.
Relating to the children youth
and family's department creating
the crimes of assault and
aggravated assault against a
public service worker and
battery and aggravated
aggravated battery against a
public service worker creating
the crime of accessory to commit
assault or battery against a
public service worker and
conspiracy to commit assault or
battery against a public service
worker establishing penalties
house bill eighty introduced by
representative block has related
have been read twice away title
is order not princeton referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill eighty one introduced
by representatives reeb and
hernanders and act relating to
taxation creating the gun
storage income tax credit.
House bill eighty one interdues
for representatives reab and
hernandez.
House bill eighty one have been
read twice by title.
Is jimmed remain under article
four section five be one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to.
The house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house sexation and revenue
committee.
House bill eighty two introduced
by representative armstrong and
act making an appropriation to
the cultural affairs department
for the new mexico historic
women marker program.
House will eighty two interdues
for representative armstrong.
House believed to have been
right was by title is deemed
german under article four
section five b one of the
constitution ordered princess
and referred to the house.
Rural development language and
cultural affairs committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
The.
House bill eighty three
introduced by representative
serato.
An act relating to taxation
extending the amount of time to
make a qualified investment and
the eligible for the angel
investment credit house bill
eighty three interviews for
representative serato.
Has believed three.
Have been retired by title is
teamed your main under article
for section of every one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then the house
taxation and revenue committee.
The.
House bill eighty four
interdeese per representative
garrett and out relating to
higher education requiring a
minimum compensation for non
temporary and temporary faculty
at public post secondary
educational institutions making
an appropriation house bill
eighty four introduced by
representative garrett has
related four have been read
twice by title is deemed remain
under article four section five
b one of the constitution
ordered printed and referred to
the house education committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee
house full eighty five interdues
by representative garrett and
act relating to lobbying
requiring a lobbying activity
report on the legislation
lobbied and position taken by a
lobbyist or lobbyists employer.
Preserving lobbying activity
reports for at least ten years
house bill eighty five
introduced for representative
garrett.
Has believed have been read
twice by title is ordered not
princeton referred to the house
rules committee.
House bill eighty six interdeals
by representative but I go.
An act making an appropriation
to the new mexico state police
division of the department of
public safety for personal
protection equipment and
canada's testing equipment house
bill eighty six introduced by
representative but I go eighty
six seven minutes was by title
is deemed remain under article
four section if I have been one
of the constitution or the
printed and referred to the
house judiciary committee then
to the house appropriations of
finance committee.
The.
House bill eighty seven
introduced by representative
borrega.
An act relating to crime
providing that multiple
violations of unlawful taking of
a vehicle or motor vehicle and
beslement of a vehicle or motor
vehicle fraudulently obtaining a
vehicle or motor vehicle or
receiving or transporting stolen
vehicles or motor vehicles shall
be combined for insentencing
providing penalties how spill
eighty seven introduced by
representative but I go has will
eighty seven have been rid was
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill eighty eight
interdeals for representative
brego and act relating to
firefighters requiring the
department of finance and
administration to establish a
program to distribute funds
appropriated to the department
for statewide and local
firefighter recruitment making
an appropriation house bill
eighty eight introduced by
representative rego eighty eight
have been read towards my title
is deemed remain under article
four section five would be one
of the constitution ordered
principle referred to the house
government election in in the
affairs committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill eighty nine
introduced by representative
borrego and act relating to
disability accommodations and
acting the closed captioning act
requiring places of public
accommodation that displayed
television programming to
provide closed captioning
requiring the attorney general
to enforce the closed captioning
act providing penalties house
bill eighty nine introduced by
representative but I thought has
believed nine have been right
was by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill ninety interdues but
representative castiano and act
making an appropriation for
capital improvements at the epi
duran regional crisis and
treatment center operated by san
migo county house bill ninety
introduced by representative
castian id have been which was
by title is deemed remain under
article four section five p one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to.
The house transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations from finance
committee.
House bill ninety one interdeese
for representative royal ball
cavital.
An act relating to geothermal
resources amending the duties of
the energy conservation and
management division of the
energy minerals and natural
resources department.
Creating the geothermal projects
development fund authorizing
grants creating the geothermal
projects revolving loan fund
authorizing loans making
appropriations house bill ninety
one introduced for
representative roy ball cabinet
many one have a bendit was by
title is deemed your main under
article four section five be one
of the constitution ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy natural resources
committee then the house
appropriations on finance
committee.
House bill ninety two interdeese
for representative robot cavital
and act relating to taxation
creating the geo thermal
electricity generation income
tax credit the geothermal
electricity generation corporate
income tax credit and gross
receipts tax and compensating
tax deductions for geothermal
electricity generation facility
construction costs distributing
the loss of local option gross
receipts tax revenue
attributable so they did a to
the deductions of local
governments house will ninety
two introduced by representative
royal ball cabinet I was really
ninety two have a minute twice
by title is deemed remain under
article four section five b one
of the constitution ordered
printed and referred to the
hell's energy environment and
natural resources committee then
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill ninety three
introduced by representative
cates and act relating to
taxation.
Creating a growth receipts tax
deduction for environmental
modification services made to
the homes of medicaid recipients
house bill ninety three
introduced by representative
cates.
The.
Has been ninety three have been
right was by title it seemed
remain under article for section
of five hundred one of the
constitution ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then's
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill ninety four interdues
for representative cates and out
relating to labor requiring the
health care authority department
to collect and report data
related to the direct care
worker work force requiring a
biannual personal care services
cast study requiring the health
care authority department to
implement the cost studies
recommendations making an
appropriation house bill ninety
four introduced for
representative case I was bill
ninety four have a minute was by
title is deemed remain under
article four section five be one
of the constitution what are
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety five
introduced by representative
lord and act relating to
children amending the family in
need of court ordered services
act expanding the definition of
family in need of court ordered
services making an appropriation
house bill ninety five
introduced by representative
lord.
House bill ninety five have a
minute was by typ.
Is deemed remain under article
four section five be one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then
the house to share committee
apologies how's helping human
services committee fence the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety six introduced
by representative lord and act
relating to interference with
law enforcement increasing the
penalty for resisting evading or
obstructing an officer to a
fourth degree felony husband
ninety six introduced by
representative lord has will
ninety six seven minutes twice
by title is order not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill ninety seven
introduced by representative
lord.
An act relating to child welfare
creating a pre natal substance
exposure task force providing
during his requiring a final
report making an appropriation
how spell ninety seven
introduced by representative
lord.
As well ninety seven have been
right towards by title is in
german under article force
section five b one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill ninety eight
interdeese per representative
thomson.
An act relating to public
finance amending the accounts
for persons with disabilities
act to expand eligibility for an
account repealing and re
enacting section six dash eight
a dash six in msa nineteen
seventy eight being last twenty
sixteen chapter forty section
six to create an exemption from
medicaid recovery house for
ninety eight introduced by
representative thompson.
The.
Husband ninety eight have a
minute was by title is in german
under article four section five
b two of the constitution.
As well as house executive
message ninety eight.
Sort of printed.
Apologies house executive
message twenty two.
Good catch madame clerk.
Order printed and referred to
the household in human services
committee then's house
appropriations on finance comma.
House bill ninety nine
introduced by representative
thompson.
An act relating to health
eliminating racinos from smoking
permitted areas allowed in the
dead johnson clean indoor air
act house bill ninety nine
introduced by representative
thompson.
Husband ninety nine have a
minerate twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
One oh one interviews for
representative thompson and
everybody's bonserves so will
get to it we're we're trying to
clarify with the sponsor of
their semester to not.
But should be a good party.
The.
No sir don't sponsor bills.
Click to read.
Husband one oh one introduced
for representative thompson.
An act relating to behavioral
health enacting the firefighter
and emergency service provider
peer support act allowing state
local and regional public fire
agencies to create peer support
programs for their employees and
volunteers making pure support
services confidential limiting
liability for the provision of
peer support services making an
appropriation house bill one or
one introduced by representative
thompson has been one of one
have been read was by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b two and house
executive message twenty.
Order printed and referred to
the house health and human
services committee events the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one o two introduced
representative chandler and act
relating to courts making the
magistrate court of a court of
record providing the appeals
from magistrate court are made
to the court of appeals
repealing sections thirty five
dash thirteen dash two.
Thirty five dash thirteen dash
three thirty nine dash two dash
five and thirty nine
six in mse nineteen seventy
eight being last nineteen
seventy five chapter two forty
two section ten last nineteen
sixty eight chapter sixty two
section one fifty one and last
eighteen sixty five chapter
forty five section three and
four as amended making an
appropriation has will one or
two interdees for representative
chamber has been one or two have
a minute to as by title is or do
not printed and refer it to the
house rules committee.
House bill one oh three
introduced faced representative
lord and act relating to crime
providing for the exposure of a
child to a schedule more in or
schedule to control the
substance to constitute child
abuse providing for taking
newborn children into temporary
product protective custody under
certain circumstances making an
appropriations.
Has been one oh three introduced
by representative.
I was with one or three have a
bedroom twice by title is order
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one oh four
introduced for representative
zapansky.
An act relating to public health
creating the statewide public
health and climate program
creating the public health and
climate resiliency fund making
appropriations house bill one of
four introduced but
representative zapansky.
I was but one of four haven't
been read twice by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b one water printed
and referred to the house health
in human services committee then
a house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one oh five
introduced by representatives
lane and townsend.
An act relating to private
education providing for the
authorization of school tuition
organizations to award
educational skillerships to
certain low income students to
attend private schools creating
the educational scholarship
income tax credit and the
educational scholarship
corporate income tax credit.
House but one or five introduced
by representatives lane and
townsend I was with one of five
hundred minutes was by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b one over the
constitution ordered printed and
referred to the house education
committee then to the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill one oh six introduced
by representatives rib and lord.
An act relating to crime adding
the exposure to the use of
fintinal as evidence of of of
abuse of a child.
Making an appropriation house
bill one oh six introduced by
representatives reeb and lord as
well one or six seven minutes
twice by title is deemed to
remain under article four
section five be one of the
constitution ordered printed and
referred to the house judiciary
committee then said house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one oh seven
introduced by representative
chat field.
An act relating to health care
amending the medical malpractice
act to change the limitation of
recovery for certain claims
against hospitals and outpatient
health care facilities that are
hospital controlled house the
one oh seven introduced by
representative chatfield house
with one or seven have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed in referred to the house
rules committee.
House bill one oh eight
introduced for representative
zapansky and act relating to
public finance creating the
local solar access fund in the
new mexico finance authority
providing grants for solar
energy systems requiring the new
mexico finance authority to
establish rules making an
appropriation hospital one o
eight introduced by
representative zapanski I was
build one eight having been read
twice by title is deemed your
main under article four section
five be one of the constitution
ordered printed and referred to
the house energy the environment
and now to a resistance
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Has but one oh nine interdeese
by representative lord.
An act relating to crime
providing that aggravated
criminal sexual penetration and
criminal sexual penetration of a
child shall be punished by
death.
Providing exceptions creating a
first degree felony for human
sexual trafficking against a
victim under eighteen years of
age punishable by death
establishing a fine for first
degree felony criminal central
penetration of a child house
bill one oh nine introduced by
representative lord hospital one
or nine hundred minutes was by
title is ordered not principle
for it to the house rules
committee.
House bill one ten internet but
representative block an out
relating to abortion limiting
the performance of certain
abortions by health care
providers imposing penalties
house bill one ten introduced a
representative block.
The.
House bill one ten hundred
minutes wise by title is ordered
not principled referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one eleven introduced
by representative block and act
making an appropriation for the
construction of a border barrier
at the new mexico mexico border
hospital one eleven introduced
for representative block has
been one eleven have been read
twice by title is deemed your
main under article for section
if I would be one of the
constitution ordered printed in
reference to the house
government elections in the
indian affairs committee then
the house of oppressions and
finance committee.
House bill one twelve introduced
for representative hochman
vehicle and after relating to
taxation distributing a portion
of the looker excise tax to
counties for the provision of
alcohol and substance used to
sort of prevention and treatment
and a portion to a new county
alcohol and substance this
disorder prevention and
treatment fund making an
appropriation house bill one
twelve introduced by
representative hochman vehicle.
Has been won twelve hundred
minutes was by totally deemed
remain under article forced
section five would be one of the
constitution.
Auto printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee then the house
appropriations of finance
committee.
House will one thirteen
introduce for representatives
hockman vehicle and chandler and
act relating to to judicial
salaries providing that justices
of the state supreme court shall
receive a salary increase
providing that an annual pay
increase be at the annual rate
of inflation removing salary
found formulas for magistrates
making an appropriation house
bill one thirteen introduced by
representatives hockman vie hill
and champer housewill one
thirteen have been retwised by
title is deemed remain under
article four sixty five be one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
house judiciary committee then
the house were preparations on
finance committee
house bill one fourteen
interdues for representative
chandler and act relating to
trade practices enacting the
firearm industry accountability
act prohibiting false
advertising and conscionable
deceptive or unfair trade
practices and actions that
impact public health safety or
welfare requiring reasonable
controls and procedures
prescribing civil penalties
providing private remedies house
bill one fourteen introduced a
representative chamber.
Has been one fourteen haven't
been read twice by title is
dingerman under article four
section five between the
constitution and house executive
message eleven order printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee then
house judiciary committee.
The.
Your leader from brilliant.
Mr speaker I moved we've got
that order of business
announcements and muscelanious
business sim objections it is
ordered.
All right members we have a few
more bills and will be done
these are bills that are
referred to the rules committee
for which we've received an
executive message so shouldn't
take too long um after that will
conclude for the day
alright pursuant to
house executive message ten.
House bill twenty seven is
deemed remain.
Ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee.
Referred to
the house consumer problem
affairs committee then the house
judiciary committee again house
bill twenty seven.
Teamed remain.
Under house executive message
ten
removed from rules ordered
printed.
And referred to the house
consumer public first committee
then's house judiciary
committee.
Yeah.
Yeah.
House will twenty five pursuant
two house executive message
sixteen.
His order was moved from rules.
Order printed.
And refer to the house commerce
and economic development
committee.
Then the house judiciary
committee.
House bill eight.
Pursuant to house executive
message twenty one.
We are pulling that bill from
the house rules committee
we order printed and referred
to.
The house government.
Elections in in an affairs
committee then the house
traditionally committee.
House bill thirty three.
Pursuing two house executive
message eighteen.
House will thirty three is
pulled from the rules committee
ordered printed.
And referred to.
The house health and human
services committee then.
The house appropriations and
finance committee.
City one pain attention out
there anymore.
So making sure.
Third reading a legislation.
I read members and either
announcements before we break
for the evening.
Right generated from early or
percent chase.
Mr speaker and with the house
standing recess until ten thirty
tomorrow.
Am.
Am thank you to lady take your
members for a very productive
day we will stand in research
until ten thirty two moral
morning.
