Here.
Yeah.
Yeah
present.
Here.
Yes to table.
Um.
We're taking a vote today.
This.
The.
Do we have.
The.
Pretty sensitive this year my
name is on helicopter
representative review I am from
district thirty five in los
cruces and i'm here to present
on house joint resolution seven
you seen of an iteration of this
bill at least two or three times
already
we feel that this bill is a lot
cleaner it's a lot tighter and
um and really I feel like I
don't even really speak any more
because you've heard it so many
times but
I will continue so how so
resolution seven does two things
it means the constitution to
create a commission that an
independent citizens commission
to establish and adjust salaries
or legislators as you all know
we don't get a salary for this
for the work that we do other
than the predium that we receive
during session
and when we're in interim and
and of course mileage and then
the second thing that it does is
that it
it it amends the constitution to
remove the prohibition around us
receiving a salary so
that way we can receive a salary
as in addition to that it would
be.
If it passes the house and the
senate the house which is done
in the past
then it would go to voters
during the next election and
then they would
aren't you questions which would
be on the very on the two things
that i've just noted and so
I know that there are
philosophical differences in
terms of whether or not we
should get paid I know that
there's a lot of pride in in
being a citizen legislature
legislator but the reason that
i've put this legislation
forward practically every year
that i've been in the
legislature and this is my eight
year is that I I believe that
this that we're leaving a lot of
people out of being able to
represent and in their own
communities are because.
It is a privileged number one to
serve in the legislature but
it's that much more of a
privilege when it comes to
finances that a person can't
actually afford to to be able to
do this
without a salary and so the
commission itself there is
nothing in this legislation that
talks about how much or anything
like that what this bill does is
create it it gives us the
gives us the we we basically
want voters to make the decision
on whether or not we create the
commission for them to then go
on and decide um how that's
going to to roll out and so with
that madam chair i'm i'm happy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So.
I see.
Yeah.
One of the forty nine.
The twenty seven.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Chair members of the committee
just like howard vice president
of ch I think just a children we
run the largest visiting program
in the state
serving hundreds of families
weekly through virtual visits on
in the past twelve years
advocating for the early
childhood constitutional
amendment this is one of the
most important issues.
As we advocated for early child
we had to do a lot of education.
So we see this.
Have their voice.
And wording out of chair members
of the committee.
Supporters we strongly support
this legislation as stated we
make suppose the only state
doesn't pay legislators and by
doing so we are actually doing
is used to service for the
people many people are unable to
serve as representative rubio.
They pay the mexical legislators
we can create stronger
legislative body and w.
Yes thank you.
Currently bar.
The largest.
State to represent.
You know obviously.
So i've seen first.
Many chair many members my needs
have been a crisis thank you for
your service and your volunteer
were that's what it is when you
don't get pay I am and all
support I am a situation
representative
and that they can purchase
volunteer work but I think we
need to move to the professional
legislature and get paid thank
you.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is miles
token deputy director ado they
representing working families
all throughout new mexico and we
strong we stand in strong
support of this legislation and
like many i've already said we
believe that financial barriers
to serve our beautiful beautiful
state should not exist and and
that for folks who want to
represent and do the awesome
privilege of being able to make
decisions that represent our
communities
that financial barriers
shouldn't be exist for that that
access to that privilege thank
you so much I do support and ask
you to earth to vote in favor.
The.
The morning madame chair members
of the committee my name is eric
at sanchez and and i'm with new
mexico center online poverty we
strongly support has joint
resolution seven as already
state it not pain our
legislators makes it extremely
difficult for those without
significant resources to ran a
base salary makes it possible
for the legislature to be more
reflective of our communities in
their diverse perspectives and
experiences and by giving
legislators a base salary we
further empower them to focus on
the issues affecting our state
and not on their financial
stability
we support their joint
resolution because it proposes a
more equitable political process
that invites on new mexicans to
rent for office and we urge the
committee to pass it thank you.
Good morning to you williams
lake of women bonus of new
mexico we support the her seven
we believe that there is a cost
of government and that the
taspayers should pay for that
cost that special interest
groups and we also agree with
all the other comments that have
been made thank you.
Madame chairman and think you
represent it I won't go on
I know we had a late night last
night in c pack so we're all
still recovering madame
first of all madame chairman
representative I just wanted to
see what what changes that we
make to this year's bill from
last year's bill just quickly if
you would like to go through
that manager thank you madame
chair thank you representatives
it was mostly just.
A lot of details so
what we had last year was that
it was just going to be too long
for like processing type stuff
on to the ballot and so what we
did is just we just meet it
tiger and so there's none of the
substance of the bills removed
it was mostly just
a lot of the details of of how
we would get there that were
that were rem.
Thank you madame chairman think
you representative and that is
helpful a certainly don't like
ballots that are like 7 pages
so madame chairman
representative can you just tell
me specifically this new
commission do we tell them who
must be appointed to the
commission and how they have to
act when they are appointed to
have like responsibilities
duties.
Thank you madam chair
representative so the way that
it would work is that if we
possible out of here in the
house in the senate it would be
on the ball
in november and then when we
would return in january we would
then have um we would have to do
enabling legislation so that's
where we would be able to
provide much more of the process
during that time but as we've
noticed in the legislation here
on page two
we do provide at the bottom of
page one and then at the starter
page to
we do provide
some uhm some language around
who the commission is made up.
Madame chairman thank you
representative and just quick.
Would just get per dim or would
they get anything as well madame
chair representative madam chair
representative as it's written
in the language it would be they
would receive predium
okay thank you madame chair
think you representative I
appreciate that you know I I
think this is an interesting
idea
I still have a lot of heartburn
with it like I did last year
unfortunately because I hear all
this rhetoric.
You know we were under
representative regular folks
can't run for this.
You know people in this body you
know a lot of regular folks who
are in this.
Billionaire business men for
example madame chairman you know
myself the way I got here ironic
string campaign against an
incumbent who was entranced well
funded
and I still won as a regular job
and we raised barely anything
compared to her and we were
still able to get here and so
because I was the first jensey
legislator ever elected in the
state and we have more young
people and I know we have
represented part of home now and
that's great that we have more
young folks in the leg.
But.
You know I don't think this
necessarily goes to the the meat
of the issue I do see the one
benefit potentially for this
legislation would be to get more
competition in these seats to
run but that would also make
this these elections even more
expensive and I think that would
actually leave regular folks out
on the sidelines because it
would take even more money to
even get to the table so that's
just one of my big concerns here
and I won't go too much longer
here but I really appreciate it
manager and I don't know if you
need follow up that's on
thank you madame chair think a
representative it's it sounds
like you
might be interested in co
signing legislation for campaign
financing reform which I am very
much open to so i'm talking
about that later on minimum to
represent if I would love to see
the bill and have those
conversations with you thank you
madame chair
representative cha.
So I have looked at this issue
and
if we.
Two hundred dollars a year.
Uh this last year.
From a r.
The legislation legislatures.
Meet.
Do we have a problem
recruiting people to run for
office and i'd sa.
This is actually gone to.
But
what is not the discuss.
To go through the formulas or
everyone.
So.
You have to have five years.
However if you have ten years.
Let's follow the form for a
moment the former.
The number of year.
So we're going to use ten years
because.
Will come up with.
So a person with ten years
currently
received seventeen thousand
eight hundred.
Or.
I think.
Yeah.
I think that.
And madame chair probably my
last comment is if we're
looking.
And so
that's my.
The think you made a.
And uh members of the committee
well.
The.
Giving.
That's.
I have.
All of the family
responsibilities.
Sure that
something had to give it was
very challenging and of course
you know some of the experiences
my family had this.
Everybody else has exte.
And well.
I do not.
To go back to s.
That does
mean.
Would offer that.
And so a thousand four.
So
well the average.
We don't know.
Would also have to be examined.
As with the flow even for
business.
So.
And that is done.
So
thank you for the.
The.
Before.
A process.
Thank you
and thank you representative for
bringing this bill forward.
So
in this joint resolution the way
it's going to work
is.
We're going to ask the people to
vote
on this resolution but they're
not really gonna be given the
facts is the way I see it and
i'll explain that a little bit
madam chair is
when if if if this joint
resolution passes me.
Will the people really know what
they're voting and by that i'm
getting to the numbers will they
know that they're voting for us
to maybe pay ourselves a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars a
year.
And then what if we did give
ourselves and outrageous amount.
We're doing this job
and then the citizens would look
at it and say that's not what I
voted on.
In and then
how would we respond to that
as the legislature legislature
or a.
Thank you madame chair
representative
this legislation if it goes to
voters is in this it's I mean it
happens in the.
He says the policy I mean we
have elections every two years
there are votes that we take
that sometimes our legit are
considering support and other
ti.
Then what we're already being
asked to do
and and matter chair and
representative it in and I
understand that part of it but
how
is this fair to the citizens of
the state and new mexico to vote
on this resolution
if then if if if they vote for
it and then we get a hold of it
back again and then we write the
rules and then give them the
numbers white why
can't we give
our citizens of the state
front as to what kind of pay.
We would be given ourselves if
this resolution.
The.
Madam chair representative again
it's it's a like a lot of the
policies that we pass I mean a
lot of the legislation that we
passed through this institution
are
we we don't necessarily do it
already and so I don't see that
that being any different than
what we're doing already and
madame chairman representative
do you think that we would be
better representing ourselves
if.
We talked
there's there's no nothing in
this legislation that talks
about our prediums that we get
there's nothing in it that talks
about our retirement which
representative rim pointed out
there's nothing that talks about
the numbers that we will pay
ourselves if this resolution
passes.
Uh do you feel like any of that
ought to be in this bill.
Madam chair representative over
asking of the voters is amended.
Commission will then make all of
those decisions if that's a
question that we need to address
later on then then we have that
program to do so leader but we
don't what we're asking at this
point is to constitution to.
Okay and I understand all that I
just I just think we have to be
more madam character to be more
open to our citizens and and as
we presently legislation like
this think and understand the
whole picture
when I talk to my constituency
and and we've been here in this
talk around the state already
for years.
And.
They agree on on
some people agree that we ought
to get paid a salary some people
don't you know and there and
there's a lot of controversy
there but I I believe
as it representative that I need
to put the whole story on the
table instead of instead of just
asking a vote for paid
legislature and does everybody
really understand what that
really means and I think if if
the whole picture was laid out.
I will oppose this bill for
those reasons.
And we know the system if if the
votes are there.
I have some reservations about
it and that's where I stand on
it thank you for bringing in the
bill forward appreciate your
hard work.
Um
I just want to uh reiterate some
other points that rep little
laid out so eloquently I will
start by saying that a
representative locker may do
having come in that we ran she
string campaign we if it was
very much kind of a boot strap
situation and and i'm sure you
spent just as much time
fundraising for your campaign as
I know I did for mine but the
focus of this bills what happens
after you win and after my
primary election my partner and
I sat down and had a very
strange discussion about what
our lives were going to look
like.
For the following year through
november and certainly they're
after an and I can see and i've
told my constituents we've had
this conversation many times
that I am very privileged that I
was able to take a full year and
just focus on being a legislator
and I am well aware that that is
not the case for most of us and
my constituents also know that
even though we are a part time
legislature and our sessions are
shorter than other states this
is still a full time jar we do
something in our c.
Every single day and
and yeah i've seen my colleagues
have to juggle between our
responsibility to our thirty
thousand some constituents which
for me is paramount and then
also having to try and balance
that with paying our own bills
so and that is that is a very
prohibitive factor
I have talked to many young
people who want to get involved
politically but they simply do
not have the time and cannot
afford to take the time off from
their jobs that would require to
run a successful campaign and as
this bill is simply asking for
the opportunity to create a
commission to study what are
paid legislature would look like
and then on page two by nine
specifically uhm it would be
reviewed every four years
they're after so if they come up
with a number that the public
does not like we will hear about
it and that will be up for
adjustment and review so for
those reasons madame chair
representative thank you very
much for bringing this bill and
I will be supporting it.
Madam chair
I think representative on you
know new clarified one of the
issues that I wanted to speak
about which is about
campaigning versus serving their
they're not the same thing and
choosing the campaign and
fundraise is a whole different
picture.
But that moment when you are
elected madame chair and you
realize you have to make your
life
work around this job and more
importantly you're constitu.
To do this job.
And you have to serve them
without compensation
is a different question
and the one determinant we share
to serving are constituents
should be the vote of our.
Not a financial
the people should be able to
choose representatives
and representatives should be
open represent.
Without this fiscal financial
barrier.
Not the campaigning
the service period we do have
folks who have tried to serve
and had to step away
from serving in our chambers
because of financial.
I'm qualified committed people
who were allected by their.
And then because of financial
very.
We have the ability
witness resolution to address
that structural impediment and
make our chamber more inclusive
to the voices of our
constituents and I think we need
to do so
many chairman has comment
question for the sponsor
I will be tired meant formula
structures and rules in the
constitution or in statute.
For sure.
In in terms of
benefits.
Enacted.
And it is the current provides
the current return benefits for
all of our legislatures which is
all optional it does have a very
uni.
Pension factors
and and there's a lot of
differing types of plans but
legislators are.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you sponsor I think that gets to
my point it's created in statute
are constitution sets up that we
do have retirement rb in our
parents exist but the
eligibility requirements that
formula is all of that we create
in statute.
So
should this go before the people
and should.
An established and independent
salary commission.
I imagine her constituents will
also demand that we revisit and
it dressed our retirement
statute well thank you manager.
Yes
no no they will explain my vote
please.
No.
Yes.
Medicare.
Yeah thank you.
I will be very quick manager I
just want to reiterate you know
I I ran this position knowing it
was a citizen legislature
knowing I wouldn't get paid and
I feel it would not be my
responsibility as the legislator
too then vote to pay myself I
think that's something that I
couldn't square I can look
myself in the mirror I guess
manager and uh I just wanted to
reiterate I didn't get into
public service as a money making
opportunity I came here because
they care about nineteen six
years and that's why voted now
so thank you manager and thank
you.
Thank you representatives
chair
solution.
That.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you chair committee house.
I am here to present house.
The.
Looked at various aspects of
modernization
and this is the.
With me I have professor tim
craps and professor michael
broka from your name.
And.
Completed a study that is
referenced and will be.
And a fact.
But is you all know
serve in a legislative structure
that is sixty days on europe.
And this structure was
established in nineteen.
That the world has changed
nineteen sixty four.
Our population.
The complexity of the issue.
And that.
Has in.
Medicare hadn't been invented
when are structure was
established in nineteen sixty
four and it changes in the
industry.
Demand more
amounts.
We are the third shortest.
The.
The.
Our budget.
Has increased as multiplied.
It's doubled in the last.
Yes
to go back to fifty I believe
it's more than.
And we are challenged.
That budget.
The number.
Oversight war.
Has also.
The.
How can we.
The oversight and.
And address this time
limitation.
Productivity in terms of
crafting and betting.
Architect deserve
well that is thoroughly debated
legislation and policy.
Session.
Interact with us on the bills
that are before us.
And
we have heard this bill in this
committee before we have passed
this building.
So I think I will even at that
for now.
We have had home.
And across.
Whether you're in the central
board art new mexico or far from
front here.
A longer.
From personally.
Trust right.
Personal experience I will say.
The.
So i'm hearing it from them and
I am asking this committee to
consider.
To let them make.
This joint resolution is
slightly.
There's message
session.
Okay so don't confuse it with
last year's
resolution I believe the fire
has to.
From prior.
Well I would like madam chair
the expert witnessed.
We are honored.
That in chair representatives I
might rocker in your honor to be
here today to provide.
The work that you all of
all study and teach american
party for you and inferbally
believe that while the public is
at the hard for democracy the
legislature is the most
important branch for
representing their is what we
tell our students every semester
speaking of students that he
remissed if we do not also thank
you for metroing so many of our
student interns professor
perhaps and I have over at
different times over the past
year two years direct
department's internship probably
was experiences or life changing
first students and we are very
grateful for providing them with
those opportunities professor
president I co wrote a policy
twenty twenty two recommending
one other things a longer
legislative session the
recommendation stands from over
fifty years of research subject
will stay out the building
institutions capacity to meet
increasing expectations from
voters as well as overwhelming
work loads in dealing with
economic political and social
challenges as are he end up
the burden has increasingly
fallen on mexico to address the
complex issues as great locking
this function continue to grip
national politics.
Yeah.
Proves law making and
representative.
It is not about passing more
laws what about.
Gaugement with colleagues.
Thoroughly considered.
Furthermore exten.
The longer session.
Early review and if needed
challenge given its royal action
thereby reinforcing the
essential principle.
Yeah.
In conclusion standing new
mexico's legislat.
Yeah.
Thoroughly.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
A lot of different backgrounds
on a lot of these topics they
were able to go out.
From both sides of the.
I also worked.
This
is here and i've been here in
all this my third session coming
is just.
Anyway it's it's been hard to
inform process bills are.
Also immediately.
Afterwards there's after you.
Anyway I too to support this at
the very minimum
adam chair members.
We want to spend more time with
you
you know they say big
legislation takes time the
constitutional member was over a
decade what if we had cut that
and half to five years that
would be spice years of children
getting services who got the
weight list for home visiting
child care prepaid there is no
weight list for children in
early childhood because there's
a window of development
weightless is a no list.
Good morning again man.
We try to support this
legislation i've been the
lobbyist for our chapter for the
last four years and i've seen
legislation coming in out just
as was mentioned earlier not a
lot of time were time running
out because.
So and on top of that I get in
my role with this year actually
get to work with lobbyists from
all.
And the license people are just
surprised at how store sessions
are.
This is this is obviously not a
criticism at our legislature
everybody works really hard with
what you have and this would
actually allow you to work.
So.
Yeah.
My name is richard moody i'm a
member of the new mexico that
prince in military families
caucus we also see and support
this bill because we feel that
the longer session would enable
legislature to pass more bills
that have been official
families but all the mexicans
thank you.
I'm.
Judy williams league of women
photos of new mexico we support
this resolution
we also believe that sessions
are no longer sufficient linked
to address the complex issues
facing the state and current
times and I went and mentioned
the
veto item and we also believe
that governments should work to
inform people of government
actions and that the public has
the right to know of reasons for
those actions so we are just
support for this thank you.
He has two morning a medan chair
members of the committee just
curt rigor on the director of
lutheran advocacy ministry of
new mexico and we express
position of that in an extra
conference of churches or simply
state that I can cur with all
that's been said by the bill
sponsor experts in the previous
speakers and urger support of h
r five thank you.
Thank you madame chair my name
is home solomon I am a cocor
nato climate focus environmental
group call
new mexico and we have been
involved in this legislative
modernization effort for several
years now and very much
appreciate the efforts and.
Articulation from the sponsor
representative figure over
basically articulating exactly
the reason why this bill and the
companion bill
that needs to pass but new
mexico is a modern state in the
twenty first century yet we are
settled with the structural
legislature
that was created under very
different conditions over a
century a goal and it is long
passed time that we modernize
the legislature so that it has
the capacity at the time and
quite frankly the compensation
levels with a different bill to
address the issues of the twenty
first century including the
urgent issues of primary change
in all the complexity that
brings up this bill is a very
important feature of that effort
and a very much appreciate the
spots or bringing this forward
urge the committee to vote yes
on this bill thank you so much.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee erika
sanchez with new mexico center
online poverty we stand and
support of this resolution new
mexicans deserve a legislature
that has adequate time in the
ability to consider legislative
solutions to the vast number of
issues impacting our communities
creating two sixty day sessions
and eliminating restrictions on
bills that can be heard will
improve the legislators of
billed legislature's ability to
affectively respond to the
complex issues that are
important to new mexicans we ask
you to support this resolution
thank you.
Bills that are coming up.
So it's.
So I think that there is.
So.
Where we.
The.
I support well i'm gonna pose
this one th.
Read that you know that.
The.
Represent the guerrilla
professors out.
Yeah.
I
think I just have two statements
rather than a question and.
First I want to say that
by having to.
We do.
We make.
Are with a n.
Yes.
We freightly passed too quickly
with enough
but review.
I was going to be a witness in
a.
Whether.
The.
A subs.
And
what I could do is trace back to
what.
I was able to I would have been
able to it ended up.
But they had they'd resolve it
in the warning.
But I really looked back at.
The change that we made.
One year I had it.
We had a call.
It.
Incorrectly so we quickly
changed and we've got it done
correctly
wrong and.
And it was just it was just the
flur.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Said it are still.
Now senator.
Under handed.
Thank you madame thank you
representative and professors
for being here today i'll be
quick just as there was with the
previous bill medium to
represent it I believe we spoke
about
I forget who said it but we
said.
When have we challenged
communitorial actions so you're
saying that we challenge given
to actions with the sixty day
session right we can challenge
good natural actions so i'm just
wondering matter to represent
when have we done that in a
sixty day session on an audio
medium chair represent.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Legislature.
As part of that.
Thank you madame chairman
thinking representative in
professor so I I just wanted to
clarify so in new mexico during
a sixty days session i'm just
wondering can you give me an
example how we can or have we
how we have in the past held the
governor accountable in a sixty
day
because we currently have a
sixteen and thirty so if we say
two sixties will do it what is
the one sixty already doing.
And that.
That we have limited opportunity
to balance that executive r.
Not insurance representative is
a really good question and and
while specific examples wall
representatives who were who
were who have one ten year in in
the legislature might have be
able to come up specific
examples I can certainly
remember anecdotes during times
it divided government when it so
it's clear that when it's
beautiful government it these
new sorts of checks and
bargaining is more likely to
happen with in part
when there is a divided in the
sixty day period I can think
about
governors on martinez's ten year
I can think about governor
richardson's ten year during
that time to you in which those
moments are much more likely
happened during the sixty days
session.
Thank you manager think
representative I think that's
actually what i'm getting at
right when we have a divided
government we have to negotiate
right now the governors in power
her parties and power in both
houses and if she's not able to
get which she wants across the
finished line with what we have
now i'm not necessarily inclined
to believe that would change
sixty days so also the concerns
with representative ream what he
said about elections you know if
if filing days during the time
we're in session or like the day
afterward it gives my primary
opponent a lot of time to go
talk to those voters knock on
those doors well i'm up here
doing the people's work and I
find that to be a huge concern
so I will just stop there i'll
be really quick but thank you
manager percent that's all thank
you madame ch.
That is part of what we have to
do.
But I don't.
And building a st.
That will be.
That will affect.
Orange.
With regard to campaign.
We can't.
Frankly to be prant because
we're going to talk about
campaigning we have what no one
is the advantage.
I'm so well we we may have
opposition
to the voters.
Every day we work
when we do.
And that work that we accomplish
is our record when we run for
reelection and with respect to
logistics madam chair.
Yeah.
I thought for the longest amount
of time it would over that pl.
And.
It's adding.
Right now it says at our
violence.
And we had or the secretary of
states
comma.
And that takes care of th.
So that peace can be done but i.
Service.
Well we.
Chicken I just add one thing to
that I just and I totally
understand where you're coming
from at the last thing about
bringing to santa fe like the
federal candidates but we would
have to file wolverine session
and I don't want to be mixing
campaigns and our service at the
same time and this would
actually be doing that because I
believe that would be during a
business day where we we should
be working and not filing for
reelections that is a huge
concern I have along with that
thank you manager
madame chair we also have
existing and statute already the
ability to des.
That exists.
It requires.
So we can cover it either way
for currently sir.
Someone else should be doing
that during the world.
And invest here.
No i.
Yeah.
No sir.
No.
The.
The.
The.
The.
I like numbers.
Members of the committee.
Good discussion on the last the
obviously.
I'm good just her government why
I think this is a good idea.
I know represent harper and I
discriminate
and that is
I would rather have two sixty d
sessions.
But I also
that you forty five sessions.
Mexico has really serious
problems if we have a hard time
addressing.
So.
Three day session I think we
start faster.
Their bills creep in.
I don't think it's working.
One the biggest changes
not only in the time i.
So while I would rather have two
sixty th.
Could live with two.
It's currently situated I work
in.
New mexico's issues.
On again again start.
So I work on an issue I make
some pro.
And the bill.
And we get in the house probably
average.
So there's a big change and i'm
back it's.
I hope that this issue is not
person and that's why I were
very hard to get
my person.
What with this issue is in my
mind.
Ourselves and.
The ability to control our own
agent.
For us not to fix
it I think this would be a hard
statute to get signed by.
The.
He moved forward so we can have.
But time and again.
I get bills that are not
the don't go for the don't have
things that I think you're
important but are still imp.
Yesterday.
You didn't go as far as I wanted
to.
I think you may have charity
community members it's a
greatest you this morning I I
want to I just may be two things
just some personal experiences.
Uhm so and and i'll see if maybe
this experience is familiar to
some of you but I remember being
a freshman legislator you know
twelve years ago and coming in
you know it's a big wide eyes
you know and and uh just you
know not knowing what I was
doing at all and and I had some
great mentors of people on both
sides the aisle that helped me
out and I was fortunate got two
bills passed and signed into law
in a sixty day session you know
I think that's probably more
than a lot of us are freshman
term
and so I felt like I kind of
after sixty days had an idea of
what was going on
and then I got to my thirty day
session and holy cow that is a
completely different animal it
is lightening fast.
Uhm you have to talk with the
governor to get bills heard and
and then i'll send you up free
election and and it was just
I I just feel like it's kind of
unfair to our freshman
right the first opportunity that
their inner session is a that's
the sixty day when anything is
german.
Is when they're completely green
and then the thirty day when you
kind of have an idea of what the
heck's going on
it's like sorry
yeah
see if you're lucky enough to
come back next year
you know so I really believe.
Thank you I do seek the forty
five forty five is better.
The other the other story all
share
is during my second term
uh we had the privilege of being
in the majority um the first
time in fifty or sixty years and
I had the privilege of sharing
the tax committee and I was
carrying the capital out way
bill
and there was a lot of friction
between us and the republican
governor at the time
I actually I will go into all
the details but it was pretty
ugly between us and in the
fourth floor
and
during the three day session
decided not to ask for any
messages because I didn't want
you have to go to the governor
and her staff and ask for
them to give me something and
then then to have something that
used how leverage me and then I
go to the caucus and have people
wondering well is he really
fighting for my interests or is
he just doing what the governor
wants that he can get his bills
her to get his bill.
And so I did not get anything
done that three days session
because I didn't want to put
myself in.
I can maybe understand why in
the past it made sense to have a
short thirty day budgetary
session that if you wanted to
talk about.
But times have changed
and and I agree with represent
my queen that we are a co equal
branch of government and we
shouldn't have to go to the
executive and ask for the
important things to ask to be
heard
stand for questions manager
thank you okay.
And went forward for discussion
in this body here.
The.
Good morning i'm cha.
Although we support.
Hi
sharing committee members my
name is.
I would just like to say that.
Prevent us from being.
Good morning again judy williams
leader would be voters of new
mexico we like parts of this
build but we don't support the
forty five forty five and so we
have to oppose the bill thank
you very much.
A second.
Yes i'd like to explain
what this is what.
Yes.
This.
This.
The.
Thank you.
Having voted guess I bel.
That I too would prefer to sixty
day session
however and
representative heart relate out
being that wide I had freshman
just last year and.
I am also a big believer.
People who spoke about position
have said that they like parts
of this bill but they don't love
all of it.
How often is representatives
have to swallow the pill of
liking
the core issue of the bill and
disliking the sprinkles I don't
know how to
hope I you're making.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Let's.
Thank you madame chair
i'm going to say I like the core
piece of that.
The danger with this incremental
step for me is if we passed.
The people of new mexico.
And a passes.
If you look at history it will
be decade.
And I think two more decades
i've even forty five forty day
sessions would be.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you manager members of the
committee so i'm all about
doing good things for the
legislation in this.
It does not in any way
limit the building to veto a
bill
it does is ask the governor to
give us a reason.
You all know how hard it is.
Legislation that has through two
chambers to the governor.
You know check some balances I
get.
Under existing constitutional
provision if we send that the
legislation before the final
three days.
Not only act on it before the
end of the session.
But give us a reason
that's already in the.
We would like an explanation for
a veto.
I think full three percent.
Past and pocket vetoed and we
have no idea why and i'll just
i'll give you one there is there
is a.
History
created and some of the broken
the two different.
Subdivisions and we want to
recognize the partition.
That bill was
three times
three times by two different
governors
at one point some language
committee wrote a letter to the
governor saying won't you tell
us why so we can fix it.
You could for the legislature.
Thinking that your community
members
i'll give you maybe one more
example.
You're probably all remember.
To a certain degree your front.
And how that helps us.
And when it's called.
So I had carried that and it
passed you.
A couple years before
and it got part of it I reached
out to the governor staff like
okay.
Secretary we had a conversation
well
I try again last year new dhs
secretary i'm looking at the.
Yeah.
Well two days after the session
is over they finally took a
moment and I still have a
concern.
Through the process I was just
really frustrating.
I would have really appreciated
it if.
A little more transparency in
communication so I wouldn't have
to waste my.
The.
I ask is all the considerations
it is not.
I mean let's just be honest the
reason why a governor republican
or democrat would like to pocket
veto something is
sometimes it's hard politically
to give a reason why you're not
si.
That's what we do this every day
sometimes it's hard for us to
vote for a bill or not vote for
a bill that's why we like to
explain our vote sometimes.
So
i'm not sure committee members.
I stepped.
Thank you sponsors will go to
public comment if you are in the
room and you are in support of
the spill which you raise.
Okay and just work in time it
out is there anyone here in
the opposition to this bill
okay let's start with word on my
rep.
Why you supp.
The.
Good morning committee members
might again my next part.
The governor's ability to build.
And.
And support
the rescue again with the circle
after strongly support this bill
and think the sponsored for
bringing it for I think this
this is about fairness for your
work.
You know there's so many bills
that pass it are really good for
no reason and that's just.
Thank you.
Where there's wor.
One.
To williams again league of
women voters of new mexico we do
believe in public's rate to know
the reasons for government
action we support this bill for
the reason stated thank you
thank you duty and curt
a good morning madam chair again
this is curt rigger with
literalxy ministry to mexico and
speaking for the new mexico
conference churches as well now
simply say deadlow to the
comments made by the bill
sponsors we strongly support
this hdr to and urge you to
support her as well.
Thank you
and that is all for comment
online committee members list.
To a bill and hold orient.
I want the governor to tell us
exactly why she.
If we don't do that.
Thank you representative.
Mentioner.
Thank you sponsors we have an
amendment and their discussion
is their discussion let's
discussion on the amendment
representative chase
think amount of chair and I
guess what i'm wondering is.
Is th.
Yeah.
We're cleaning up the language.
But the current word is a.
If you're asking for an explana.
So I don't think.
Yeah in drafting this I I
struggled with this issue.
I settled on just.
Do you think there's
potential therefore a governor.
You know I I think there is uh
sort of hope of you know good
faith on the part of whoever's
governor.
I mean a governor could give the
same explanation for every bill.
Um so III
the reason I said it's
acceptable
to me at least if it's the will
of the committee some kind of
neutral on it because i've
struggled with it I can see it
come on either way.
Discussion on the amendment.
Uh manager
while I agree that it could.
Look at our current.
So
what is it you know it's not
going to affect the next coming.
Um.
So that it is co.
Vague.
So that whatever
they d.
Thank you representative
discussion on the amendment
replac.
Yeah.
The.
If you want to make that
withdraw mine or redo it again
relevant to.
Yeah
representative that we would
have to amend the amendment or
we send the amendment and
probably.
Okay so
madame chiero.
Relevant to.
We need to make a motion on the
amendment
that was proposed no no i'm just
you can withdraw okay we need to
put that in the record first
proposed amendment is withdrawn
we are proposing.
Which is strike online twenty
two.
And
and in search
irrelevant.
And I want to make sure our
committee assistance have this
down and everyone who is
listening is following our
public does not necessarily have
a copy of the bill in front of
them it's important that they
understand
what where we certain inserting
line twenty two on pa.
Strike the word and
and and insert a.
Relevant.
A relevant explanation for the
veto would be the line a
relevant explanation for the
okay is that correct.
How we have a proposed amendment
we have discussion on the
amendment
rep chase
them chair I looked up the word.
Yeah.
High school english teacher
I I want to get these other.
Ah madame chair.
So
so i'll withdraw amendment
the impermanent spend with run
and we are still on discussion
of the bill as written
representative ream you have the
floor.
I'm done but I if no one
discussed i'm ready to do it do
pass I believe we have
discussion representative
little.
No
chasing
the amter I was all for this but
then representative heart
pursuit said something that gave
me a heartburn.
This mean every member is going
to be explaining his or her vote
and I don't
know
thank you
representatives more.
Okay
before we go to the dupesman
vote I have a question for the
sponsors that I wanted to ask
why you chose in line twenty two
to use the word explanation in
instead of using
the previous language and saying
include an objection where
include the objection to the
vote why did you change the word
from objection to explanation
chair explanation just seem to
be what we were actually we
don't necessarily you know it's
explanation
it seemed like a better and I
will say in working on on this
amendment and.
Can't see sure members are hard
because you're mending the
constitution that was poorly
written I mean it's really still
to integrate in language so
trying to fit the what you want
to do.
Thank you sponsor I appreciate
that I wondered not being a
lawyer myself if there was some
significance to the word of
jackson that pertained
thank you we have a motion and
at this point I forgot.
And the second from
representatives more and we ca.
Does anyone let's go ahead and
call role I think we better on
this.
Pass.
Can't we could see
yes yes.
And I don't need to explain my
vote.
Yes
representative yes sir.
Did you go back to
representative block please
I guess yes.
Yes.
The.
The.
You have a do pass the voter six
to zero thank you
thank you
and committee members that
publishes a work for today
they're should be publication of
monday's agenda this afternoon
so keep an eye up for that to do
you read form of monday not
saturday thanking for really
