Johnson.
The.
Thank you m.
It's my voice carrying over.
It's great to be with you this.
And then we.
Sarah I said yes she's my new
best friend anyhow she has
taught me a lot both of these
women have really taught me a
lot about the the powers.
And.
I.
As we stand on a lot of show.
So the reason i'm excited about
this bill is because.
And I my family i'm always
always been a grant right right
i've always been a rainmaker I
you know I bring in money that's
was.
Forty years.
Where.
Yeah.
There's a lot of technical
skills.
And you don't have the right
person to.
You're in real deep trouble.
Members from rural districts all
over the state they would agree
with me so.
I saw all this federal money
coming.
We did have junior money I made.
A tows a call facts I mean it's
a huge.
Districts to put in money so
that we had a combined budget.
So I can.
Two year period and there's
twenty eight million still
outing grounds which means we
could get a lot more you know
it's kind of a timing issue so
this is why.
She has ten of them on contract
so some b.
You know you have different
skill sets for different kinds
of federal grants and different
kinds.
There's a grand for that you
need to go right a grant and
here is the person you call i.
And that's how it should be in
every district that's how it
should be for every single
member of th.
Need support we can't I can't I
know how to wreck.
So when i'm saying is I think
this will be.
And and that was just the first
two years.
If we've gotten already.
Thirty five.
Assistance.
Opportunity.
Um this was a brilliant idea I
think I think that.
A higher two staff people to do
this we would always be
overwhelmed s.
There's were actually at the
year and a half mark so the
first year we brought in fifteen
million and ground awards.
Just july.
It is a a fairly.
The other thing that i'll just
add that that wasn't said is
that th.
And what we're seeing.
And.
And provide that.
To help them.
So good morning matting chair
and members of the committee i'm
presellable settle and I am with
the southwest new mexico cancel
the governments I might as
silver city and i'm also the
stature for the group but if
there's one thing I really want
articulate today is that i'm the
oldest of all of the group
that's been with the car and and
this is my thirty seventh a
year.
So I have been through every
possible thing you can imagine
and trying to help local
governments from emergency is to
you name and i've i've just
about denoral relative dressing
fire legislative everything you
can imagine but I think that the
greatest reward is really being
able to support not only all of
you but they elected officials
within our region to help faster
those additional opportunities
are committee because sometimes
they're they're that other left
behind and you see that more in
the rural infrantiour
communities so one thing I
wanted to to also add to
monica's point is that I spend a
lot of time also getting them
prepared to apply right so
there's all this this steps that
we have to do so here's pending
what we do i'm established three
i'm the executive director in
the director for twenty years
not only do I do the grant
writing i'm doing capital and
captain permanent plans i'm
doing reatherizations i'm
knowing capital outlay I have
one transportation planner and
when administrative assistant
and
one of the things that I do want
to share from my car and then
i'll talk about the state is
during covered we veried in a
hundred and twenty two million
dollars in planning to the
southwest region just dealing
with economic recovery funds
that we did for a two year
period now in this particular
year with the capacity grand
just in my region we brought in
sixty five million but I think
what i'm more when i'm proudest
of is to bring moneys to areas
that we've never been able to
bring money to and one of those
examples would be for me for a
school district rerain five
million dollars five million
dollars to a school district is
unheard of inner community right
and the beauty of that was we
get to have a mental arm and to
help therapist in each one of
the schools.
Unheard of inneral committee
knowing what we know today and
dealing with behavior
so I couldn't be proud of of
that then knowing that these are
that the impact that we're
having in our communities so
just a couple of states that I
want to give you just from a
state perspective because we did
a return on investment as all
cogso we could share with you
what are accomplishments are and
just so you know just in state
appropriation we only get ninety
nine thousand dollars a year.
When I started in nineteen
eighty seven we only received
thirty eight thousand dollars a
year.
So you can see that the value of
the dollar is really leveraged.
Many times so just that you know
in this running return and
investment for a fiscal year
twenty three we brought in as
cars one one hundred and eighty
five million seven hundred and
seventeen thousand two hundred
and ninety eight dollars.
I think sometimes we don't pay
the time to really show case
what we do
the other portion that I just
wanted to say from a leverage in
what local governments give us
as an additional support is
about nine hundred and seventy
two thousand dollars in support
but just just in what we're
doing already we've done about
two hundred and eighty five
icaps a hundred and fifty one
capitally request we're doing
reauthorizations were doing
every.
Because those things have that
been at the local level and I
live at that and i'm i'm feel
very honored and privileged to
have served the state in new
mexico and other capacities to
read the voices to the rural
areas right and to really show
case and I would also say that
in most of them were error
rolled errors we've seen more
and more emergencies around
water and waste water and every
day it's the challenge because
now we're dealing with those
emergencies and weak you know
water's life and and we ca.
So thank you for the opportunity
to share a little bit of those
statistics with you and for
allowing us to serve you as then
be an extension of you and the
local areas.
Who have boots on the ground.
Aren't for.
The.
Thank you manager members of the
really many michael young center
city policy and just water your
support for this this is one of
the set of very important bills.
Seventy seven and HB two ten all
really helped to provide a
resources tools at the dfa the
calls and local communities are
going to need to really help
move a lot of the.
I really think it's a good idea.
The.
M.
The three hundred and twenty
thousand.
Split the budget by allocating
some of it towards staff time so
in a sand.
Three people on our staff part
of their ti.
Who's writing what.
That work with the communities
on a daily basis so part.
So that personnel and benef.
We do have to move money around.
About seventy five percent.
Some staff bacon.
We basically just you know kind
of start with what we think it's
going to be for the year but we.
I'll i'll answer that I was I
was a development office.
And you bring in five million if
you took ten perce.
But I mean it's a it's kind of
ethical consideration and in.
It's not illegal but it it is
not a good practice and it's
not.
The.
The.
The grow money they really gave
like eleven million to your.
And the population you know
it's.
So I I think the grow money as
something I I actually.
The.
Thank you very much madame chair
and excuse the scratchy voice.
Thank you representative and.
I think this series of bills
what is it to to
eight.
Are the.
Are the most important things
that we are working on.
I tried to sign on because.
But the reason for this is
many people when they first when
they get into government don't
realize how government actually
functions right like we're so
fixated at the federal level and
what the president of the united
states of america is doing in
reality the real work thank the
beginning stuff every day that
matters and people's lives work
is right here.
And when I became see
representative I had no idea
what I had no idea what a car
I really didn't know what the
car was tell i'm gonna
transportation was chair of
transportation and we don't pay
enough at.
The.
Relates to cost me necessary.
And so how we start having more
legislation like this that
encourages not only the support
but the.
Really not going to get.
Government money out there right
now all of it is dependent o.
People are filling out these
grand.
You know what is available they
don't know what the reporting
requirements are and most
importantly a lot of these
smaller government.
And so like we're essentially
sending ourselves up to fail.
Without legislation like this
and so calling attention to it.
I don't know if this last time I
heard there is money in the
budget I really hope.
And I hope that is still true
everybody should ever.
Chairman there again thank you
ma'am chairman thank you
representative thank you experts
and you know I I am fond of
representative seller sad he was
my cousin so I come from the
seller side family have been
espanolous so I know everyone
well so that's very good madame
to represent I just had a couple
of questions real quick about
this can the seven districts can
they pool funds together let's
just say if district I don't
know where exactly they are.
Can district two if they have an
extra ten million ten thousand
dollars I wish it was ten
thousand dollars can they give
it to the other cog or is it
merely four hundred thousand
only for each cog manager
representative chair represented
block that's a great question
and yes they have done that I I
know that
there was you know cogliness
don't follow.
So we often.
This is kind of modeled after
our experience were spending.
We know that you know.
So we left it open on the side
of you know not.
Thank you thank you represented
that's very good i'm glad that
they can work together because I
know different different cogns.
Thank you for that and then my
last question is regarding this
the current funding so I believe
you said it's about ninety some
thousand a year so I know this
is a one time appropriation and
I know from the fire and the
analysis it says we're
leveraging once in a lifetime
federal funding as well state
funding for infrastructure etc
so madam to represent it is this
is like a first step to make
sure this does recur in the
future if we do have excess
money which I sir hope you do.
That's the.
We you know i.
I'm lyrian.
Yeah.
And so so I just hope we can do
a good job on this.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative and I I like your
bill I will support the bill and
I love our cugs and god bless
them all the work they do I
don't know how they do it on
that kind of budget so I echo my
the comments from representative
hockman hill and everyone else.
Good bill i'm very excited thank
you matter.
Madam chair.
The.
Thank you.
Thank you members how the
committee very appreciated.
Thank you committee this morning
I am under due bring before your
house joint resolution ten which
would put the question before
the voters have new mexico to
establish an ind.
It passed by simple majority of
the voters it would have signed
th.
To an independent redistricting
commission i'd like to present
one of my proposed experts have
her values as the former
executive of former executive
director of new mexico first and
current vice president of the
election ref.
And think her for being here one
of our expert witnesses cannot
be here due to a family so i'd
like to express condolences from
here to him from all of the
working group.
Um why are we doing this.
Because new mexicans deserve a
fair and transparent.
And where we doing this now
because
twenty thirty as fast
approaching and it will come
more quickly than we think and
ride at this moment.
Of the twenty twenty one process
and our citizens redistrict in
committee what went well and
what didn't so we can put that
to work in this process.
And we did in twenty twenty one.
Create their citizens
redistricting committee and that
was a huge step forward for new
mexico.
However that statue was in a
sense unfinished because it
required a constitutional
amendment and there was not time
to do one at that moment and get
it
through the process in time to
be part of that redistricting
cycle so we're working on it now
allowing plenty of time to do
the resolution put it before the
voters.
Do enabling legislation and be
well and thoughtfully prepared
for twenty thirty one.
I believe.
That there is a strong call
across the state
or an independent redistricting
committee across partisan groups
of cross age groups that cross
genders.
The.
I'm going to be clear with a
committee this will not remove
politics from redistricting
redistricting is drawing
political boundaries politics
will always be part of it but
this will remove
the clear and obvious conflict
of interest between legislators
drawing their own lights and
that much we can do.
To ensure public trust.
In our democratic institutions.
Um.
And madam chair I believe the
committee has substitute bill so
we are moving the committee
substitute.
That out or is it done.
Thank you madame florida later
and.
So you have in the public hands
a thirteen page or original hard
ten.
That is essentially
what will now refer to is
proposed enabling legislation to
discuss at another time it is
too long to answered in the
constitution.
But I wanted to be very
transparent with the public and
with the committee about the
intent.
My intent
what we'd like to see in an
independent redistrict in
commission now you have in front
of you the short version.
A more reasonable size for a
constitutional amendment that
will helpfully lead us where we
need to go.
Um and before I get and you the
logistics of that i'd like to
give the expert witness a moment
to share a few words.
Thank you madame chair now if
you look directly at the bill.
The committee substitute mind
you page two and page one and
the type of page to are just
language to update take away he
in his and make it senator
representative gender neutral
but page two line fourteen has
the essential removal
of the legislature.
Conducting the process.
That allows us to have an
independent of the legislature
process.
And then section to is new
language.
And two a.
Specifies that the commission
will file the adopted pl.
So what what we're getting at
here.
Are the pieces of the citizens
redistricting committee that we
currently have that were
problematic and those.
In the end the selection and
appointment process of
commissioner of committee
members.
And then the legislature.
Changing the maps.
So to have it truly independent
And you will notice in the
fiscal impact report there is
the line that says this seems to
indicate that the legislature in
the governor will not approve or
adopt the plans that is correct
that is the point of the word
independent.
Section and b.
Um addresses the selection of
the commissioners so page three
line for.
Nine members.
The.
Divided three three three.
Three each of the two largest
political.
Not.
The.
And that as closely as possible
and th.
Meres the geographic and
demographic make up o.
That is important.
So two thirds of those nine
members will be random lease.
That means no one
no ethics commission no
leadership of the legislature
nope governor is appointing
these people these are randomly
selected with statistically
waited methodology.
To ensure that geographic and
demographic diversity.
And then the pine all third
there'll be three left after
those six are randomly selected
and the final three.
Will be selected by those six.
In case the randomized method
does not insure does not get us.
The demographic diversity and
geographic diversity we need.
Those six that human component.
Well select the last three from
the remainder of the poor.
And I look forward to the
discussion.
Thank you manager thank you
representative.
In twenty twenty we did a pole
on this issue.
Yeah.
This process we actually.
Seven hundred and fifty over
hundred seven hundred and fifty
different.
We believe that they're maps and
video german rings how we creat.
The latest new mexico.
Organization.
As well as you.
Members of the committee.
We ask for.
The.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee and
robert rat again an independent
voda and I was a member of new
mexico's twenty twenty citizens
redistricting committee the crc
was a great step forward for
bare elections and fair
representation in new mexico and
the next step is this resolution
in the establishment and of it
independent redistricting
commission that creates binding
district maps a valid criticism
of the citizen registrating
committee was that it did not
reflect the geographic and
demographic diversity of our
state members were
disproportionately white and
from the his albuque area.
The statistical waiting method
in this resolution allows for an
impartial process of selecting
commissioners it gives fair
opportunity to new mexicans of
every race ethnicity sex age and
political affiliation in every
corner of our state thank you
madam chair.
The.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and committee members for
your work and for considering
this important bill
my name is sharon berman and I
am a policy manager for new
mexico
Solutions for a better new
over three years the new mexico
Considered wasted strengthen our
state redistricting act and
while several of their
recommendations helped
strengthen the act and twenty
twenty one their top priority in
independent redistricting
commission did not this task for
us consisted of over twenty five
members and were students
business people researchers
legislators members of state and
tribal government nonprofit
organizations and member of
state and national associations
it was diverse culturally
professionally in geographically
on behalf of that task force
please pass hjr ten and help our
state lead the nation to a
stronger fairer and visionary
registrating system thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is curt right here on the
director of a lutheran avex
mister new mexico lithuan
advocacy also expressed the
position and in mexico
conference of churches today and
i'm here today to support her
straw to the state or strong
support for hgrim as
organizations we believe that
all residents of our nation and
specifically new mexico have a
responsibility to make
government function well and not
to abandon our democracy but to
engage in it in the spirit of
robust duty during the recent
registering process we saw
robust civic duty from citizens
across the state as they voiced
their thoughts and shared in the
effort but when read districting
his left in the hands of prime
primarily in the hands of
elected officials we also
witnessed damage to our
democracy for the chairman in a
doubt of legislative districts
we believe the case to success
our public input transparency
and that the commission must be
truly independent I encourage
you to support hgr ten and not
to push this decision down the
road thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you this
morning.
You are doing someone could only
get to has to my name is leonard
goreman can asked in the
enslaughter's tv business chain
the now honest in human rights
commission pass a resolution
but earlier this month and and a
number two community of the
nomination can also present
in which it states that it will
support by displaced protects
the board in rights of the
napole's citizens in new mexico
my commission has been involved
in variety of redistricting
issues across the state of new
mexico arizona in utah in
particular in arizona there is a
independent weak distributing
commission in a stables and it's
works it worked very well in new
mexico although we had a new
mexico redistricting committee
citizen reditioned in
commissioner that was
established or the twenty twenty
one be distributing process we
expressed a very strong concern
in our president renownation
express that concern at that
time that there was no native
american on the committee I
think this particular build as
the substitute really aims at
insuring there the diversity of
the state is a part of the we
distributing commission so
therefore the nomination emeras
commission with the resolution
from the name he had to
committee supports the passage
of this particular resolution
thank you.
The.
Think you made him chair and
representatives my name is sila
of jule and i'm the executive
director of new mexico open
elections our organization fully
supported to this bill as we
know that redistricting reforms
such as the creation of an
independent redistrict in
commission eliminates partisan
jerry mandering and gives voters
a stronger voice by taking party
politics and special interests
out of the map drying process
currently new mexico has a
citizens we district in
committee however members are
appointed by elected officials
and the recommendations of the
committee are non binding
neighboring states like colorado
in arizona have already high
functioning and effective
independent redistricting
commissions they redistricting
process and new mexico today
faster as polarization and it is
not accurately represent
districts people live in the
independent commission's
decrease polarization encourage
compromise and increase
responsiveness of elected
officials to the constituent's
interest new mexico needs sound
and ethical government practices
that are trusted by all voters
thank you so much.
The.
The.
That of chair members of the
committee on merit making
speaking on behalf of the
american association of
university women and color the
reason specified by other
supporters
I also stand a good station
stands and support i'd like to
just add one other point by
removing the registered game
from the legislators duty it
leads to a much more functional
much more collaborative
cooperative environment climate
within the legislature they're
not joking for
you know this mapper that map
and I hope that we can have a
letter that much more focused on
solutions when you take the
rediscription duty from them
they can honor the decisions of
the gord
of commissioners better very
balanced and
and I really appreciate all the
work that gone into this joint
resolution and the different
versions of that I think this
was ready for the voter to
decide whether we want an
independent rediscussion
commission let's get it out of
the building and onto the ballot
thank you so much.
Since I guess anyone
thank you for give me manager
but what I would like.
I als.
Random selection.
Will be.
Who will be there.
Would be able to be achieved.
Can I repeat it and I sure can
yes terribly.
That's what I was going to do
madam chairs to to repeat it to
make sure I have it correct line
thirteen after the period
insert.
To achieve the geographic and
demographic make.
Comma.
And then change the cab.
And madam chair would you like
me to rep.
Nine thirteen
after the period.
Two achieve.
The geographic and demographic
make up of the state.
And a comma.
And madam chair that is
entirely friendly I think it
goes exactly to the intent.
Of this section it is repeating
language
from.
Line ten k the that language is
in line ten so the assum.
I really appreciate madam chair
the representatives.
Clarifica.
Can i.
The.
After the period in ser.
Yes manager and molly.
I believe madam chair the order
is the amendment
that committees have has already
been moved for discussion
and our majority leader will
correct me if i'm wrong but now
we have moved discussion on an
amendment decide whether they're
not we like it and then decide
whether or not we like the
amended commi.
So we will discuss th.
Discussion everything
member I just can make a most
into a doctor.
The.
Madam chair I make a most.
On the point to vision of the
committee substitute for house.
Government elections than indian
affairs committee substitute for
house.
We have leader here.
Yeah.
Thank you madame.
Um.
I appreciate the.
The acknowledgement of the
wording version because the I
agree that has.
My intention for enabling
legislation for guidelines.
Has those pro.
Party players all of those folks
are prohibited
and we would have to ensure that
that happens.
In the enabled english slation
again that's on page three if
you.
With respect to responsibility
for this job it is given to the
legislature in the constitution
that's why we're bringing.
Because the voters seem to want
it and we are putting it before
them.
To choose whether they want the
legislature to get.
We are not deciding today.
And allow them to make that
choice.
Which truly does hold us
accountable thank you manner.
Madame chair not on the subpage
three of the original which is
the enabling legislation which
we have to create because
thirteen pages cannot be showed
into the constitution or so I am
told by our constitutional
attorney.
I don't chair my expert witness
can address that because that
was exactly one of my questions
how do you ensure that it random
selection cannot be manipulated.
We all asked when we were
sorting out how to look at this
activity there are two other
states that use a.
Of their commissioners one of
those is and the one that is
closest to the procedure that we
would be.
Michigan and we at a member of
my staff actually interviewed
the statisticians who helped
organize that activity and one
of the things that we learned
was that the statistical method
that was deployed in a winner
wing down their pool the waiting
formulas were publicly disclosed
so that the
law make.
What assumptions were being
built in and are assumptions are
that we can't ever again have an
redistricting commission that
doesn't represent the race and
at the city of our state and
doesn't represent our rural
communities for you and I are
both from so there is
interesting challenges when we
think about where how we look at
the way that that metric will be
created but it would be i'm
developed in a way that is
representative of new mexico as
in the case and michig.
Customised to their state the
formulas and algorithms made
public and then the drying
itself done publicly and so I
have a slide deck which were not
making you all watch but has a
but has this pretty i'm boring
page that is a screenshot of the
zoom lottery drying that was
done in michigan in which the
unprocessed was was public and
thousands and thousands of
voters tuned in and watched this
process live as it happened to
one c if their name got picked
up but two to determine to have
confidence that the process was
d.
Level of detail that I just
described is exactly what I
would hope that we could deal
wi.
First of all I want to start by
acknowledging the changes I
noticed and even be long
version.
Compared to the build it was
brought forward last year with a
joint resolution.
So my first question ma.
Developing the membership of
this commission.
The.
Madam chair and representative
it's an excellent question there
has been a lot of discussion and
since our committee was created
that that group of seven was too
small to represent the breath of
diversity.
But there's no number big enough
to represent the breath of
diversity in new mexico
so there's not compromise that
it has to be made in nine seemed
to be a reasonable number of the
committee members who were part
of this process and shared their
feelings about what it worked
and didn't said much larger than
seven is unwieldy and doesn't
function and get the work done
so we didn't want to go.
That that makes sense thank you.
The.
My question.
Where mi.
Of that nine member commission
why is that broken into equal
thirds by party when that
doesn't ref.
Thank you madame chair thank you
for the question and that is too
neutralized the partisanship in
the.
I understand that
but you know there aren't.
You know the electorate in new
mexico I think we've seen time
and time again is more.
State wide races you know.
In the last election cycle and I
think there's a reason for that
so i'll i'll leave my questions
for their right now and i'm
cher.
But very simply.
The voters of the state.
The fact that we would be.
Makes me kind of uncomfortabl.
And
madam chairman presenters.
And goes right up.
If we format.
To redi.
So then we've we.
But I don't chair there is
nothing that can prevent any
commission from being sued that
it's a freedom of this country
and is it seems to be almost
guaranteed but what had and what
independent commission can do is
often depending on how it's
composed ensure that those suits
failed or are dismissed because
if if the commission is created.
In a balanced way and I can let
my expert refer to that if
necessary but that's what we're
finding across the country that
suits.
Don't carry as much wait if the
commission creating it is tr.
The.
The.
It just concerns me that.
Involved with the work that they
do
and then.
Enough and i'll give you i'll
give you for instance.
As to what happened.
Was.
And and we debated it and
committee.
The.
But it did go in the direction
that I would like.
Was.
There's dvations that are given
under the voting rights act.
To the state and new mexico for
minority parties.
And.
Mister lenner gorman made it
made a statement earlier that on
on the video that.
The.
There were some concerns from
the native population as to how.
Well in the redistricting.
The deviations all went to the.
The.
And the rest of the minorities
in the state didn't get well
represented so if.
There was proof.
This.
In court that that happened in
in it could be proven.
In this commission.
The.
The.
What.
How can those.
Liber.
The.
Or could they.
Madame chair and representative
no.
And those are my concerns and I
guess as well as this moves
forward.
And how we do this and do it.
The.
What's going to be the.
And how this progresses and.
Thank you.
I would I will withdraw my
motion and let representative
hockman make her motion.
I do not thank you and do not
pass for hr attend and emotion
for a due pass for the committee
substitute of hr ten as
amended.
Point two version.
Representative on your nor know
and i'd like to explain my vote.
Representative block pass.
The.
The.
This.
Representatives the more no.
Representative block.
Johnson.
I.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair I just
want to
I think I kind of outlined my
reasons in my questions about
why I wasn't comfortable with
them the current draft and i.
Some changes i'd like to make
but just for every.
Immediate pass speaker
pointed out that if you want to
pass legislation that protects
reproductive rates which is
legislation that members of the
minority party vehimently
opposed and if you want to have
legislation that protects ballot
access which members of my door.
And common sense governor
legislation
which I don't.
To pass that legislation with a
strong democratic majority so I
can't support.
To protect women's rights ballot
access and dense safety in the
state and I won't give the
minority party.
Relative to their share of the
vote state wide so I do want to
be really clear that I one
hundred percent would support
and do support the need for a
federal constitutional amendment
to injury mandarin nationally
but I won't vote to endanger the
rights of new mexicans for the
gains that we've made in the
legislature so until this is a
national bill that I I
respectfully have to put the
needs.
Kind of like a perceived
fairness that.
The.
With house bill.
Appreciate your hearing as this
morning I do have.
And.
And we had a doctor moses
present to the interim court's
corrections and justice
committee this summer regarding
artificial intelligence and I am
I wanted to.
Let you know that we hospital
one eighty two immense a
campaign reporting act to our
disclaimer requirements for the
use of synthetic images visuals
and audio created by artificial
intelligence sometimes referred
to his deep fakes in campaign
advertising so we've heard of
really horrible fakes to damage
individuals reputations and make
the public question what is real
and what is spake so this bill
actually requires.
Th.
Audio
visual or written that it be
disclosed to the public so the
public knows what it they're see
so it really is about
transparent.
I've got.
Front of me instead of my own.
What we want to do here with
this is be clear about what the
disclaimer requirements are and
we want to
actually make.
Good to see you all again.
Obviously artificial.
As well as public and elected
officials and what's more we've
seen.
I'm around the world but
specifically what we're
concerned about it is that
transparency factor and and this
doesn't line with an initiative
that that we have at the office
currently.
To help understand whether or
not.
Are real or representative of
the actual circumstances of a
candidate.
Ultimately the.
Create a transparency to build a
central trust among new mexico's
voters in the electoral process
and they would make voters aware
of the use of a I in the
democratic process.
And.
That voters just need to.
And.
And she is one.
Madame chairman and
representatives I appreciate the
chance to talk about what I
think is very timely legislation
i'll just speak to the the
nature of the technology and
where we are right now
I have they've been concerns a.
Over the last few years this is
really the year where the.
Almost in.
Any individual myself included
would really struggl.
The impact of having this
technology
one exist two be quite fr.
Ability to understand.
There are many complex areas the
technology itself.
Is dealing with something that's
actually.
You know what it what a
candidate would any of you with
any political a person has
actually said versus what is
just.
Out of character we would stand
request.
The representative.
Make sure that voters understand
you pick it all the information
available at with technology
artificial intelligence it's
really.
So full voters and we definitely
do not want that.
Yes thank you manager and
members of the committee
my name is cring home I
represent the more than seven
thousand
citizens in new mexico that are
members and activities of public
services public citizens
strongly supports this type of
transparency legislation we've
seen deep fakes being used to
deceive voters at both of
federal states and local levels
around the country we can expect
the twenty twenty four election
to be particularly problematic
when it comes to these deep
fakes because there are very
feel regulations and very few
disclosure requirements involved
right now we'll leave fire the
states have laws on the books
that require transparency of
deep facts and although twenty
eight states including no
mexical is now considering
joining that league twenty
twenty four the twenty twenty
four elections going to be the
first really serious deep fake
election and the federal
government is very slow at
acting so it's really up to the
states to step up to the plate
and address this so I we
strongly support HB one eighty
two.
I make a motion to roll this
bill on to tomorrow we have some
some of the most important
legislation on the floor today
and we're not we're not we're
being held up in committee.
And i'd i'd like to make a
motion to roll it on to on
point of order manager the
decision.
Community members.
Representative I think you raise
a good point because you don't
want to scare people to death
and not let them be able to do
anything I think i'm going to
let my experts try to reassure
you.
Thank you representative for
that question so I actually am
also i'm a computer science
professor so i'm actually.
Just gave my class instructions
for their assignment that that
allows quite a bit of use.
Creativity with it
this bill does not concern me
that it it it creates any kind
of a difficulty in using
enhancements particularly with
this language miss material
deceptive media media
that depicts an individual
engaged in conductor speech and
w.
Creating an i.
Actually is quite narrowly
focused or there are many many
other concern.
And I imagine that over the
years this body.
But this to me is.
Interstate working group.
As we're not.
So if it if you're sending out a
written piece your describers
written if you're doing the
visual you're displayment visual
and it's not little timing at
the bottom if you're just doing
a radio add it has to be audible
and understandable.
Anyway.
Now but.
And and now chair I I just
invite you to
actually look at it.
And see if there's anything you
think requires.
Is is just so that there's
people aren't being deceived in
any way.
And madame charlotte rubbis this
barkman and superclassed
thank you madame chair
representative the way
disclaimer actions currently.
From someone about a specific
advertisement not meeting the
standard and there are two
sections in the campaign
reporting act that provide a
path.
Criminal referral or we need a
determination of that to that
fact i'm fr.
Well so that's currently how it
works there would not be a
dedicated person responsible for
watching all the ads ever
which is good news for that
person but there would be still.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you representative sender.
Rules and the rules do state.
I'm.
So I proceed.
This is in.
Madam j.
I'm just wondering that i'm
terribly representative like.
It doesn't seem to be.
Would that then require.
As an attorney at him to her
representative like I I don't
see any
any reason for a complaint about
that.
Perhaps
let let doctor
so.
So I will speak again from the.
So I I was not all involved in
tracking this I was actually
just pleased to see that exists
there's language here that of
the defines materially deceptive
media meaning an image video or
audio that depicts an individual
engaged in contact or speed too
much they did not engage and
that a reasonable person would
imagine was real so something
like a simple logo couldn't
possibly be.
Indicating and into another p.
If you're looking at accompanied
by your political opponents gave
it in some nefarious activity
that's when the disc.
And that's really the heart of.
It would have been fairly
difficult to create an image.
Realistic
with early.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Regarding the person candidate.
I.
Just say it was a graphic with
a.
Vote no against joe or whatever
or bob.
The.
Create a artificial.
Madame to represent.
Joe doesn't like chocolate.
The statement made through.
Would that.
Well it doesn't matter what the
examples are giving don't seem
to be
damaging to a person's
reputation or
or materially
misrepresenting something net
pertains to be election if you
claim that he took
bribes while in office that
would be where.
You know
manager representative window
already be covered under
liberal.
Lives.
Representative when he already
heard regardless of it a I are
not it's a matter of them chair
and representative of using
artificial intelligence to
creat.
Representative so we spoke a
little bit about the candidate
themselves and not about.
Groundho.
I'm trying to as possible so I I
use mid journey.
These pictures of ground hugs
and save the ground
vote for joe he loves groundhogs
madam chair representative I
would need to use a disclaimer
saying I used a I to to get this
adorable picture of ground hots.
So that that that's a great and
not of chair and leader
representatives that say that's
a good entertaining example
actually that I think is the
kind of thing that many people
will use.
Fairly clearly not the intent of
the bill so also again speak to
this um from the technology
is that it doesn't image such as
it you know a cute ground hug
constitute material deceptive
media depicting an individual
engaged in conductor speech.
I think that an individual does
refer to an individual human I
think that the intent is that.
If that needs to be clarified.
All of these examples that
you're bringing up are not
examples of creating a.
So I will continue using my door
grandhug pictures thank you for
that.
Not as good with humans but i'm
sure they're working on it
manager representative I saw in
the.
I believe it invokes something
about.
When reading social media posts
of trump online.
One included president trump
reading social media post.
But it did not include any
information that told.
I know there are a lot of donald
trump and personators who are
not robots.
So madam to represent it with
its cover somebody who is imp.
Put it in and add to me it
seemed like it was him because I
don't see that included here and
I think that's a huge gap that
we might want to talk about so I
don't know if you are.
Item chair representative again
the secretary's role.
If that came before us we would
make the appropriate referrals I
did include that as an example
as well as.
President bite ins voice so
those are just examples th.
So.
Thank you ma'am sure thank you
representative so i'm i'm.
Or senately.
The.
Made them lose an election for
example right something bad some
madame tear representative who
if it was not parity or satire
and it was merely met to to
mislead voters in a key area.
Make sure that that is also.
I know materially dis.
But it only.
Putting in a provision here to
see anything to mislead th.
The.
Human voices.
The.
Make voters.
Them to represent this bill is
just for a I generated.
Yeah.
Made a google s.
Let's just say I I asked google
that and google's response is a
I generated and I just can't be
pays that under a mailer and
then attribute it to goog.
I tribute it to where I got it
would that fall under this dis.
Yes I think an important word in
the definition of material and
deceptive media is the word a.
Point out that was produced in
holland part that is once it is
already established that this is
depicting an individua.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative and I see
that and they're but I know like
for instance i've used it like
i'm not good at it but i've
asked chat and like with the
weather today chat and what if
it gives me the wrong answer.
And so how are we safeguarding
against incorrect answers from a
I so if I if I ask you I
does does extra white candidate
believe in experience.
And I use that.
In my mailer but I do say it is
a I generated.
But I don't know that madame
representative how can we remedy
that.
If the ai says one thing that's
incorrect I believe it I use the
disclaimer.
Ma'am chair representative I
believe it will protect.
Because you did the disclaimer.
Okay
so if I use the disclaimer it
was incorrect.
It could be libelist for
example.
Under liberal.
Madame chair representative like
this is not about anything b.
Required the disclaimer and if.
Say there's another whole body.
Situation.
And I hope there is cause i.
If we have a disclaimer.
Radio says joe's great he loves
I speak whatever the vote for
joe even.
Do I have to disclaim.
What the ai generated
specifically in the
advertisement or can I just say
it was created.
That's a robot voice reading
that it's like this was created
by a.
Is that that covered or is it
just the initial advertisement.
I.
And the can't madam characters
it against you either.
I appreciate the thoughtful
conversation and I love aid
generated ground hugs and my
favorite thing now so thank you
madame thank you representative.
Movie.
Representative on your north new
yes.
Representative block pass.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative yes.
No.
The.
Representative block.
No.
Vice chair figure out.
Yes.
Madam chair johnson.
