Here
representative googles
representative harper
representative
of underst
speaker martinez
representative or chess
representatives car
representatives that are
all
representative towns in
man investor coming here and
chairman I am here mister chair
i'm here also okay
notice thank you good morning
again members good morning those
in the audience good morning to
those turning in online happy
friday happy last friday of this
legislative session and as we
get to the final hours of this
legislative session I would like
to first announce that we have
read us today and with having
breed us at the celebration
so there's breath up here on top
and for me members please grab
one if they actually any left
members of the audience can be
grab one too we have more than
plenty from from the
good work of marked area and
associates as well as from the
new mexico manufacturer housing
association thank you for
providing records brilliant this
morning and as we look forward
to getting our works begun they
started today let's let's
revisit something that we said
that we come back to at the end
of our last
committee hearing and that is
going back to house bill two
thirteen as amended and so
without further to do
representative than a
representative of a home
representative her nondess the
floors want to get yours and I
know that we were at question
and answer from the committee so
if you want to continue there I
did have
I did have
representative scott
to get a stuff
thank you mister chairman
representative this
is a very substantial
modification of our liquor tax
system.
And have appeared to me to have
two components the first being a
collection component.
In the second thing it
distribution component remarks
on the right track mister chair
representative yes he two
thirteen proposes that we
eliminate the current collection
of tax at the wholesale level
and instead imposing tax on
alcohol at the retail level and
then we
offer a new updated proposal for
equitably getting those
resources back out to county is
meaningfalling and local
governments where they can have
the most impact as well as
directing resources to support
the state medicaid program.
Thank you thank you for that
representative.
So maybe the focus sand first on
the collection side of this
we're going to eliminate at the
whole trail
of those taxes that currently
occur by volume is that mr chair
representative yes and mister
chairman representative to
replace that we are going to tax
as a percentage of the soil
price of the product is not also
mister chair representative yes
and to clarify that is by
alcohol type so there is a
proposed percentage for spirits
at four percent for wine at
three and for beer it too.
Mister term repsons of our like
to come back to the because I
find those sparing rates to be
perhaps a bit problematic for
the retailers but from from the
mile high perspective
the crack amount of tax bin
collected is what.
Mister her representative this
has become one of the most
revenue one of the most stable
revenue of sources in new mexico
because those flat price points
have not been updated since the
nineties and because their flat
points they don't increase over
time they don't increase the
inflation so we have collected
for decades now about fifty
million a year.
Five zero million dollars a year
yes mister chair repaired mister
chairman representative with
this nuisance what is the
projection for the.
Mister chair representative the
estimates we have or that it
would be a fairly revenue
neutral potentially in
additional two million dollars a
year
but missed chairman and
representative would
automatically adjust as prices
went up and down at the retail
level was at accurate mister
chair representative yes it it
wouldn't be an adjustment but
yes the attack I would I would
argue that we we'd see an
increase in revenue collected as
prices go up since this tax
would be tied to the value of
the product sold okay so
missed chairman representative
i've heard talked from retailers
that maintaining these multiple
percentages could be problematic
could you address it mr chair
representative certainly as
myself in my excuse me myself in
my co sponsors began work on
these proposals after listening
and learning to advocate an
experts for many years I
originally introduced this
concept so that we could have an
honest inaccurate debate about
what a serving tax would look
like or what it would look like
to tax new mexicans for the
alcohol they were purchasing.
Um I thought this would be more
of a a path for debate and to
have a a good conversation about
how we impose alcohol tax in new
mexico but the first folks I
shared this idea with where
local bars and restaurants and
crafter reason craft distillers
and they were pretty intrigued
by the idea and said if we had
three months to do this no way
but if we had a delayed
implementation date so we could
update our point of sales
systems and have room to build
this out absolutely it's
possible since then i've
certainly heard concerns and the
ones weighing on my heart today
are those of local groceries and
others and
I I am very open we're a minute
aminable to doing my research
and learning more about what
barriers we we we we might
accidentally be imposing on
those folks and that's certainly
not our intention but even as
drafted this has a delayed
implementation date a year out
so that we could work through
some of those concerns
of mischairman representative
but appear to be there.
The the taxes relatively
progressive higher than all our
value of the
of the product the more tax
you're going to pay so perhaps a
revisit of the.
Multiple percentage program
might
be in order mr chair president
of I think that certainly
something worth considering
historically we've seen that
tier tack those tiered tax rates
based on a b v or alcohol by
volume so historically the
concept has been that if there
is a product with the higher
alcohol content it would be
important there would be a
higher tax imposed but certainly
if we were moving in in a new
way to try to imagine a tax
policy that left a regressive
policy behind and moved towards
a progressive policy I certainly
think that's an idea worth
considering.
And now now mister chairman
representative if I could move
over to the distribution side
what is the current distribution
of alcohol sales taxes.
Teddy mr chair representative
and since the nineties again we
start with about a collection
wait of close to fifty million
and it's it's really stable some
years it'll be forty nine point
seven the next year fifty point
one but it really hovers around
that fifty million mark as it
happens today about twenty five
million dollars or half of
what's collected is held in the
general fund it's not hold for
purposes related to alcohol
alcohol harm or anything else
it's just part of our state
revenue as our appropriators
figure out capacity and budget
forecast that twenty five
million is considered there.
Um otherwise and we've talked
through some of this.
Off the top the city of
farmington the only meaning in
the state to to be in the
situation receives a monthly
distribution of twenty thousand
seven hundred and fifty dollars
to house street any breads to
shelter street initiates after
that and this is the newest
edition since twenty nineteen
and amount that equals about
three million a year has been
going to the drug court to help
fund operations of those drug
and treatment quotes around the
state
