The.
The.
The.
The house protection public
works in capital improvements
committee then so the house
judiciary committee.
House bill one eighty five.
Introduced by time soon have
none this
deemed remain pursuing to
article force section five b two
house executive message thirty
six.
What are printed poor from rules
order printed and referred to
the house health and human
services committee men's the
house judiciary committee again
that is house bill one eighty
five thousand and this zapansky
chassis deemed remain pursuant
to article for section five b
two has executive message thirty
six pulled from rurals referred
to the house helping human
services committee fence the
house judiciary committee.
House belong forty four
introduced by representative
hockey and be hill deemed
remaining pursuing to work on
four section five b two hours
executive message thirty five
removed from rules or printed
and referred to the house
consumer public affairs
committee events the house
judiciary committee again has
been one forty four hockman
behill.
Deemed remain percent to article
forces I would be too house
executive message thirty five.
Pulled from rules referred to
the house consumer public
affairs committee then the house
judiciary committee.
Last one house bill one sixty
two introduced by am strong chat
field mason letter invents
remain percent of article for
section five b two.
Pulled from the rules.
Apologies to remain pursuant to
article four section five b two
senate executive message twenty
three.
Senate executive message twenty
three
paul from rules order printed
and referred to the house
agriculture as I guess in water
resources committee in the house
judiciary committee again that
house will one sixty two.
Any final announcements
generally from.
Generally from.
The.
Clear rivers on the wells into a
thousand percent of a
mister speaker your house to
agriculture seconds and what a
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock
in room three fifteen member
signal during later from chavis
mister speaker thank you very
much I was kind of concerned I
heard I had to build up tomorrow
and transportation but
transportation is not showing up
on the golden rod.
The.
To lady I am told by her chief
clerk that it is online showing
up as a separate agenda.
Thank you very much for
clarifying that especially for
my constituents thank you member
stick note.
Any other announcements.
There lady from berlier
president of chase.
Mr speaker and now be at eleven
fifty nine am I moved we
adjourned until twelve o one pm
also come to order mr speaker I
asking animals consent that the
rules be suspended in that the
journal show that all those
president in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session objection it
is ordered mr speaker I asking
animals consent that the rules
be suspended that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
business committee objection it
is ordered
to late from berlin.
This was speaker i'm will be
good that a business
announcement miscellaneous
business objection is ordered
members that will conclude the
business for the day happy
trails with your committees
because they go well
and we will come back to the
floor to more row
one less announcement house
ratios of finance committee will
meet fifteen minutes following
the floor session in room three
o seven taken order that please
your lady from britalia.
This will speak I move the house
down the recess until eleven
thirty tomorrow which is there
is a.
January twenty fifth members
stick no to take it for great
day today was loaded but we got
a lot of good work done.
The house was sent research
until eleven thirty two moral.
