Mike Kemp make it this morning.
Is there somebody from the
today?
Oh, Hannah. Thank you. So,
Hannah, um so I'm going to go
through this and then just to
let everybody know
I have another meant.
Uh, so I hope that we can get
through this fast. But it's up
to the committee because I would
love to vote because we all
worked on them it again this
year, So I would love to be part
of that vote. But if I can't, I
can't and, uh, you know,
It is what it is. Yes, Mr
Representatives tomorrow.
Madam chair. Uh,
In your statement. You just
stated that we had a unanimous
vote.
But but the vote was to roll the
bill. O okay, But there is
there. You're right. You're
right. There seemed to be
unanimous agreement about, uh,
everything that we went through.
We went back and forth. And yes,
we rolled the bills so that we
we rolled the bill so that we
could have a. I agreed with
that. I said yes. Let's have
and, uh
Thank you. Chair, Vice chair
Field takeover.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And as soon as Madam chair takes
the seat, she will explain the
bill.
And, uh,
After she explains the bill, we
will go to the audience or
People in sport or people
against so
Whenever you're ready, Madam
chair, explain your bill.
Thank you. House. Bill 211 is
really Bill to 10 House, Bill
210 extended the appropriate
trust.
Board Act to allow for 150
million more dollars, so that we
we could expand the list. Devin
projects, uh, that were vetted
and approved by the Water Trust
board, and we worked hard.
A number of us worked hard for
the last six months to expand
the appropriation so that in
these times budget we could get
the most water projects we could
online funded and create clean
drinking water wastewater
system all of all of the above
this amendment. We also this
bill to 11.
We worked really hard with the,
um
State engineer, man I'm f A to
look at how we could
Eliminate a lot of bureaucracy.
That we had in projects in a
faster, more meaningful manner.
Ah, So so what? You don't know
if either of my expert with
white
Who is the Mr Chair, I'll
Stanford.
Thank you, Madam Chair before we
go to the odd to the members
were going to go to the
audience.
Who in the audience is in
support of this bill.
Um
We'll give you one minute to
voice your support of this bill.
Then after that, we'll go to the
members. There are in non
support of this bill. So
Anybody want to take the first
minute? Yes, ma'am, is Kathy
Elliott I'm a registered
lobbyist for the city of Truth
or Mexico World Water.
Um this is in dire need of a lot
of infrastructure money to
replace the pipes that they
have.
In their city because they
currently have a leakage of
approximately 30 to 35 so
We are absolutely in favor of
all of these efforts put forth
to help finance is their New
Mexico world. Water feels that
it will drive money towards this
community water systems.
Which is always important, it
will ease the hurdles What we
were talking about to get those
money money and also retains
financial security with the FAA
to keep everyone accountable.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you,
ma'am.
Anyone else in sport.
Front row.
Thank you, sir.
Um
I saw one hand in the back of my
accuse executive.
And, um, bowled over the years
has been changes.
Thank you, ma'am. Hmm.
One person in the back. Uh, Mr
Vice Chair. Committee members
were also in support of this
bill. However, we would like the
flag struck and you add
wastewater treatment, Vance. It
would be our preference to see
you, Um, keep that language in
there and add wastewater. There
are a couple of reasons for this
one, I think is this recognition
that the future of water
management is full of
uncertainty and having more
options on the table? Not less,
is a made by experts at the
Water Trust board.
And if in a given year, they
think that is in the best
interests of water users of the
state's water future to fund
projects with an endangered
species component, because we
know endangered species to make
water management both more
complex and expensive. We think
that is a good use of those
funds in our experience doing
species recovery. I can tell you
that they're not an abundance of
state funds out there to do this
type of work.
So we hope you won't preclude
that from a use in the future,
so a very kind of friendly asked
to just keep that language in
the bill. Thank you. Thank you,
sir. One more.
Colleague who believe that a
friendly as Dan has already said
those projects will still be
vetted for all the other
reasons.
Thank you, ma'am, any one in
against the bill?
Okay, Serious.
Okay. Thank you, sir. C n no
more questions. We're going to
go to the committee.
Thank you for that.
So any questions from the
members
Place else.
This bill happen.
I can't I? There's some big
changes in this particular
Marquita needs one. We got one,
okay?
Mr Chairman. It's very
troublesome to me that we are
not getting the bill
presentation. I really have a
problem with that. Whichever
amount I want to chastise them
for not getting us these in a
time.
Whenever we are, because
Right now.
According to what this F I R. Is
telling me there's lots of state
education. Therefore, that's why
I'm getting
Mr Chairman and representative
on Page two, talking about the
office of the state Madam Chair.
Mr Chair, Madam Chair. Can you
explain? Maybe Miss rise, Lee
would be able to help us out
here and
Uh, I do know that that I'm
going to refer to Hannah to
answer this question. Thank you,
madam. Uh, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And I. This is murky to
Russell from the Finance
Authority. I was around when
that change got made. There's a
direction and I think 2004 to
appropriate 10% of all money
that goes to the Water Project
Fund, whether that's from the
water trust
Fund itself or from the for
adjudication and an additional
20% of that, then goes up the
courts. So the 9% distribution
that you all believe of
severance text 8.1% actually
goes to water projects and the
other 9.9, the state engineer
for their for their adjudication
purposes, so they're related,
but they're not all for the
water projects.
And Mr Chair and representative
is outside like to ask OSC
general counsel not take risks
to just add briefly to the
comments.
Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative and Marquita.
What I would add, is the 10 the
percentages that director
Russell explained, aren't all
being appropriated to the office
of the state engineer right now,
So there's a dedication in this
statute and so that money can't
be used for any other purpose.
But if you look at house Bill
two, we've had an appropriation
of
Somewhere between 2.6 and $2.7
million actually going to the
office, the state engineer for
adjudications for quite some
time And so the 10% language in
the bill just means that that
money can't be touched. But that
money is actually not all going
to adjudicate. Just wanted to
correct that point, so not all
being approved Chairman.
Officer of the state engineer.
As far as adjudication gives
where this money is going to
progress on the Judaization of I
would bet it's like this, okay?
So I'd like an explanation. Mr.
Chair representative. I do. I
would not agree with the
characterization that's like
this. We are currently moving
forward on adjudications in a
number of different basins,
including the Roswell Artesian
Basin there at 99% in the P V, I
C D Basin or that that was
completed, so I guess I need a
better explanation.
I would love to talk to you a
lot about that adjudication. We
could talk at some length.
There are a number of claims for
people to get earlier priority
dates in the Roswell Artesian
Basin. There are approximately
250 good, valid claims to for
people to get earlier priority
dates in the reservoir Teaching
Basin. That's what we're working
on in that basin. Right now. We
completed this year. The
gayness, uh, supply will. I'm
sorry. The gayness section in
the Pecos adjudication and we're
about to begin work on a
Ah decree on the Fort Sumner
Irrigation district in the Pecos
adjudication. So we're we're
busy on the Pecos adjudication
where continuing work that we've
been doing on the
Well, Loreal grand adjudication
and we're about to begin some
significant new efforts on the
Rio San Jose on Santa Clara
Creek, or about to complete the
charm adjudication in several
sections, and we're about to
open up negotiations on the
middle Rio Grande. So we're
moving adjudications forward in
11, Madam Chairman That's not
vigorous.
Spell the last name for me, C h
a k e appreciate the expression
goes.
But the energy Committee
encompassed the water situation.
So we've been talking about
adjudication for over 20 glad to
hear at the variant that we are
finally starting to work on the
Middle Rio Grande Valley.
But my concern is regarding what
we're seeing in this committee
Substitute is on page two line
22 through 24, where the
implementation of Federal
Endangered Species Act 1973
collaborative program that has
been stricken out so the
Interstate street for making
sure that these endangered
So if that is stricken out, and
it only says on
Uh, B two wastewater convention
with
Your species.
So what? Your hands are kind of
tied in my opinion.
Am I reading? Just the wrong
way. Mr Chairman and Madam.
Mr Chair and representative, Um,
I would say, I think this
language was removed because
typically, those programs aren't
funded through water Trust board
grants That happens on rare
occasions, and I think the
effort was to clean up the bill
and streamline it and also see
the enhanced environmental
benefits of adding wastewater
conveyance and treatment.
That said, Um, Personally, I'm
open to retaining that language
Given the comments today. Um, I
think that the intent was that
it's typically not used for that
purpose and I'll that Marquita
ad
Madam Chair. I'm sorry, Mr
Chairman, representative, the
other issue that I would just
highlight Is that when you have
a program like that, you know
very specific kind of niche. Um,
technical assistance need it's
hard for the Finance authority
to oversee those projects.
Um, so with our wastewater
projects are water projects, all
of those we can have one
contractor and engineering firm,
help us with the oversight when
you have a state agency
implementing these very niche
projects, it's difficult for us
to oversee the funds. So it's
you know, just from an
administrative perspective, it
sits out
Very far to the, uh, aside all
the other projects that we look
at, and that becomes a difficult
thing for us to ensure that the
project funds are being spent
correctly. We trust entirely the
Interstate Stream Commission and
their oversight of those
projects, but we can't
independently verify that
they're being done correctly.
Well, Mr Chairman, Madam
Chairman, Miss Russell. I
understand what you're saying.
That is not micromanage all of
these projects that are coming
through because you will not be
a drink county. You have what
the progress is on any of the
projects over there.
That in case of a drought
situation, which we were faced
with several years ago over on
the Packers side where that
river dried up.
The Interstate Stream Commission
had step in to pump water into
that river. Just Yeah, the
signer.
So anyway.
This is not allowing them that
opportunity to be in compliance
with what federal losses as far
as our
Protection.
Whenever we are not
Allowing to Interstate Stream
Commission.
Through the office of the state
engineer because to be able to
protect
I'm just throwing that out there
as an example in an extreme.
I mean, it wasn't a question. I
just have a problem.
Mr Chairman. Oh,
Madam. I would like to see that
language put back in myself. I
really would just situation
The other thing with all the
changes that took place and
understand it better.
I have a problem.
With taking out? Yes. Um what
We're trying to what we're
trying to do here,
Representative yourself is
eliminate practices that that
type and and I'm gonna turn.
This is when these projects are
all vetted. Okay? They get they
have to report in August, August
and and then he isn't doesn't go
out to July and then by the time
It gets trying to do this work
these good volunteers on the
most part. We're really trying
to improve their water systems.
It can be up to 18 months and
and in that time representative
itself. You know what's going
on? We can't control We can't
control these prices so they
could come in at one at one
amount.
And then by the time they
actually get the money, and they
have to go back and get approval
to increase that funding again,
I I'm really gonna let um um um
Marquita wrestling explain this
better than I, but that's pretty
much
That's why we're trying to do
it. We're trying to help low so
that they can start these
projects.
Thank you, madam Chair, Mr
Chairman, Representative, So I
think you need to look at the
changes in totality the primary.
The two primary changes that
we're making our to add
wastewater as you mentioned
earlier and the other is to add
the ability to use the water
project funds for technical
assistance to provide direct
technical assistance to the
small systems.
Who have said, and I think
they're right that they have not
had complete access to the fund
because of the upfront
requirements and their inability
to really get the help needed to
to apply for those funds.
So those are the two primary
purposes and we want to do that
now, in particular when there's
high levels of severance tax
bonds and federal dollars that
are out there, so our goal is to
get folks out as quickly as
possible to help these small
communities, the actual
application process is quite
lengthy because we need to get
all of our vetting done before
making a recommendation.
To the Legislature way back when
that used to be in January, we'd
meet you know the Friday or the
Monday before the session
started, and you would approve
that bill for endorsement or the
oversight committee. Would that
now happens this year. It
happened on November 1st. So
we're pushing back because it
takes time to vet those
applications fully. We're
pushing back when the
application starts, so it now
starts.
In August. We make approvals in
June.
And then by August, the small
systems are in need to be
starting their application
process again. So it's a 10
month process. The other
earmarks, the tribal
infrastructure funding the
colonias Infrastructure fund
don't have that same legislative
authorization requirement and
therefore can start the process
in January, so those
applications from the same
source of dollars starting
January. Where will the water
trust Board? We start in August?
And the we think for this five
year period where we expect to
see high levels of federal
dollars and high levels of
severance tax
Getting rid of that legislative
authorization allows our
technical assistance and boots
on the ground to get out into
those small communities and
generate more applications, so
it really is in totality and
effort to get more access for
these limited dollars to the
small systems are late. Are
larger systems don't have a
problem Cities and counties.
There's 26 projects on our
authorization bill from cities.
This year. Um, we they don't
have problems with this With
this timeline. It's the small
systems that do and so it's a
five year period is expected to
be in collapsing, um, to be in
concert with the high levels of
state and federal funding and
the technical assistance. These
should not be seen separate from
one another, because it's all
part of the same process, and I
hope I answered that question.
Mr Chairman. Madam Chairman,
Miss Russell. Thank you.
And I understand the need for
these small systems and I'm
really thoroughly really am.
But if we don't what projects
are
Going to be able to pass that
next step if they are
Boots on the ground.
I really do, and that's why I'm
concerned about the suspension
of the lead. CERN's I've had
some questions to answer. New
York
I appreciate what in there, but
in MF, I does as far as this
particular bill goes, It's a
whole lot easier. There are
still some questions I have. I
know that other members have
Thank you. Representative is l
next We'll go to representative
Matthews.
Um
Thank you. Presenters,
unfortunately, was not here on
going to be sure. Before I vote
that I noticed on Page three at
line four.
There is struck.
The language about creating a
drought strike team to call the
coordinate responses to
emergency water These days. I'm
wondering what Thank you,
Representative Matthews. I'm
going to turn that over to
Hannah because I don't think I
think that was enacted during
the Richardson administration.
Is Madame Chariot actually
started in the Johnson
administration. Um, and there
was a very short lived about 18
months throughout Strike team
that was making recommendations
to the Water Trust board.
For emergency funding down from
the governor. It has since been
replaced with a much broader,
more proactive drought task
force that the chair, uh that
the state engineer chairs um and
the finance of this need this
emergency funding project
recommendation is no longer
really in place. There have been
other kind of agency wide
efforts to replace really
outdated language.
Thank you. Thank you, Marquita
and Mr Chair. I'm I'm glad
I'm glad to know we haven't
given up.
Mr Chair. Um
Representative presenters. I
didn't totally follow the
Conversation about eliminating
the language regarding
Is that going to someone?
And I didn't really follow the
explanation about why we were
Madam chair So in in the 24
year history of the Water Trust
board, it's maybe fewer than a
handful of times that we've
funded projects from the Water
Project Fund for these
Endangered Species Act. It is
very rarely accessed by the
Interstate Stream Commission.
They're the only ones to have
ever applied for it as a state
agency or instrumentality. They
have access
To funding that more directly
fits their needs coming through
a 10 month grant process and
going through our requisition
process is, I think, a little
cumbersome from their
perspective. There are other
places where they've been able
to fund those projects. From our
perspective. We have to have an
entirely separate system for in
place for approving applications
that come once every five years.
Ah!
Mr Chair market if we're still
going to be doing this within
the
Making this that is correct. Mr
Chairman to funding to support s
a collaborative programs is a
key part of our mission. Madam,
Mr. Chair. I think six
Line 20.
It does still require these
projects are still going to come
to us for
My understanding that the
recommend again to coincide with
what funding both the federal
and state our technical
assistance, so it's basically a
five year
Not even a pilot program. We
anticipate going back to
legislative authorization in
2029. So we're just too that I
You know, I have carried this
I just want to add that as we
representative, Mr Chair. Thank
you. Appreciate that. I mean,
we've said we hear these
Um, often, um
I guess I do have a little bit
of heartburn.
Along with representatives l
about removing for five years.
All of these projects from our
oversight. Will will somebody
come in and give us something
that's letting us what's being
approved whether it's fair
throughout the state Equitable I
have great faith and Marquita
and all the peoples of these,
but
Or the personnel change. I don't
mean to people personal change,
and sometimes people changed
Misuse the enemy. FAA has
Madam chair. We do annual
reports in the interim,
actually, usually twice on the
water Trust board, um and on
colonias and other programs that
we operate in particular. So
there are there are some in
depth presentations made about
the projects. Any issues that
we're facing expenditure rates
that we're looking at. We do,
um, required reporting to the
LFC on all of these projects.
We're certainly you know, happy
to have increased reporting
during the time period is not an
issue from our perspective,
except that we get to have, you
know additional four months with
our small systems to get them in
a place to apply, so we're happy
to be as transparent and report
as often as you like, but we do
currently about twice in the
interim report to the N M F, a
oversight committee.
And, uh, thank you, Mr Russell.
Next. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Russell. Next will
go to representative Armstrong,
followed by representatives of
water.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for the all the information.
Um how, uh, Miss Russell how
many projects were approved?
Um, Mr Chairman. There are 65
projects that appear on your
legislative authorization
request. And that is, as was
last year. 100% of the quality
so much for that answer and out
of those
Um, how many were small
projects?
Just off the top of your head,
Madam chair. I think the the
mutual domestics, I can
certainly answer for soil and
water conservation districts,
Mutual domestics this year
represent, uh, soil and water
conservation district, another
11, but large projects Counties
municipalities, authorities are
37. Okay. Thank you for that.
Answer. Um, that's um I think
part of the concern of giving up
the oversight. Um, I appreciate
Mr Chairman so much all that you
all do and how you are but 37
large projects means
The majority.
Um, And then the smaller
projects. You know, there were
fewer, but I'm really happy and
I think we carried legislation
to make sure they all got
approved. Well, I'll got
funding, which
Which I'm happy representative
Harare and others.
Um, I want these projects
approved. I want these projects
done in our in our areas. Um
But unfortunately we've given up
legislative oversight on a lot
of things.
And it's come back to bite us in
the rear.
And so I, It's just it's always
makes me nervous.
Um, but I agree that possibly,
you know, maybe some other
additional reporting. I agree
with representative Harare that
Hmm. We never whine about the
projects.
We might wind to ourselves, but
we really never say I want this
one taken out.
Ah and then being in the
minority that so I just want to
voice that concerned, but I also
want to clean this up.
Ah, and I also understand that
they are already pre vetted
projects. But one of my
questions is, Is there any
hydrogen water projects have
been vetted in the state of New
Mexico that might be applying
for this that you know of Madame
Chair? No. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. That's all. Um I'm
supportive. Other than giving up
Legislative approval. But maybe
you could add some kind of
additional reporting or
something. I don't think you
representative next We'll go to
representatives Amora, followed
by representative Gates and then
representatives that will
raffle. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Presenters for this
bringing this bill forward.
I tell him. I have concerns
about
Legislative oversight. Ah,
How am I going to go back to my
constituency or tell them
I guess the question that would
be asked what I would tell him.
Well, we gave up our
Our authority. Thank you, Gail.
We give up our authority to
oversee these things, and you
have to go directly to the water
as as we represent our
districts.
We come up with issues.
And in my district were so
diversified. We we go from
Circle pivots all the way to a
secular is on the west side of
it.
And there's always issues that
come up.
And I've even contacted you,
representative Barrera about
issues and you've been very
helpful.
Ah!
To steer people in the right.
But I believe that's our job.
Is for a constituent to be able
to come to us.
Who they elected.
To help them with their issues.
And and steer them in the right
direction.
Represent Mr Chairman and
representative Reira.
Do you think?
And and I feel in my heart, But
do you think
From your From where you sit.
That this bill
The bill. The timing of this
bill is kind of bad.
Because we have funded
If the bill is passed, that we
voted on, I know and I know they
have to go finish the process.
But we have
Funded
Correct me if I'm wrong a little
over $300 million worth of water
projects in the state of New
And those moneys are already in
the budget.
Yeah, I am I correct in saying
that.
Mr Chairman and representative,
Mr Chair and rip.
Um, are there in the budget now,
But it ain't over till it's
over. You know, I'm I'm
continuing the fight. You don't
and then we have to get over and
agree. So right now it looks
good. But I can't tell you
extended. Whatever it was, it
was huge.
And, um
And so it's in the budget Now
you know, I I none of us have
got a cop, Mr Chair and
representative, And I appreciate
that answer, because we we all
know the process.
But we also know
That if we have the money in the
budget
It has strong support with
everything that happened in the
interim, and and his
And as we go forward,
We will more most likely it's
not an unfunded mandate. We're
talking about a lot of money.
There wasn't
Minimum, minimal thought put
into that.
150 million. I believe
That we're doing a good job on
the water projects.
And
Mr Chairman and representative,
can you point me?
In the bills.
I know it says small projects.
But what does that actually
mean?
What are we talking?
Area dollars.
And and when Mr Chairman and
representative when we get into
When we get into super small
projects.
I don't think our government at
this level at the state level to
be micromanaging even small.
Water you are. Are we talking so
small that if somebody has a
leak, and they need
$500 looking at things like
that.
Um
Um, chair and representatives of
more. No, I mean, usually small
projects can take care of small
things. That's why the
government but we have a lot of
we have a lot of mutual domestic
waters. And those are the people
that have a, um I've got to
commend it's reached out to
these people helped. It is the
most of these people running
these mutuals.
And for them, you know, it's
it's amazing. They can fix any
water, but they're not really
good at writing grants. I mean,
you know, I'm not good at fixing
the water system, but I can
write a grant. We put money in
the cogs to help people do know
if you're talking about
ordinary. It's about getting
systems that work better get
that we passed last year, so
that well for these systems so
Not about running a mutual
domestic
As a bitter market ad. She knows
a lot more than
Um Mr Chairman, the smallest
project in the or in the in the
water project was $100,000, the
largest quite a difference your
average mutual domestic request
is about one and a hand. They
tend to be larger capital
projects. They need preliminary
engineering reports in order to
support their request. These are
not our large projects
typically.
So, so, Mr Chair and presenters
then that leads me to my next
question. How big can a project
be under this?
Where were
And this bill, you said the
biggest one, There's 20 million.
Could it be $100 Million
project?
Mr Chairman. The bill itself
doesn't limit the amount of
money and you'd see in the
actual authorization bill.
There's no dollar amounts
associated with them. That's
authorization, forced to make a
grant or a loan based on the
terms and conditions set by the
finance Authority, So there's
actually it's not a true
appropriation bill that you
ultimately oversee. It's an
authorization bill to allow us
to make grants.
The water project, the water
Trust authority has to abide by
relative to size is and the
maximum, um, award under current
policy is 15% of the available
this year. We in January and
sorry in August when they
started the application process
that was around, I think 19.8
million to 15% limit.
So that's the max that people
applied for, and thank you for
that. Answer. Mr Chairman and
presenter Marquita.
So
I think that's that's a lot to
let go for the Legislature and
My final question.
It is.
I wonder if
This aligns data. New Mexico for
us to keep up.
Our oversight.
I'm gonna go back and study that
a little bit And what
How that aligns. Just look at
the tribal infrastructure fund.
They have the similar earmarks,
and they don't have the
legislative for that insight and
Mr Chair and Marquita. So how
much money's
Do they handle in the tribal in
the circuit, But Mr Chairman,
they received 4.5% earlier. The
water project and Mr Chair and
Marquita is that
From the fund or is the smaller
percentages are from the 9%.
Mr Chairman, the smaller the
tribal infrastructure fund
receives 4.5% of the senior
severance tax bunk capacity
similar with the colonias, 4.5%
And then the water Project fund
receives 18 years so they're all
separate. Distribute. Thank you
for that. And 11 last question.
For
Representative Barrera.
If we do this
On an annual basis, and we're
always rolling that money and
funding these projects.
I know you're you're talking
about the delay.
But then we're doing. We're
doing it and so
Is the delay really gonna be any
better?
Because you're going to have to
vet these projects, right? Um,
Mr Chair. We the projects are
vetted before they start the app
and Mr Chairman and
representative
I'm okay with getting in the
weeds on it, but I
But I think it's just
I don't mean to get my
Make my question too.
Complicated.
I'm just thinking. Are we really
holding these projects up that
much?
The way we're doing it now that
I think I think in my eyes
And and
This is my third term that I've
been here and and I still
consider myself kinda new.
But in my eyes
If we hold up projects it's not
because we're not working on
him, enrolling these projects
and in passing these bills.
Usually when we hold up a
project, it's because we don't
have my correct in saying that
representative Well, not really,
Not really. In my opinion, I
think the process the
bureaucracy itself holds up a
lot of these projects, and
that's what we're trying to.
That's where we're trying to
improve here. We're trying to
people get funded so that they
can really, you know, it's
really what it's about. I got to
tell you
When we brought this up when I
brought this is the part I worry
about the most. And I know there
will be pushback. But then I
realized
And that's when I decided to get
I'm in favor of We've got this
massive amount of federal money
coming in.
We? You know, I heard years ago
that the water pressure water
systems cost 8 billion. You know
what? I think it's closer to 16
billion. Now, That's how much
work we haven't done on water in
this state. So we've got a kind
of takes. We can do these
projects Marquitos speak and
Madam.
Mr Chair and represented. I'm
good with that answer.
My next question would be Mr
turn and is more directed to
mark.
How many FTE s short? Are you in
your
Office to reach full capacity of
Processing all your
Work that you have to do for the
state.
Um, Mr Chairman. We currently
Russell before you answer that
question. Um, I think we need to
remind everybody as to the title
of this bill.
I think we're going deeper.
We're reading fine prints into
this document that are not even
there.
So I think we're going to much
into it. We're turning this
seven page bill into what is
Might be a 50 page booklet.
So, uh,
Please Direct your question is
to what Bill is trying to
address. I think we're reading
fine prints into it that are not
there. So, uh, Miss Russell
Answer Mr Zamora's question,
please. Thank you. Mr Chairman
Work currently, um, fully funded
for this water project. Um, um,
oversight. I think the issue is
that smaller systems have to do
to applications as a result of
the bifurcated process, which
means they're engineers have to
do to
Um, applications and help them
and what ends up happening then
is that they are able to only
help fewer. They helped fewer
entities as a result, if you
were clients they can help
because the workload is so high
to apply to the water Trust
board, So it's partly a matter
of the small systems being able
to have the personnel to apply,
but also their contracting
consultants. It's a much faster
process for one
With one application, so it's a
it goes deeper than the Finance
Authority. It goes more to the
consulting engineers and the
community's ability to go
through two different
application.
Thank you for that. Mr Chair and
In directing my questions. What?
What I was getting at Mr
Chairman representative is
Do we have enough?
Capacity in the in the state
level.
To do the process to make the
processes happened that need to
happen.
And and we hear it time and time
again in the state of New
Mexico, Mr Chair and
representative
That we're short people at at at
the state water engineers.
Level at different
Offices in the state.
And
We We We all go back to Covid
and everything else and why we
can't hire enough people And
those are my concerns that have
directly impact would have
direct impact.
On asking for for this bill.
And I didn't mean to get off
target. I didn't mean to get off
the bill.
But trying to understand the
mechanics
Of why we would vote for this
bill or not vote for it.
And Mr Chairman and
representative that concludes my
questions. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Representative. Next
will go to representative Cates.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for presenting this again. I
was lucky to be one of the
committee members who was able
to attend.
The last meeting for the
presentation.
And and I do appreciate the
details of it. I just need a few
bits of clarifications. Although
representative Matthews and
Marquita you have really
answered a lot of my questions,
and thank you.
Um
So currently
In the in the current system
before this bill is passed the
$100,000 small projects
Are requiring to have
legislative authority.
Which means they are spending
twice the amount of money on
reapplying the application and
doing new two sets of
engineering.
Uh, drawings for this.
Um, rather than in your proposal
just to try it for five years.
That it doesn't require the
legislative authority. But
Finance Authority already has in
process at bi annual report, two
legislature.
In which you are doing and I'm a
member of the interim committee.
You guys do an excellent job. I
mean, you and this is one of my
pet peeves of most of the state
agencies is they don't have that
audit loop where they report
back to the Legislature.
You guys do it great and rich
and data. Um, so that is what
the proposal is correct. To
mean. I want to applaud our
chair for actually.
Looking at government programs
and trying to maintain the more
efficient and effective
Um, we don't always do that. And
so it was not giving up the
oversight. There isn't oversight
in here You are reporting twice
a year with deep
Um, data. You are just not
having to wait for a new set of
full application in the current
system for these small projects
that
Were characterized earlier.
Fear of micromanaging It sounds
like we're micromanaging them.
now, if we're requiring them to
to do to applications and two
sets of is that how you're
trying? You're you're setting
the structure currently.
Madam Chair expert witness. Yes.
and I'm going to turn this smart
key to to explain more Madam
chair, So the projects require
Mr Chairman. I apologize. The
projects were choir, um, full
plans, uh, as part of their
initial application, and then
they're required to do updates
to that as part of the second
application, and that's what's
really taking the engineers.
Time has cost updates.
Permitting, updates other
things. So if we did it once we
would be using half the time of
both the consulting engineers
who helped the applicants apply
as well as our mostly volunteer
applicants themselves.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Marquita. I do
applaud of the finance Authority
M f A as well. Um, you are the
two agencies that actually
really follow a standard of
practice of lending and vetting
and creating and follows
projects. Um
Um, I love how data driven you
are and your standardized
lending practices. Um, and yet
still recognizing that are
smaller systems.
You don't lower the
requirements, you are offering
them technical assistance to be
able to meet that high standards
or requirements. I applaud you.
Thank you very much. Let's go
back to our concerns on striking
the federal Endangered Species
Act, um which you know, makes me
a little
Hard when I first hear it, but I
understand, but I want to make
sure that I understand.
Is that
Um and I understand
representatives cells concerns
because she has a memory of when
this was actually helped
agriculture and being able to
put money back into the river.
And even if we only use it for
five times every 20 years, those
are four or five times it kept
people afloat and kept wild
species afloat. And so we want
to
Be mindful of it.
But let me understand your
argument seem to overseas, such
as specialized project, which is
different than potable water
irrigation, sewage, such
drastically different technical
expertise.
You cannot expand your staff to
be able to oversee something
that is outside your other
wheelhouse. And because interest
stream already has that
technical expertise, this is
your efficiency, ineffective
recommendation is that correct?
Mr Chairman. That's correct
again. It gets to our ability to
oversee the dollars. We have
nothing against the projects
that have applied. I really want
to make that clear. It's about
the efficiency with high dollar
amounts. It gets unwieldy. We
don't have a problem with it.
It's just more expensive for us
because we have to find that
technical expertise to thank you
very much, Mr Chair.
And and I thank you for your
answer, Um, just to
Uh, re read clarified between
nine lender a non, uh, state
engineer terms, right? You don't
want a lender plumber to oversee
the delicacy of an
environmental, uh and, you know,
environmental place to be that
Dell delicacies are two
different jobs to different
skills and we'll houses I
I understand that I thank you
for your time, and I think you
again for your second present.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we'll go to representative
Armstrong to be followed by a
representative of you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um,
since representative as l left,
she passed me her questions. And
then I thought of a few more so
in the title of the Bill, Mr
Chairman, it says there's two
things removing the requirement
that El eligible entities
conduct an audit and without
receiving approval of the
Legislature that's actually in
the
The title of the bill, so that I
think is where the issues are.
So, uh,
Mr Chairman Marquita. Can you
tell me is the application
process for large entities?
Is the application process the
same for all
Mr Chairman? Yes. Okay. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and Marquita.
so it may be more simple to make
an application process for small
entities different than the
large and I don't know if that's
doable, But just an idea also,
um
Are the large entities available
available for the large entities
as well.
Um, Mr Chairman to date Finance
Authority and the Water Trust
board have not done technical
assistance. So this would be the
first time that the water trust
board would be looking at that,
and that would be up to the
decision of the water Trust
board. So this is an element
that the finance authority would
pay for, but that the Water
trust board would oversee and
If I could just clarify your
other point, the audit issue
does not remove, um
Any issue related to the State
Audit Act, if if entities are
required to produce an audit
under the state audit rules that
doesn't change anything. What
this does is eliminates the
requirement that the NMFS to do
an audit of the project finances
and that's a different level.
It's not about the eligible
entities.
Finances and their books and
records. It's about the project
records. Um and our need to
require require an audit over
the project records. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you for that
clarification because I
misunderstood that, So I'm glad
you brought that cleared that
up, so if they by law, they're
required to have so itself,
okay?
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and, uh,
next week represented Catania.
Thanks.
Madam care any less comments? Um
I do appreciate this committee.
I can appreciate the depth of
the questions with that, Uh,
Turn it back to the chair.
Okay, Thanks for that, madam
Tier. We have a motion for a new
path. Second by representative
Cates.
The chair. I move.
Okay, Now we got the proper
motion and proper second. What
is in the clerk? Take roll,
please.
Representative Armstrong.
Uh, no, for the reasons stated
earlier.
Representative Cates.
Yes.
You know?
Yes.
Representative as L.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representatives device you? Yes.
Madam Chair? Yes. Five to do you
have a do pass?
Hmm. Representative Armstrong's
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Committee. Um, with me is,
uh, Sean to Davis. I wanted to
call him my other friend Shawn's
last name, and I know it's not,
But anyway, Sean Davis, um with
the livestock board.
Um, Madam Chair. Um
House. Bill 162 is the meat
inspection bill. Think madam
chair.
I'm not sure that we need to go
into the whole bill. There's a
few little technical changes we
have been informed of.
The problem. Someone has a
problem with the wanted an
amendment for the horse's bottom
line. Madam chair Is this the
same bill that I've carried for
the last three years?
Uh or maybe more. Three. For
sure, Madam chair and, um
What this would do is provide.
New Mexico USD A and certified
inspectors and in the home
A process for New Mexico
meatpacking.
For New Mexico beef to be
inspected through and USDA
certified so that we can have
new Mexicans feeding the
Mexicans and, uh and what we
would really like this process.
We've run into a few hurdles. We
did get a, uh, letter from the
governor stating that this is a
good bill. She wants this bill.
We want this bill. New Mexico
wants this bill.
On the Senate side. It's a I
have a mirror Senator Stephan
Exes carrying, um, it's hung up
once again.
And they're rewriting it. So,
uh,
Bottom line is Madam chair. We'd
like to get this bill through
very again. But we've given them
the list of the requirements
that the the federal government
is requiring, and we'll see what
comes out of it. So honestly, I
would just like to move this
bill forward. If changes need to
be made, I'm sure they'll be
made on the Senate side. It's
got a head start on there. Would
you like to add anything, Sean?
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. We
stand for questions. Thank you,
representative. And I guess I am
looking at
Whoops.
Anybody else wish to speak in
favor of the bill? Do we have
any
Seeing none will turn it over to
the committee for questions and
I'll start
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for bringing this
bill forward, Madam chair I move
to do pass on this bill.
I'll second that
Representative Armstrong.
Heck, yeah.
Representative Armstrong votes.
Heck, yeah.
Is there any Cadena?
Yes,
inspection inspections.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Zamora.
Yes, Representative.
Mr Vice Chair.
I'm also a heck Yeah,
Representative, Madam chair.
I'm a co sponsor on this bill.
Heck, yeah, for me, too.
The chair votes. Heck, yeah.
So, uh, representative that you
have a unanimous eight to
nothing, but congratulations,
and we have two people to
Just offering and would
appreciate your considering line
19.
The meat product is adulterated
if
It is okay, now I'm gonna call
on and I'm gonna call on the
Representative Matthews. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um and yes, In
part I wanted to explain. I
think I am probably the only
and however, it is not up to me
to tell other people what they
should eat.
And I am fine with having these
products available, but I was
curious on Page seven.
Is it? This is the whole
Group of saying group of
Animals.
Um and
Is the impact of this bill.
Essentially just for beef or are
there
Do we have processing?
For poultry, sheep swine, and
I'm just curious. Do we already
have those facilities or is
Would be also expanding those
Madam Chair. We absolutely have
sheep and goat slaughter
markets.
Just a quick story. I know this.
I know you're in a hurry. I sat
on a plane a few years ago with
a guy who sells a lot of
chickens to whole food markets,
and he was begging for a state
meat inspection program again.
He really liked the way the
state inspection programs
operate, operated prior to its
disposal in 2006, this allow us
to export.
Well, Madam Chair, Uh, members
represented Matthews. Uh, in the
long run, it could initially
know the program has to be equal
to for interest state, but if
it's it's same, as is the goal
of the program to be same as the
feds in
If s I s would allow us under
the Tallmadge Act out of state.
Thank you. And we've been
looking at this finally got it
done and sure we have a lot of
speakers this morning supporting
your bill.
Thank you, madam Chair for
allowing me to make a comment.
You know if you go back in the
history
Of meat processing in the United
States.
For whatever reasons we wound up
with. I believe like five
Processors in the United States
of Control.
The meat processing industry.
There have been lawsuits and
various states in the past
history.
And because of
Ranchers and farmers and beef
producers feeling like they have
monopolized.
The the processing business as
we go forward in the state of
New Mexico, we can make it a
better place.
We can give our ranchers
In our AG people.
Feedlots are dairies more
support.
It's a
I believe over an $8 billion
industry agriculture industry in
the state of New Mexico.
And I look forward to supporting
The farmers and the ranchers and
the community and what we do and
what we have the capacity or
capability to do here in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Presenters and, uh, meeting
adjourned. Thank you, madam.
Jordan America.
Jesus, Okay?
Oh, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry. I meant to tell
everybody Representative Jones
as that We roll her bills. She
has some problems with it. So we
