Ellery, um were if you're
missing a phone. I think we're
going to try to have somebody
out in the
Coloring in the office. The
entryway, so want to announce
there's a phone here. If anybody
is missing a phone. This was
from the gallery. Please go into
the office. There's a pass code
and everything. So if nobody
claims it, obviously it'll go
down to lost and found. Okay,
Thank you for that. Let's go
ahead and call the roll, please.
Representative Allyson here,
representative here.
Okay. We have a quorum. Thank
you Members, members. We're
going to switch up the order.
We're going to go with our
special schools. First, we're
going to have Mr Jorgensen, Miss
Macias given overview. Then
we'll ask Dr Herbal, Dr Beecher
and General grizzled to come up,
So we're gonna do our special
schools first.
Um with that, Mr Jorgensen?
whomever if you or Mr C s want
to kick us off and please
announced which packet we're
working with, and we'll go from
there.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr
Chair members. Jorgensen on the
LFC, analyst for higher
education institutions in the
special schools. We're gonna
start off with the small packet
with this table.
