The.
Welcome as close we have a
quote.
The.
Please rise for today's
implication led by
representative as.
The.
Job from someone invocation
please.
Thank you mister speaker let's
pray but you thank you for the
option we have here together or
in the people's house we're
grateful for the nation we're
born into
to be able to to serve in in
such an amazing place and we
pray for wisdom or as we do make
decisions on behalf of the
people in mexico that you would
give us your wisdom and help us
to make those decisions that
that come from service heart and
in our best for our people
ordered and just pray that you
take care of person and all of
our families look at some
christine premium.
Represent evidence it was
political religions.
It was a dixon with the solution
in mexico flag.
Plea ball.
Gentle lady from a suntaffeer.
Thank you mr speaker I moved we
go to that order of business
introduction of legislation in
objection to sort of click to
read.
House memorial nine introduced
by representatives is had a
group scott brown and mason.
A memorial honoring hubert henry
kintanna for her selfless
community service and a life
dedicated to economic benefit in
south eastern new mexico and the
state of new mexico.
How some moral nine introduced
by representatives is though
pategro scott brown and mason as
memorial nine and bedroom twist
by title is that not printed in
place on the speaker staple
get lady from santa fe.
Thank you mr speaker I move we
go to that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business and objection it is or
ordered
good morning members
here there are a lot more
detroit lion fans out here today
for some reason.
Didn't really as I was a thing
i'm gonna go to announcements
i'm gonna go to the gentle lady
from charities actually i'm
gonna go to the gentleman from
the
first representative petty group
thank you mister speaker we have
several guests up in the gallery
today from lovington and hobs
skills usa team members was
hoping that you might introduce
them and then I could talk a
little bit about skills you are
saying absolutely thank you
gentlemen uh up in the gallery
as guests of representative pity
group loving things skills you
are say michael dotson who's the
mass media adviser tracy
overcast technical math advisor
morgan mccormick family and
consumer sciences adviser peten
haggler the energy education
adviser along with students eric
dunkin who is the president
america while dvs whose reporter
max minors reporter a million
sendle treasure jackson bell
treasure i've been out of the
hotel ya a done is chavis cori
or net.
And they have that I get letter
elice under one august voils
jarener mosio carol bias rashel
howard lyonardo tarango maddocks
as to the eu.
Picking at wood row and growth
against gay goes same.
Tilo long.
And kevin or this welcome to the
house.
Mr
thank you for doing that I think
mister speaker you may have a
second page for our hob skills
you say as well we sure do
gentlemen we have hop skills US
safe one cannot mavina advisor
is real martinez advisor mario
advisor.
Oscar contraris advisor welcome
to the house half skills usa
call me back to you.
Thank you thank you mister
speaker and just a type briefly
about skills under say the
practice skills apple cooled for
all fields
including public speaking job
interviews resume building a
long with uh
their work on the career and
technical side.
The kind of experience that
these students get engaged keeps
them engaged in our schools
mister speaker allow students to
work with professionals from
their career filled create
talent to leaders ready to fill
the work force the mister
speaker III want there I have a
whole paragraph and i'm not
going to spin all that time
reading everything but
they came up here mister speaker
prepared to talk about and
skills you say that one of the
first questions one of the
gentleman asked me and then was
backed up by several other total
of uh twenty five members from
loving ten and eleven from half
an about eight different
advisors but one of the students
came right up to me and so what
questions can I answer and he
goes I want to know what you did
with the remaining twenty seven
million of the forty million for
c t either you had last year and
why don't we have it this year
in so
we're working through that
process but I just love the fact
that there there they're willing
to come in and and speak uh not
just for their school but all
eighty nine school districts all
the charter schools everybody
bring in it to us talking about
what their concerns are in what
they think we need to be doing
up here so mrperiod speaker with
that
to the members of the house i'd
like just for everybody the
stand up in
given when plaus I know we have
skills usa from all over the
state here today that just think
of for being here we don't take
a gentleman at and before before
we do that we we also have gone
in students from carls about
skills usa uh we have eleven
sooners from calls by high
school uh please join me and
given them all around the plus.
There else means the gentleman
from curry the bucket whether
look at roosevelt and sunday
gale representative somewhat.
Thank you mister speaker I also
have some guest here today
i'm i'm
like to welcome here welcome
here welcome them here to the
house floor my guess today our
students from the from clovis
they are career and technical
student organizations and their
advisers
today we have here the e c a
advisor don glitter getters and
f c c LA m garcia in h o s a
cell c fredericks thank you
mister welcome to the house
stakey representative.
The.
The general lady from the
representative of gay goes.
Thank you mister speaker mr
speaker again today is animals
you women's athletic day and I
have the distinct honor of
introducing five outstanding
aggie athletes jailing burton
who is a senior and plays
softball
entering her fourth year with
the aggie software program
jailene has appeared in a
hundred and thirty two games
while serving as a major
contributor for all three
seasons the alva turkey native
begins here senior year campaign
with fifty five career hits
jailing help the ages collect
the program six whack regular
season title thank you jailing.
Listen gustrong sorry with that
form to oil mexico.
Eldest in belarus began her
college golf career with the
aggies in twenty nineteen and
has since become one of the best
offers for the crimson and white
in foreign and half years with
the argues she has been named a
wca all american scholar twice
she also shot seven under par to
be crowned the individual
champion for the gulf week red
classic sky classic this
perspect thank you all.
Mari sharp wrapping up her
fourth season
so
wrapping up her for season with
the aggies in in in the
formarities now appeared in two
hundred and ninety one sets
during her time in los crucials
with more his assistance the
aggies claimed back to back
whack regular season titles
during her first two seasons she
has also been named to the
academic all whack team during
her career thank you mari.
Relaying garcia really enjoyed
railing thank you
really enjoying the aggy
volleyball team in twenty twelve
and immediately made an impact
as a true freshman appearing in
fifty cents as a soft moraline
saw her role increased
tremendously as she appeared in
thirty of thirty one matches
during twenty twenty three
campaign
in total she compiled five
hundred and twenty assist to
ring second among the ages think
you really
loma make nice
loma has put together one of the
greatest careers of any aggie
soccer players since arriving on
campus for the twenty twenty one
season in total loma has tallied
fifty one points to rank third
all time and program history
this season she tallied six
goals and six assist on her way
to earn player of the year
honors as a junior loma also
helped lead the aggies to a wack
to title to earn the programs
first ever nc double a
tournament appearance you can
see mister speaker we've got so
much talent one more.
Said la lee hernandez from
phoenix arizona
swapped up an exceptional year
with the aggies in the far and
currently racks tied for a
fourth all time in assist with
ten to her name during her
career she has been named all
conference twice including
earning defensive player of the
year honors and twenty twenty
three as the captain she's
helped lead the aggies to a
whack tournament championship to
earn the n c double a tournament
appearance for the first time in
the history of the new mexico
state program.
Mr speaker also like to
acknowledge
the staff from in an issue that
the companies are great students
are regional chair and my vf
doctor removed of a stalic
athletic director in my neighbor
mario moca
senior woman administrator
amberberg
asleddic director bron curt rate
women's sacred coach bob barts
women support codes kathy
router.
And last but not at least our
are distinguished president j
gooche.
Go aggies thank you all.
They can generate wages it's on
the record on the web ask I just
said it
before we go to the external
announcement you leave from
tunana you also have some guests
in the gallery from the new mex
connection assistance
association members of the
organization as well as students
because today's anne seciar
assistance day in the capital
welcome to the house.
The.
Thank you mister speaker and
representative as you know prior
like to make the
the introduction of his guest
who is also with them.
Fantastic let's go to german
from silent miguel and torrents
representative cast thinking of
the generally yield.
Well you don't you don't you
don't have to yield but you can
go ahead and interest thank you
for your for you
my guess today is ideas the
president of the new mexico and
institute assistance association
today is.
As a representative guy who said
today is an estate assistance
day in the capital and will
quickly speak particular that
you guys have in front of you
are from the city of las vegas.
I don't see any here but i'll
take your word for a gentleman.
Right when I go to the gentle
lady from santa fe
representative hunt for
announcement.
Thank you mr speaker I think you
have somebody on your desk my
guests in the gallery or our
guests in the gallery I do
generally would you like me to
introduce some yes please thank
you delay we have uh the decade
program here in attendance in
the house today i'm gonna start
with the president jason cloud.
Welcome
we also have we also have the
state officer coordinator for
decade ray henderson welcome to
the house.
We have the other state office
coordinator are now chabra
welcome welcome to the house.
We have said advisor debbie
kline welcome to the house.
Not pretty sure debbie client
was at highland high school many
moons ago if i'm not mistaken so
good to see you misclaim.
Uh we have a producer the how v
p development predictable
welcome to house.
It may be a guest than it have
been of marketing welcome to the
house.
And the vice president for
social media j c per poor
welcome to the house.
Thank you mr speaker for that
introduction decade prepares the
emerging leaders and enterprise
for careers in marketing finance
hospitality and management high
schools in colleges around the
club in new mexico today you'll
you'll see a well over a three
hundred students members of
decade walk in our halls and
today we have schools
represented or members
represented from real round your
high school law quarter siebella
capital high school real grand
n losl thank you for being here
today this is your opportunity
for you to come and talk to us
and get to know your
representatives and mister
speaker they are coming out and
they are telling us that they
want us to focus in on some
budgetary items that reflect how
we spend our dollars in the the
these types of activities for
our schools and I want to think
each in every one of them for
coming and for all their members
across the state mister speaker
there are over thirty eight
hundred members across the state
in our high schools and I want
to say thank you to each one of
them as you are preparing an
emerging work force for your
state of new mexico thank you
mister general lady ukray
program thank you for being in
the house today.
I'm gonna go to the gentleman
from son one representative
don't can.
Thank you mister speaker I have
got a great group of young
people in the gallery today
would you introduce them from my
high school curtail and central.
Gentlemen
are can you do you have a list
of names.
Not sure you should have that I
apologize this is from the
business professionals america
and they are right there there's
a professionals of america
welcome to the house.
This.
Baker german.
Thank you misses.
General lady from sandwill and
a little representative
thank you very much mister
speaker I have some guess in the
as well for their from the
hospital in tse which are career
and technical students
I would like to welcome them and
there are facilitators if they
like to stand from the asking
academy and the fastest growing
county in our state in the city
of real rancho thank you thank
you generally welcome to us
before it before I go to the
next set of announcements I do
want to introduce guests of our
colleague representative back up
and i'm gonna start with also
whose students from as long as
high school sponsored by their
nurse key russell welcome to an
house.
The.
And I will also like to welcome
to our chamber family members of
representative back up
please rise when I see your name
so we can recognize you we have
uh said back us father mister
walter back welcome to the
house.
We have representative back as
mother trees savaka welcome to
the house missus baca.
The.
We have representative back as
sisters clear in cardinal walk
to the house.
We have answer an uncourse of
representative back in the house
as well welcome to the house.
In mass but not least we have
representatives but uh but every
say back as brother.
Jason baca welcome to the house.
In well what do you the better
applied with is so uh there's
some wages on the floor who the
better athlete might be.
He raised his hand down here
I think your brother makes a
difference welcome to the house
folks thank you for being here
generally from sunday in berlin
percentage of lord thinking mr
speaker but they switched me to
torrent county now I have a
whole new district they I get
rid of santa fe
and not a purpose
I want to introduce my guess
today go ahead and stand up this
is can bring in he is the mayor
of edgewood which was in my
former district also running for
office and he wants to see how
we make the sausage here thank
you welcome to the house
honourable can read in may of
each wood.
Generally from any and the
representative
thank you mr speaker and good
morning to everybody mister
speaker this is one of my
favorite days every legislative
session when we have students
come from career and business
organizations to to visit us
here in santa fe and I believe
mister speaker there may be some
visitors in the gallery from our
teacher the uh business
professionals of america
mister speaker do you have a
list of names there I do uh
generally
and i'm happy to introduce
these folks from our teacher
high school.
Fantastic or teacher high school
in the house we have jerrible
humble advisor as well as
students morgan of calendar
owings in the bill gaggle
welcome to the house artist.
Thank you thank you mister
speaker just a little bit more I
am privileged to have visited
with students from the skills
usa group at carl's bed high
school we had a great meeting
rep mason and I with these
students animals say we're
always very impressed with them
and mr speaker I have a shadow
today from that group and i'm
going to ask her to stand uh
mister speaker this is levena
fwentes a very bright young lady
and she is seventeen years old
attends carlsbar high school and
will be graduating in twenty
twenty four this year
she has been in cte programs for
three years already and she
studied automotive technology
and she says it's because of the
experience she's learned many
skills that will benefit here in
her future and that is so true
mister speaker she has also
developed leadership skills and
I can testify that so mister
speaker will lena says once she
graduates for goal is to get a
degree and social work and be in
social services and we
desperately need people in that
career field so mr speaker i'd
ask everyone to welcome the lane
of wedders welcome to the house
million of twenties.
Generating from chavis courier
roosevelt representative rebuy
mr speaker my group from clovers
high school in the gallery and I
think you have their I don't
have all their names but if you
could please welcome them and
announce them I would greatly
appreciate it a lady we have
family career community of
america from clovis high school
please rise to be recognized
welcome to the house are the
records you see up there.
The.
A some nice mobile cherry red
up.
We said dunkin general mean from
southward have gone names here
i've got curtain central high
school david collared bpay will
fos through bpay and students
jake of martin just inheriting
potential crudes emily wrong
horse has spilled me roxaia
courtes philip horseley and
madison medly welcome to the
house.
Thank you mister speaker.
We have a guest the
representative i'm strong as
well we have a decade chapter
out of moslum us
settle and draven fill up as
welcome to the house.
The.
And we have guest of the
gentleman from chavis area
representative of mason.
Mister speaker
yesterday
i'm not sure if they made it to
the gary and not that my guess
we're with the new mexico
business professionals of
america and the state
organization their state
president and i.
You have their name so sir
generally I have I have one name
I have mislead fears who the
adviser for new mexico business
proper professionals of america
okay yes sir then with home was
sponsoring the student president
vice pr- in two vice presidents
can I read their names or would
you go answer
student president
and nair and I might miss his
have safe say paul well the.
And was the president and she is
from crossbad new mexico vice
president of correspondence
greece are release
vice president of social media.
A leader rollabel
thank you mister speriod they
could welcome to the house.
It's good to the generated from
chavez
on announcements.
Mr speaker first off I want to
make apologies I did not know I
was supposed to do the
invocation this morning so as my
penance I will do it for the
next five days lower is it later
you're your leader pension
very nicely and I appreciate
that I happened to be locked out
mr speaker I would like to
remove a very special
memorial
and
i'd like for it to be removed
from the speakers a table and
made the next order of business.
See an objection it is so
ordered
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house memorial nine on final
pass which has been taken and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentilated to explain the
memorial.
Mr speaker
ladies and gentlemen of the
house.
I have some very special guest
with me today they're setting
right up there on the rostrum
lian can turn and the entire
family of hubert henry contana
if you could please rise please.
Mr speakers with heavy hearts
that we are honoring this great
man today.
Here is not only
yours daddy your husband
grandfather.
He was are very dear friend.
And he will be greatly missed by
every one of us appear.
Mr speaker at this time if I
could have the clerk read the
memorial.
Click to read.
More real nine introduced by
representatives is pedegree
brown scott and mason a memorial
honoring hubert henry kingtanner
for his selfless community
service and a life dedicated to
the economic benefit in
southeastern new mexico and the
state of new mexico.
Whereas hubert henry kintana an
individual who touched the lives
of so many people in new mexico
with his distinguished service
will be remembered for his
passion and dedication to
southeastern new mexico and
whereas hubert henry cantana was
a native new mexican born and
last cruises on march seventh
nineteen forty eight to remoan
kintanna and alfonso might
remember cantona and whereas
hubert graduated from palm
springs high school in palm
screens california and attended
college of the desert community
college and palm desert
california where he was student
body president and played tennis
and baseball and after
graduating he attended san diego
state university where he
majored and physical education
and whereas on december
sixteenth nineteen sixty seven
here married merry len kelly at
seem to raise a catholic church
in palm springs and where as
hubert returned to his home
state of new mexico where he
held many esteemed professional
rules including executive
director of the southeastern new
mexico economic development
district interim county manager
for the city of hull.
Director of the new mexico
firefighter training academy and
shaves county manager and
whereas hubert also served a
numerous volunteer rules
including positions on the
boards of directors for the
rosmill girl boys and girls club
the nights of columbus the new
mexico boys and girls club the
new mexico association of
regional councils the colonious
infrastructure board the
southeast new mexico community
action corporation.
The national association of
development organizations and
the southwest region executive
directors association.
And whereas here it had a
distinguished and out ongoing
record of public service in
which he spent countless hours
traveling throughout the state
teaching speaking lobbying
mentoring and finding previously
unknown ways to help others
which exemplified what it takes
to be an outset to the
communities and a positive role
model and whereas in june two
thousand and sixteen he brought
retired from the southeast new
mexico economic development
district as executive director
but continued to work as a
consultant for the development
there's district and to oversee
the capital outlay process for
the five counties and twenty one
cities of southeastern new
mexico and whereas hubert's
important work should not be
quantified only by the economic
benefit to the residents of
counties or to the state of new
mexico but should be measured by
his exceptional and selfless
public service.
And whereas hubert's love of
guard and his fellow man shines
through all of his
accomplishments and made a
tremendous difference in the
communities that will last well
beyond his years of service.
And whereas hubert passed away
on september twelfth two
thousand and twenty three now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of new mexico that it
officially impersonally mourned
the passing of this great
community and state leader and
that had expressed its sorrow
heart felt sympathy and since
sear condolences to the family
of hubert henry kington and the
communities of the southeastern
new mexico.
Who have lost not only a loved
and honored citizen but someone
who touched many lives and be it
for the resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the family of hubert henry king
tanner.
House memorial nine introduced
by representatives is pedagree
brown scott amason.
Mr speaker.
How long i've got to put my
glasses on.
I want to thank the family for
sharing your husband and your
dad with this.
He was a selfless man any made a
huge difference in the lives of
so many not only in southeastern
new mexico put throughout the
state and I know that you're
missing terribly
mr speaker.
At this time I think we do have
a couple of members that would
like to speak on his behalf is
religional lady there is debate
on house memorial nine will go
first to the journal lady from
any and the representative
brown.
Thank you so much mr speaker
and.
O to the family all I can say as
how much we miss him we know you
miss him as well so much he was.
Such a gentleman and made my.
Entry into the legislature very
easy I could turn to him on any
subject and he knew all about it
it seems mr speaker he had so
much knowledge and honestly I
don't believe I could have done
my job as the legislator when it
came to capital outlay and some
other issues without his help
I know mister speaker we worked
in really hard during session
we came away exhausted and I
know he did too but he always
came back in and helped us in
mister speaker into the family I
will remember his tight
collection he had great ties and
a lot of them were kind of
useful like we need the poo and
things like that and couldn't
help it smile when he came into
my office and I looked at his
tie for the day but he was a
true general men and you know
that's kind of where these days
mister speaker
we loved him I think he loved us
and he did touch so many lives
through his work and so he
leaves the legacy that's
unmatched in my opinion and
again my condolences to the
family thank you mister speaker
thank you general lady are there
is further debates on house
memorial nine next we'll go to
the gentleman from.
Lee.
Representative scott.
Oh thank you
today
mister I cannot.
Became to describe.
The assistance that he gave.
To the legislators and south
national mexico was instrumental
in the other capital outlay
process that I have been a part
of since I have been here.
And actually made
the organization of that
material and the help he
provided.
Made the southeast new mexico
legislators they end the.
Of my colleagues in this body.
When it can.
To capino capital outlay
requests.
Organized.
It's present.
A huge hole.
And big shoes to fill.
And I can assure you from all of
us.
That he would be sore limit
thank you mister speaker think a
gentleman there is for the
debate on the memorial generated
from a killing representative
lunch
thank you mr speaker I too would
like to say a few words about my
very good friend hubert
kentanner and a welcome his
family here today here on the
house floor
cuba nair met for the first time
in the mid eighties when I was a
junior cog director from
northwest new mexico and he was
senior guy mister speaker and
members and he was the person
that helped train all the rest
of the new card directors so we
knew how to work in our regions
I think we all had served as
those directors for over twenty
five years I was
very very impressed with all the
kinds of things that he would
get involved with and I think my
car leagues on the other side of
the isle or our absolutely
correct didn't matter if it was
water planning or transportation
planning border issues and I
know he spent a heck of a lot of
time up here and sound affect
when it came to the capital
outlay process I think he was
every on every board and every
commission that a governor could
appoint somebody to
want you to know with all my
heart he was one of the most
outstanding public servants i've
ever met and one that always
worked with the highest
integrity and I know that
because for many many years we
work together so want you to
know that
from a former cognt director to
a cop director's family that he
meant the world all of us and
again welcome and he will be he
will be greatly missed thank you
mister speaker thank you gentle
lady there is further debate on
house memorial nine gentlemen
from lee representative
pedicree.
Thank you mr speaker.
My heart.
Um
very very special man.
I got to meet him my first time
in two thousand and ten.
As a president of the edc and
southeast new mexico in the way
he counciled in the week he
carried on a basis for why i'm
here today.
Very much appreciate him a very
much appreciate the family
sharing him with us.
And his values in this
roundhouse.
Custom
to put into words the capability
of a person they can.
Work with twenty six different
entities.
And sixteen different
legislators that may change from
one time to the next and get us
all into an agreement on how we
find.
Our areas
is hard to do but he did it
every year and he worked
tirelessly at it all year long.
Some of the people.
That i've had the opportunity to
talk worse that are trying to
accomplish the work the miser
point cantone
I think there's four of them
now.
That are trained and fulfilled
one person shoes that says so
much for your husband for your
dad for your granddad for your
family and i'm just so thankful
we got to share we got to spend
some of our time with somebody
so valuable in meaningful in
loved by you thank you mister
speaker.
Thank you gentlemen there is
further debate on how they more
line german from link in an otel
representative vincent thank you
mister speaker and.
He were quintana I started work
with him about fifteen years ago
and
I was a handful then
and after I retired from the
fire department in in rid also
he thought that he was going to
get rid of me and then I
graduated to the legislature in
here I am and he and i'm twice
the handful now.
And I was always so up tight
about junior money and capital
money because now you're
distinguished out and he always
told me don't worry I i'm gonna
take care of you.
And that's exactly what he did
and everybody's nervous.
And if you can just imagine
heard and a bunch of cats around
he was a professional cat heard
her he could put us all in a
room
and literally were in their
thirty minutes and it's done and
I don't even know how I did it
we have all of our money right
and everything's going like it's
supposed to go and then in two
days it's over and it really
want that bad but curse of his
leadership
he will be sorely missed but I
hope when he's looking down he
looks at the people that
turkey's role and they're doing
a fine job so he taught him well
and we're going to missing thank
you for letting us having
take a gentleman there is for
the debate on a house memorial
mine the gentleman from chavis
adding the representative.
Thank you mister speaker I don't
have the long history with him
but the most of the but last
year was my first.
Session here in our guarantee I
was scared when this came.
But he took.
By the time he got through with
me.
It was easy or he was a perfect
later he was a perfect gentleman
uhm even though i'm in a short
time i'd like to call in the
perfect friend thank you for
sharing him with me
for it was only one session but
I remember forever thank you
very much thank you german and
there is further debate and
house memorial nine the
gentleman from what they do
representative block.
Thank you mister speaker and
thank you all for being here
part of the family you know I
myself included I I met him last
year first time right after I
got elected and he really helped
me you know he
makes us all look like we're
doing a great job but it's all
hebert you know and so mister
mister speaker I just had a few
words just to describe hubert as
a man you know he he was so
smart who was so intelligent and
you know I always called them
and asked him about my capital
outlay my my junior money always
this can get you how do I word
this and he was always saying
representative blocked calm down
it's okay we got to and he was
the safety not that we needed as
representatives to another our
money was in good hands it was
going to get back home and it
absolutely we did so mister
speaker he was also a man of
patiences you know he he deals
with me after all you need a
little patience to do with me so
mister speaker he really he
really was a man of patience he
he waited outside my office for
me to to guide me through the
the process and so like one of
the other representatives said
working and probably need four
or five people just to do one
job of of hubert and mister
speaker he was he was also very
humble he was a man of humanity
and it was always about the
people it was always about what
our communities needed and
that's something that I will
always remember of humbert going
forward or the other good
energies than five that he gave
us to really represent the
people on the ground the people
who sent us here to sanity and
that's really what would he
championed in me well that will
I been up here he's also
you know a man of he just loves
this state he loved this stay
with all of his heart new guital
with the way he talked about our
communities talked about when he
he was done almost gordon we
always give me a college get
some coffee and let's talk about
about your capital for next year
and unfortunately I didn't ever
get that chance to sit down with
him and talk about capital for
this year and so that's one
thing that I will always
remember and always know that he
cares about our art state.
Everyone of our districts and
each one of us he loved us all
and we loved him with all their
hearts and my mind is heart goes
out to all of you and my players
continue to go out to you for
hearing and I know that human is
looking down on us and smiling
on us and and he's probably
laughing that five or six people
are going to need to fill his
two shoes so god bless him
working tonight and thank you so
much mister speaker and thank
you to the family for for
honoring this great man by
giving him giving us his present
so thank you so much mister
speaker thank you gentlemen is
referred to debate on house
memorial nine.
Generally before
before I go to you to close if
if I may take a bit of a chair's
program
to try mr container's family I
think what you heard here today
is an example of of a live very
very well lived somebody who had
a tremendous impact
be beyond up his beautiful
family as as you sent here today
are somebody who had an impact
throughout different communities
throughout the entire state
across party isles across
partisan politics and his life
is one that
those are worse in public
service at think should all
aspire to live
so thank you for sharing him
with so many new mexicans
his legacy will continue in the
spirit of so many public
servants in this body in the
cross of state thank you back to
the jelly due from chavers mr
speaker thank you very much I
don't have a person's standing
here behind me.
That wants to express his thanks
to the family also but since we
don't allow senators to come
over here at the house floor
we're going to just passive by
right now
mr speaker
lian and the family at hubert's
service I heard one of the most
touching stories of my life.
And this is in regard in regard
to your suddenly that would
touch me deeply I know that
hubert loved christmas
he would just
he he.
Got me in the mood and usually
i'm screwed to christmas but
whenever I would visit with him
it all changed
some is to speaker again thank
you for allowing us to honor
this wonderful family
and mr speaker I now move that
house memorial nine do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
the house that the record show
that the role has been called in
all members present voted in the
affirmative there has been
emotion to show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative signal objection
it is so ordered.
We are final passage of house
memorial nine the vote is now
open.
The board is now caused by a
vote of seventy in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house memorial nine has only
passed this house.
General lady from bernalio
representative chassis.
Mr speaker we got that order of
business messages.
Seen objection it is so ordered.
Clerk to read.
Message from the senate mr
speaker i'm directed to informed
the house of the duly enrolled
in a growth copies of house
built one with emergency clause
have been read inform and signed
by the officers of the senate in
open session and returns same
here with respectfully submitted
sharing dealing on senate chief
message will be entered.
House executive message number
twenty six speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuing to
article for section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature second session
submission rebuild bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
six nine zero one a billion
acting the government use of
artificial intelligence
transparency act requiring
inventories and assessments of
artificial intelligent use
requiring reports amining the
procurement quote to require
vendor transparency for
purchases for purchases of
artificial intelligent products.
And services.
And providing definitions
respectfully yours michelle the
hungry and governor.
But most meteorites are here in
the record.
House executive message number
twenty seven speaker martin as
the members of the house
pursuant to article four section
five b two mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature's second
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two seven zero three three a
amending and enacting sections
of the campaign reporting act by
adding disclaimer requirements
for advertisements generated by
artificial intelligence.
Providing disclaimer
requirements related to the use
of materially deceptive media.
Creating the crime of
distributing or entering into an
agreement with another to
distribute distribute materially
decepted media adding
definitions and providing
penalties respectfully yours
michelle language and governor
message will be entered.
House exactly executive message
number twenty eight speaker
martinez and members of the
house I have this day signed
house bill one with emergency
class enacted by the fifty six
legislature second session
twenty twenty four respectful
yours michelle language and
governor
message will be entered.
Gentle lady from bernalyo.
Mr speaker I hope we go to that
order of business committee
reports in objection that is so
ordered.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to them has been referred house
bill five has had it in a
consideration reporting with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
a sale lee alcohol chair.
Mr report.
We're an adoption of federal
committee report on house bill
five all those in favor single
publicity night but it'll
suppose me the ice have a
committee reported off.
Mr speaker your energy
environment and natural
resources committee to has been
referred house bill forty one
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
judiciary committee respectfully
submitted mathematically share
move without.
We're an adoption of federal
community report in hospital
forty one all those in favor of
seeing if I was in I
other supposedly the eyes have
been committed reported up.
Mr speaker your energy
environment and natural
resources committee to has been
referred house bill forty eight
has had a really consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the commerce and economic
development many respectfully
submitted mathematically
the doctor we're an adoption of
a federal community report and
house will forty eight all those
in favor in the privacy night.
I was supposed to the eyes have
it committed reported opted.
Gentle lady from berliel.
This would speaker I won't go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation
objection it is so ordered.
House bill when seventy six
introduced by representatives
small and dixon.
An act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
required by la hell spill one
seventy six introduced by
representatives small and dixon.
As with one seventy six hundred
twelve by title is deemed remain
under article four section five
b one order printed for to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
The.
House bill one eighty two
introduced by representatives
chassis and little and act
relating to elections amending
an enacting sections of the
campaign reporting act by adding
disclaimer requirements for
advertisements generated by
using artificial intelligence
providing disclaimer
requirements related to the use
of materially deceptive media
creating the crime of
distributing or entering into an
agreement with another person to
distribute material deceptive
media adding definitions
providing penalties declaring an
emergency
one eighty two introduced by
representatives chassis and
little house but one eighty two
have a minute twice by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b two house
executive message twenty seven
order printed in referred to the
house government elections and
indian affairs committee then
the house traditionally
committee.
House bill one eighty three
introduced by representatives
little and goodola and act
relating to crime increasing the
penalty for negligent use of a
deadly weapon to a misdemeanor
for a first offence and forth
degree felony for a second or
subsequent offense house bill
one eighty three introduced by
representatives little and good
one eighty three we have
bedrooms was by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill one eighty four
introduced by representatives
saraniana serato chandler and
chasing act relating to
artificial intelligence in
acting the government use of
artificial intelligence
transparency act requiring
inventories and assessments of
artificial intelligence system
use requiring reports amending
the procurement code requiring
vinder transparency for
purchases of artificial
intelligence products and
services providing definitions
making an appropriation house
but one eighty four introduced
but representatives sarniana
serato channeller and chase has
been one eighty four have been a
twelve by title is
deemed remain persuant to
article four section five b two
house executive message twenty
six is ordered printed referred
to the house government election
in the in affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee.
House bill one eighty five
introduced by representatives
thomson hernandez zapansky and
chasing act relating to health
coverage and acting the new
sections of the health care
purchasing act the public
assistance act the new mexico
insurance code the health
maintenance organization law and
the non private health care plan
law to establish guidelines
relating to step therapy for
prescription drug coverage and
eliminate step through
requirements for certain
conditions how spell one eighty
five introduced by
representatives thomson
hernandez sapansky and chasi has
will one eighty five have been
read twice by tiral is ordered
not printed in referred to the
house rules committee
house fill one eighty six
introduced by representative.
An act relating to motor
vehicles raising the apparent
damage amount for a mo- a
vehicle accident that requires a
written report of the accident
to the department of
transportation from five hundred
dollars to one thousand dollars.
House but one eighty six
introduced by representative
centers.
Has been one eighty six a minute
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one eighty seven
introduced by representative
ferrari.
An act relating to taxation
creating the school solar income
tax credit house bill one eighty
seven introduced by
representative ferrari.
House with one eighty seven
hundred twice by title is deemed
remained pursuant to article
four section five b one ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy environment to
natural resources committee then
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one eighty eight
introduced by representative or
tests and act relating to land
grants amending the landground
support act creating the
landgrand mercedes revolving
land fund providing for
administration and rule making
amending the landground were
said assistance fund providing
for distributions for loan
repayments making an
appropriation house but one
eighty eight introduced for
representative or tests.
Has been one eighty eight
hundred minutes was by title is
deemed remain percent to article
four section of five one order
printed and referred to the
house rural development language
and cultural affairs committee
then the house were propriations
and finance committee.
House bill one eighty nine
introduced by representative or
terrors and act relating to
utilities and acting the low
income solar act requiring
equitable distribution of
benefits of unsight solar
generated energy generated on
affordable housing restricting
some utility fees for solar
unaffordable housing providing
for promulgation of related
rules regulating the tax
valuation of solar energy
systems house bill one eighty
nine introduced by
representative or test house
bill one eighty nine have been
with twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one ninety introduced
by representative of garrett and
act relating to procurement and
acting sections of the
procurement code allowing public
partners to contract with
private partners for the
performance of public projects
requiring the board of finance
division of the department of
finance at administration to
promote it rules for review and
approve public private
partnership agreements has been
one ninety interdeese
representative garrett.
Has been one night we have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one ninety one
introduced by representatives
luhan and sunches.
And act relating to animal where
welfare and acting the animal
welfare funding act requiring
the department of finance and
administration to administer
animal welfare grants creating
the animal welfare trust fund
and the animal welfare grant
fund providing duties making an
appropriation house bill one
ninety one introduced for
representatives and sanchez.
Has been one ninety one have
been read twice by title is
dimed remained under article
four section five b one.
Auto printed and refreshed to
the house consumer in public
affairs committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one ninety two
introduced for representative
luham and act making approach
appropriations to the health
care authority department for
programs and santa fe county
that refer people in need of
resources.
House bill one ninety two
introduced by representative
luham has been one ninety two
have been read twice by title is
deemed to be.
Pursuant to article four section
five b one or printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee the
ends the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one ninety three
introduced by representatives
delay cruise and dixon and act
relating to the law enforcement
retention fund allowing
retention differential
disbursements for full time
certified law enforcement
officers who have been employed
by one or more long forcement
agencies for the required years
of service providing a new
retention differential
dispersement for full time
certified law enforcement
officers with twenty or more
years of service requiring law
enforcement agency is to comply
with the law enforcement
training act and to submit
additional information to
receive retention differential
dispersements making an
appropriation house but one
ninety three introduced for
representatives delay cruise and
dixon has been one eighty three
have minutes was by totally
steamed remain pursuant to
article four section five b one
order princeton referred to the
house judiciary committee then
it's a house appropriations of
finance committee.
Else bill one ninety four
introduced by representative
channel an act relating to labor
requiring that public contracts
provide for increased contractor
and sub contractor reimbursement
and worker wage increases in
accordance with and concurrent
with state minimum wage
increases or increased costs as
mandated by wa house bill one
ninety four introduced by
representative chamber.
Has been one eighty four hundred
minutes was by title is ordered
not print now printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill one ninety five
introduced by representatives
serato and dixon and act
relating to finance amending and
an acting sections of the
opportunity enterprise act and
change in the name of the act
allowing the new mexico finance
authority to provide housing
development loans creating the
housing development revolving
fund defining terms amending the
structure of the opportunity
enterprise review board and
changing its name providing
duties requiring rule making
amending requirements for
opportunity enterprise loans
requiring reporting house bill
one ninety five introduced for
representatives serato and dixon
has been one eighty five have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill one ninety six
introduced for representative
small and act relating to public
finance creating the government
accountability expendable trust
and the government
accountability program fund
providing for distributions from
the government accountability
expendable trust to the
government accountability
program fund to fund pilot
projects that will be evaluated
by the legislative finance
committee in consultation with
the state budget division of the
department of financial
administration and the states
agency administrating the pilot
project changing a provision of
la that currently transfers
certain excess revenue to the
tax stabilization reserve to
instead transfer the excess
revenue to the government
accountability expendable trust.
House bill one ninety six
introduced by representative
small house be one ninety six
minutes wise by title is deemed
remain pursuing torticle force
section five b one order printed
in referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one ninety seven
introduced by representative
and act relating to higher
education expanding the scope of
nondiscrimination in eligibility
for education and benefits house
bill 19 introduced by
representative choves as we were
ninety seven have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one ninety eight
introduced by representative
hockman vehicle and act relating
to crime increasing the penalty
for a felon in a serious violent
felon found in possession of a
firearm providing that a person
convicted of possession of a
firearm or destructive device is
not eligible for earned
meritorious deductions house
bill one ninety eight introduced
for representative hockenville
has been one ninety eight have
been read twice by title is the
dim german pursuing to article
force section five b two hours
executive message six ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer in public affairs
committee then the house
judiciary committee.
House bill one ninety nine
introduced by representatives
harrera and drease romero lada
baca and good ola an act
relating to school personnel
increasing the minimum annual
salary for license to
educational assistance to thirty
thousand dollars acquiring a
minimum way minimum wage rate of
fifteen dollars per hour for all
public school employees and a
mimit minimum annual salary of
thirty thousand dollars for all
full time public school
employees house but one ninety
nine introduced by
representatives harretta andreas
romero lada bucker and goodola
has the one ninety nine haven't
been read twice by title is
deemed remain percent toward
four section five b one order
printed and referred to the
house education committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two hundred
introduced by representatives
had a meal lonstrum harry garcia
castiano and sunches and apt
relating to crimes increasing
the sentence for second degree
murder house built two hundred
introduced for representatives
how to meal monster harry garcia
castiano and sanchez.
House will two hundred have a
minute twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill two o one introduced
by representatives had edit
macqueen armstrong madrid and
allison and act making an
appropriation to the water
project fund house will two oh
one introduced for
representatives here mcqueen
armstrong madrid and allison.
Has bill two zero one two
hundred and one have been read
twice by title is deemed remain
pursuant to article four section
five b one order printed and
referred to the house
agriculture.
While I say yes and whatever
research is committee and then
to the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House build two hundred and two
introduced by representatives
gay goes armstrong costiano and
hotel meal and act relating to
child care providing that county
and municipality zoning
authorities shall treat
registered child care homes
licensed family child care homes
and license group child care
homes as residential in use in
the application of local
regulations including zoning
land use development fire and
safety sanitation and building
codes and cannot impose
additional regulations that do
not also apply to other private
residences clarifying the
application of rules promulgated
pursuit to chapter fifty nine a
article five two in msa nineteen
seventy eight house bill two
hundred and two introduced for
representatives gayego kyogos
armstrong casting I know and
harmier.
House will two hundred and two
have amendment twise by title is
ordered not printed or referred
to the house rules committee.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
House joint resolution seven
introduced by representatives
rubio garrett senator duhig
representative or test and
senator o'neal a joint
resolution proposing to amend
article four of the constitution
of new mexico to add a new
section to create a citizen
commission on legislative
salaries to establish a just and
limit the salaries of members of
the legislature and to immense
section ten to authorize payment
of legislative salaries.
House joint resolution seven
introduced a representative
rubio garrett senator duheg
representative of our tests and
senator or neal.
Has joint resolution seven have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in the indian affairs committee
then the house judiciary
committee.
House joint resolution eight
interdues by representatives
lane ton townsend armstrong lord
and block.
A joint resolution proposing and
amendment to article for of the
constitution of new mexico to
provide that a declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to a
power granted to the governor by
law terminates after ninety days
unless the governor calls the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency and to require a
three fifths vote of the
legislature to extend restrict
suspend or terminate the
emergency declaration house
don't resolution eight
introduced by representatives
lane townsend armstrong lord and
block.
This.
House joint resolution eight
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections and indian affairs
committee then the house
judiciary committee.
House memorial five introduced
per representative allison and
the memorial requesting the new
mexico congressional delegation
to support legislation to expand
compensation under the federal
radiation exposure compensation
act for individuals exposed to
radiation house house memorial
five introduced by
representative allison.
Yeah.
House memorial five haven't been
read twice by title.
This.
Is order printed and referred
to.
The house.
Government election in the
indian affairs committee.
The.
House memorial eight introduced
for representative others a
memorial urging the new mexico
congressional delegation to
request that the biden
administration called for and
facilitate negotiations for an
immediate descalation and
ceasefire in israel and occupied
palestine house memorial eight
introduced for representative
chotes I was more related to
have been read twice by title is
ordered princess referred to the
house judiciary committee.
House memorial ten introduced by
representatives had a meal
charters dixon harry garcia and
armstrong in a moral requesting
that a joint task force be
convened by the children youth
and family's department and the
health care authority department
to make immediate and long term
strategy recommendations to the
legislature to solve the acute
crisis of faster children
sleeping and state office
buildings house memorial ten
introduced by representatives
how to meal charters dixon harry
garcia and armstrong has moyle
ten haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
election in the indian affairs
committee.
House memorial eleven introduced
by representatives tarasars
townsend medibal moya backer end
jones a memorial requesting the
public education department to
convene work group to study ways
to assist school districts and
charter schools with strategies
to reduce absenteeism in public
schools.
Focusing on approaches at a
community and family level for
identifying barriers to
attendance and route causes of
absenteens and when practical
and one at case by case basis of
questioning that the work group
provide recommendations for
implementation and report the
results of the study and
findings to the legislative
education study committee by
december first two thousand
twenty four.
House memorial eleven introduced
for representatives terraces
townsend mitable moya bucker and
jones has moral eleven have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house education committee.
House memorial twelve introduced
by representatives little harmeo
patahon thomson and herndon a
memorial acknowledging
administrative burdens faced by
behavioral health care providers
and calling for a study to
examine these burdens and to
provide recommendations to
expand the behavioral health
care workforce in new mexico
house memorial twelve introduced
for representatives little had a
meal per horn thomson and
herndon.
The.
How do I have been with with a
title is ordered principally
referred to the house health and
human services committee.
House memorial thirteen
introduced for representatives
thomson charters cates and
parahon a memorial per claiming
february twelfth two thousand
twenty four public health day in
the house of representatives
house memorial thirteen
introduced for representatives
thomson charters cates and
paraholm has a memorial thirteen
have been read was by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speaker stable.
House memorial fourteen
introduced for representative
vincent a memorial declaring
january twenty third two
thousand twenty four smoky bare
day in the house of
representatives how some more
fourteen introduced for
representative events and.
How's more of fourteen haven't
been read twice by that is a
smoky the bear or a small key
bear.
Has a more on fourteen have been
retired by time was ordered not
printed in place on the speaker
stable.
House memorial fifteen
introduced for representative
miguel garacia and memorial
requesting the penisco
independent school district to
transfer the escalator building
and last trump us to the last
trampos mutual domestic water
consumers association how some
oriole fifteen introduced for
representative miguel garcia
house memorial fifteen hundred
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house rural development language
and cultural affairs committee.
This.
House were moral sixteen
interdues for representatives
monstron harry garcia el con and
johnson a memorial per claiming
january twenty fourth two
thousand and twenty four galip
mckinley county day in the house
of representatives house
memorial sixteen introduced for
representatives monster perry
garcia el cone and johnson.
House memorial sixteen haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial seventeen
introduced for representative
charges in memorial requesting
social workers practicing in new
mexico to adopt principles of
environmental justice for
competent practice.
House memorial seventeen
introduced for representative
house of moral seventeen have
been rich was by title is
ordered printed and refreshed to
the house government elections
in indian affairs committee.
House resolution one interdeeds
by representatives lord and
black.
A resolution constituting
articles of impeachment of muhat
michelle lucongrisham governor
being a recitation of the
articles of impeachment upon
which the house of
representatives finds that
michelle luhongrisham has
committed acts that weren't
impeachment and trial in the
senate pursuant to sections
thirty five and thirty six of
article four of the constitution
of new mexico.
Providing for notice of
impeachment and the prosecution
of impeachment house resolution
one introduced by
representatives lord and block
house resolution one have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
indian affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee.
Gentle lady from burnerly your
representative chase.
Mr speaker now being eleven
fifty nine am I moved we are
journaling until twelve or one
pm.
The house come to order
mister speaker I asked unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
that all those president in this
morning session are president in
this afternoon session.
There's objection it is ordered.
Mr speaker I ask anonymous
consent that the rules be
suspended and with the wreckers
show that the journal has been
run in full and approved subject
to revision and approval of the
rules in order business
committee
Lady from berlie.
Mr speaker I grew up I hope we
go to that order business
announcements in the celebrities
business see an objection it is
ordered
announcements the gentle lady
from the legal set
the
think you mister speaker the
house appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at one
thirty in room three oh seven.
Member state notes gentlemen
from send the balance on the
favorite center of mcqueen
thank you mister speaker the
house energy environment and
that's a resources committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
eight thirty
the agenda does not appear on
the golden ride it has been
since circulated to the members
we will be in room three
seventeen not three sixteen we
will be hearing house bill one
await seventy three one forty
ninety one in ninety two
and also mister speaker members
of the committee don't forget we
are having our committee dinner
tonight at six o'clock at kyoti
cafe thank you mister speaker.
And gentlemen I am informed that
the your agenda is online.
Thinking of a speaker it has
been smither was a little late.
Other announcements the gentle
lady from some that fair.
And to other recounties
thank you mr speaker just to
reminder that your house
judiciary committee will be
meeting at one thirty today in
room three o nine we have about
four bills and hopefully we'll
go relatively quickly thank you
mr speaker.
Member state nor delete it from
towers thank you mister speaker
your house rural development
language and cultural affairs
committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning at nine am we
have four bills on the docket
thank you member signal to
general lady from
donation of ferrari.
Uh thank you mister speaker your
house consumer in public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow at
one thirty in room three
seventeen and we have five bills
on the dock member signal to
lady from really was on the well
south of towns representative.
Thank you mr speaker just want
everybody to know that you're
how agriculture seconds and what
a resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock
in three fifteen we have four
bills on the docket thank you
members take a note the gentle
lady from benelia representative
hockman behill every month is
the speaker your house transfer
tation public works and capital
improvements committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning nine am
room three or five we have three
bills we will be considering.
Member state.
Not.
Gentle lady from any
representative round.
Thank you mr speaker it's my
pleasure to invite any
legislator who's interested to
our tuesday morning bible study
and prayer time we meet in room
three twenty one at seven am and
breakfast is always served so
please join us if you'd like
again seven am room three twenty
one thank you mister speaker
lady member stick note any other
announcements.
All right i've got a couple of
announcements bear with me folks
we have somebody or we have
somebody hopefully they're still
there from the second year
state's office in the lounge
ready and will into help support
any of you with your financial
disclosure forms which are do
later this month.
At the end of the month
also we have representatives
from the mv
who are going to be
there I believe tomorrow.
Willing enable to help any
member with simple court unquote
simple empty transactions i'm
not sure what simple means i've
guess if you get three boats to
register little lane and a
couple of airplanes maybe this
is not the place for that.
But uh for the new members if
you want world's cool red plates
tomorrow's time to get it
so member is signaled in the
lounge
i'm gonna go rise on this one so
we've got one bill
that we've consulted with the
rules chair as well as
leadership on both sides.
This is house bill thirty eight
representative hernin it was
sent to the rules committee.
But mean percent two article
four section five b one this is
house bill thirty eight and
appropriations bill.
Uh four a
task force I believe uh we would
like to order that printed and
referred to the house consumer
consumer and public affairs
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee again house bill
thirty eight representative
hernine originally sent to the
rules committee but found your
main percent to article four
section five b one it is in
appropriation bill
that was mistakenly sent to
rules
we have a second bill and this
is pursuant to an executive
message
this is house bill one two eight
one twenty eight and three
representative and they are
metal.
The.
Send to rules but german
pursuant to article four section
five b two
second of message et.
We therefore order printed and
referred to the house consumer
in public affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee
again house bill one twenty
eight representative on the down
metal originally sent to house
rules committee but found remain
pursuant to article four section
five b two executive message
eighteen ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee events
the house judiciary committee.
Any other announcements
folks we don't plan on uh we're
now planning in afternoon floor
session today celebration time
representative is.
We do have I understand
committees this afternoon so
please
those of you who are members of
those committees go work the
rest of us will hang out at your
percentage of monetary nesses
alan martinez's office for a
game of jim rummy totally
kidding we're all working heart
up here.
Any other announcements.
Right.
Generating from berliel.
This your speaker I move the
house standard race as till
eleven am tomorrow.
All right.
The house will sell a research
until eleven am tomorrow.
Tuesday.
January.
Twenty third.
