I.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Good morning good morning how
are you good how many years
do you go to the
computer to seven thirty
I do the mobile assistant action
bill affirmative consent from
yes yeah can they say yes.
What goes close we have a
quarrel
please rise for today's
invocation courtesy he of
representative
thank you please show me in
prayer heavily father creator of
love truth beauty and goodness
we thank you for this
opportunity to gather today we
thank each legislator and staff
member who's devoting time
father because we care about the
state of new mexico we care
about each and every person
living in new mexico and we pray
that during this legislative
session we can really develop
the policies the legislation and
the budget in that will help
this state and it's people to go
forward into the future thank
you for the blessings of the
sweep thank you for the
blessings of the companionship
that this body can really
demonstrate to this nation that
we can agree to disagree with
civility kindness in
appreciation I offer this prayer
in the names in the faith of
everybody gathered here in
person and online amen.
And representative round we'll
please lead us in the political
religions.
And percent well gone with the
solution the new mexico flag.
Please.
You're lady from berlio.
This year speaker I know if we
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objection it is so
ordered good morning members
have a second day
how many days to go
representative
twenty eight very good
good morning folks we're gonna
do we've got a couple of
memorials that we're going to do
this morning we're going to
uh take up house bill one a
little bit after that
and then and then we'll need to
to a little bit housekeeping and
then break I think for maybe
some organizational committee
meetings and maybe some cakes
meetings.
Uhm then we might be coming back
a little bit later to to do more
housekeeping are all or being
coordination or corner with both
leaders to.
To figure that out a little
later announcements the
generation sounds
representatively.
Thank you mister speaker uh
mister speaker I just want to
give thanks to the sergeant and
arms and his staff for yesterday
I thought I know with protest
and everything we we can have
discussions about whether this
is a proper bin you know or not
but the reality is that staff of
the sergeant arms that great job
of keeping us safe the governor
saved the the folks in the items
safe and you did it an orderly
manner and we appreciate what
you do for us thank you.
Thank you german answer at least
sergeants and how security state
police always always appreciate
their work uhm sometimes it's it
could be for you could feel a
little bit invinced invincible
invisible
because there's not a crisis or
or anything really
happening that is super obvious
but yesterday surely it was.
So thank you for that gentleman
other announcements generated
from burner leo representative
but I go.
Thank you mr chairman
mr speaker
I am in really proud this
morning and I want to welcome to
the chambers the new mexico fill
harmonic
and they are sitting up on the
podium with you um they are
planning to
play a song for this for us this
morning and the song is just
about a minute long
it's a i'm getting sentimental
over you by tommy door and some
of you may remember that some of
us may not
some of us may
or parents but before I have the
employee I want to introduce to
you some of the folks that are
going to be part of this
new mexico fill harmonic the
person who's going to be playing
this morning is erin zinclain
zankland and he has a principle
trombonus and he's sitting out
on the
at the front with his trombone I
would like to introduce marine
blacker whose chairman of the
board for the hill er new mexico
fill harmonic
I would like to introduce
marion tunnel who is the
president and ceo
I would
say
I would like to introduce
roverto
shock
i'm trying not to assassinate
your names here he is the music
director and the conductor
I would like to introduce l
starts who is the vice chair.
I would like to introduce a
dallia let you go ten who is
aboard member and a violinist
and before I have erin
play for you i'm just gonna
mention to you that they are
asking for twenty five
thousand dollars a capital
outlet and tonight there's a
card on your desk inviting you
to a reception at palace prime
from six to eight and they would
love to extend an invitation to
all of you to attend they are
hoping to build the biggest
performing arts center in new
mexico and you know we are in
definite need of a performing
arts center in the nineties
mister speaker we had proposed a
performing arts center and alva
cricket and
it gained some traction we did a
study but it really never
received the funding so I think
it's time for new mexico to have
a performing arts center and
with that I am going to ask
areas inclined to go ahead and
start thank you.
The.
And.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Mt.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And.
The.
The.
The.
Well.
The.
The.
Thank you mister speaker
thank you that was a beautiful
beautiful rendition thank you to
the new mexico feeling harmonic
and thank you for that wonderful
performance we appreciate having
you here we look forward to
supporting your good work
throughout the state
i'd like to take the liberty to
introduce some guest of
representative harlen
I believe you are.
Are you in the gallery or you
hear on the floor you're in the
gallery okay
these are all folks from eastern
new mexico university we've got
mister president ryan trosper
welcome.
The.
We also have the chief office
read eastern emergency
university robin demand.
We have a student that eastern
new mexico university olivia
with rome.
And faith mask another student
at eastern new mexico university
goal grey house they give remain
here.
Front factor percent of harlem
my cousins played baseball at
eastern so I spent a little bit
of time down there with all
those wild kids plain bar
folks
there is our doctor the day
upstairs as you know the number
for those new members who.
Um I need those services nine
eight six four seven nine nine
is a direct line
thing there here as long as
we're here in floor session and
so for to give him a call if you
didn't ask brand or if you need.
Uhm.
Any type of medical support
announcements as go to the
gentleman from.
All those beautiful counties
represent of somewhat.
Thank you mister speaker and and
I just felt a proper since you
just announced eastern new
mexico
people up in the audience to
tell you that you can find a bag
of peanuts.
On your desk and there's a
little iron in in in given
giving out peanuts right mister
speaker generally peanuts up
here but okay
i'll i'll make sure you get a
bag with that
but eastern new mexico we're
we're very powered of eastern
new mexico university
we have three branches one time
per tallest as we all know.
And one in rosalyn one rio
dolso.
Helping it to educate our kids
and and we're very proud of
eastern new mexico university of
what they do and we look for
your support here in this house
thank you mister speaker thank
you gentlemen.
Gentleman from what they don't
representative
thank you mister speaker i'd
also eminent alumni of eastern
new mexico university go
greyhounds go agree so
greyhounds mister speaker so I
on your desk you will also see
in my county o terror county
days is happening tomorrow we're
having a reception at the air
vay wine bar over on san
francisco street that starts at
six pm mr speaker and in the day
following on the nineteenth we
have a legislative breakfast
sale derado hotel this year room
and that starts at seven am so
grab your coffee and run over to
meet us here though terrible
county a terrible county has a
lot of good things to offer in
our state we have hall in an air
force base we have our weight
sands mister range we also have
white sense national park as
well we have the oldest zew in
the southwest the alamita park
is and we have the new mexico
museum of space history we are a
great county and we're so
excited to welcome you guys to
come visit us by having our
reception and our breakfast
mister speaker don't you also
have the job station in a total
county mister speaker we should
do it and against the status you
have farm with the largest
postage you in the world
actually so come on down and
visit us thank you mister
speaker is said brought to you
by reps that are blocking
martinez.
Other announcements go to the
gentleman
from you'll excuse me I don't
have my list so i'm getting a
referred to those amazing
beautiful counties that you
represent sir I don't remember
if it's one more than the other
gentleman in the other corner or
if it's one less but regardless
equally important gentlemen.
Thank you mister speaker mister
speaker I moved in house
memorial six be removed from the
speakers table and be made the
next order of business in
objection it is so ordered
that the record inflict that
election is sure for placing
house memorial.
One.
I'm final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Mister speaker we have some vote
here today with us from new
mexico highlands university new
mexico highlands was named one
of the most diverse regional
universities in the west a top
one hundred best regional
university in the west and in
the top fifty public university
in the west by US news world
report in two thousand and
twenty three it is also right
number fifty five among the top
one hundred years and among the
universities in the US news and
world reports two thousand and
twenty three performers on
social mobility list.
The general manager debate there
is a bit of a from sound
megalitorizer percent of
customer mister speaker on the
general please speak your idea
of.
Thank you mister speaker i'd
like to introduce the guess we
have on the restrictive which
speaker today for miscohilience
day a doctor rock sandram's all
this provost and vice president
of academic affairs please.
This.
Dr kimble vice president of
student affairs.
Dr brand in company chief of
staff.
Dr linda bean of arts and
science.
Doctor mary
okay right dean of the social
denounced school of education.
Jim dissolar code director of
athletics.
It's an honor to have them here
mister speaker on behalf of the
representative myself in
representative chatfield who
represents san gulf
representative
sanchez is not additional but
thank you guys for having this
memorial we really think you
guys for being out here today
with those at the let's nature
thank you mister speaker and
it's an honor to integrate my
guests thank you thank you
gentlemen.
Gentleman
from.
All those beautiful counties
were subsented thank you mister
speaker I just
want to see how important
highlands is to northern new
mexico and a lot of people from
all over go to go to school
there have a lot of class meets
in all professions teachers
doctors attorneys highlands is a
great school in the just one of
the gents from northern new
mexico so I just wanted to say
that thank you mister speaker.
Thank you gentlemen and the
other anymore debate.
The generated from sent a fair
representative looking.
Thank you mr speaker i'd like to
stand in support full support of
this memorial into in the
recognition that's been given to
highland university it is truly
a jam I can't tell you how many
people I know and family members
included that have benefited
from the education and the
cultural diversification that
uhm highly university supports
in promotes throughout our state
in a crossover united states I
just want to say thank you for
all the work that you've done
and I appreciate this memorial
thank you for bringing it
forward thank you mister chair I
mean speaker they can generally
the generated from earlier
presentative boggle.
Thank you mister speaker I also
want to sub stand and full
support of this memorial I think
if you're a young person in new
mexico we should have options
for higher education but also
skill training so I think that
you know offering our
our young folks the
opportunities and moving into
the future all of these options
should be available highlands
has been exemplory in terms of
providing education for many
students across the state thank
you.
Thank you there is for the
debate to generally from berlio
and torrents representative
lord.
It's alright.
Thank you miss the speaker of
this pressing buttons apparently
over here all good only always
president button okay but I
support this thank you.
Is there further debate
for the debate back to the
gentleman.
Mister speaker I asked unanimous
consent of the house that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
president voted in the
affirmative on house memorial
number six.
There's been a motion to show
all members of the house
president and voting in the
affirmative scene objection it
is so ordered
we are a final passage of house
more one the vote is now open.
The world is now.
I'm sorry six.
The voice are close.
By border of seventy infirmative
zero native house memorial six
has do it past this house
congratulations.
We are on announcements the
general lady from brilliantly or
representative.
Thompson.
The mister speaker there's too
many general women from bernald
county not too many but when you
need to specify so mister
speaker I move that house memory
or seven
be put on its final passage.
Then and made the next daughter
business.
Red I think what we meant to say
is you asked unanimous consent
that house memorial seventy
removed from the speaker civil
and be made the next order of
business in objectivities
ordered.
The direct reflect that election
necessary for replacing house
and moral seven or final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you mister speaker so
today's autism day and you have
wonderful top bags at your desk
and landyards and cookies and
those are from elevate the
spectrum
all of you know that artism has
been my passion for well my son
it will be thirty three so about
thirty three years
and I want to introduce some
folks on the rostrum we have
barbie sanchez and josea I they
are sanchez with just sires
begged goods and they did the
cookie if you guys could stand
up in.
And just I have made the
cookies.
And then he needs no
introduction joe davis um who is
that with elevate the spectrum
and the chair of the development
disabilities council I have to
leave that planning out.
And then jennifer sanchez is
with also with elevate the
spectrum
and is the secretary of the
developmental disabilities
council so welcome all of you
and I I will turn it over to my
coast butters for just a some
brief comments in introduction
so I will go to representative
her meal is their debate.
You think i've never done this
before the general lady from
earlier and sent a while to set
their kids I think you must
speaker I don't uh the general
person for bernalio yield ideal
thank you
thank you so much I am very
proud to be able I I was so
appreciated to our chair to
allow me to sign on to this
memorial I just want to take a
moment to brag about elevate the
spectrum this saturday they'll
be creating heroes bags
therefore our first responders
although I keep one a trunk of
my car if you were talking to an
individual who communicates
differently they'll have
headphones they'll have since
the retoise they have ways to be
a sunglasses for light it's a
wonderful way for our first
responders why they are in an is
emergency situations if they're
dealing with someone who may be
overly sensitive whether
sensitive to the to the lights
in the sounds would be so
helpful and i'm appreciative of
all the advocacy that elevate
the spectrum goes thank you very
much because your ladies are
further debate on house memorial
seven the joint from something a
fair representative looking.
Thank you mr chair I too m prow
to be
a correspondent around this
memorial as a parents with the
child
on the spectrum I just want to
say thank you to all of our
families of our community they
come together to celebrate are
our children in our individuals
on the spectrum and.
An honoring our autism day and I
want to say to the sponsor I
mean sponsor here in all the
work that she is done before she
was even a legislator and all
those others that have been
working in the advocacy and then
come into this world and really
bring for the advocacy out
for through our values
throughout legislation and
policy I want to think you all
today thank you
I have a couple of guests on the
rostroom to mister speaker I
have miss show through threm ago
is the new mexico special ad
ombuds her office proof provides
free advocate state wide for
students requesting receiving
special education services for
ips and other issues thank you
for being here with us today
awesome.
Also on the rostroom we have
alice loom acquired she is
executive director of the new
mexico developmental
disabilities council and is a
disabilities attorney that
overseas the state office of
guardianship office itself
advocacy new mexico's special
add on beds and the state
developments will do stability
to five year plan thank you for
all your service in all your
work
thank you mister speaker again
thank you to all of our families
in our communities
thank you ladies and further
debate on how's memorial seven.
Generated from achilles and a
honda representative johnson
thank you mr speaker there's
they are generally the yield
mister speaker I yield to my
crown point sister thank you I
just want to think you
representative thompson and
sister for taking the lead on
this house memorial artism day I
think that our children and
community members who need.
Support in this area
some of them are forgotten in
some of our communities and we
still need to work on more
therapies speech therapy
occupational therapy physical
therapy and all the therapies
that are needed so I just want
to thank you for your lead and
working on this throughout your
years thank you mister speaker.
Thank you general ladies and for
the debate on the memorial.
Signed over the beach and
related to close mister speaker
could the cork read the memorial
certainly the click to read.
Yeah.
House memorial seven introduced
by representatives thomson
johnson kates harmeo and luhan.
A memorial declaring january
seventeenth two thousand and
twenty four artism day in the
house of representatives.
Whereas artism spectrum disorder
is a neurological disorder that
affects the development of
communication and social
interaction skills and whereas
in two thousand twenty with the
federal centers for disease
control and provision reported
that one in every thirty six
children is diagnosed as having
an autism spectrum disorder.
And whereas artism affects
people of all races and
religions and all educational
and economic levels and whereas
artism is a lifelong condition
that presents challenges to
education employment housing and
community development and
whereas parents professionals
self advocates and volunteers
devote countless hours to
improving the quality of life
for those effected by artism and
whereas early intervention
evidence based practices and
proven support systems greatly
improve the outcomes and reduce
the lifelong costs of
individuals with artism and
their families and whereas new
mexico celebrates and recognizes
the valuable contributions to
its communities businesses
technologies and cultures made
by people with artism and
whereas the mini professionals
families advocates and
volunteers working to promote a
greater understanding of autism
and to improve the quality of
life for those effected by
autism are to be commended now
therefore be it resolved by the
house would representatives of
the state of new mexico that
january seventeenth two thousand
twenty four be declared autism
day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
elevate the spectrum
incorporated a new mexico based
grassroots non profit
organization.
Dedicated to empowering
individuals on the artism
spectrum and their families
through inclusion advocacy and
friendship house memorial seven
introduced by representatives
thompson johnson kates harmeo
and luhan.
Thank you mr speaker I ask in
animals consent of the house
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present in the affirmative
on house memorial seven speed
emotion to show all the members
of the house president boarding
in the affirmative scene
objection it is so ordered we
are final passage of house
memorial seven the vote is now
open.
The voice are closed by word of
seventy in the affirmatives here
in the negative house moral
seven has duly passed this house
congratulations thank you mister
speaker.
And the other announcements.
Alright it's good generally from
berlie.
The.
Propositive chasing.
Mister speaker removed we got
that business.
Third meeting of legislation
it's an objection it is ordered.
Going to give it a few seconds
to get our experitness on the
floor he's running down from the
fourth floor as we speak.
He's a faster runner than the
cowboy's quarterback.
Twenty said he's a cowboy's
friend.
Yeah.
Is your expert on his way
generally.
I didn't check with a coach.
The coaches read outside the
door.
I am told he is.
So jeopardy music somebody could
play in the background.
And they're here.
Welcome.
Members in conversation with
members of the leadership of the
both carcasses I assume item has
consent that we waived the
twenty four hour rule under
eleven dash rule eleven dash
twenty dash one see an objection
it is so ordered.
Generally from bernalie.
The.
Mr speaker house bill one
generated would you like me to
get to that point.
That it's a new session we're
all relearning this stuff okay.
That the record reflect that
i'll actually serve replacing
house bill one on final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentilated to
explain the bill egg minister
speaker as members now house
bill one is called the feedbill
because this is the bill that
funds the legislative session
let me though briefly
remind the members of the
various sections of the bill
section one contains the session
expenses section two.
Begins on page for and this is
the funding for bills and other
printed materials section three
funds the legislative council
service section for is the
contains the expenses for the
legislature
section five dollars thirty
finance committee
section six the legislative
education study committee
section seven the house chief
clerk section aid the senate
chief clerk section nine is the
official master database of law
self publication this is the new
mexico statutes annotated
around.
Section ten is the category
transfer authority section
eleven requires performance
measures and section twelve is
has the emergency class the
members of the house
printing and supplies committee
say the
figures first yeah are none
yesterday morning and then we
presented the bill to the house
appropriations and finance
committee in the afternoon and
so they're going to have a
little bit more familiarity but
I will stand for questions
mister speaker.
There is a bit the gentle lady
from some that favour
presentative zippensky.
Thank you mr speaker will the
lady from bernalio yield I yield
mister speaker.
Think you mr speaker
one of the
questions that I had about this
bill relates to the finding of
recession staff.
One of the challenges that i've
seen over the years has been
sort of the back and forth
between chambers
depending on the pay you may
lose a long term long time
veteran staff member
to the other chamber because at
times they have been offering
higher pay
and it just depends you know
it's kind of switched back and
forth over the years
however it I think it takes into
account some of the absent downs
in and it feels like right now
it's imperative to make sure
that there's similar pay
structure between chambers and I
understand that there's an
effort included in this year's
house bill one to address some
of that could you elaborate on
that a little bit mister speaker
and lady from the center
what I I actually have been
complaining about this ever
since I first became a committee
chair
which I I did that for sixteen
years but what we are going to
try to do in this interim is
figure out exactly what the
methodology is in each chamber
for finding various levels of
staff whether it's the clerks
office or the
committee analysts the majority
of minority analysts and and try
to see if there is a subway that
we can achieve party it's not
that real people don't work as
hard or that uhm the the senate
with fewer members need more
staff but there has definitely
been a disparity that uhm isn't
really welcome to us.
Mr speaker and the lady from
bernaldo would you say sometimes
it's difficult to get part time
staff to work for a month or two
months
and that the pay for that
dedicated staff that that all of
us depend on
is a critical part of that
recruitment effort.
Mr speaker and later from sanity
absolutely
the.
I know
and in discussions are with our
staff at the majority of us in
the minority office there has
been a lot of concern that
people wave really relied on and
we trust and whose advice we
follow
can't afford
to pass up a significant pay
differential and even though
they might like working for us
better they they leave us for a
financial reasons.
Thank you lady from really and
thank you mister speaker I
I think it's important to know
having worked with the staff for
many years that although many
staff make great sacrifices to
be here during the legislative
session
and while we depend very much on
each and every one of our
incredible house staff they also
have an entire network of people
that are depending on them and
their personal lives children
elders family members that they
have to also look out for so
they're balancing the personal
sacrifices that they're making
to serve during the session with
some of their personal
responsibilities and I think
it's from aa I really want to
commend you a lady from bernalio
in addressing that in house
build one this year so that
hopefully we can set a
trajectory for the staff that
will keep us competitive with
the other agencies and other uh
the other chamber that may be
offering them work as well the
other thing I wanted to mention
is the four side in increasing
some of the capability of our
incredible legislative finance
committee team to analyze issues
related to health and human
services
and as
as we have our witnessed the
fields of health and human
services is witnessing it is
undergoing some organizational
changes right now
that mean that the oversight of
the legislative finance
committee as well as its staff
is even more critically
important important
lady from bernalio could you
share light perhaps on some of
the additional.
Staffing for the health care in
human services area that that
are part of this legislation.
Mr speaker in lady from santa fe
I might have to consult the vice
chair of legislative health and
human services interim committee
in the chair of the
standing health in human
services committee in the house
but when you look at the dollar
figure that comes from our state
budget that goes to this area of
health and human services it may
not be equivalent to public
education but when you look at
the federal dollars that come in
that are part of the equation
there's a huge better or match
for so many of those dollars and
it's staggering the amount of
money federal and state that we
are.
Responsible to appropriate and
so we have.
I know i'm not a voting member
of that interim committee about
that in her committee has been
seeking for many years to have
permanent stuff and the LFC has
found that they literally uhm
their new health care authority
recommended budget would total
over twelve billion more than
two billion then the entire
general thank revenue for all
agencies so one analyst in the
current lsc state is responsible
for the health care authority
budget and oversight along with
the handful of agencies so that
the house build one non spending
for additional analysts to
support the legislature
including providing specific
ongoing policy in fiscal
analysts for LHS in coordination
with legislative council service
so are three of our branches of
our support branches our
departments and the legislative
finance committee the
legislative health and human
services internal community and
legislative council will be
working into try to bring this
together and money just check
with my colleague here to see if
i've got it covered.
Um chair mister speaker lady
from satisfaction said that I I
did all right giving the broad
overview.
Thank you mr speaker and lady
from bernalio
you know there is a lot of
exciting innovation that has
been promised and the new health
care authority and I think that
promise will only be realized in
the implementation and it is so
critical to have our experts on
the legislative finance
committee and there's staff have
adequate resources to really
grow go through
the implementation in details of
the health care authority the
budgeting and appropriations to
that agency to understand how
the newer agency is being
formulated and the new divisions
that are being formed under that
authority and I think it it
seems like an appropriate time
to increase at the support for
what is in a
sizeable appropriation and also
a sizeable shift in programmatic
operations within our health
care agencies and and health
related agencies
think you think you mister
speaker and lady from burning
the others are just a couple of
the issues that are and wanted
to highlight thank you.
There is full debate the gentle
lady from catherine sierra so
last year representative
thank you mister speaker rather
general lady from bernaly or
yield list your speaker I yield
thank you kind lady I I
appreciate the information that
was just debated on the floor
that that came out and it's a
lot more clear so I do
appreciate that so much so thank
you for that I do have a
question on and it was explained
and committee yesterday
phone lady but I would like it
explained on the house floor
just for everyone else's
information about the fifteen
thousand dollars for the witness
and where that is and
specifically what it's for.
Mister speaker and lady from
catering
we have had right now there's no
ability for any members to
request the chairs of their
standing committees to have an
expert witness come in and
present to a standing committee
we've had some requests from
chairs to do this and during the
interim the chairs of the
interim committees name make
that request of the legislative
council service so the fifteen
thousand dollars this is the
first time appropriation it
would make this money available
to be divided among the house
and senate and if a committee
chair
through or a member approach is
a committee chair and says
mainly have a presentation on
let's say the structured
literacy that the governor was
speaking about yesterday then
the member would be with the
chair of the house education
committee and uhm
that would that request we'll be
put through the speaker's office
to the legislative council
service and we could then
conceivably bring someone in to
present to the committee and
it's really the first time we're
trying it but we have had some
request that it had to be
denied because we didn't have
that ability before
thank you mr speaker and thank
you kind lady that that makes
sense I just was curious who was
in control of that money and who
made those decisions so thank
you for that information I I
want to draw your attention now
on page eight section ten
line twenty four it starts
online twenty four where it says
the amounts set out in section
three through eight of this act
are provided for informational
purposes only and maybe
transferred among categories can
you just touch on what that
actually means.
Are because all of those three
through eight have dollars
dollar amounts in them.
Mr speaker in lady from
catching.
I first of all after we had a
rehearing yesterday one of my
staff reminded me this is fairly
boilerplate language for
transfers a burning category
categories it allows the
transfer of funds within an
agency only as to categories
salaries contracts and other no
funds can be transferred from
one agency to another that
language has not been changed in
many years the only difference
found was that it used to say
freely transferred and now the
advert has been removed and it
just says transferred I would I
would point out and I I think I
wish I had pointed it out
yesterday when we were
discussing this in the house
appropriations committee is that
the executive branch has
a good deal of buyer authority
budget adjustment request the
legit the judicial brand has bar
authority and this preserves are
status as a couple branch of
government and
that I think that really sums it
up
thank you mr speaker and think
you kind lady I just
want to remind that we have a a
budget for a reason and budget
at those numbers in that
category we hold all entities
accountable for their budgeting
and
it gets a little massive when we
start transferring them but I I
do hear you and I understand and
I think you for you your answers
think you mister speaker.
There is further debate.
The german from lee
representative petty group.
The.
Thank you mr speaker will the
general lady from bernaly or
yield mister speaker I also.
Mr speaker general lady I
appreciate the conversation that
we had yesterday
very unlightening
there are things about mister
speaker there are things about
the feed bill that are
concerning to me
we uh
through legislative finance
through the summer we did
everything we could try and say
between five percent find a six
percent increase with respect to
what we do
mister speaker and general lady
I understand the discussion that
we had with yourself and mister
bersey again about the increases
what we needed to do to separate
to to bring some disparity
together between the house and
the senate staff we all want our
staff paid
we all want to pay them as much
as we can with respect to what
we have available within our
budget and I I do
want to continue that they can
find that I have mister speaker
and general lady
is a total of a
forty point four percent
increase from the twenty twenty
two to the twenty twenty four
thirty day session and I would
like you to have the opportunity
just highlight a couple of
things I want what what you
think are the differences I
think the increases is too much
but the other side is as I
understand some of the
conversation we had yesterday
and maybe not everybody got to
hear that so feel free mister
speaker general lady to
add live on any specific point
you would like.
Mr speaker and john women I have
some further information from
the lfc since yesterday and
first I want to say that the
lfcs authorized fta and filled f
two have remain consistent over
the past six years but from
fiscal year nineteen to fiscal
you know twenty four the
authorised fte at the lfc has on
the ground by three after at the
same time the state budget has
grown by fifty one percent in
general fund revenue and
appropriations for capital
outlay and i'm recurring a
special appropriations have also
grown so significantly
the legislature has appropriated
six point eight billion and
special man recurring
appropriations since if I twenty
one through fy twenty four
the same fiscal analysts are
responsible for oversight of
that ukraine budget which has
increased to almost ten billion
fifty one percent a responsible
for the oversight of the
especial appropriations there's
also over five point two billion
in the pipeline for capital
outlay spending across about
five thousand projects so that
is I hope I full picture of why
we need the additional staff.
The.
Mr speaker in general lady I do
appreciate that we didn't get to
have some of those steps in and
you bring in the additional
information today is very much
appreciated once again yes we
have grown government that far
it's unrealistic how much we've
actually grown government with
compared to the quality of life
are our residents in the state
and the mexico receive that
should not impact the people
that work and support the
session and the legislature
process throughout the year I do
appreciate that update
mrperiod speaker and general
lady one of the other uh
people that ask questions to
talk about us holding all all
departments accountable I would
say very clearly that is we go
through volumes on through three
of our of the legislative
finance report we're not doing a
good job of holding our
departments accountable what I
will say is within this bill our
department forced their tell off
and I appreciate it thank you
there's for the debate the
chance of it for motel
representative block.
Thank you mister speaker with
the general lady from bernalio
please yield this to speaker I
yield thank you mister speaker
and thank you general lady for
your hard work on this feedbill
I did have a few questions I
just wanted to start off with
contract services for capital
building
commission I believe that is and
I see that in the last three
years we've been spending
it looks like two fifty was
spent in twenty twenty two
one fifty and twenty three and
then this year's to fifty i'm
just wondering mister speaker
why is it that that has just
begun being spent in fiscal year
twenty two onward do we know
mister speaker.
Mr speaker and gentlemen from
autaro
sometimes those appropriations
have been in hospital to
but because
all three branches of government
and represented here and where
in control of how it spent we
began to put it into house
spell.
And we excuse me and and also
mister speaker and gentleman
we staff the committee the l and
LCS staffs the committee that
makes all the decisions so it
makes sense to have it here as
an economy efficiency
thank you mister speaker and
general lady from bernalio I
appreciate that and that is that
clears it up for me I I
appreciate it next mister
speaker regarding lfc and lesc
did the appropriations committee
make any tweaks to the budget
asks of either over those kept
entirely intact for both lesc
and LFC mister speaker general
leading.
Mr speaker in gentleman was i'm
not entirely clear of the
question but hefc made no
changes in the request yesterday
and is your question about
whether lfc made changes
thank you mister speaker
internal lady my no my question
was about appropriations when
you all met yesterday if you
changed any of the year asks for
both lfc and less during
yesterday's deliberations mister
speaker generally this year
speaker gentleman now.
Perfect thank you mister speaker
thank you general lady and then
regarding the LFC I know we
spoke about it a little bit
about the increase I believe it
was for increased personnel
which was the cost increased to
twenty nine percent from last
year's feedbill mister speaker
general lady i'm wondering do we
know how many specifically how
many new individuals will be
joining the LFC with that
increased appropriation mister
speaker general lady.
And mister speaker and general
it's three additional staff.
Okay thank you mister speaker
thank you general leading.
So i'm guessing these staff will
be high level because it's quite
a bit of a bothered jump mister
speaker if we're hiring three
new folks
with the personnel services or
i'm just looking at personnel
it's four point eight seven in
twenty twenty three and I
believe mister speaker now it's
six point two nine.
How i'm just wondering who is
who is being added to this with
that huge jump it looks like
about a million and a half
dollars mister speaker general
lady or these higher level folks
or we just asking for contract
uh economists things like that
mystery speaker generally.
Uh mister speaker and gentlemen
first of all I just want to say
these are contemplated to be
full employed in the full time
employees contract staff are
different because then
you have all of the
live and and benefits and and
retirement and so forth that
goes along with it but i'm going
to uh turn to mister bersey I
got for a little bit and
additional information.
The.
And mr speaker and gentleman
they request for fiscal year
twenty five that's the six point
two nine four
that does not just include the
three new staff it is for the
staff increases for all of our
legislative agencies.
That particular line item okay
perfect mister speaker general
thank you for that clarification
I will I will move on here
mister speaker general lady I
believe the governor signed an
executive order earlier this
year or maybe it was last year
about the paid family leave for
state employees I believe it was
mr speaker general lady do we
know of that anyway affected
this for folks who work at the
department's included or the
budgets and offices in this fed
bill such as the house of
representatives less clfc.
Yadia mister speaker.
Mr speaker in gentleman that's a
good question because I really
just learned something from the
answer from uh mister presiaga
when the governor is should her
executive order eventually the
legislative council service
does it legislate council
schools me and I serve on it
body so uhm
adopted a policy that would
apply to legislative employees
but there's no specific funding
request because it is believed
that we can absorb that cost.
Okay thank you mister speaker
and general lady that that's
good to know and
you know I guess whenever that
does happen at least there's
some funds in there to absorb it
so that that is helpful so
mister speaker general lady just
another quick question regarding
the general budget just this
general HB one last year we made
one off appropriations for
things such as technology
improvements things in that will
house mister speaker general
lady do we have any one off
investment opportunities that we
included in this package today
mister speaker general lady.
Mister speaker and gentleman not
this year.
Okay thank you mister speaker
and thank you general lady that
that clears it up for me and I I
guess I wrap out rapid up mister
speaker thank you so much
precedent thank you gentlemen
there's for the beat getting
from donate representative small
thank you very much mister
speaker mister speaker with the
general lady from bernalio this
was speaker I yield thank you
mister speaker thank you general
lady thank you for talking as
through this mister speaker
general lady I want to go
briefly to
the LFC portion mister speaker
general lady what it's surprised
you to know that our health care
appropriations have grown almost
fifty nine percent since fy
nineteen.
Mr speaker down and it would not
surprise me mister speaker
german that uh neither me
although it it is a significant
amount mister speaker general
lady as u n I and all the
members know those the growth in
that area has been for things
like provider reimbursement
rates to end the d d weight list
and other many other priority
areas just within the health
care area would you agree mister
speaker general lady this was
bigger general yes and there is
still a greater need mister
speaker general eighty you
mention that and I don't want to
look too much forward but I know
mister speaker general lady will
be talking about things this
session that include hundreds of
millions if not more of new
state dollars that would likely
leverage over a billion new
federal dollars is that your
sense mister speaker general
lady mister speaker gentleman
absolutely that's why we really
don't want to short change
ourselves if we don't have the
capacity to happen to the
federal dollars we lose that
opportunity mister speaker
general lady I couldn't agree
more and mister speaker general
lady would you agree that the
the both the analysts and the
evaluator positions as well as
the economist positions at
proposed at the LFC that those
sort of touch all those areas of
uh increases mister speaker
general lady that we've had
since twenty nineteen
and also that they provide a
sort of a core accountability
that is mister speaker general
lady for instance the rate
increases have those rate
increases gotten all the way to
health care practitioners all
over new mexico is that maybe a
function of the LFC mister
speaker and and when absolutely
and that's where right now with
our status as being rather part
time legislators are if we don't
have that expertise we really
are not tracking the proper.
Funding of the services and
their could be fried if we did
not have the proper tracking and
so it's really good government
to watch the dollars mister
speaker general lady I love how
you said that an in fact mister
speaker generally it makes me
think of how in the l s c there
is a medicaid fraud report
generated every single year
mister speaker general lady the
uhm I would just point out that
the LFC budget overall has
tracked at least twenty percent
behind the numbers we just
talked about when it comes to
the priority health care areas
so mister speaker general eighty
sounds like we agree and we
acknowledge that we sort of
haven't kept up with those
accountability and evaluation
responsibilities that we have as
a legislature.
This was baker gentleman that's
correct thank you mister speaker
thank you generally and we're
working to fix that I want to
think you also want to think
that general lady from bernalio
uh the chair of our and her the
members of the committee both in
the summer and standing for
their work highlighting this
area during the LFC process
mister speaker general lady
moving just briefly on the uh
evaluators can also look into
areas like capital outlay would
you agree with that minister
speaker generally this would
speak a john and yes and we're
really good help there because
we are getting to the shovel
ready stage nearly as fast as
the sponsors of all of the
measures contemplated and as
spast as the communities need it
mister speaker general lady I
couldn't agree more in think we
need to point out that there are
really over five billion dollars
in the pipeline across priority
areas all across state
government including our school
system where the evaluation and
analyst position will help us
move that money more quickly
mister speaker generally coming
back I know we've talked about
this
this also brings us more coequal
the we keep the authority in the
speaker general lady what it's
surprised you to know that the
transfer authority has been
included in the last several
feet.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
it surprised me yes mister
speaker generally.
No miss speaker generally that's
good because it it's been there
it just it keeps us on an equal
footing with the other branches
of government and so I agree
mister speaker general lady
frankly just sort of best
practice as we approach budgets
to have that coequer footing and
miss speaker general lady I
would just conclude by thinking
you and all who have worked on
this for beginning to really
address the disparities between
this chamber and and the other
chamber mister speaker general
lady that the disparities
shouldn't exist in the fact that
you're helping all staff for our
house get paid more fairly while
also looking at the long term uh
ensuring that that is not just a
short term fix but a mid and
long term commitment is also
very commendable thank you
mister speaker thank you
generating.
There's a debate to generally
from any lead representative
brown.
Thank you mister speaker will
the general lady from bernalio
please yield mister speaker I
yield
thank you generally
mrperiod speaker internal lady I
am privileged to serve on the
house appropriations in finance
committee we heard this feedback
yesterday afternoon and um
there's some things that we
discussed in committee that
other members may not be aware
of and so mister speaker
generally I just like to a few
questions just perhaps to
clarify a few things so mr
speaker general lady
on our
basically a spreadsheet were
given
and this is the main one that we
were given it's a four columns
there's a twenty twenty two
actual next door to that is
twenty twenty two appropriate
funds
twenty twenty three appropriate
and then the final column is
twenty twenty four request
so general lady would you just
point out to the members we we
see some fluctuation from year
to year for example with the
session expenses for the house
it went from one point eight
million or call at one point
nine all round up in a in twenty
twenty two it uh went to an
increase of two point almost two
point five million and then next
it went to four point two but
for the twenty twenty four
request it is
now out two point seven million
dollars so from the what was
appropriate and twenty twenty
three mister speaker to work is
being requested for the twenty
four session there is a decline
of more than a million dollars
so could you explain please
matter mister speaker why we see
that kind of fluctuation and I
believe it has something to do
with thirty day sessions and
sixty days sessions so we have
their thirty day sessions or
apples to apples the sixty day
or
oranges to oranges so if you
were just explain which of these
columns involves work length of
session.
Mister chair general lady.
The.
Mister speaker and waiting for
the.
At the very top of the page if
you're looking at the four
column page that
appeared with the analysis of
house spell one above the black
bar is the session only and then
everything works as interim only
is below so it only interim only
before.
Columns across.
Indicate
internal expenses the interim is
actually longer on a thirty day
session so the interim being
more than on AAA sixty days
session and
but I was overlooked confused by
one of the figures you reduce it
was was out of the house I
bought the session only two
point seven
seven.
This out which you were asking
about that particular number
mr speaker generally I I really
think the point I was trying to
make is that sometimes we see an
up swing in cost depending on
which column and sometimes we
see a a decrease and I just want
the members to remember that are
thirty days sessions are usually
less expensive I would hope that
our sixty day sessions and so
sometimes we react to a number
but when we put it in
perspective we realize it's it's
normal mister speaker general
lady mr speaker at least for
many good point.
Don't miss your speaker
generally I would like to ask
you about the
and so yes on top of the top of
the black bar on our spreadsheet
and that is session expenses
only and below the bar we see
interim expenses only I would
like to take a look mister
speaker general lady at the
second item under the interim
lines
it's legislative interim expense
and again this is interim
expense so mister speaker
generally
in the last two columns we had a
twenty twenty four fiscal year
appropriate and then we have the
current request there is a
reduction of a million dollars
so for twenty twenty three
twenty four four million
now the request is for three
million and there is a very good
explanation in the committee
from out of chair as to why a
decline or decrease of a million
dollars and for the sake of the
members would you please cover
that for for all of us mister
speaker general eighty mister
speaker lady from any what are
we mister bersey I guess really
the one who explained it but
last year we had four million in
that particular
appropriation because we were
facing several lawsuits and we
had to hire council to defend
the legislative position and
there was a redistricting law
suit which now has has concluded
we still have another law suit
an environmental issues that's
ongoing.
And there are two other pending
lawsuits one on epra and one
which is escaping our
recollection at this moment but
we could safely retest that
figure for our request this
year.
Thank you general lady mr
speaker I think that's important
information and so I appreciate
mister bersey august detailing
of that yesterday
mr speaker general lady um
anybody who's visited the round
house who's been here before a
couple years ago to this year
will realize we've had a lot of
technology upgrades I in our
committee rooms we have a large
monitors now so we can show
documents to the to the audience
into the members
we have some new microphones
which I think for very much
needed so we appreciate that so
those technology upgrades um
mister speaker general lady are
we passed the point at which we
need to spend more money on
upgrades or
where we need to be mister
speaker general lady.
Mr
unfortunately never
it information technologies and
affording the replacement cycle
that's laptops and in whatever
in yesterday I was kind of you
know mentally making a fun of
the fact that we have
legislative switchboard I mean
that evokes slilly timeline you
know plugging in the switchboard
and accidental job at the grand
canon when I was a kid plugging
in a real switchboard like that
but at we have a long way to go
really to get into the twenty
first century
in this building technology
wise.
So mister speaker and generally
for the request for a twenty
twenty four
even going forward how much
money is being dedicated to
technology upgrades and you
don't have to specify exactly
what is being purchased but give
us a sense please of how much of
the minorities there is for
technology.
Mr speaker.
Mister speaker in lady from
adding its probably attendant
twenty percent for increasing
the technology but the rest is
to maintain what we have and for
the licensing agreements which
are expensive for everything
networks.
Thank you for that answer
general mister speaker just a
couple more questions if you
abide by uh beyond this but we
have a line item it's for
interim only expense that we did
not discuss in committee
yesterday and I think because of
enlightening for us to just
touch on it but it's the last
item on the list for intern only
in its extensible markup
language database.
And the request has been
consistently for four hundred
thousand dollars
general lady mister speaker
could you please explain what
that expenses all about mr
speaker.
Mister speaker and lady from
many that is actually the what
the work that the compilation
commission does to put our
statutes online in searchable
and free of charge to the
general public and as noted with
a little astros at the balance
of the page that's appropriate
and we from legislative cash
balances.
Mr speaker generally thank you I
I think that's a very important
feature that we need to offer
the public enter members as well
so I appreciate it's staying at
four hundred thousand that's
nice to see but it is a very
important component of our of
the legislature
mr speaker general lady i'll
just close by saying I really
appreciate all of the work that
went into this feedbill uhm it's
really the first billion we
consider when we come to session
and uhm I do have just one
concern that some of the the
overall increase in spending is
above what I think is prudent
usually prudent is about five
percent maybe little more but
this is a a bigger increase than
that and I believe it's
been extended already how much
of an increase there says some
will concerned about that mister
speaker we tend to have a
at least I do have a loss of you
that we want to keep our
spending um
a bit on the conservative side
use our money very wisely be
good stewards of what we have
and we're trying to do that at
least I hope in all of our
spending across state government
but we're seeing some very large
increases double digits and so
forth and in some ways I I have
a problem with it but thank you
again for all the work and
mister speaker I thank you for
the time they could you lady the
gentleman from better than your
representative we got to see
how.
The.
Could I say as a similar speaker
with a young lady from berlin
yield mister speaker
thank you mister speaker and the
lady from bernardio
I might have missed the.
The uh dialogue gone on the item
so excuse me for that if I if we
see if I see that representative
repetitive
but that was the last speaker
generally from being a little
and
there is a lot.
It's a attention versus
the state
is the governor and the
legislature and
the planes are kind of asking
the executive and allegedly to.
To implement uh being
eliminating measures in the oil
and.
Gas industry as called for in
our state constitution and I
wanna to see where in the hand
out.
Is the legislative council
making a loans for the cost.
Regarding that that last year.
And mr speaker in gentleman
because the lawsuit is i'm going
without a resolution at this
point there's only money here in
the budget and it's the second
item down under the black big
block claim for legislative
interim expense that is where
the legal fees would be but
there's no reparation that has
been either a greater pon or
ordered by the court yet.
Okay thank you for that manager
I mean
generating from when they are
the stimulus speaker or as the
maspic.
Thank you next we have the
general men from real rival sand
of all santa fe county
representative however.
Think you managed speaker will
the general lady from burning a
please you are you held.
Thank you and this is just a
comment on our on our budget in
general you know how we
appropriate money for this
legislature in general and one
can say in general ge- in
generally speaking kind lady
that if you look at an
organization's budget it will
tell you the organization's
values that's how you can tell
how an organization sets up its
values structure it sets it up
through its budget I would
contend that we spend actually
very very little on this
legislative buddy we really
don't spend enough to do the
work that we need to do and I I
worry about that this is my six
year as a legislator so i'm i've
we can do what we can't do it's
really hard to do so I just want
to go over some of the figures
if you don't mind kind lady of
kind of the money that we're
talking about
retalking about a budget this
year of ten point two billion
that's the budget that we're
going to pass this year or
that's the money that we have to
spend this year we're talking
about a total allowance of forty
one million four this
legislative body the senate and
the house that's what we were
spending on ourselves to to get
the staff we need to do the work
that we need to do the policy
work that we need to do there
the
the accounting in the
appropriation work we need to do
and and I just I just worry
about this I just worry about
this that's let's look at some
of the numbers we talk about is
ten point.
The.
Two billion dollar budget but
really health and human services
you know what they're going to
spend this year twelve and a
half billion
and more money will come more
money will come
to
three point two billion more
money is going to come in the
the sense eh transmission line
twenty five billion we have the
largest transition line in the
country what i'm asking this
legislature to consider is who
is doing the policy work to
oversee these huge projects
really how are we doing the
policy work that is necessary to
oversee this project and in our
fairness i'm thrilled that you
got another couple staff members
for the h h committee in the LFC
but i'm talking about policy
committees policy committees in
this house so we have committees
like helping him and services
judiciary tax and revenue
transportation energy
environment natural resources
were talking about those
communities that have no year
round staff no year round step
it off which means that we are
tied to policy decisions that
are made by in budget
considerations and when i'm
suggesting is that this body
consider with me doing a studies
so that we have year round staff
people who work for the house
chief clerks officer the senate
choose to collect surface and
instead of going into interim
session and then turning into
build drafters when we have a
regular session that they hear
work year round so that we can
have deep policy discussions I
mean I am really.
Thankful a
man of chair in kind lady that
we have we have the lfc and we
have the house of probations we
have this in a finance we have
those committees that look at
our budget and we as a
legislator president alternative
budget the governor presents
their budget we're one of the
few states that actually do that
so we have a voice from the
legislature and we have a voice
from the governor what we don't
have is a year round voice on
policy that's dedicated to these
standing committees and for
for a chair to come into a
committee that overseas a twelve
and a half billion dollar budget
and not have a staff to work
with
that that works around I I think
it's a detriment to this body
so madame chair and kind lady I
just rise to speak uh I just
rise to speak to the idea that
we really need to consider how
we're going to do policy in this
body in the future system about
me not about not about what's
going on in this budget today
this is for future consideration
I will be uh dropping a bill but
I think it's I think it's
important that we understand
that to do deep policy unity
around staff and you need
interim committees that are line
with the standing committees so
that when you come back to the
legislature you have a body of
work and I understand this
deeply kind lady and madame
chair because I am also a member
of the LESC so we work with a
staff at twelve during the
session on education policies
we've right at bills we have a
understanding of what we're
going to bring to the floor but
we have staff that do this work
continually so I just rise
to see
it
thank you just I just asked my
math expert here my math
teacher.
So so the amount that we spend
on ourselves as a legislature is
four hundredth of one percent of
our budget so if people think
that we're not spending or
spending too much on this
legislative body i'd like to
remind people that you know
you get what you pay for if we
want good policy and we want
people to really examine the the
indept consideration of the the
federal funds as they impact
state budgets as state budgets
impact federal funds I would
just like to recommend that we
consider consider that this year
and madam kind lady I think you
for your time thank you mister
speaker.
There is further debate the
generation gentle lady from
better than you and torrents
representative lord.
Thank you mr speaker will the
lady from bernalyo county please
yield this speaker I have.
Who I got through that first
time so I have some quick
questions on this.
So I know that there's some
money set aside although I get
my paperwork
there's money that set aside
fifteen thousand for expert
witnesses.
And that's going to be divided
between the speaker and the
present protown so it's going to
both sides.
And that's.
Available for the expert
witnesses how is that going to
be equally divided then between
republicans and democrats or how
is that divided
mr speaker lady we actually did
talk about this a little earlier
so now
line item in the budget there
have been some community chairs
who have come and ask if they
could have an expert travel to
speak to a committee during the
session
whereas in the interim right now
committed to vice chairs can ask
for that when they are setting
up their work plan for the
interim and because we had never
tried it before this is to try
it out in the way I explained it
earlier when it was
questioned from when a fair
members is that any member of a
committee can go to the
committee chair and say I wonder
if we could have an expert on
this topic and with that
community chairs request to the
speaker that is how it would be
decided and we're trying it for
the first time so I the example
I gave is that the there was
some discussion yesterday about
structured loaning
structure literacy
instruction and if there were an
expert that some members and it
any member of the committee
could speak with the chair of
house education and if it was
agreed that that would be a
useful for the committee then
they will go the speakers office
and with the speakers approval
much like we are get permission
to attend a committee that in
the entire that we're not
appointed to and will collect
period so it would be just
decided that way and this is
this will be our first pass out.
So it's it's hard to say exactly
how everything will work.
In thinking mr speaker and don't
think that i'm putting pressure
on you and how this is going to
happen but when I want to know
i've done lady mr speaker is
so as a what i'm trying to
forget is it going to be first
come first serve is going to be
the people who come like it's
going to be here's the date you
can start putting in for that
and its first come for sir or
how the decision what will it be
a partisan decision like I mean
I just don't want to make sure
that it's it's treated fairly in
broken down fairly and
everybody's got an equal shake
on both sides of the aisle mr
speaker and lady it's really to
be determined I mean I don't
think there's any intention to
promote only one type of view.
Well thank you mister speaker
and general lady average of a
ten c bill more controversial so
i'm just want to make sure that
you know we still we still get
people that I am just trying to
figure out if for me if I was in
that position i'm trying to how
I would figure that out would I
be first come for serve am I
going to put some sort of
stipulations like I would be
more inclined to wow this person
that that purses cavality
decision making that i'm not
clear on um so since we don't
really know that there means to
be just a little nervous will
there be transparency afterwards
I guess they're somewhere could
go and say hey I want to look at
those records and see whom got
their expert witnesses paid for
and who got declined is that
going to be something that I
could look at later.
Mister speaker and
it should be a public record but
unless we set up some kind of
paramount request system
at this point it's just hard to
say as I said it it's we're
trying this is an experiment.
Okay thank you
mr speaker and late i'm just
that's my biggest concern well I
have a lot of concern to i'm
just turned off everyone else
addressed by the questions I
just want to when you don't have
a policy if you have like you
have an offer so you don't have
an offer of the policy procedure
then that leaves to semis
discretion so I guess we'll just
have to play it by air see how
it turns out but I just want to
make sure
that we have transparency so
that everybody here could look
at the records and see who was
allowed to have an expert paid
and then who and specifically
who is denied as well and how
that decision was made and
mister speaker I think that's
all the question I have thank
you.
Picked a lady there spent a
debate the gentleman from
charlie's eddie and a better
representative townson
thank you mistaker will the
generate yield mister speaker I
know
ten lady.
Have listened to this debate on
the house floor.
A
personnel parity between the
house in the senate more than
once as you will enough.
And I quite frankly appreciate
the efforts to get are per star.
Paid and treated equally as we
aldo
my question is what does this
bill do in your opinion cheap at
that way going forward.
Mister speaker and gentlemen
right now.
It would take a coordination
between house and sell
leadership and and possibly that
house and said it clerks
but it's up to us.
To really pursue it in a m term
as as my discussion with the
lady from santa fe and revealed
earlier in this debate we have
to keep working on it right now
we're not exactly
certain how the other body makes
it decisions and they probably
not certain how we make ours and
quite frankly we have a loud
always we let them do their
thing whether or bills germany
and over there are not for
example we don't tell them
they're bills that are declared
to remain aren't going to be
german over here if they get a
sabelle over here then we look
at it we give it for
consideration but we have worked
to do still so I can't tell you
that there is a heart of that
guarantee here what I think we
have is a shared commitment.
We're going to keep pursuing
this and it it really isn't fair
otherwise and I wish you are
commitment to doing that.
I thank you that speaker john
lady it's.
And it's just.
To me it's kind of a common
decency items count imagine that
a.
Legislative person working for
two reps over here covering
twice as many committees.
Antering twice as many phone
calls schedule and twice as much
work.
The.
Is substandard.
To a person taking care of a
single person so my.
My concern years I appreciate
getting caught up I think that.
Wise in
needed.
But also as legislators that are
responsible for our staff.
I think they would like to know
going forward to this is not
going to slip again.
And would that we're gonna go
for five years and then try to
do it again so that would be my
that way that would be my
comments to this the other thing
much speaker in general lady is
there is
there is there's
identified in this bill.
That are content on other bills
passing as that cr.
This your speaker general that's
not the case here today.
So every dollar that is in this
budget.
Is authorized in in has no
dependent on any other bill
passing.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
That's good
that's not what I understood
earlier
mispeaker general lady.
Um.
Again thank you for your work
it's good stuff um
people deserve to be paid and
paid timely and I would just
encourage the body to make sure
that in the interim we do a
method.
That we said a process that that
keeps it that way going forward
so that we don't lapse we owe it
to our employees that serve a so
well to make sure that we treat
unfairly going forward thank you
speaker thank you gentle lady
thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the general from
coffees could be hard in
question get in union
representative chatfield thank
you mister speaker does the
general lady is this to speak
arrived.
Miss speakers some of the things
that I will talk about right now
I know we've gone over a little
bit but I want to talk about it
just a little bit more something
that's important to me in this
feedback is the very thing we
just spoke about and that's our
staff that's our employees
we come here all summer long we
go across the state we work on
various things with the LFC we
come here in do this session and
quite honestly no one in this
room is an expert on everything
we don't know the numbers on
everything we might know the
numbers in the things on that
particular saying that we do for
a living or or something that we
worked on in committee but we
rely on these.
Ah staff we rely on them too to
listen to the public to tell us
what kind of responses were
getting there we rely on them
for numbers to understand so we
can make wise choices in
committee so I think it is of
the utmost.
Importance that we have the top
knowledge the best people in
their field working for us and
that they're conference say that
fairly for what they do.
So generally in in committee I
talked to you a little bit about
the increase in about pay bands
and I would just give you the
opportunity to talk a little bit
about that here today on the
floor
mr speaker and gentlemen i'm
going to consult mister bersey
again because this is a work in
progress and I need to be
reminded of how long it's been
since we adjusted them.
They pay bands for year round
staff have only adjusted when
the state employees receive a
race
they pay bands they're not
compete downside there for the
secession staff.
The house and senate chief
clerks have been working on the
payments between their staff to
try to bring those up to date.
N and mister speaker gentleman
may do that periodically.
And and mister speaker gentleman
just wanted to the problem with
the eurostaff which an some
chief **** office and senate
chief clear and all of our all
of our branches lfc less uhm
alcs has not kept up with
inflation.
So mister speaker
setting on the lfc that is of
particular importance to me and
I see a pretty good raise there
are.
In that day in that fund so
pretty good increase if I vote
for this bill can I rest assured
that that that those folks are
going to get a race and that
that that money will go to them.
Minister speaker general there
is enough money in here to
provide for
equity
for the staff.
As determined by.
Him and managers leadership and
so forth.
Mr speaker that's what I like to
hear
that's almost figure.
Thank you gentlemen with the
debate the general from some
huan representative dunkin.
Thank you mister speaker will
the general lady yield mister
speaker I held.
I I just have a statement and
i'm coming from a small business
perspective every one of us have
a budget at our homes and we
have a budget in our businesses
and when I go back to my
district and say this is the
increase that was given and I
hope I agree that we need to do
this but the point that was made
by
one of the other representatives
was how are we gonna make sure
that this is kept going forward.
Mr speaker gentleman we only
budget a year at a time in new
mexico uh we don't do multi
budgets but the clear intent
here is to stay
with increases as allowed by the
income that we're anticipating.
Thank you mr speaker generally
and I I guess that's as good as
it's going to be but when when
your home budget increases by a
forty year seventy or whatever
the percentage is on this stuff
or your business does then
there's a problem and in
hopefully we can take care of
that problem now and that's
that's uh the desire that I have
is that we take care of it we
treat our people fair and that
we make sure that we do that
because when you come back two
years and now and say okay it's
another forty percent or
whatever that amount is I I
question how we're doing it in
the methodology and how we can't
keep up with that thank you.
Thank you gentlemen there is for
their debate the other gentleman
from some one with slightly less
hair representative of montoya
thank you mr speaker unlike the
other gentleman from sale on
county agricultural tree line.
Mr speaker does the generally
from earlier yield I have missed
your speaker.
Thank you miss speaker and
generally real quick just to
follow up a briefly on a
question that representative
towns and asked
their I understand there's an
increase to many power to
lfc staff does that not require
another bill.
Uh or is is to to increase that
man powers that completely in
this cause that's that's
permanent that would make it
multi year commitment to that
staff.
Mister speaker gelman it's up to
the director of the lsc to
higher staff and and to submit
his or her budget to the the
legislative finance committee
and we go through the process
there's nothing automatic and
there's nothing denied that
director to be able to advocate
for higher uhm salaries if if
they are wanted and funds are
available.
Thank you for that mr speaker
and generally well III guess the
reason i'm asking that is.
That money is being placed there
to pay for that extra staff in
the feedbill.
Yet.
That generally is when we're
increasing staff is generally
part of house bill too so it it
does appear as if at least that
portion has to be.
Uhm funded or request made of
allergy staff because that's
multi and some multi commitment
tire staff so I don't want to
believe the point but it does
appear as if there is something
else required for that so much
speaker in general.
That is really where I was going
anyway uh is about the increase
to lfc
speaker and generally the I i'm
one of the folks who voted no in
committee on uh the fee bill
actually I I agree that uh the
increase.
Two for parity to make I
obviously our staff on their
side not only
has more work from the
standpoint of
the cover more legislators.
And that uh frankly they work
longer hours
I don't have a days during the
session will be over here
working in the the senate's done
for the day
I mean that happens year over a
year part of it I think is the
number of the number of bills
that are introduced on this side
so there is a lot more work on
this site so I parody I agree
with.
Mr speaker in general lady
the concern I have is the.
Dramatic increase to lfc.
A budget misspeaker and
generated during the interim.
Uh the request that was made by
lfc was for a five percent
increase.
Uh but miss speaker and jelly
what's included in this budget
before us in the first time I
heard it was yesterday.
Was uhm.
It's it's up to twenty five
percent increase and i'm not
sure where that came from that
was not presented to lfc during
the interim the lfc committee so
is there any way to to be able
to tell us beyond what.
Lfc requested the lc uh.
Department.
Requested why did it why did it
jump up of about twenty percent
of speaker and generally.
Mister speaker gentleman before
I answer let me ask you if you
heard the discussion of this at
the very first question of this
debate.
Miss speaker and generating no I
was helping the committee right
over it again the uhm lfc
appropriations have grown at a
slower pace compared to the
legislature and the rest of the
state budget from fy nineteen FY
twenty four the total state
budget has increased by fifty
one percent with categories of
priority growing at a faster
rate the lfc has grown in a much
slower rate than the budget
overall and at a slower rate
compared to areas of growth the
lfc's budget has grown by forty
percent the rate of growth in
just general fund appropriations
is to fill one percent overall
and for the health and human
services portion fifty nine
percent and that excludes the
significant growth in federal
dollars to help in human
services their new healthcare
authority recommended budget
were total over twelve billion
more than two billion
gives me more than two billion
more than the entire general
fund revenue for all agencies
one analyst is responsible for
the health care authority budget
and oversight along with the
handful of agencies house bill
line in conspiring for
additional analysts to support
the legislature including
providing specific i'm going
policy and fiscal analysts for
lhs in coordination with
legislative council service and
they
lfc itself has from this compare
nineteen difficult year twenty
four authorized fta.
The.
It has only ground by three in
all of that time it's the same
time the state budget is grown
by fifty one percent and
appropriations for capital
outlay and non recurring special
appropriations have also grown
significantly the legislature
has appropriate about six point
eight billion in special non
recurring appropriations since
mister twenty one through twenty
four and the same fiscal
analysts responsible for the
oversight and the recurring
budget have increased to almost
ten billion
fifty one percent a responsible
for oversight of the special
appropriations through is also
five point two billion in the
pipeline for capital outlays
spending across about five
thousand projects and what we
want to do is get those projects
to shove already sooner and part
of the problem has been with
oversight so that explains the
difference.
Thank you mister speaker and
generally I understand
that I understand that reasoning
what I don't understand is how.
Those numbers were placed in
this budget in this year round
budget
who placed that in there that
was not presented to lfc none of
what you just stated mister
speaker and generally was
presented in lfc during the
interim so I there was obviously
an adjustment made
my question is not what because
you've answered what I meant i'm
wanting to understand how what
was the process or that was
placed in there outside of the
lfc oversight committee that
meets in the interim list of
speaker general so you didn't
need all that data that I just
gave you
this speaker in general i'm
unable to interrupt you in the
middle of the of your answer to
tell you I understood that
you're speaking and gentleman we
rely on the legislative council
service to give us their budget
way rely on the legislative
education study committee to
give us their budget where we
rely on the lfc to give us their
budget and if there are some
specific person at the lfc who
requested this
the council service doesn't
reveal that there's
confidentiality so I that's all
I can tell you thank you this
speaker and generally I guess
that that is the concern is
because they did present their
budget to us and it was five
percent.
And and then all of us said and
it was a twenty five percent
increase number speaker in
general idea i'm not going to
believe the point that is my
concern and that is why I voted
no.
But mister speaker and general
lady my concern is we're trying
to hold.
Uh during the interim was made
very clear by members of lfc
that we're trying to hold the
administration's growth to under
six percent
now some departments more some a
little less but overall we're
trying to keep them to six
percent it just harms their
credibility of of house
appropriations it will hurt the
credibility of senate finance
misspeaker and generally when
we're when we the very agency is
that as presenting our budgets
about the government the
governor's agencies are coming
so much higher so i'm the
speaker generally I think that
there's going to be so push back
from the administration I think
we lose some credibility i'm not
sure that we're not
beginning a line item veto from
the governor on this item
because we are trying to hold
her departments responsible.
Ah speaker gentleman mister
salary just provided us with
the total recurring round budget
for legislature legislature only
is is growing by five point
eight percent so that's for
everything and
will we'll see.
Thank you around recording.
Thank you miss speaker I
appreciate those answers
appreciate
you taking the time I know you
not the one who prepared this
but appreciate you france
answering the questions.
Okay seeing no further debate
the gentle lady too close
and this your speaker thank you
very much for the debate and i'm
glad for the questions that
we're asked that elaborated on
the points that we discussed in
house appropriations I really
want to think are
um
support
agencies they have
director some way of the
legislative finance committee
guentere one minute from the
alliancy why
expert witness her today busy
again and um of the legislative
council service are achieved
clerically or tears for the
chief quirk's budget I really
want to think my shape of staff
was uh less and our whole picked
up the
touch from me when I had
personal crises recently and the
frame claim and she's thinking
from my work it was really my
chief of staff who did so much
of this work and i'm very very
grateful for that I am
I have appreciated the debate
and everybody's contribution to
it and will I think of the
chairman house appropriations
and the vice chair as well and
without mister speaker I the
house build one with the
emergency clause do now pass
where a federal passage of house
bill one with an emergency class
the vote is now open.
The what's about to close.
The vote is now closed by about
a fifty one and the i'm sorry I
apologize man clerk there's one
person on that go ahead.
Representative from.
Yes represent for it was yes no
close by volume fifty two in the
affirmative thirteen in the
negative house bill one with an
emergency class has deleted past
this house
gentle lady from bernalie
representative chase.
This would be grandmother go to
that order of business
announcements in missile in this
business objection it is so
ordered thank you members for a
good health debate on the
feedback
we're gonna do we we we've got a
think about fifteen messages
executive messages I will read
in the will break for I know the
demm the the democratic cockers
will have a meeting and they
believe how's judiciary will be
meeting for an organizational
meeting
the plan will be to come back
here at four thirty to do some
brief intro uh there'll be no
other business that will conduct
and then will hopefully break
for dinner and be done for the
day.
This will speak around when we
go to that order business
messages and it is ordered clerk
to read.
House executive message number
one.
Speaker martinez the members of
the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature.
Second session submission of
house bill one thirty three.
A bill amending the oil and gas
to allow the oil conservation
division of the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to regulate certain transfers of
oil and gas wells and authorize
the conservation of oil and gas
wells for energy storage and
your their mode development
increase the amount of fees and
financial assurance associated
with operating oil and gas
increased civil penalties allow
fees to be adjusted to account
for inflation require the
capture of ninety eight percent
of natural gas pr- produced
beginning in twenty twenty seven
and provide for certain setbacks
from oil and gas facilities
respectful euros michelle longer
show governor.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
two
speaker martinez and members of
the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexican constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill forty
one a bill authorizing the
environmental improvement for to
adopt rules to establish an
assess fees for a clean
transportation for your standard
respectful yours michelle
hungarian governor
message will be entered.
House executive message number
three speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five b two
within mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number.
Point two two seven two three
five a bill creating the clean
car income tax credit the clean
car charging unit income tax
credit the clean car corporate
income tax credit and the clean
car charging unit corporate
income tax credit respectfully
yours michelle the language of
governor
message will be in.
The.
House executive message number
four speaker martin is the
members of the house pursuant to
article for section five b two
of the new mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill seven a
bill eliminating and upcoming
decrease in a distribution to
the health care affordability
fund respectfully yours michelle
hungership governor message will
be entered.
House executive message number
five speaker martinez the
members of the house pursuing to
article four section five b two
of the new mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven two five eight a bill
expanding the opportunity
enterprise fund for housing
projects responsible yours were
shown language and governor
message will be entered.
House executive message number
six speaker martinez members of
the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven zero nine eight a bill
increasing the penalty for a
felon and a serious felon found
in possession of a firearm and
providing that a person
convicted of possession of a
fire arm or destructive device
is not eligible for earned
victoria's deductions respectful
yours michelle hungers and
governor.
Message will be entered house
the executive message number
seven missus speaker and members
of the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature's second
session submission of house bill
one twenty nine a bill requiring
a waiting period when conducting
the sale of a fire arm and for
fighting exceptions and
penalties respectful years
michelle the language of
government message will be
entered.
House executive message number
eight speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuing to
article force section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven zero eight seven a bill
and acting the gas operated semi
automatic fire arms exclusion
act prohibiting the importation
sale manufacturer transfer
receipt or possession of gas
operated semi automatic firms
prohibiting large capacity
ammunition feeding devices.
Prohibiting devices that
materially increase the rate of
fire of a firearm or
approximate.
Or approximate the action or
rate of fire of a michigan
prohibiting machine guns and
machine and attachments
requiring the attorney general
to list gas operated semi
automatic firearms.
Subject to the provisions of the
gas operated samira semi
automatic firm's exclusion act.
Requiring the certification of
gas operated semi automatic
firms and providing exceptions
and penalties respectful euros
michelle the longer than
governor.
The.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
nine mr speaker and members of
the house pursuing to article
forced section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
twenty seven.
A bill establishing a minimum
aid of twenty one to purchase or
possess an automatic firearm is
semi automatic for arm or a
large capacity ammunition
feeding device and providing
exceptions and penalties
respectfully yours michelle the
language of governor message
will be entered.
Has executive message number ten
mister speaker and members of
the house pursuant to article
five four.
Section five b two the new
mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill twenty
seven.
A bill amending the extreme risk
fire armed protection order act
to allow health care
professionals and law
enforcement officers to request
petitions for extreme risk fire
are protection orders.
Provide an expedited process for
temporary orders to be issued at
all times require immediate real
englishman of firearms upon
service of an order and allow
long forcement agencies to
destroy cell or transfer
unclaimed properties
respectfully yours michelle the
hungry governor message to be
entered.
House executive message number
eleven.
Mr speaker and members of the
house pursuant to article four
section five b two of the new
mexico constitution.
I am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
fourteen a bill enacting the
firearm industry accountability
act providing false advertising
and conscionable deceptive or
unfair trade practices and
actions that impact public
health safety or welfare
requiring reasonable controls
and procedures prescribing civil
penalties and providing private
remedies respectful years
michelle the language and
government will be entered.
House executive message number
twelve speaker martinez the
members of the house pursue into
article four section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session.
Submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
six seven seven zero a bill
creating the new mexico match
fund to assist local tribal and
other eligible entities with
obtaining matching funds for
federal grounds and offset a
higher project costs associated
with federal program
requirements respectful years
michelle hungership governor
message will be entered.
How's the executive message
number thirteen speaker martinez
members of the house pursuit to
article four section five b two
the mexican constitution I am
authorising for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven.
Three three eight a bill raising
judicial salaries and removing
salary formulas for magistrates
we spipple euros michelle the
hunger some governor message
will be entered.
House executive message number
fourteen speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five v two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of legislation
requiring certain employers to
provide paid family medical
leave respectfully euros
michelle grisham governor.
Message will be entered.
House executive message fifteen
speaker martin is the members of
the house pursuant to article
four section five b two the new
mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature's second
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two six four two three a
bill creating the crimes of
hazing and aggravated hazing
cream and online reporting
portal providing an exception to
the inspection of public records
acts for hazing complaints
submitted through the portal and
providing penalties respectful
yours michelle hungership
governor misses will be entered.
Generally from earlier
representative chasing.
Mr speaker will go that order
business announcements in
miscellaneous business objection
it is ordered remember so we're
going to break for lunch and
meetings and
carcass meetings in committee
meetings will plan to go in back
at four thirty for a little bit
to do to some housekeeping some
bill intro uhm and then will
we'll try to dispose of those uh
quickly and and break for dinner
and get some rest.
Any other announcements.
General meant from donate
representative small thank you
mister speaker you have
appropriations in finance
committee will meet fifteen
minutes following the democratic
caucus in room three zero four
you mean seven.
Three zero seven this is now I
think mister speaker and a three
zero seven.
Gentlemen from charities area
representative
mister speaker point of personal
previous place still point sir
yes just wanting to divide
everybody in the body today
there's a rally for the.
For the life of the unborn
east entrance of the capital at
two o'clock everyone that wants
to come thank you thank you
member stick note gentlemen from
donator representative latter
thank you mister speaker quick
announcement how democratic
caucus will be meeting in room
three or some fifteen minutes
after the floor session thank
you mister speaker member stick
not gentle lady from earlier
percent of thompson thank you
mister speaker i'm doing my
ecology announcement today there
are still people here who don't
know your bottom right hand
drawer is a trash can and if you
pull it out further it's a place
to recycle your paper and you
know how much paper goes through
here so please recycle member
states not generally from south
of a representative looking.
Thank you mister speaker I just
want to draw attention to our
desk that we have a multiple
wonderful goodies on our jets on
our desk but I got to sponsor
one of the goody based regard
from new mexico true or tourism
department and just like to just
remind everybody that he makes
your tour tourism department is
a state wide agency task for
providing mexico for leisure
travel and driving visitation to
our state and many many other
things and contributing to our
economy and I just want to say
that they're doing just an
incredible job and i'm sure as
the travel that we we take as
legislators in doing things
across cross the states.
If you take no incertain of the
hubs and as we're flying from a
place to place how well the job
they're doing in promoting our
state and our tourism and
wonderful new mexico true
coordination or crossor us to
just bring more people to are
say to recognize how our culture
is is something that people need
to come in visiting and get to
know it's better with so I would
like to think our department of
tourism for all their goody bag
and for all that they do for our
state thank you mister speaker
generally generally from
rosalimos santa fe and sunday
wild representative generally
thank you mister speaker just
want folks to know that how
studio issuer will be meeting
fifteen minutes after the
democratic caucus in room three
oh nine and I know our room
number mr speaker
there goes that budget lane item
gentleman from
sand availability went on a high
representative thank you mister
speaker good afternoon the house
taxation and revenue committee
will not be meeting this morning
at eight thirty in the morning
we also will not be meeting on
friday our first meeting will be
on monday eight thirty in the
morning for an organization
meeting thank you all the
members of the tax committee are
devastated that they will not
meet until monday.
I know I know harper probably is
actually.
Generally from earlier percent
of how can we be here thank you
very much mister speaker your
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning nine am shirt
room three oh nine see there out
the gentle.
No looks like that's it.
Gentle lady from really a
representative chasing.
Mr speaker I moved that the
house stand in reserves until
four thirty this afternoon.
See an objection the house will
send in racism to four thirty
this afternoon.
