Representative Sweetser that was
for you were you.
That's his band.
Mentors as right.
Yeah.
Running
gentle lady from Bernalillo
percent of it.
account for.
It's so I mean Madam else's lane
is.
Members are going to read some
messages and do a little bit of
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
report seeing no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team is
adoption we are in adoption of
federal committed for the Senate
finance committee subs to
present a bill eight all the
staff members of this and I.
Senate bill two eighty as
amended has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that a do pass as
amended respectfully submitted a
that small chair Mr speaker move
Those opposed a yes Committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is
referred to Senate bill three
three twenty seven all those in
favor say if I was and I.
The school's name the as of the
committee put up to.
Mr speaker appropriations and
respectfully submitted a that
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're not optional
Federal committed Fordham's
Senate health public affairs
committee supposed to present a
bill for fifty three as amended
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
members of the house I have the
state signed house bill three
seventy seven as amended and
acted by the fifty six
legislature for session twenty
twenty three respectfully yours
section twenty two of the New
Mexico constitution I have
signed house bill one thirty as
amended enacted by the fifty six
the members of the house present
to my authority under article
four section twenty two of the
New Mexico constitution I have
signed house bill one forty
eight an act by the fifty six
Dear speaker Martinez the
members of the house I have
decided to veto house bill one
twenty five as amended which
would have created a task force
to examine dual credit
House memorial eighty five
planned for state owned and
maintained roadways in New
Mexico with the goal of this
zero vehicle related deaths or
serious injuries by the end of
calendar year twenty thirty
We're sorry.
Senator Kernan and others a
Joint Memorial requesting the
public education department the
Legislative Education education
study committees the legislative
finance committee The New Mexico
school and school district
reporting requirements Senate
Joint Memorial fourteen.
Gentleman from the gentleman
from the university let us.
addition it is so ordered gentle
lady from Los Alamos
Representative Chandler your
house judiciary committee will
meet at nine thirty tomorrow and
room three oh nine we have.
stuck in the committee what's
going on.
Doing my job Mr speaker.
Members signal generated from
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker
we have one very not complicated
bill to review thank you they
miss less work stability.
Easy built simple boots number
signal.
Any other announcements.
a good time and he said to say
hi to everybody so hyped or
happy birthday.
Related to seeing.
You too.
Any other announcements
gentleman from.
Finally is able again is what is
often is here Representative
Garcia holds its ritually chips
I have representative I did not
only a make a little
announcement what do you have
for dinner today.
Representative.
restaurant about the whole meal
happy meal.
And and I do have a pool it's
fantastic thank you
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr.
tentative traders seems not very
well as he is in the hospital
right now and as the running
praying for a speedy recovery
for the representative.
Any other announcements before
we go to third reading.
Right gentleman from the you
know.
HighRadius item number seventy
one.
Thank you Mr going into that
point.
Thank you Mr speaker so Senate
bill one forty five one forty
five brings parity right now
when it comes to retirement.
for both the yes and
See no debate the gentleman
close.
Mr speaker I move that Senate
bill one forty five do now pass
we are on final passage of
Senate bill one forty five the
the affirmative zero in the
negative.
Senate bill one forty five has
duly passed this house.
His agility from Bernalillo
Senate bill one thirty one is
twice amended on final passage
has been taken.
It is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
public school capital outlay
Elia C. in the LFC is endorsed
by all committees this is the
one that's going to free up the
seven hundred million dollars
speaker this is a long time
coming but I do move that Senate
bill one thirty one as twice
amended do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate bill one
have fifteen different of zero
in the negative Senate bill one
thirty one is twice amended has
duly passed this house.
directly to provide election is
information Senate bill seventy
one as amended with an emergency
clause on final passage of the
taking it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain the
persons based on physical or
mental disabilities in all
aspects of the organ transplant
process and with that I'm ready
for questions I see no debate
the gentle lady to close.
are on final passage of Senate
bill seventy one as amended with
an emergency clause the vote is
now open.
as amended with an emergency
clause has duly passed this
house.
Thank you Mr speaker I am
waiting for here is my expert
witness if you will indulge me
to get a chair for him please.
Ten is a bill that establishes
the National Guard element doing
hold on let me get to that I
apologize Mr chair when you get
Mr speaker and get me to that
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate Bill
Trenton establishes the National
Guard death benefit fund with
the two million non reverting
appropriation the purpose of the
officers and fire fighters
should be killed while in the
state active duty status.
Will be provided within five
hundred thousand death benefit
for surviving family members.
proud that Senator Padilla
include me on this particular
bill I think it's important for
long overdue and it gives
priority to are very we have a
roll like national guardsmen
Emergency
is emergency clause and how to
pass.
We are final passage of Senate
bill two ten is three times
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
one in the negative.
Senate bill two tennis three
times amended with an emergency
clause has duly passed this
house.
The record reflect that all
action is replacing Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute presented
down three seats Mr speaker is
I'm doing a different one that's
the.
But okay okay I guess we can do
it never mind thank you Mr
speaker.
requires us Mr speaker it
requires us to do a three years
study
Members of the rural universe
The support payments to the real
companies with that Mr speaker
yes a request.
It is.
Individual in the clothes thank
The Senate tax business and
transportation
this committee substitute for
Senate bill one fifty I do now
pass.
unanimous.
Maybe we'll leave it on the
experts.
We are final passage of Senate
tax business and transportation
committees of the two percent of
What is one of fifty three in
the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate tax business and
transportation committee so to
to percent of the one fifty five
has duly passed this house.
Generating will stay with you
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty one of final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution Senator explained
the bill thank you Mr speaker
services the same way with that
Mr speaker I stand for questions
no debate the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for House for Senate
bill forty one do now pass.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty nine in the affirmative
Gentlelady from Katrin said US
equitable and see a.
Are you ready on item number
twenty six.
Stand by.
Thank you generated.
five final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker this
bill is allowing New Mexico to
additional federal funds and
this is only for rural hospitals
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions senior division lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
What close.
What is the vote of fifty two in
the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate bill two point
five as we pass this house.
Deleted the state item forty
amendment or substitution is
related to explain the bill on
thank you Mr speaker this act
deals with the child's exemption
for immunization this act allows
a physician's assistants or
I stand for questions I see no
debate gentle lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I now move
that Senate bill eighty one do
now pass we are on final passage
of Senate bill eighty one the
zero in the negative Senate bill
eighty one as we passed this
house.
Mr speaker can you get me that
point.
bill.
As the one thirty three is very
simple we've had a rash of
catalytic converter thefts in
the state and this just adds
catalytic converter and other
safeguards as such and I stand
for questions senior division
leader close.
Thank you very much Mr speaker I
do now move that.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute.
Qualities we are final passage.
Senate Judiciary Committee
supposed to percent of the one
It's about close.
To reopen the vote against you
can work directly.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one thirty three as amended
as we passed this house.
The record for the election
certification Senate bill three
zero two on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill
yes Mr speaker ladies and
unconstitutional expanding the
judicial standards commission's
jurisdiction and this is correct
in the and I that we needed
Senate bill three zero two the
vote is now open.
Senate bill three zero two has
duly passed as house.
The record reflect that
elections are provisions in a
bill to fifteen final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
benefits for fall and police and
fire this bill is only with
regards to the fire it reduces
and I believe the clerk has that
Mr speaker regimen ruled you
please move the amendment and
then we can have the amendment
passed out.
Let's get it passed out in a
bloated online give it one
minute and then we'll have you
expand the amendment.
Gentleman what do you go ahead
and explain the amendment.
Speaker leader gentleman so
again this amendment brings this
bill in alignment with the one
From this increase in the
survivor benefit
this allows us to capture those
folks that were lost in
helicopter crash with that I
stand for questions to debate
amendment.
amendment close.
The gentleman I now move that
Senate bill ten fifty as amended
passed this house we are on
final passage of Senate bill two
Was about to close.
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate bill two fifty as amended
has duly passed this house.
substitute for Senate bill three
zero nine as amended with an
emergency clause has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
because they have any questions
see no debate gentleman close I
now move that the Senate finance
the substance for Senate bill
three oh nine do not pass we are
on final passage of Senate
The votes about close
Representative Lente do you wish
to vote on your bill.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty five in the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate
finance committee substitute for
Representative one percentage on
this are you ready on item
number eighty.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
give me to the point.
thank you Mr speaker this bill
is from the inner at health and
Human Services first thing it
does is it close the loop over
insurance companies have
insurer has to credential and
load from forty five days to
thirty days with that I stand
for questions there is debate
the gentleman from San Juan
river for the Senate debate
vote is now open for.
as we passed this house.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
leadership agreed to remove the
following memorials Angela
morals from the speakers table
please on final passage passage
in both them under one motion.
Here they go.
forty eight House memorial sixty
three House memorial seventy
eight House memorial AT house
memorial eighty two.
memorial on final passage.
Seeing none.
Let the record reflect that all
eight sixty three seventy eight
eighty.
Eighty two eighty four and
senator memorial thirteen on
final passage.
Representative one Mr speaker I
move that house more eleven
house more sixteen house more
eighteen House moral thirty
house more eighty four.
Senate Joint Memorial not three
but thirteen.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent that house the record
show that are the rules being
called in all members present
We are on final passage of.
House memorial eleven sixteen
eighteen thirty seven forty
Seven.
It
was one of seven in the
affirmative answer in the
negative house memorial eleven
thirteen.
Have duly passed this house.
opportunity right now to just
acknowledge somebody that has
been present with us and
spending a lot of time with us
in the evening we all but
diving down into
All Things provided us Mr Mister
speaker of body I'd like to have
it's please stand and if we all
recognize.
give a little more information
about Lucas he enjoys.
I was born here in Santa Fe and
he enjoys and is proud of his
dual citizenship in the United
And Lucas is a really good dance
I just like to say he would be.
Two hundred bill party Mr
speaker and he had a very lovely
time and and just a wonderful
And especially interested in law
economics and finance Susan the
right place
He's starting to export
consider Law School his features
I said and is it is free time he
likes skiing climbing rafting
and going to the gym and Lucas's
been working as an assistant
the you know I want to spare
time.
After school he's dedicated he's
hard working he's ambitious and
we have a certificate from but I
want to say again Lucas thank
just want to say thank you again
we're almost at the end of it
and you've been a real champion
for for all of us and for our
chief clerks office support
The lady from Bernalillo.
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair.
Madam chair.
for the Senate bill four ninety
one all those in favor signify
the state not.
I suppose in a test of a
committee reported up to.
Yes.
Gentleman from the you.
Mr speaker I know now move the
next order of business third
reading of legislation to no
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from early or you're
ready on item thirty five.
Mr speaker that the record
debate amendment or substitution
the generated to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker Senate
bill eighty four is coming over
both parties have been working
for ten years on tribal justice
reform and trying to get a
handle on probation pro reform
of a criminal offense fans but
has potential incarceration
sentence isn't approach more
completely suspended it's so the
judge didn't say you have to
the length of the parole is
determined by the degree of the
felony so what we have in this
situation we have a New Mexico
right now Mr speaker and ladies
people on not the new offenses
when they're out on probation or
parole but on technical
violations and we've had some
people with drug addiction
For the first time ever it
actually divides the violations
of probation or parole into two
categories.
We have never done this
officially the technical
doesn't involve prohibited
contact with the victim or
witness it doesn't create it
doesn't constitute a new prime a
standard violations all other
lot of discretion to the
judicial district.
To
Is providing specific guidance
prevents full revocation for
first second third formal
technical violations but retains
the court's authority to
cycle and conservation and
fiscal a Mr speaker ladies and
gentleman this makes sense
because of the cost of
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yields high health thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady can you
please tell the body what the
differences between a technical
curry the
The technical violations.
Representative doesn't creative
threat to anyone and it it does
not constitute a new crime.
or parole with the New Mexico
department corrections Mr
speaker gentle lady is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes all
right and so you've stated
filing in the state law which is
Yes Mr speaker John sorry.
Mr speaker gentle lady and so
there of and number of listed
Home visits getting a job having
a weapon testing positive for
drugs getting a new arrest
Mr speaker lady I'm let me see I
described is a mixture of both
what we would under the new
legislation called a technical
violation and then also a
standard violation if they
urine yes Mr speaker gentle
you're correct third that I
believe these are make sure of
technical and standard
conditions of right of to up
their appropriations contract
lady what we're talking about so
Mister speaker gentle lady when
someone of sconce from
appropriations let's say for a
year is that a technical or
standard condition of probation
or parole
of a story of a client who was
in the system online as of
Sunday and yet he was in court
facility and was on probation
and.
Is this happened several times
was the parent with whom the
children were being reunited by
his phone would break so he
would not call his probation
officer when he should he
couldn't take his children to
this disappointment and he
wasn't dealing drugs and had a
job but he was listed as of
expanding housing agency
disappointments so I I count
and I I agree that upstanding
could be a technical violation
if it's forgetting to report
once or twice but if somebody Mr
of probation.
definition of standard and
technical after a Louisiana and
if somebody does what you just
violations on page three of the
bill number one if they create a
threat to the probation or the
prole E. can you describe a
situation where that would come
Mr speaker in lady from trying
to have the then and then from
that consumer public affairs
in the Senate health and public
affairs committee right and I'm
the probation or the probably.
Right.
asking me what that means that
creative threat to the probation
or parole Lee yes Mr speaker
engaging behavior that was
dangerous to himself or herself
and it ultimately it could be to
others as well that's not a
or using drugs would you
consider that a technical
violation or standard violation
under the probation contract in
this bill.
yes dirty while on probation
that's going to be a technical
violation.
Mr speaker lady yes and Mr
speaker gentle lady so if you're
appropriations are probably.
asking these questions because
I'm learning more about how the
have defined it and and this law
but if if the individual in
danger to that individual it
could be considered by the
courts up to the court's
discretion to to make a standard
violation so using drugs while
on probation could be a standard
on the exact circumstances thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady one
of the issues I have with this
bill is for a technical
violation it lists what the
first offense is going to be the
question so if you are found
guilty of a technical violation
Mr speaker gentle lady your
first violation is going to be
three days of community service
restrictive curfew behavioral
examples of non detention
sanctions but that's not
exhaustive Mr speaker gentle
lady in the bill it says you
is five days a community service
your third one.
It is not more than seven days
of incarceration and your fourth
Mr speaker and maybe the way
it's written it is shown on
impose more than three days and
then the additional terms that
Mr speaker and gentle lady no
but the nature of the crime can
crime but just at the violation
Mr speaker gentle lady.
at the nature of the purported
violations.
But you would agree that on the
bill Mr speaker gentle lady it
does give language that the
sanction
it's
it's not intended to be based on
the crime but the the the court
does not and is not ignorant of
the underlying crime and if
that is what the underlying
crime is and I'm concerned with
cases where you have a criminal
sexual penetration a rape of a
child some violent felony where
it's played down to a probated
up for drinking alcohol and
that's a technical violation
under your bill Mr speaker
gentle lady so I want to make
sure that the judge can look at
that underlying crime of
was revoked so under this bill
it seems that the court would
have to look at the fact that
the defendant or appropriations
are probably was drinking
alcohol and not so much consider
that he was actually on
court's discretion away from
what the court can do it
requires under technical
violations that you have to have
for violations before anything
possessing a weapon could be for
a thirty year analysis could be
for a lot of things is actually
preventing the court from having
any discretion in this matter Mr
Mr speaker Mr leader it doesn't
have to say that because if
felon in possession of firearms
Mr speaker gentle lady it would
just be a violation of your
probation and could be
considered a technical violation
under this bill Mr speaker maybe
hands when a judge basically
understands the case understands
the conditions and what has
happened previous to it could
take for technical violations to
months obviously to five years
but originally when you get
these violations of probation
most of the time the district
attorney's office does not even
technical violations in order to
do anything to this person on
probation or parole.
Mr speaker and reading that is
likely the case however the
is their research that most of
the violations occur as they're
just getting out
and starting and they're
struggled with addiction and so
that's why we don't want to
punish every single struggle
stumbled with more prison
an individual who will reserves
of eight.
Okay and Mister speaker gently
government in our arguments
about the evidence of what it
shows but I just believe this
their hands Mr speaker gentle
lady in order on these technical
violations to make them just
have a day in jail or community
service or some type of program
understand how this bill is
going to help but I would ask
you Mr speaker gentle lady have
you gotten the support of the
probation offices are the
corrections department at least
we have the support of every
other stakeholder the
corrections department simply
says is unnecessary because
they're already doing this okay
late not individuals right and
Mr speaker gentle it was spread
to the probation our officers
I've spoken with one hundred
percent do not support this
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I I just wanted to make those
points that I don't believe this
bill is going to help when I
think it's going to end up doing
him on probation it will prevent
them from playing a case down to
something lesser to see how they
do or appropriations because of
they know as a prosecutor and as
wasn't reported that nothing's
going to happen Mr speaker
gentle lady I believe you're
actually going to get the
opposite effect you're going to
end up with harsher please was
the judges loving this bill
because you're tying their hands
when they know these
dependencies probationers these
clients and what they've done
over their career so why
the state Mr speaker gentle lady
and I think we're in a time
where crime is at an all time
high once again Mr speaker
generally receive another bill
to support this bill and Mr
speaker I would yield at this
point.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close Mr speaker in
closing just very quickly assure
the violations the seriousness
of the violation and not a
punishment for the offence of
conviction is consistent with
evidence based practices and
could contribute to resistance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four as twice and
then to do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
Thirty nine in the affirmative
twenty eight in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substantive percent health
Representative Chasey.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate bill one seventy eight as
amended Senate bill two sixteen
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill three sixty
seven and requests the
concurrence of the house present
this ministry do the on Senate
in and goes copies of house
concurrent resolution one.
House bill one thirty four as
amended house bill one ninety
seven House Bill to twenty nine
Members and attention to
concurrence calendar it's on the
speaker and I move that the
house concurrent Senate
amendments to house bill thirty
five.
to be included in this bill.
Kayser debate.
On the motion to concur.
As opposed may be as seven
thousand could win Senate
amendments to house with thirty
five this was amended.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house concurrent Senate
amendments to house bill one
ninety one.
Related to explain the
amendments thank you Mr speaker
On the motion.
We have a motion to concur
resented amendments to house
bill one ninty one is twice
amended all those in favor of
the motion could signify by
The gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Fe are you ready and
concerns item number four.
Mr speaker I move that the house
Mr speaker of the amendments
made some changes to the way the
game commission members are
appointed they removed the
requirement that the governor's
the provision relating to the
scientist they make all the
appointments subject to Senate
confirmation not just the
governor's the creative vacancy
if the commissioner misses three
the commission it passed the
Senate thirty forty two and I
urge the body to though yes.
a sametime.
As opposed may just have is the
houses because the house was
concurred with Senate amendments
to house bill one eighty for S.
calendar passed out stand by.
order business introduction of
legislation in objection it is
so ordered.
Senate bill three sixty seven
school interventions providing
for methods to re engage
dropouts creating a fund making
grant awards to school districts
The Senate bill three sixty
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee has.
The lady from Bernalillo
To no objection is ordered
members I believe everybody has
the supplement occurrence
calendar number one on your
desk.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
amendments to house bill one six
one.
The gentle lady to explain the
amendment.
inserted after inter tribal
making the new name intertribal
Indian ceremonial.
I move that the house concur
with Senate and equipment to
the motion to concur missing
about the same time.
Supposedly the house house
concurred with Senator
amendments to house bill one
Yes Mr speaker.
I move that the house concur
with the Senate amendments to
house bill two thirty four.
Mr speaker there was an
amendment which was negotiated
with the public defender's
office to clarify the language
exponent the that explanation
but the definition so it's much
clearer.
And I move that the house can.
We have a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House
Judiciary Committee subs to
browse with two thirty four as
amended all those in favor of
the motion to concur saying this
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to that order
to have a couple of committees
are going to meet real briefly
tonight as opposed to tomorrow
morning.
To deal with a couple of bills
that have been referred to
please help yourselves a major
office dinner for all members
the gentleman from really of us
and one in Sandoval
Representative Lente that Mr
minutes after the floor session
because we want to have just
issued me before us so we can
staff them and they can step us
there after so about thirty
minutes after the floor session
judiciary committee will meet in
room three oh nine this evening
it's eight twenty five that's
much Mr speaker members take
note any other announcements and
miscellaneous business.
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
happy I'm not saying today.
Are we all gentle lady are we
all.
Members say have a great day
we'll see you tomorrow the house
