The.
Oh god here we go.
Yeah.
Feedback on the eight thirty
nine why should I be thinking.
I don't.
Yeah.
You couldn't if you couldn't
get.
Anything healthcare medical care
buttons.
Sick is sympathetic to your
device but could not even always
get a button.
Okay
I don't have a door doesn't.
See what's often
high how are you
when i'm gonna see if you know.
Yeah.
Sale but.
There are good things I think.
Yeah.
Well go schools.
His rise for today's.
The gentleman from the thirty
percent but the leaders in the
pledge of religions.
And will the gentleman from
chavez idiot leave center mason
leaders in the solution in
mexico flag.
The.
Do you live from brilliant.
Mr speaker removed we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
See an objection it is so
ordered.
Good morning members almost
after no good call view busy day
in committees busy day with the
meetings all over the place by
grateful to see you all again
i've got i've got a couple
announcements i'd like to make
for we get onto today's memorial
um we have
guest of mine up on the gallery
uh a school that is near and
here my heart and is in my
district in in my neighborhood
we've got fifth graders thirty
three in eight teachers with
them from money sorry of that
and they turn the school in
albuquerque welcome to the house
minor sorry kids.
And she is going to hate me for
doing this but what kind of a
dad would I be if I did not
embarrass her so my daughter is
among that group of visitors
today my said last year that
martin is boil please rise to be
recognized.
And as you can imagine she keeps
me on my thousand keeps me
grounded thank you for visiting
and you'll have a busy day so go
ahead and get to the rest of
your day
gentlemen from link and and not
that representative of vincent.
Thank you mister speaker and a
good job embarrassing that the
more unembarrassing is the more
you level I just wanted to do
that all that.
Mister speaker I moved that
house memorial fourteen be
removed from the speakers table
and made the next order of
business in objectiveness
ordered.
That the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house memorial.
Fourteen on final person has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Thank you mister speaker this is
smoky bears eightieth birthday
so
it's real big in in my district
and district fifty six capital
new mexico and on may third and
fourth we have smokey bear
smokey bear days and we have
parades we have folk festivals
we have found for the kids
family find for everyone and
missus speaker I wanted to ask
you a question do you know who
the most famous new mexican is
and it mexico
i'm at the each of my seat sir
is smoky bear swap nobody there
is really the most famous new
mexican from what I understand
not believe the kid not any of
those smokey bear so I have some
people on the rost on the
rostrum that I would like to
introduce.
Starting with law mccarthy if
you would rise please
see the new mexico state
forester mary levien.
Smoky bear historical manager
max well
my hand check
and he's the smokey bear
historical ranger and then bobby
share is one of our village
trustees of capital welcome to
the house.
And mister speaker
I just want to throw a plug real
quick before I can get the clear
to read this memorial if you
don't mind
there was only one thing this
monkey bear wanted for his
birthday and that will that was
for representative mcqueen to
vote for the smokey bear license
plate this this time.
And I was hoping that he was
going to be here but he's not so
if you could help me out the
only thing smoky words for his
birthday is for representative
mcqueen to vote for
representative documentize smoky
bare license plate thank you
will work on that gentleman.
Clerk to read.
A memorial declaring january
twenty third twenty.
In the house.
Whereas one spring day in
nineteen fifty a wildfire
broker.
And.
But survived.
Took refuge in a charg.
He bears death in nineteen sev.
To have his own z.
The.
Is our debate on the original
gentleman from burden learn
percent of the
mister speco I just want to show
representative vincent that I
whole heartedly support is
efforts around smoky
and I will do my best efforts
mister speaker to lobby
representative mcqueen to ensure
that we get that licensely by
the way must speaker these these
kids appear would absolutely
love the little village of
capital new mexico you would
love it there I would encourage
everyone to visit the smoky
birth museum and by the way
smoky bears lead to reserve
thank you mister speaker thank
you john and there is further
debate that gentlemen from
tether over senator block.
The.
Thank you mister speaker and the
thank you so much for bringing
this forward to representative I
love smoky bear I always go up
there when a very can to winking
county to see the smoky bare
museum and I got a smokey bear
pin there but I forgot to wear
it today mister speaker I know
i'm not in my egain this session
mister speaker but you know I I
go to the museum up there all
the time and I just love to
watch the the presentation they
have the great video that they
share and I I can't get enough
of it and I learned so much just
about force management when it
comes to smoky bear and the
extraordinary legacy that smoky
barely leaves for our state and
he's a great learning tool for
our youth and I just love smoky
bear and also of these little
bears that we got on our own our
desk here need a hugum I think
i'm in a name this one smoky
mister speaker so I just wanted
to say I totally support this
memorial I love smoky bear as a
educational tour he is truly
the brand of new mexico and we
are just so blessed to have him
call new mexico home so thank
you mister speaker thank you
representative
gentlemen there's further debate
to generally from some one
representative duncan.
Thank you mister speaker uhm I
to rise in support of this uhm
he is the ambassador for our
forest and what we can and
cannot do and and what we should
be doing and how we should go
about doing it
this is a great memorial I
appreciate my corresponds around
this
but only on the flip side of
that coin almost as much fun
would have been to see our our
friend from santa fe county here
when that offer was made.
I I think we all heard that in
it was a webcast that in
archived.
The german family of the cruises
on the hook thank you mister
speaker.
There's what debate the roman
from financial representative
but thank you mister speaker and
I i'm sure the gentleman wheel
but I turn rise and support this
memorial of actually I sort of
titan crew and weight also I
spent eight years in leaking
county.
And so it definitely am aware of
what a a part of that community
is although you could not tell
now I actually I used to work
for the smoking bear range of
district during the summer so I
was a teacher during the school
year.
I work to the.
The range of district in the
summer that I was also scared
structure neither of which I can
do now so I I support that I
thank you for bringing this
forward and it's definitely a
part of our state history in a
kind of identity so thank you
mister speaker thank you for
general men for the debate on
house memorial fourteen.
You know arm when one of the
very first school lessons I
remember uhm
when we first moved to this
country was as a third creator
we had a presentation
it might have been the forest
service out but i'm not sure who
was when he was about smoky
bear.
I mean it always stuck with me
uhm you know what had happened
and how sad it was right
but I never clicked that that
had actually happened in new
mexico and too much later in
life I swear to you I thought it
was so.
Uh so
thank you for them while john.
I agree the most famous
character.
Seeing no for the debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you mr speaker and my
apologies I smoke years on
special assignment today so he
is unable to be here he's out
doing our work and making sure
that our force are safe
but mister speaker I move that
house memorial fourteen do now
pass
and ask unanimous consent of the
house that the records show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative on house memorial
fourteen has been emotion to
show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative senate objection it
is
we are on federal passage of
house memorial fourteen the vote
is now open.
The vote is our cosmopolitan
seventy in the affirmative zero
in the negative house memorial
fourteen has duly passed this
house.
We are on announcements the
generally from berlier
representative
thinking is just speaker mister
speaker I have guess on the
rustroom that I would like to
introduced they are from new
mexico highlands university
center for excellence in social
work and I am very proud to have
them here today highlands as you
know
is one of our schools in new
mexico who educates and
graduates social workers and we
are in great need of social
workers
the mission of the fact while
their school of social work
center for excellence is to
collaborate with students
practitioners educators and
community and organizational
leaders state wide to respond to
the evolving needs of new
mexico's diverse and
multicultural people families
and communities for the
advancement of racial you could
environmental social and
economic justice for equitable
outcomes for all mister speaker
on the rustian we have with us
the dean of the fact of all
their school of social work says
that a bodica.
We have the director on a nelson
she is the director of the
center for excellence.
We also have joint he menace who
works for the center for a
social work excellence
who also works at the senate for
social work excellence.
Monica other who also works at
the center
and we have with us a graduate
student in social work in lawn
fishman.
The.
Thank you leading and welcome to
the house and thanks for all of
the tremendous work that you do
in a place like new mexico where
social workers I think we all
agree across a gracial are
sorely needed and it is one of
those professions at uh makes a
direct and immediate impact on
the lives of young people so
thank you for being here and
thank you for recognizing them
generally from berlio
an announcement somewhere to go
to the gentleman from me
cherries.
Reserve a sofa I don't have my
own county I was going to say no
yet
thank you mister speaker
uh I just want to announcement
that this is national school
choice week and would like to
bring that that to everybody
know all our each student has
their own unique sets of talents
interest challenges in having a
variety of options in education
is critical thank you mister
bigger thank you gentlemen and
announcements that you're lady
from berlin leo representative
garrett.
Thank you mister chair I have to
end on smoking the bear that
thousands of new mexicans moved
to southern california after the
desperate error and so we always
that smoke the big sport and
southern california because they
were smoky with them i'm happy
mister speaker to introduce a
six guests if they can stand up
and don't clap until I introduce
solidarity if the six of you
could stand up these are six
american federation of teacher
retirees they represent over two
hundred and ten years of
teaching and coaching and
serving experience over here to
my left is by repeaters and she
just retired from the aps sport
of education laurie harris is up
there waiting a diana share a
tree susanders who's also the
chair of the retirees health
care board a john calmstoke and
elen counted thank you for your
service and welcome to the
house.
Welcome to the house.
Generally from send the fair
representative
thank you mr speaker a mr
speaker I wanted to introduce
the teddy bears that are on your
das today they are from the new
mexico primary care clinics
these clinic serve three hundred
and fifty thousand new mexicans
and we are grateful for the
support these clinics have
received for from the new mexico
legislature for over forty years
it's just important to note that
these clinics are one in three
of new mexico's uninsured
population and fifty six percent
of our new mexicans with incomes
under one hundred percent of the
federal poverty line they
provide over a hundred million
dollars a year and high quality
uncompensated care in ninety new
mexican communities hundred and
ninety six sites they provide
medical dental behavior holding
school based services to new
mexicans at the right time in
the right place regardless of
their ability to pay so today
january twenty third is new
mexico primary care day and I
just ask the body to join me in
recognizing these clinics for
over fifty years.
Thank you mister speaker
lady for their announcements and
thank you are these primarily
comproviders that help support
so many of our communities in in
many different ways.
Generally from earlier percent
mister speaker I just want our
reminder chosen vice chairs of
committees to come to three or
nine as soon as we financially
are on the house for members
take note any other
announcements gentlemen from a
kindly in simple representative
thank you mister speaker your
house labor veterans and
military affairs community will
need to ten minutes after the
charge meeting numbers take note
that generally from brilliant
representative do you have an
announcement.
Rips of kids do you have an
announcement to have a guest to
introduce.
Thank you speaker no I do not
that is for tomorrow thank you
god thank you very much.
Any other announcements general
lady from.
This would be growing up because
of that order of business
committee reports sorry mister
speaker reading messages.
See an objection
it is ordered.
Second of message number twenty
nine.
Speaker martin is the members of
the house pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexican constitution I am
authorising for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislatu.
Sixteen a bill removing the time
limitation for commencing
prosecution of human trafficking
increasing the age for sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution to eighteen adding
human trafficking to the
definition of racketeering
amending the elements of human
trafficking providing a
definition of harm.
Prohibiting certain defences in
a prosecution for human
trafficking adding victims of
human trafficking and social
exploitation of children to th.
Earned in victoria's detections
for a human trafficking sentence
responsible years michelle
hungarian governor message will
be entered.
House executive message number
thirty.
The speaker martin is the
members of the house pursuant to
article for section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature's second
session submission of house bill
one seventy one a bill changing
graduation requirements for
students entering ninth grade in
the twenty twenty five twenty
twenty sixth school year
preparing students to graduate
with a diploma of excellence and
aligning next deck plans to
graduate to graduate profiles.
Respectful years michelle
hungership governor message will
be entered.
The.
House executive message number
thirty one speaker martin as the
members of the house pursuant to
article forest section five b
two the new mexico constitution
I am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house build twenty
eight a bill authorizing the new
mexico finance authority to make
loans for the public projects
from the public project
involving fund respectfully
yours michelle the longer some
government message will be
entered.
House executive message number
thirty two speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuing to
article for section five b two
the mexican constitution.
The.
Submission of house bill one
fifty one a bill requiring state
funded post secondary
educational institutions to
adopt policies and procedures
addressing affirmative consent
in prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence in harassment or
stocking respectively yours
michelle hungers and government
message will be entered.
Generating from.
To speak around we go to that
order business committee
reports.
Seen objection it is so ordered.
The.
Mr speaker your government
elections and indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill twenty nine
has has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
dewander johnson.
Move adoption where an adoption
of a favorable committee
important house build twenty
nine all those in favor seen if
I was in our
disposal the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in the indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill sixty seven
has had another consideration
reports sing with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted do you want a jobs and
chair.
Mr become
where that option of a favorable
committee important house bill
sixty seven of those in favor
seen if I were saying I
was supposed need the saving
committee report adopted
mr speaker your government
elections in indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill sixty eight
has had it under consideration
reports in with the
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully stability
do you want to johnson share
mister.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee important has will
sixty eight all those in favor
seen if I by saying I of the
support the is habit committee
reported
opted mr speaker your government
elections in the indian affairs
committee to him has been
referred house bill eighty eight
has had an under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
do you want to johnson chair
visitor speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report and house bill
eighty eight all those in favor
signified by say that opposing a
the eyes ha.
The.
Mr speaker you're health in
human services committee to him
has been referred house bill
seven has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully smithed
elizabeth thompson chair.
We're an adoption of a few
common report in the house built
seven although it's in favors in
the february night.
Well suppose me the eyes have it
can be report of it.
Mr speaker your health and human
services committee to has been
referred house build twenty six
has added under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
elizabeth thompson chair mister
option where an adoption of a
federal committee reported house
bill twenty six all those in
favor city policy now oppose the
is habit committee report
adopted
mr speaker you're health in
human services committee to whom
has been referred house bill
thirty four has had it under
consideration report saying was
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
elizabeth thompson chair move
adoption where you're on
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
thirty four all those in favors
and if I was an eye
although supposed name the eyes
have a committee report adopted
mr speaker you're healthing
human services committee to him
has been referred house bill
thirty five has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
elizabeth thompson chair
adoption for an adoption of a
federal community report in
husband thirty five all those in
favor in if I was in eye.
Well the supposenly the ice have
a committee reported up to.
Mr speaker your judiciary
committee to him has been
referred house bill forty three
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
then refer to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted christine
channel chair mister speaker
move adoption where adoption of
a formal committee reporting
house bill forty three all those
in favors in the purpose and i.
I was supposed need.
No catalytic comp.
The eyes have a could be for
adopted.
Mr speaker your judiciary
committee to him has been
referred house bill eighty six
has had an under consideration
report sim with recommendation
that it do pass and then suffer
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted christine challenger
mister speaker mobile option for
that i've should have a
favorable committee report in
hospital eighty six all those in
favor of seeing the purpose you
know.
Although simply receive
everything i.
I was supposed to a guys have a
community report adopted.
Your judiciary committee to has
been referred house bill one
zero six has headed under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
christian channel chair mister
speaker rubber option and
adoption of a federal community
port and house bill one zero six
all those in favor simplify by
saying I although suppose may.
The I said I could be reported
up to
mr speaker your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred house bill one forty
one.
Has had it under consideration
reports seamless recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations of finance
committee respectfully smith
christine challenge here
mister speaker option we're
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house bill one forty
one all those in favor seeing if
I by saying I
was as a positive the eyes have
it committed reported opted mr
speaker enrolling an engrossing
committee to miss been referred
house memorial house memorial
seven has had them under
consideration reports that same
have been duly enrolled in and
growth preparatory designing by
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted cynthia
borrego chair.
Move adoption.
We are on adoption of a federal
committee port on.
On house moral six n hazard more
seven although it's in favor of
seen if I was an eye.
As was nay the isolated report
adopted.
Let the reconflict that the duly
in gross copies of house
memorial six end house world
seven
have been signed by the officers
of the court of the house in
open session.
Yeah.
And lady from.
This your speaker and what we
got to that order of business
introduction of legislation in
objection this ordered.
Introduced by a representative
has been s.
An a.
Has been two or three minutes
was by title is timed remain
pursuant deemed remain pursuing
to article four section five one
order printed on referred to the
householding human services
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and four
introduced.
Act relating to distrib.
Providing for covered positions
to be def.
House bill to for having been
read twice by title is deemed
remain pursuing to article four
section five b one order printed
in referred to the house.
Judiciary committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two hundred and five
introduced by representatives
rep jones.
An act relating to sex and
acting the woman's bill of
rights.
Providing guidelines for data.
Has been two hundred and five
hundred minutes was by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
I spell two hundred and six
introduced by representatives
reb.
Limiting other defense for.
Castigano and montoya has been
two hundred and six haven't been
rit was by title as ordered not
printed in reference to the
house rules committee.
Relating to finance require.
Husband two hundred and seven
have been twice by title is
interim in pursuing torture for
section five b one ordered
princeton referred to the house
education committee then the
house appropriations in finance
committee.
House bill two hundred
eight introduced by
representatives montoya brown.
Relating to educat.
Creating the trade education.
House bill two hundred eight
minute wise by title is the main
persuant torticle force issue
five b one or prince I don't
refer to the house education
committee events the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Introduced by representatives
horrera dixon brown sarinana and
orters and act relating to
economic development removing
the match requirement for
regional councils of planning
and dev.
Finance and administration
providing that the matching
function on their.
House bill two hundred.
House will two hundred and nine
have been right well by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee
house bill two hundred and ten
introduced by representati.
Appropriation to the department
of finance and administration
for the regional planning
districts to provide grant
writing.
As well two hundred and ten have
been which was by totally deemed
remain pursuing to article four
section five one ordered printed
and referred to the house
government elections and indian
affairs committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Hospital two hundred and eleven.
Introduced by representatives
here or test.
Prioritizing water project.
Allowing the water.
Providing that the new mexico
finance authorities.
The.
Removing their requirement th.
Environment before approval
removing.
Allowing.
The.
House which eleven have been a
twist by title is dim tremendous
sup- pursuing toiletical force
section five b one order printed
and referred to the house
agriculture a second in water
research as committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee house bill two hundred
and twelve introduced by
representatives codena lent da.
And act relating to taxation
amending the liquor excise tax
act changing the rates of the
tax to a percentage basis.
Changing the distributions of
the tax creating the.
Defining barrels in the act
eliminating fortified wine is a
specific type of alcohol
beverage repealing the local DWI
grant program act.
House built in twelve minutes
was by title is danger main
pursuing toico for section five
be one order printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then
the house sexation and revenue
committee
house bill two hundred and
thirteen introduced by
represent.
The.
An act relating to taxation
amending the liquor excise tax
act imposing the tax on
retailers.
Amending definitions and liquor
excise tax act eliminating for.
Excluding the liquor.
Repealing the local dw.
House bill two thirteen have
been which was by totally teamed
remain pursuing towards
conforced section five b one
order printed and referred to
the house health and human
services committee then south
accession and revenue committee
hospital two hundred and
fourteen introduced by
representatives torosis and
jones and.
Making an appropriation to the
board of region s.
Support a men's baseball.
Process and jones and senator
brown.
That.
House bill two fourteen have a
minute twice by title is the
main percent to article four
section five one or three
printed and referred to the
house education committee then
the house appropriations
committee play ball
house bill two hundred and
fifteen inter.
And teaching loads requiring the
public education department to
crea.
Last violations riding class
load waivers providing rumo.
Requiring school districts to
provide.
House have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed
referred to the house rules
committee
house bill two hundred.
An act relating to t.
Requiring all.
Repealing sec.
As well to succeed have been
retwiced by title is given your
main personal into article four
section five b one order printed
and referred to the house
commerce and economic
development committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee
I was built two hundred and
seventeen introduced by
representatives har.
Act relating to taxation
amending distributions of liquor
excise tax.
House will two seventeen have
been it was by title is seems
remain pursuant to article four
section five one order printed
and referred to the house.
Taxation revenue committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee
I was bill two hundred and
eighteen introduced by
representatives harper and jones
and act relating to taxation
amending eligibility.
In the rural health care
practitioner tax.
Has been to eighteen have been
twice by title the team remained
percent to article four section
five b one order princeton
referred to the house rule
development langrade and sing
cultural affairs committee
against the house taxation and
revenue.
Under nineteen introduced by
representative harper and act
relating to taxation reducing
the r.
Has will two nineteen.
Have been twice by title this
time you may pursue into article
for section of everyone.
What a princeton reference and
house commerce and economic
development committee then
sounds taxation.
House bill two hundred and
twenty introduced by
representative thompson and act
relating to corrections
providing that youth referred by
the children
youth and families depart.
The.
House bill to twenty have
minorities by totally sort of
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
I was bill two hundred and
twenty one.
And acts relating to.
A new issue.
Is it out of order which is
moving to the floor right now
and go for third reading.
House will twenty one haven't
been right twice by title is
that are not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee much to.
The.
The.
House bill two hundred and
twenty two have a minute was by
title is generally in.
Special entrical four section
five by order printed and
referred to the house education
committee then's house
appropriation.
Hundred and twenty three
introduced by representatives
block lord and mason and act
relea.
Providing for geographic copies
of a vot.
Has been to twenty three have
been read twice by title as
order not printed and referred
to the house rules committee
I was bill two hundred and
twenty four.
For solutions department to.
Has been to twenty four hundred
minutes wise by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee
house bill two hundred and
twenty five introdu.
Relating to hazing creating the
crimes of hazing an aggravated
hazing creating an online
reporting portal providing an
exception.
House bill to twenty five have
been ripped wise by title is jim
remain pursuing to article for
six or five b two housing
executive message fifteen
ordered printed and referred to
the house judiciary committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
Yeah.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business in.
No objection it is ordered
announcements.
Right folks we have a number of
bills that ever received
executive messages.
We have a number of bills that
we have executive messages for
that we're delivered since we
resales yesterday and i'll go
really slowly so everybody can
follow long here.
House build twenty eight.
Deemed your main percent to
article forced section five
house executive message thirty
one.
This is house will twenty eight
introduced by representative
give it.
It will be pulled from and order
printed and referred to be house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee.
Then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one sixteen.
Introduced by representative
thompson
damage remain under article
personal portable four section
five b two house executive
message twenty nine
it is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
in public affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee.
House bill one fifty one.
Danger mained persuant to
article for a section five ****
house executive message thirty
two.
We will remove the bill from
rules order printed and refer to
the house health in human
services committee.
House bill one seventy one
introduced by representatives
and lane.
Damned remain pursuing torticle
for section five b two has
executive message thirty.
It is ordered printed and
referred to the house education
committee.
Housable one ninety five
introduced by website of
celebral in dixon deemed a main
percent to article four section
by between house executive
message five.
It is removed from
order printed in referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
The.
That was my mouth.
Any other announcements
gentlemen from.
Delay from berlin thank you
mister speaker we will have our
house health and human services
meeting tomorrow at eight thirty
in room three o seven and please
beyond time because we expect
the long agenda thank you mister
speaker members ignored any
other announcements committee
announcements.
Folks we do have staff from in
the lounge again today to help
support you with simple.
And video transactions
and also reminder that your
financial disclosure forms are
do at the end of the month uh go
talk to you respect of staff for
feel free to recharge a
secretary of state staff.
Ah they are located in the
addicts on the second floor.
General lady from santa fe thank
you mr speaker your house
consumer in public affairs will
be.
The.
Members take note.
The.
Right folks so that will
conclude a business for today on
the floor they'll be committed
meetings after this
I think for the foreseeable
future we should have fairly
