Well call is closed. We have a
quorum. Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan with
today's implication. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Heavenly father. We're grateful
this day to be able to serve the
or
Grateful for the blessings that
we enjoy.
Grateful for the opportunity.
The
The callings that we have to
serve the people of New Mexico
and pray that we might serve
with servants, hearts we might
listen and to our constituents
that we might be able to vote
our conscience.
Father bless her sister. As we
debate as we question that we
might do so with respect and
admiration for one another help
us as we, uh, dive into these
bills, and as we look at them
closely that we can see the
unintended consequences if there
are any in that we might be able
to further we give. Thanks for
all the blessings we enjoy. We
pray for the leaders of the
state.
And of our nation, pray for the
spirit to be with them and guide
and direct them also.
Again we give thanks for the
those who serve us and those who
help us in our staff and those
that help us within these
chambers and we say this in the
net.
Generally from Burnley,
representative Corolla with the
Pledge of Allegiance, Pleasure
allegiance to the flag.
Gentlemen from Valencia
representative Buckle with the
salute to the New Mexico
relations to our nearest board
operator who recited the pledge.
To the New Mexico flag without
reading it, General Lady from
Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered.
Your lady from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I have some special
guests on the rostrum this
morning. I have the family of
Condi Cordova, who was a state
legislator is state
representative. Excuse me and
served with us from 2001 through
2007. And, um, there are four of
us who were here then.
I am only see one in the chamber
right now. And that is the lady
from Chavez representative is l
but the other to the gentleman
from Berta Leo, representative
Miguel Garcia and the Lady from
Gallup representative Lundstrom.
So, um, Connie was a very
treasured colleague.
And we have her family here
today and let me introduce them
first. Pam Cordova.
And I'll introduce the whole
family before we clap If that's
okay with you, her Cam's sister,
Sharon, they're the daughters of
Candy Cordova. We have a family
friend in our chip bag.
And ah, Condi's granddaughter.
Whoops. Marissa Baca, her
husband, Nick Vodka and their
daughter, Joey, and Joey wants
to say hello to everybody.
So please welcome them to the
house. Welcome to the house.
Familia Cordova.
And I'd like to ask the clerk to
read this certificate to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
representative Candelaria, Candy
Cordova and family, whereas
Candelaria Candy Cordova left a
legacy of big heartedness,
kindness, compassion and the
responsibility to make a
community a better place.
And whereas Candies family
always came first, her husband
Smiley, and her four Children,
Pamela, Sharon, Christopher and
Joey, and whereas when Candies
Children were growing up, she
instilled in them the importance
of education, music and art.
And whereas Candy was an
associate manager at Beneficial
finance company business manager
at the Valencia County News
Bulletin, and she owned and
operated Hub City Collection
agency
And whereas candy was a people,
person and active in community
nonprofit organizations before
she ran for public office and
became the Valencia County clerk
in 1988, serving until 2000
And whereas Candy was the first
woman to be invited to join the
Rotary Club of blend and
ultimately served as president,
and whereas candy was also the
president of the Greater Bellen
Chamber of Commerce, and whereas
candy profoundly served as the
state grand region of the
Catholic Daughters of America,
and whereas as a state
representative of House District
seven from 2001 through 2007.
Candy was most proud of her work
and education and bringing back
capital outlay funding for the
Whitfield Wildlife Conservation
area.
And whereas as a legislator
candy help vulnerable
populations by, for example,
advocating for laws to provide
proper staffing, accountability
and quality care and nursing
homes. And whereas candy was a
mentor to governor, Michelle
Luhan Grisham, who described her
as the first legislator, the
first policymaker in my career
that had the courage to let her
guard down and show emotion
about what people were suffering
through.
And whereas Candy was a great
athlete who completed competed
in and won marathons and fund
runs around the state and loved
riding her bike and
participating in the Senior
Olympics, and whereas candy will
be remembered best for her
million dollar smile.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition and condolences be
extended to the family of
Candelaria Candy Cordova.
Signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, reader. We do have
comments on the certificate will
go first to the generator from
McKinley. Representative
Lindstrom. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I'd also like to
welcome the family here today.
Actually, Candy and I were
freshmen together. We were
elected the same year.
And I think we all know that
when you come in as a freshman,
you kind of bond because nobody
knows anything. And nobody helps
you. And so you're kind of
clueless as you're walking
around the capital. But I want
to welcome you. And I appreciate
the General lady from Bern Leo
bringing this forward Great lady
and the number one issue that I
remember. She worked on and
Those that were here may
remember this also was the whole
issue around nursing home abuse.
Never forget that. I mean that
was her issue, and, um, she did
a lot of work in that area.
Great lady and thank you all for
being here today. Thank you,
Gentle lady Lady from Chavez.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you very
much. First off. I want to
welcome the family here.
And I want to thank you for
sharing her with this. She was a
lot of fun to be around it just
like representative Lindstrom
said. She came in before I did,
but she understood the
importance of helping freshman
and she did She whenever she was
visiting Rosel. Once upon a
time, I got a call from her and
she said, I'm here at Casa
Maria. Would you like to join
me? And that was one of our
nursing homes.
So she was very kind lady, and I
certainly did appreciate her
advice. So thank you all for
sharing her gentlemen from
Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in
support being from Valencia
County. Uh, this quarter there
was, you know very synonymous
with with all that you did for
the work that you did for our
community. Her advocacy, um, was
greatly appreciated.
Her daughter. Actually, Miss
Pam. Quarter was my teacher. Um
I still have some homework that
its duty against him. I'm giving
shirt after the floor. I'll turn
in my my my my English homework,
but, um
What do we talk about people
that make a difference? Uh, she
definitely for our community and
for
For the folks in there. We want
to thank you. Thank the family
for the work that she did. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Um I add my words of gratitude
to your family. Um and, um
Even though I never met your
mother.
I know that every time I walk
into this building, I'm walking
on the shoulders of giants and
she was clearly one of those
giant so it is a true honor to
follow in her footsteps and
hopefully in all of our actions
every single day we we are
continuously aspiring to be like
Gentlemen from Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm not
sure if anyone in the houses
were but there might be a
basketball game tonight. I don't
know if we know that.
Gentlemen, May I, uh, may I
appoint a committee of three to
inform the Senate that we're
ready to go play ball?
I appoint the gentleman from San
Juan representative Duncan.
The gentle lady from Bernal era
percent of our tests.
And the gentleman from Otero
Representative Block. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
I think that we do need. I think
it's just right and that we do
inform the Senate. The House has
been working hard early morning
practices.
Already. This is a you know, Mr
Speaker that the house is going
to get back on the winning side
of things. Just not like the
Dallas Cowboys, Hopefully
And Mr Speaker, Um
To make sure that this game not
that there's going to be any
pulled muscles or any aches or
maybe any sprains, but we do
have a dedicated group of health
care professionals.
That will be making sure that
the Senate is well taken care
of. So, Mr Speaker, I would like
to, uh
Standing recognizing show our
appreciation.
Our distinguished healthcare
professionals in the chamber.
Today they are the athletic
trainers. They play a vital role
in delivering health care to
numerous at individuals across
state from high schools and
universities, hospitals and
corporate industry.
All branches the United States.
Their contributions towards our
kids, and our community is, uh,
His prices.
And we want to thank you for
your continued commitment. I
actually don't know if you guys
can. Mr Speaker if you can
recognize him so we can give
them a I also Mr Speaker. I did
kind of give them some money. I
shouldn't say that on camera,
but to make sure that they take
better care of us in the Senate.
So I
We're gonna We're gonna make
sure that we do everything that
we can get that winning.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. You know,
this is archived forever. So
there you go. Thank you. Thank
you with all the healthcare
professionals here in the
building and take care of our
folks tonight at the basketball
game, so we get that trophy
back.
Members. I've got a couple of
very special guests of mine here
on the rostrum, both from
Albuquerque and very proud of
what Both are doing The first
nominee introducing both, and we
can give them a big round of
applause. The first one is my
good friend and neighbor,
Joaquin Baca, who served several
years as a director of the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district and is now has been
elected to the Albuquerque City
Council for District two, which
is the heart of Albuquerque
Downtown and the North Valley.
Um, also with him, Uh, a good
friend of mine and fellow
Highland High School Hornet
grad Gabriella Blakey, who is
the new superintendent of the
Albuquerque Public schools.
Please join me in welcoming both
to the House of Representatives.
I'm very excited about each of
them is going to do in their new
roles, and especially at the
school district where we know we
need a lot of help, and we've
got a good one leading the way.
Let's go next to the gentleman
from San Miguel and Torrance,
Representative custody, general.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I like to
introduce my guests. Also on the
floor. Mrs Roosevelt Diego's
from New Mexico.
Mr Daniel Garcia from Pueblo,
Kathy Adelaide and her husband,
Pete Villar, from Cena, like
gaggles from Nueva Guy goes from
La Francois. I believe Brandon
Guy goes from a and his wife,
girlfriend.
True Hill, Mr Speaker.
The clerk to read.
We have a certificate in honor
of Commissioner San Miguel
County, Roy Diego's clerk to
read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico.
Having learned of the passing of
Roy Kjos, whereas Roy J. J. J. J
goes past into the arms of the
Lord on December 17th 2023 at
the age of 81, surrounded by his
loving family and friends.
And whereas he was born on April
26th 1942 and being aware of a
new Mexico to Pedro and
Josephina, Gay goes
Whereas Roy attended Alma matter
Catholic school and being a
waiver. It was a lifetime farmer
and rancher who loved his race,
horses and cattle.
And whereas he married the love
of his life. Roosevelt Garcia
Gay goes on October 18th 1963 at
San Miguel del Bado church.
And whereas Roy served as my
other homo for more than 20
years as San Miguel County
commissioner for two consecutive
terms and drove school Busses
for the last Vegas public
schools for many years, and
whereas Roy is preceded in death
by his parents, Pedro and Jorge
Sofina Gallegos, two brothers,
one gay goes
Husband of Caroline and Piquet
goes junior and sister Leonora
Diego's Don
And whereas he is survived by
his beloved wife, Roosevelt
Gallegos, two Children Miriam
Julie Gonzalez, Furman and Mike
Diego's five grandchildren.
Heather Rene Gonzalez, Roman
Furman, Roy Gonzalez, and he
Lika, Adrian Brandon and Dylan
Roy Diego's Jocelyn Great
granddaughter, Mia. Faith Santa,
Three siblings.
Team Yoga Hagos Lorella,
Catherine Ideal are Pete and
candy guy goes, Delfina.
Many other family and friends
now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
condolences be extended to the
family and friends of Roj Gay
goes
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Roy was a
teller of our community, and
it's a pleasure mine to have
this certificate meeting his
memory, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen. And
welcome to the entire Gallegos
family And that family Thank you
for joining us today as we honor
Commissioner Diego's welcome to
the house.
Folks, we've got some guests in
the gallery of Representative
Little's. We've got the Santa
Domingo school. Their
chaperones Alicia Barrera's
Laurie Lee Chavez, Darva
Randolph and 10 students.
Welcome to the House.
Also with representatives little
we've got Martino Leah, who is a
teacher and policy liaison for
Central New Mexico. Community
College. Welcome to the House,
Mr Aaliyah.
Guests of representative Lotta
We've got the guts to in high
school class of 2025 officers
and leaders. Alien raise
President Marlene Raise Vice
President Michael Mora Secretary
Caitlin Cuevas, historian.
Leader said he'll Quintana,
Carla Landeros, Alexandra
Rodriguez and Alexandria
Ramirez. Welcome to the House.
All the way from Gadsden. That's
a far trip.
Gentle lady from Valencia,
Socorro.
Sierra and Katherine. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I stand on a point
of personal privilege. State.
Your point. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I just wanted to bring
to everyone's attention that in
Belinda, Mexico, the safe haven
baby box was utilized. Um, a
couple of days ago, and I just
want to stand in support of
choices for new Mexican parents.
Um, this has been a life saving,
uh,
Function for the Mexico and
we're just so proud.
That they chose.
For that baby to go in the box.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. We've got a
guest or number of guests of
representative medal. I'm not
sure if it's under raise or
Andrea. But
If you're in the gallery, please
rise to be recognized. We've got
the Aspen Community School Fifth
graders sixth graders as well as
their teachers, Margarita Bowl
and Caroline Brown. Welcome to
the house.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to introduce I have 33 and
lasted shadows today and
activity. Just some. The first
young lady is Darlene Fernandez.
Darlene is from farming tonight,
even though she was born here in
the United States were first
language was Spanish. But once
you entered school, she was able
to learn the language, the
English language, much like
myself and Mr Speaker. Spanish
was my first language as well.
Darlene is as always, like to be
active in sports. She's always
trying to put her best and
hardest work when it comes to
school school has, and it's
still something very important
for Darlene, and she can't grow
very to Can't wait to graduate
high school this year to start a
new chapter in her life, and we
want to college to be a
veterinarian. She wants to study
to be a veterinarian, Mr
Speaker. One little fun fact
about Arlene is that she is very
talented in music.
Welcome.
My other shadow that I have. Mr
Speaker is also Performative
ELISA Peru. Ramos Moose 17 Years
old. She was born in Mexico, but
she lives in farming tonight.
She's currently attending at
least a high school and will
graduate in a couple of months.
Ah, at Lisa's first language is
also Spanish. She has a strong
passion for anything, whether
it's music, sports, family,
friends or academics.
She will make sure her grades
are no longer than a no lower
than I am sorry, and we'll get
everything done is a privilege
to be able to attend. School at
least, uh, wants to study
dermatology and college. She
also makes sure she also wants
to make her family proud as much
as you can. And with her growing
up with such high expectations
from seeing her parents work so
hard to get her where she is
today.
She will make sure not to
disappoint. Welcome. Welcome
ELISA last and certainly not
least in my Martinez was born
and raised in Anthony, New
Mexico. She's a
Yeah, she's she's a currently a
junior guest in high school. And
although her experience and
intelligent was recognized since
her youth, Emma has also
participated in extra curricular
activities to broaden her
horizons.
Mm aspires to be a leader of the
future, as well as she continues
on her journey to become an
officer in the United States Air
Force with ambitions to the
United States Air Force Academy
majoring in biology to
eventually become a doctor. I
want him welcome, Emma,
especially and and Mr speaker
fold included. Disclosure. Emma
is my perimeter and I'm really,
really their family is very,
very proud of her. Welcome,
Bella.
Welcome to the House.
Make sure your mobile as you
dinner tonight, Okay?
Um, generated from Berna. Leo,
uh, on
Generally from Santa Fe.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I do have
a shadow today. I'd like to
introduce everybody. This is a
Talia's Sanchez and just she so
happens to be a relative of
another representative. Who's
the Sanchez in our in our house?
Um, and she is a graduate
student in the school of
Education from Coral s New
Mexico.
She's attending Highland
University. She is currently
pursuing her master's degree in
special education with a
concentration in gifted
education. Dalia hopes to
continue her education in either
school psychology or educational
diagnostics and work to improve
educational opportunities for
special education students. Mr.
Speaker, please welcome my
shadow. Talia's Sanchez.
Thank you.
Gentle.
Mm.
Lady from Berlin.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have
the pleasure of introducing
three in Los a legislative
internship people. This is the
fourth day and final day of
their internships. I have
Christian Gonzales Hernandez.
He's from Anthony, New Mexico,
He attends Kasten High School.
He's a member of National Honor
Society and the varsity
basketball team, Although it's
not available tonight to help us
He enjoys hanging out with
friends, Video games watching
football. He's a Swartz to bond
with his family. He first
started speaking English when he
was eight. So he is a total
bilingual. He is going to be a
first generation high school
graduate. He wants to pursue a
major in accounting and finance.
I've suggested working at the
Legislature in the future.
And, um, let's welcome him.
And then I have my a Gaetan.
She's a junior at Las Cruces
High School, where she is
president of best buddies. The
club that links students with
disabilities with students who
don't have disabilities, She's
as her father says LA premiere
er ee ha of a Chicano Padre and
the first daughter of a mother.
Her future aspiration is to
provide for others struggling or
not, with the tools to be able
to manage their mental health
and healthy ways, And she's
determined to prove those who
have doubted her capabilities
wrong and to use their negative
negativity as a motivation to
succeed. I have no doubt she'll
succeed. She's planning to go to
MSU and major in psychology or
social work. Let's welcome her.
And finally, I have Carolina
Reira. She's a junior at
Mayfield High School. She likes
drawing and has been inspired by
Frida Kahlo and Lady Gaga with
their quirky art, um and her
third grade teacher, miss would
completely turned her school
path in another direction when
she was at Highland Elementary.
She really increased her
academic work in law say has
been a deeply meaningful
experience for her at Mayfield
High School and helping her to
emerge with her voice and her
confidence to speak in front of
others. She is currently the
vice president of in Lost, say,
and hopes to be the president
next year. Her goal is to pursue
A degree in nursing or
psychology. Let's welcome,
Carolina and I just wanna thank
everybody from in Los safe for
sponsoring this fabulous program
that's doing so much for young
people throughout the state.
Thank you.
The gentleman from
You see, I lost you.
San Miguel in Torrance.
Representative custodian. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I would also
like to introduce my Shadow Day
and my brain O Connell.
Is a double majoring in
political science and media arts
with an anticipated graduation
date of 2025, the spring of
2025 residing in Las Vegas and
Mexico Community communities.
Kyle's
Hold on against motivation comes
from understanding the
importance of having a well
representative district for
community development. Being
part of the legislative
fellowship, Kyle had hopes to
gain a better understanding of
the legislative process, build
networks and most importantly,
advocate for the next call.
Haydn's Thank you, Speaker like
to welcome Kyle Conway.
Welcome to the House
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Point of
personal privilege.
State your point.
Mr Speaker. I would like to
request the sergeant of arms to
review the cameras today because
ribbon about corn says somebody
stole his potato chips.
So ordered and Mr Speaker, it
just happened that ripping
Falcone by the potato chips.
And, uh, he kind of a little bit
upset and he wants to find out
who took him. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The general lady from Benaglio
represented little with an
announcement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Today is C N. M Day here at the
Capitol. And may I ask if you
would introduce the guests on
the roster?
Oh, it's part of me. I
introduced the gifts on the
rostrum. Forgive me.
Thank you. I would like to
welcome to the house chambers.
Um Tracy Hartzler, CNN's
president, and if you would hold
your applause, please tell I
announce them all. I would
appreciate that.
Uh,
Tom Swiss Tech, who many of you
may some may remember is
pressed, served as past senator
and mayor of Rio Rancho.
Who is now the C N M board
president.
Um and then Chavez Cruz, who is
a board member of C. N. M.
Virginia Trujillo.
And Nancy Baca, who are also CNN
board members. Please join me in
welcoming them, please.
Welcome to the House.
Any other announcement. I have a
certificate that
Mr Speaker. Thank you. There is
a certificate to present and may
I ask the clerk to read
To read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico declares
February 8th 2024 Central New
Mexico Community College Day,
whereas central New Mexico
Community College has provided
New Mexico residents with access
to high quality and affordable,
higher education and training
for 60 years.
And whereas Central New Mexico
Community College serves the
state's largest undergraduate
student body by providing
relevant career technical
education and workforce training
through more than 100 programs
designed to meet New Mexico's
economic and workforce needs and
academic courses and degrees
that transferred to four year
state universities.
And whereas Central New Mexico
Community College is a founding
member of the collaborative for
higher education, shared
services, in which New Mexico
colleges share enterprise level
technology, resources and
processes to create cost
efficiencies while modernizing
and improving the student
experience, the employee
experience and the higher
education experience and whereas
Central New Mexico Community
College continues to support
entrepreneurship
An early stage business through
CNN's into ingenuity, Fuse micro
space.
Venture fund and the hyperspace
Challenge. And whereas Central
New Mexico community colleges
dedicated to its vision of
changing lives, building
community and its mission of
creating futures for our
learners and partners through
leadership and education,
training and innovation,
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
central New Mexico Community
College be recognized for its
many valuable contributions to
the economic well being of New
Mexico and its residents by
proclaiming February 8th 2024
a center in the Mexico Community
College Day in the House of
Representatives signed and
sealed in the capital and the
city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
It is a very special day today,
not only to have
The board of CNN here for CNN
Day, but to also have center
Domingo Elementary School with
me here.
It couldn't have
Been better if I planned it this
way, which was totally
coincidental because I was a
second grader at Santa Domingo
Elementary School.
I went. I went all the way
through when we completed the
sixth grade, and then I went
into the Berlinale public school
systems.
But
I got my start there.
And coming later.
As a nontraditional student to C
N. M.
Ah, actually in 2000. Yes, I was
a nontraditional, aka older
student at C. N. M when I
finally went back, but I got my
associates there.
And there's some really
interesting facts that I think
two pieces that I'd really like
to share.
One. As we heard it serves the
largest understood undergraduate
student body in the state that
number in 2000 and three's fall
term was 19,067 students.
Amazing.
And
A few other, um, notes that I
really important
CNN is number one in a recent,
uh
Department of Education. Um,
study. They found that C N M is
number one among 823 public two
year colleges for the number of
associates and certificates
awarded to Native Americans
number two for degrees and
certificates awarded to
Hispanics and number three for
degrees and certificates awarded
to all students the support
system that I had at CNN was
incredible. There was
There were advisers, the
instructors that were there were
available to talk with me to
help walk me through because I
had to start all over again.
And there was no way that I was
going to
Not be successful unless
I didn't want to be so when the
will is there they are there.
I actually did so well as a
nontraditional student later
became inducted into five Beta
Kappa.
The owner society there at CNN.
And after I received my
associates, I went on to you.
You and M and completed my
finally got my undergraduate
there.
And I am so very appreciative to
C N M two year degree gave me
the skills that certificate that
at the diploma that I needed
that would help me until I was
able to graduate from you and M
in 2016.
Long time in there, but I did
some amazing things and look at
what happens to some of us from
U. C. N M.
So I think you I thank you all
so much. I think Santa Domingo
Elementary School for giving me
a start as well. A wonderful
start. Love you all.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
Do you have any other comments
on the representative Lindstrom?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'd also
like to congratulate CNN for
being here today. It this must
be blast from the past day for
me when I look at the group,
setting up there, particularly,
I remember representative Tom
Swiss stack.
When he served with us and I
remember he sat right in front
of me.
So every time we had an
interesting debate or bill he'd
swing around. Look to see what
the back row was going to do,
But he is a great He was a great
representative in those days and
did a wonderful job for all of
us Also, uh, I see Tracy down
there. There wasn't that many
year handful of years ago that
she was my lfc Higher Ed analyst
and now look, she's president of
the college.
Um, I remember her her work,
particularly in helping us
design a higher ed funding
formula did a lot of work on
that over the years and we
finally got that implemented and
lots of institutions didn't like
it. But we didn't care because
we had to start some from
someplace and we did.
But I'd like to thank the lady
for bringing this forward again.
This is kind of a blast from the
past for me this morning.
And I again want to congratulate
all of you for being here and
for the wonderful lunch box and
the and the great lunch we had
today. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Next. We have the
representative from burning Leo
Representative Delacruz. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Are you want to
talk about two topics this
morning briefly.
First
The reach red chili chips.
The ones that representative
Alkon provides. But
representative Garcia takes
credit.
I just want to warn the body
that
That these are so good.
That you need to keep your eye
on these red chili chips because
Representative.
Sanchez and I are threatening to
start a fight and steal the
chips. Mr Chairman without a
little bit of levity. Um, I also
want to welcome the board of CN
Emma, particularly because I'm
really fond of one of the board
members. My wife, Annette.
And as the body knows, they do
wonderful work for New Mexico
and I'm proud that I was an
instructor there and and I'm
very familiar with the faculty
and what occurs and so it they
attribute to them, and I'm so
happy to see them here every
year because I know that the
body appreciates the work and
you Mexicans in general,
appreciate the work, So we're so
glad you're here. But more
important topic related to C. N.
M.
I'm sure that everybody knows
everybody in the state of New
Mexico knows who the mascot is.
And so, Mr Speaker.
I have a question for you.
What is the name of CNN's
mascot? I don't know. Gentlemen,
please enlighten me.
I am shocked because this
particular mascot is well known
throughout the nation. Nay, the
world
Is the famous son Cat and the
Sun Cat has a name. His name is
Saul.
So welcome CNN board.
Appreciate all of you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. For the
comments on CNN. D yes.
The representative from Berna,
Leo representative Random
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr
Chair. I rise today to give a
special thanks to the president
of C N. M. Tracy hearts there
for her vision and guidance and
being the woman who says I am
going to recognize recognize
women in the trades. This is the
third year that they will be
hosting that event and we are
exceptionally proud of that. So
let's give her a big hand.
And Mr Speaker. I also would
like to honor and thank the
board for supporting President
Hartzler. Because without them,
we wouldn't have women who are
going to be welders. They're
going to be electricians.
They're going to be construction
workers, and they are helping to
grow our own. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Next. We
have the young lady from Berna.
Leo, representative Casey.
Think it thank you very much, Mr
Speaker and thank you very much
for this certificate because Mr
Speaker, the main campus of CNN
is in my legislative district,
and I
I've been there often drive
through it often. I try to make
all of the meetings for
legislators that are held at
CNN. I am so thrilled with the
leadership, um, with Tracy
hardliners work and with the
board and all of the work you're
doing. I am in fact, dedicated
some of my grow money to their
structured literacy program.
Thanks a lot for being here. And
for all the work you do.
Thank you. Next. We have the
gentleman from Brasilia
representative. Really?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members of the body. I want to
thank CN M we when I have
students that go to college and
those who go to college at C N M
I really appreciate it because
the instructors are closer to
their students than you and M.
Um, I wanna also talk about a
couple of people up there. Uh,
Representative Daily Cruises
Internet We are friends and then
Tom Swiss Stack Tom Swiss Stack
was in this legislature.
And I sat next to him in the
Judiciary Committee.
And you know when you look at
The the history that he's made
for the state mayor, You know,
representatives, Senator, you
know now on the board, Great,
great.
Accomplishments. And lastly, I
was an instructor at T V. I
For their traffic investigative
classes.
Anyway. CNN great job and thanks
for lunch, but
Next. We have the gentle lady
from Burnley on Sandoval,
Representative Cates. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I to rise to thank
us CNN's leadership. We've We've
talked a lot about
representative Swiss tack, but I
know him as mayor, Swiss Tech
and so, But I want to thank all
the leadership and the delicious
lunch. Um, I too I've taken
classes in both my adult
Children obtained classes at C.
N. M.
Um, I have a cousin that works
at CNN. But I want to rise and
let you know that my father who
passed almost 14 years ago next
month, Um, he started off as a
police officer, a union pipe
fitter and worked his way as an
executive and in retirement.
We talked about what would be
his dream job in his dream job
was to teach.
And C. N M offered him that
opportunity. He taught those H
vac classes. It was probably,
you know, out of all this fancy
jobs. That was his favorite job
of all time, and I will tell you
when we knew he was passing 11
days before he died. He entered
his own grades into the system,
and he couldn't have been more
proud. Thank you very much CNN.
Thank you. Next. We have the
gentleman from Sandoval
represented on this.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I also
rise with a thank you to CNN. M.
Um as some of you guys know, I
recently graduated from C N. M.
On my way to getting my
bachelor's and I want to thank
President Hartzler and the rest
of the board and you know, Mayor
Or representatives. Senators. I
don't know all kinds of names
for for for Tom up there, but
thank you guys so much Without
your help. I would have never
gotten through it. So thank you.
Thank you, sir. Next we have a
gentleman from Sandoval
represented Harper. You have a
guest?
Mr Speaker. Thank you for that.
I introduced my guest yesterday.
He's just love this place so
much. He wanted to come back
again. So thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we
have the gentleman from Otero
representative block.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I have a
report for you from the Senate.
Mr Speaker Myself and
representative Ortez and
representative Duncan, we we
paraded ourselves around to the
Senate with our beautiful
jerseys with beautiful Aggies.
Of course, Mr Speaker, and we
couldn't find a senator to be
seen. They were seen fleeing the
scenes looking for anywhere but
the house. Mr Speaker. I believe
they're shaking in their boots
and I will knock on wood here,
but I believe we may be tasting
victory tonight. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for the good vibes.
Up. Next We have the gentle lady
from Bert from Bert Naleo
representative Bachmann
behavior.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And today
I am riding high because it's
transportation Day at the
roundhouse.
Ah, no. Three page long
certificates, But I'm going to
let everybody know that the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation is all in the
rotunda. Right now. They've got
lots of swag. Go meet them. Go
talk to them. We also have a lot
of contractors here from the
Associated Contractors of New
Mexico. Go meet them as well
because together
They spend about $100 million a
month.
Of your money in New Mexico and
again transportation
infrastructures really important
to everything we do in this
state, and, um, on behalf of an
n d O T.
Ah, I am thinking all of you for
your service and go visit them.
You can also go drive an
electric car outside the
roundhouse if you want to. I'm
about to do that, too. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Mr
Speaker, Lady from Bergoglio,
Representative, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Representative of the
Lady from Burnley, a
representative Hawkman, Vol. I
drove a Ford truck Electric
truck today and it was terrific
and they have a selection of
cars. And if you have a little
time you can take it out on the
highway. I had not enough time,
So I
Just grow on the city streets,
so I didn't get to really open
it up. But it was. It was really
wonderful. So take advantage of
that. They'll be out there till
four. I think
And there there on the east side
for the said they were gonna be
on the West side, but they moved
over to the side. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Gentle lady
for the update.
I would also like to announce
that well, today's CNN College
Community College Day and
there's a luncheon that sent in
a house chambers from 11 to 11
to from 11 to 130 invitation.
Only members please make note.
We also have the 2024 hoops or
hope. Legislative basketball to
Nate basketball game tonight is
that the Indian school at seven
o'clock tip off time at seven.
Let's let's let's show up in
force members.
We also have another
announcement Public Health day
on on the 12th adult flu and
covid vaccines will be offered
by opponent or walk up while
supplies Last general Lady from
Bern, Elio for third reading.
Speaker. I move on to that order
business third reading of
legislation.
I see no objection. So order the
gentleman from Rio River
Sandoval and San Juan counties.
Yes, Mr Speaker, would you
please get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Bill 134 is twice
submitted on final passage has
been taken in is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, Gentlemen to
explain the bill and Mr Speaker,
I do have an amendment for the
bill. So if you can, please pass
it out.
Okay. Thank you. We'll take a
moment to get that amendment
passed out, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Would you like to
explain the bill? In the
meantime, while we get that
passed out
Absolutely so the amendment
that's being passed out now and
I can't wait to read the T 02
number or do you want to always
up, okay?
So as we're passing up the
amendment to this piece of
legislation what I'm presenting
today is House Bill 134, which
is the tribal education Trust
fund bill and the main purpose.
Of this bill is to establish a
new Travel Asian Education Trust
fund to strengthen the capacity
of New Mexico's tribes, nations
and problems to support their
native students in education.
This long term investment will
generate stable and consistent
funding for tribal educations
for years to come.
House Bill two currently as it
sits in the Senate and passed
through here, including
appropriation of $50 million to
establish, said Tribal Education
trust fund and at this point, Mr
Speaker, I would wait until the
amendment is passed out so that
I can explain the amendment.
Member says everyone received
the amendment.
Gentlemen to move the amendment
Read the 200 to 2 number,
please. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
The 202 number is point.
228077.3
Thank you, gentlemen to explain
the amendment. Thank you. I will
go through a paragraph by
paragraph analysis of this
amendment.
Amendments number one and number
two. Remove most earlier
amendments. The number one
strikes most of the House
education amendments, leaving in
place only the correction one
made to the distribution amount.
This is because I had requested
the in House Education Committee
amendments in response to my
discussion with tribes.
But that response was
insufficient. Excuse me.
Today's amendment replaces that
with a new solution, which means
that we can strike the task
force and the entire section of
this bill.
Secondly, changes to the HFC
amendment.
While we were in HFC last
Friday, which intended to remove
the appropriation, but also
mistakenly struck the phrase
making appropriations in the
title. LCS staff advised that
because the trust fund makes
regular disbursements, this
phrase should remain so we
replaced that again simply based
on the mistake in drafting or
for the amendments.
Changes to the original bill.
Number three. The title
recognizes the role of the
public Education Department and
its duties within this bill.
Fourth subsection D Page two
after line 19
Clarifies how the State
investment office will
distribute the funds to the
public Education Department in
the first five years.
Before transitioning to the five
year average of year and market
values, which is standard
language in any state investment
counsel.
The fifth inserts a new
subsection e at the top of Page
three.
This gets really to the heart of
the amendment.
We add language that outlines
the process for the public
Education Department and for all
pueblos, tribes and nations to
develop a formula for
distributing funds from said
Trust fund.
The formula has to be equitable
and consider both education
capacity needs within each
tribal community as well as
student population.
Tribes and the public Education
Department have to engage in a
process of consultation
collaboration and communication
to achieve a unanimous
consensus. This is really at the
heart and and follows what the
state
Tribal collaboration Act is all
about an existing law.
Indigenous peacemakers. If it
comes to this point may be
appointed if there is a dispute
amongst those tribal nations in
regards to the dispersement
formula of this trust fund.
The formula has to be finalized
by June 1st of 2025, just in
time for its first distribution.
Number six and number eight
lettering subsections.
Number seven at the beginning of
the old subsection F Page three
line 19.
Clarifies the trust fund
beneficiaries of being New
Mexico tribes and their students
in New Mexico Educational
Institution nine through 12, old
subsections, G and H pages three
and four.
Removes repetitive and redundant
languages.
Number 13 through 16 old
subsections I and J, which is an
page number four, consolidates
these two sections and
simplifies tribal reporting
requirements.
To some to summarize.
Tribal accountability.
Will be ensured through each
tribe's submission of an annual
plan.
Spending report.
An assessment of impacts and
outcomes.
Number 7317 through 20.
Changing references and
clarifying language, which is on
page number five.
Number 21 remove subsection end
Top of Page five. Top of Page
six. Bottom of Page five. Top of
Page six. Excuse me.
Which strikes administration
fees for the public Education
Department.
We were concerned that public
education's additional duties
would be so minimal.
That they don't merit an
additional full time employee
for the disbursement of these
funds.
Number 22 and 23 subsection o
page six lines seven through
eight.
A slight reversion to the
definition of New Mexico tribes.
24 and 26 relating of
subsections and finally
Strike Section two, which
contains the process of
developing a distribution
formula, which has now been
simplified and then now move to
subsection E. And with that Mr
Speaker, I would stand for any
questions.
Thank you. Gentlemen is their
debate on the bill.
I mean, I mean, under Amendment.
My apologies. The representative
from San Juan Representative
Ellison.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Good morning, Mr Speaker and
members of the House stand up
this morning as a proud co
sponsor of this bill.
Before us. This is an
unprecedented effort to
establish such a trust fund.
To support tribes to support
their Children in their own
communities.
Nearly 150 years since the first
Indian education policy was
introduced in the late
18 sixties through 18 eighties,
education has been used as a
process to assimilate us.
It has definitely devastated
generations of our people.
I do not know how many in this
body know that the first
Indian education policy was
purposely designed to kill our
language and kill our culture by
removing Children from their
language and culture and denying
them their language and culture.
It was the beginning of the
removal of Children from their
families and their communities
to boarding schools across the
country.
The United States built
literally hundreds and hundreds
of these boarding schools,
including those in New Mexico.
It was one of the cruelest
policy generations for our
people were subjected to,
including my generation.
It was not until 1990 that
Congress changed that policy.
The same government that 100
years previously enacted the
policy to kill languages that
declared a new policy.
A new policy that Congress
declared stating that it was
their duty and responsibility.
To protect and preserve
indigenous languages and support
tribes to sustain this essential
part of our way of life. That
was only 34 years ago.
We did the same here in Mexico
just a few years ago.
We were forced into integration
into public schools in the 19
thirties after the devastation
of generations subjected to
federal boarding schools.
It was not until 19 fifties that
the policy prohibiting the use
of our language in school which
resulted in punishment was
lifted.
The punishment was usually
washing our mouths out with
soap.
Ladies and gentlemen, this
prohibition was during my time.
I hear stories from my relatives
telling me about
The times that they were forced
to wash their mouths out with
soap for speaking their
language.
It took a lawsuit decided in
2018 to bring to our attention
that in my time and in the time
of my Children, my grandchildren
in our time as members of this
body that such injustice and
inequities continue.
It took my Neverhood sister.
Will Amina Yossi on behalf of
her Children that in America in
our land of enchantment.
That it was time for change. She
became the namesake in Yossi
Martinez.
This legislation is the
beginning of that change more
important than the money of $50
million is the idea that a trust
fund be established and our
sovereign nations being named as
the beneficiaries on behalf of
their Children.
This action speaks volumes that
we could and can be that change
in New Mexico.
This is historic and is
monumental.
This will be the first of its
kind in the nation. We have
dreams, too. Ladies and
gentlemen of the house. Our
dream is that this is just the
beginning.
And that future generations will
benefit from our dreams and our
vision on their behalf.
I am proud to stand here with my
colleagues to see this through
and that this becomes a reality.
It will be the first time that
such a trust fund is established
to support the tribes to build
their capacity to become strong
partners with our schools.
It will support tribes to
develop community based
programs invest resources to
support their languages.
To provide students with
enrichment programs and support
services in their own
communities.
I am also proud that my brother
representative Derek plenty, has
made significant efforts to work
with all the sovereign nations
that resulted in unanimous
support for the bill before us
I want to thank my colleagues
for working hard to reach out to
our tribal nations to gain their
support.
And assure them that the
principles of justice and equity
for our Children is that the
heart of this legislation
I appreciate that there will be
a process that is inclusive and
there are traditional values and
principles will guide or tribal
leaders to provide equity for
all the tribal nations on behalf
of our Children.
I want to thank my colleagues
across the aisle.
Who supported our efforts to
bring this onto the floor today.
I stand proud to support this
piece of legislation.
In my time here, I can say that.
Let's legislation will stand to
be one of my proudest moments in
my service here as a legislator,
as I said, it is not always
about money, but gestures of
goodwill.
This will be an example to the
nation that we do things
differently in New Mexico.
And days like today brings me
great pride.
It stirs great emotion in me
that future generations can look
back and say thank you to us
when in their time.
They will speak of us as their
ancestors.
We will. They will thank us for
our vision.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, representative Lenti
and the co sponsors and thank
you, ladies and gentlemen.
My colleagues.
Of the House.
I urge your support for this
historic piece of legislation on
behalf of our Children and
grandchildren and all those yet
to be born.
I wish to close by saying that
in my tradition as a Navajo
We plan historic and monumental
events. We gather our elders
into Hogan.
Hogan that is built very, very
similarly to this roundhouse.
It is a roundhouse that has no
corners.
Yeah.
It is a roundhouse that is that
has its opening to the East.
That is where
What is gathered, There is the
great wisdom.
I see that great wisdom in this
round house today.
We include the wisdom of the
elders, as we include the wisdom
of the youth as well.
To generate new ideas going
forward.
Ladies and gentlemen.
I ask for your support of this
legislation. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Mr Lenti.
Thank you gentlemen, just to
ruin her colleagues that we are
debating the amendment.
Um
We do have debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
San Juan representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Chair does
Does the gentleman yield Mr
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I appreciate this
amendment That's coming forward
this morning because or this
afternoon, Mr Speaker, um,
because I know we weren't there.
On Friday.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate
The negotiations, which I know
we're hours throughout the
weekend to come to
An answer.
And Mr Speaker. I do just have a
couple of questions about the
amendment just just to make sure
I completely understand.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
Item five Section E.
There is a term that I'm that
I'm not necessarily familiar
with and you could
Just work with me on it.
Unanimous consensus.
I know what unanimous consent is
and I know what consensus is.
But could you just briefly
explain to me unanimous
consensus?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan. It's a
I guess I can say in this way
we're talking about a
traditional sovereign consensus
that's based upon discussions
between sovereign sovereign
governments to which is
recognized by our tribes here in
New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, That's what I
Initially I was concerned about
that language because I thought
they were at odds. But as I
spoke with some folks, that
does, I believe mean that it
that
Consensus but still
Everyone needs to be an
agreement. And then I saw the
following
The continuation of that on Page
two that with the option of
appointing peacemakers to the
process if the process gets
Gets bogged down, so I believe
Miss Speaker and gentlemen, this
gets to where, um
Where I can encourage
The body to support this
amendment.
But I just once again I
appreciate you allowing me into
the process.
And I appreciate the Navajo
nation and they're working with
you as well. And with obviously
with representative Allyson in
this process, so I just
appreciate, uh, I appreciate
that. And representative
Allyson, I appreciate your
leadership on this. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Thank you. There's further
debate on the amendment. The
general lady from Achille
Representative Lunchroom. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield Mr Speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
McKinley County. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen, just a couple of
tidbits of information. I'm the
longest serving house member.
Um
That has represented a native
district.
In the entire chamber.
So I'm very concerned about
making sure that there's equity
for the people that I represent.
And I have a couple questions
regarding item five E.
When the statement is an
equitable formula that considers
Native Americans student
populations and tribal education
capacity needs, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, what is tribal
education capacity needs.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. What
That means is well.
All tribes in the state are at
different sizes and different
capacity levels. What this
directly goes to his providing
and looking at the capacity
needs within each individual
tribe, Pueblo, our nation to see
what type of needs they would
have within those communities.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, Would
this be done by the New Mexico
Public Education Department?
Mr Speaker and gently. No,
ma'am. It will be done by the as
mentioned here on government to
government basis between the
tribes, pueblos and the nation's
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
when the decision or matrix for
determining equitable formula
On student population and tribal
education capacity needs. It
would not be done by the state.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. No,
ma'am.
Yeah, that That was the part. I
was a little bit confused, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because when
it says that the beginning the
public Education department
shall distribute the annual
funding
From the tribal Education Trust
fund.
Is that Mr Speaker? Gentlemen,
the distribution then based on
the recommendation of the
tribes.
Mr Speaker and gentility. You're
exactly correct.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, is
there some kind of a board or
how does that work?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, what
we did in this process to bring
it to a point of the amendment
today is that we simplified it
by taking out there was a second
step initially, uh, when I
approached appropriations, and
that people had conflict with
and that was the establishment
of a task force, we eliminate
that altogether, too. Then just
bring back simply.
Tribal leaders in their capacity
to then have this kind of
foundational meeting to
determine disbursement
mechanism.
And that PDS function purely
administrative to make sure that
money goes out as the tribes see
fit.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen who
would actually
Be responsible for pulling
everybody together and then
providing the statistical
information that decisions are
based on
Mr Speaker and gentle Lady, the
Public Education Department
would have that function to come
through as a facilitator. If you
want to call it that between the
tribes.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, when
we talk about student
populations, are we going to
include all the schools such as
In McKinley County, Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, we have b I a
schools. We have charter
schools. We have the McKinley
County public schools. Would it
be everybody, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady? Yes, ma'am.
I'm glad to hear that because we
have so many different
designations of schools.
Um
Sometimes it's hard to get our
arms around it.
And how many? Actually we have
in student population, at least
in my area.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
The public Education Department
would serve as the facilitator
come up with a statistical
information.
Ah then the tribes would all
come together in a meeting and
make the determination of how
district the distribution is
done.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Gentle
lady. Yes, ma'am, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and that would
obviously it's you said earlier
would be based on plan and
outcomes and all that kind of
stuff.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes,
ma'am.
Already. And do you anticipate
Mr Speaker, gentlemen that those
measurements would be different
than what the public Education
Department uses.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I
think we're talking about more
culturally appropriate type of
measurement versus what PD would
impose on our students.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, with
the distribution
It would then go to the tribal
The tribal government.
Could it be used as a
supplement, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen to what's happening in
the public schools. So as an
example they have those after
school programs. I can't
remember the name of it, but it
was a big big thing a few years
ago, and it's worked out really
well.
Yeah, Mr Speaker and gentle
ladies so currently during my
tenure in this legislature, I
have sought to provide funding
for tribal governments to
provide capacity for programming
and and that programming dollar
is reflected under tribal rural
extended learning programs and
so many of the tribes today have
access to this type of funding.
But it's very political, and
it's year after year recurring
funding that we have to ask for.
And what the funding is being
used for today are before school
programming after school
programming, language
programming things of this
nature.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, That's
what I was really trying to get
out is And can it be used, Mr
Speaker, then this distribution
in, uh, a collaboration with
existing programs at the tribes
feel are successful.
Mr Speaker and gentility.
Absolutely.
Alrighty. I just wanted to ask a
few questions. I've had a number
of constituents texting me about
this, and I certainly wanted to
be clear. Mr. Speaker. I thank
the gentleman for his answers on
this. Obviously, I will.
Be supporting this bill, but I
just wanted to be clear for the
constituents and they could hear
it over the loudspeaker. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen. There is further
debate on the amendment. The
young lady from Achilleas and
one representative Johnson.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
Mr.
My little brother.
Uh, gentlemen, from Rio, Reba
Sandoval and San Juan counties.
This is, um
I'm asking almost the same
questions as representative
Montoya and representative lunch
drum. I just want to reassure,
and I don't know if you have
anything else to add, gentlemen.
But would you explain the
support of our tribes nations in
pueblos?
And the support of this
amendment. If you have any more
details to add, Thank you,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
counties. So the support has
always been there in the
establishment and recognition of
a tribal education Trust fund.
Dollar figure but the practice
of how we get to distribution.
That's what we had to figure
out what's the best path forward
to ensure that, uh, we're not
being dictated to by, uh, Public
Education Department or any
other state funded organization
versus having tribes have the
autonomy to create distribution
formulas themselves and so in
the past
Since Friday, after I had went
to the Appropriations Committee.
I made the commitment there in
the Appropriations Committee to
the members as well as those
that stood up for public comment
that I would go back and and
work on this to which we have
worked on this extensively over
the over the past several days
and have come to a point now
where
All the tribes.
Apache, Navajo and Pueblo have
come together again to once
again endorsed and appreciate
what's in front of you today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and you mentioned and
we know we are tribes within
tribes, and we have varying
demographics and Geographics. So
with that, how did you get our
tribes to work together for that
support?
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady, if you
think whipping 70 votes in this
room is difficult. Um, you know
when you can bring together
sovereign nations all across our
state to focus on on one goal
That's really the work that was
put in by not just me, but we
have a team of amazing
individuals all across our
state. That really
Truly understand that this is
about our kids, and I'm so glad
and thankful for all of our
pueblos nations and tribes for
two appreciating that this is
not about today, But this is
about tomorrow. So we came
together and and over a number
of days came to this agreement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I think it would be
good to explain why we're always
asking Why? Why should our
tribes be the beneficiaries of
this new trust fund?
What difference would it make
for our tribes and our Children?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
That's that's a great question.
And so in in the assessments of
if you grew up on a reservation
if you grew up as a native
American and were part of the
public school educational
process, or even before then
were part of the federal head
Start program. It had always
been in a simulation process to
make Native Americans more like
everybody else.
And so what This does is it
pushes back against 200, plus
years of federal policies that
sought to erase native Americans
from this nation.
And says, Well, we know how to
school teach our Children best.
So this is what we plan to do,
and that's how in the small
short time that we have been
here and in the provided
programming to the tribes, they
know how to teach their Children
best. They know that language is
important. That's why they have
implemented such great language
programs, and I'll give you
examples of like
Curious Children Learning center
or the wallet to schools or a
number of other institutions now
that are developed, developing
themselves to teach language
that
In many cases, Mr Mr Speaker and
and generated from McKinley and
San Juan counties, Children that
attend that live
On tribal lands don't have the
same opportunities that students
that maybe attend. Urban schools
have
We don't have the luxury of
going down the street to a
library. We don't have the
luxury of after school program
programming because we have to
get back on that bus to be bused
back in our to our homes to then
go to a place that doesn't have
a WiFi connection, so there are
a number of discrepancies an
unfortunate discrepancies around
this. And so that's why I'm so
proud once again to bring
This piece of legislation with
the amendment that we're talking
about right now to ensure that
all tribes at this point our
understanding and appreciate and
endorse this piece of
legislation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that's silly.
Would you explain how this bill
is related to the 2018 Yossi
Martinez ruling Mr Speaker and
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan counties. It's directly
related, and I think it provides
a great path forward. If you
recall back in 2019. It was the
year of the great education
Moonshot.
And it was. That was a year
after the decision in Yossi
Martinez
I I have worked extremely hard
on seeing the Moonshot takeoff
and I have We have limped along
to light the fuse. And so at
this point in time, it's this
type of bold thinking to really
ignite this type of change
within our state for our
students, especially those named
as plaintiffs in the Yossi
Martinez lawsuit, So I think
it's directly tied to that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen, should we have
over 500 federally recognized
tribes.
Within our United States or
country.
Do we have any other such trust
funds in our country that you
know of
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. This
would be the first
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
There is further debate The
general Lady from idiot Lee
representative Brown.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker,
Will the gentleman from Rio
Arriba Sandoval and San Juan,
please yield. Mr Speaker, I
yield to the gentle lady from
Eddy and Lea counties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So, um, um
On this amendment. I just want
to congratulate you for the
progress that's being made
through this proposed amendment.
I remember in house
Appropriations and finance
Committee just a short while ago
we had a very long discussion
about this bill.
And, according to public
comment, Mr Speaker, there were
some people who were very
unhappy with a certain part of
the bill. But it appears that,
um this floor amendment does a
lot of fine tuning to the bill
And the question I have is for
those Mr Speaker, gentlemen who
were in opposition to the bill
as written, are they now
satisfied with
This floor amendment Modifying
the bill. Mr Speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Yes,
And and by way of correspondence
through letter, both the Navajo
Nation President Office of the
president and the Navajo Nation
Council wrote their full support
for this amendment and the bill
as it as it looks today.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So once
again, I commend you for the
extra work that was done.
Sometimes we find the bill being
presented and we just kind of
locked down because we have the
votes to pass it. But in this
case, this is if this four
amendment is adopted, I believe
this will be a much better bill
that will serve a great many
students in communities. So
appreciate all the work that
went into this, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen again, Thank you.
Thank you, General Lady. The
representatives from San Juan
Leader Lane is not saying no
further debate, Gentlemen.
Gentlemen are closer.
Amendment on the amendment.
Okay. Thank you for the
clarification. So at this point,
Mr Speaker, I would move. House
floor Amendment number one to
House Bill 134.
As amended.
There.
There is a motion to adopt the
amendment for hospital. 134 is
twice amended, Uh, House Floor
Amendment number one.
All those in favor for adopting
an amendment. Please signify by
saying, Aye.
Any opposed.
Been adopted, Amendment adopted
gentlemen.
The German used to have the
floor.
Mr Speaker. At this point, I
would stand for any questions.
Seeing debate on the amendment.
I mean, on the bill, I'm sorry.
Uh, we have the gentleman from
Colfax Curry Harding, son,
Beginning Union County's
representatives, Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There's a gentleman yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from
Jeez, all those counties
Ah, Mr Speaker.
This is the third time I've seen
this bill.
And I
I really want to commend the
gentleman for being able to
bring so many people together.
And I just want to go back over
a little bit like
Like, say, I've seen it three
times in three different forms
because it's changed every time
I've seen it.
Ah, so
Uh, Mr Speaker.
23 tribes that correct
There are a number of tribes in
this day. Yes, sir.
Mr Speaker does that include the
Alamo Navajo band, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, includes all of
Navajo Nation.
Thank you.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Uh,
According to my calculations.
This funding would produce about
2.5 million per year.
Currently at 5% interest. I
believe
Is that somewhere close to the
amount of anticipated Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, you are correct.
So, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. How much is that Poor
tribe.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we're
not there yet. And that was the
reason for this amendment is
because we want to make sure
that tribes will have the
ultimate authority to come
together and determined
dispersement formulas.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
Divided evenly. It's a little
over 100,000
Uh,
Are you saying that it's not
divided evenly? It's just
decided amongst the leadership
where it will be a portion
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
that's where in the amendment it
talks about tribal capacity
needs as well as student
population, so it will be a
little bit of figure of both.
So the probably the
The tribes with the larger
populations might have a little
more need and might
Receive a little more funding,
Possibly Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, That's probably true,
Yes.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I would have
I think we've spoken before.
And I would be remiss if I
didn't
Tell you today.
How much
That's cowboys have in common.
With y'all.
We really would like some self
determination.
We would like the ability
To decide if a four day school
week
Was the best suited for our
lifestyle, our remote areas and
for our Children's education.
Because I believe that
The people that live here in New
Mexico.
Live in various different places
in different ways and someone
that lives.
Right in the middle of downtown
Albuquerque.
Might not have.
That much in common with
somebody that lived, although we
have many commonalities and many
things that bind us together.
There are different things about
someone that lives in the middle
of the Navajo nation.
Or someone that lives.
Harding County.
With a population of 610.
No grocery store.
Limited gas station even
available.
So I believe that one of the
great things that this nation
Has two provided
Is self determination.
And I support that.
And, uh,
What say you?
Gentlemen, was that Was that a
question?
That was
Mr Speaker. I didn't hear the
what Say you part? I agree. I
agree. It's just something that
that as as representatives, the
few of us that are here that
represent Native American in
Mexico have been pushing for a
number of years to make sure
that those that have been most
disenfranchised can get their
first shot.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I appreciate that. I appreciate
your support, and I support your
bill.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative Johnson.
Thanks, Mr Speaker and as the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker and gentility from
McKinley in San Juan. A yield
Thank you. I just wanted to tell
you
A little story as I was asking
representative Lynn to these
questions, a memory.
Surfaced about my grandparents
and I
It was probably about 10 years
old and I was spending time with
my grandparents and they looked
at me and they said
Hmm. What will we leave you?
Our grandchild.
And they answered, and they said
we will leave you our land.
We will leave you our language.
We will leave you our culture.
We will leave you our prayers.
In our way of life.
And then it will be up to you to
carry on and protect our values
with 42.
As they said, of course, in our
Navajo language.
And they said after that, you
will know what you will know
what to do.
You will be are moored.
With all that we leave you
So this is Endo enough? Hadn't a
door
Is how we say it. And now the
whole
Then they went on to talk about
education.
And my grandpa said education is
life itself.
From dawn till sunset.
We are learning. We learn.
And so now it is a privilege.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr
Speaker.
That we leave a gift of
education.
For our Children for many
generations to come.
So Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
representative Lenti, thank you
for the work on this, and I am
proud to to be a co sponsor.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. There has been a
request for the gentleman to
remove their coats.
So moved
Knicks. There's further debate.
Next. We have the general lady
from Berna, Leo, representative
Robot hero. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
sponsor, please yield I yield to
the gentle lady from Berlin
County.
Thank you very much, Um
So this is a very emotional
moment. Uh, for me.
And I will do my best.
In tears.
Which I've been doing.
Far too often the last this last
year.
This is, um, a significant
moment as my
Sister colleague.
Because
As I was growing up.
Many, many times.
Um, education.
Was seen as a way
Escape.
As a way to advance.
As a way to as a way to pay for
the rent.
Of our house so many ways and
As a way to, um
Overcome.
The pain.
The anguish.
The understanding and the
knowing.
Of the history.
Of how our
People in particular, might what
they've had to endure.
For generations. And I say pain
because
My I would sit around the
kitchen table in Las Cruces,
listening to stories.
My grandfather was the head
chief of his tribe.
For many, many years. He was
also the natural heat and for
the city and everyone who wanted
to come and get healed in Las
Cruces.
And Mr Speaker, he would talk
about
The many stories
But the heart wrenching part of
it all was
How he has brothers, sisters,
cousins.
And those before him suffered.
Being taken away from their
homes.
Here.
And Santa Fe and Albuquerque.
And how that was one of the most
devastating things.
That he could endure.
Because he was stripped away.
From his family, his parents
The same thing happened to my
father.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
What brings tears to my eyes.
On a regular basis.
Is the stories of my father.
Having to go to school.
Barefoot.
In Las Cruces, the elementary
school
Because they did not have enough
money.
To buy shoes.
My mother would say, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
He even wore high waters pants
because
They were recycled.
Between all the cousins down to
My father and his siblings.
But education was so important.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that my
father would stand outside of
the classroom.
My mother would hope that have
the door open.
The Windows Open.
So that he could hear.
The lessons.
Of the day in each of his
classes.
And then later in the day, my
mother would sit with him.
And they would go through the
homework assignments.
And she would make sure that he
understood and learned so that
he could pass.
His grades. Mr Speaker.
Education.
Is one of the very basic tenants
of our constitution.
Not just as the United States
but of the state.
We guarantee
A good
Successful.
Education, sufficient education.
To all who wish to seek
That education in order to
Seek
Whatever their dreams are,
whatever their career paths or
whatever it is that they choose
to seek.
We guarantee
This education.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, my
family felt so strongly.
About that, Um
That
When my father left home, it was
to make a living.
So that he could send money home
to his parents to help with his
siblings.
And he promised
That he would ensure if he when,
if, and when he had Children.
Which he ended up having three
daughters.
That he would be able to
provide not just a basic and
sufficient education in his
view.
But because of his experiences
He wanted to ensure
That we received.
In his view and my mother's view
of the very best.
Of education.
Any worked very hard. 34 almost
34 years in the military, US
Army
In order to be able to provide
that to us.
For us.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
It.
Every day when I wake up
It amazes me.
How this country
Has had to witness be witnessed.
To the historic
Erasers that have occurred.
Of our culture of our traditions
of our practices.
We've been witness to
Historical atrocities.
We've been victims of the worst
pain.
Violence that a people can feel
in these
United States.
And it pains me.
That I'm my family is part of
that history.
There's been we've talked
Many a time here and in
committee.
And we've read. We've all gone
through school and those of us
that were privileged to be able
to know the real history of
these United States.
We understood very
How important it was.
That we went through, Um, the
treaty.
And the treaty negotiations.
However, however, we have also
witnessed
Violation after violation after
violation of these treaties.
And land thefts that have
occurred historically.
In an attempt to annihilate
Native American populations in
these United States.
There's no way you can gloss
over that history. There's no
way you can deny that history.
We know it. We feel it. We
believe it. It's in our blood.
And we feel it every single day
of our existence.
So in the name Mr Speaker.
And I pulled up my family. Um
May Mr Speaker may ask for quiet
in the room, please.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I pulled up my my own family
history as it relates.
And it's so similar to everybody
else is here. So
I do want to say that I want to,
um, the time has come.
It's beyond time.
That we in this state of New
Mexico.
Recognized the value the
importance
The significance.
Uh, of
Our native American populations,
not just the past.
The president before our future
Children and future generations
to come, and that's why
I and I'm
Honored.
To be a co sponsor of this
legislation is
I have in previous years.
But this fund is a drop in the
bucket.
Remediation.
For
Generations that have been
disenfranchised from
opportunities, educational
opportunities, economic
opportunities and all
opportunities in this state and
in these United States.
So when we look at it, I asked
my colleagues, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen not to look at it from
a monetary value.
Or for how much of it we're
going to get back. What's our
return?
Our return.
Is in the form of an apology.
For what has been stripped from
us.
All these generations.
This is
Yet just the beginning.
If I may.
Of attempting
To correct
Historic our historical past.
And to bring to light
Yep.
Where our Children will study.
The truth.
Behind.
Who they are, what they are.
And importantly, the
significance that they bring to
the table and the value.
Of those cultural traditions and
practices language.
That they bring to share with
others.
In the classroom.
Those Children will be the
leaders.
It doesn't matter.
When they come What generation
they will be the leaders of that
classroom.
Because they're coming
culturally and linguistically
enriched.
And they're bringing the very
core of who they are.
To help educate everyone in that
classroom.
As to who that and what that
core represents, Mr Speaker.
So I will name. Uh, Mr Speaker.
I have one question for the
gentleman.
Um
Gentlemen, can you
Recall the year that the Indian
Education Act was enacted.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady that
was in 2000 and speaker and
thank you, gentlemen.
2003 think about it. My
colleagues.
We had to file a lawsuit.
I think I can't remember. I
think it was 2017.
Around 20.
2019
We had to file a lawsuit even
though we had Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Enacted an education act, which
in my view, Mr Speaker was, um
Was an effort.
Um, very, um
Dehumanizing effort.
Because
The tribes in this state had to
come forward.
As we do every year.
In that year.
To it.
What I began with as being what
should be a basic constitutional
right in our nation and our and
humiliating because and and
humbling I should say maybe not
humiliating, humbling.
Because
We came forward and past that in
the Indian Education Act yet our
Children continue to fail.
Our communities continue to be
poor, impoverished more so than
ever before.
Our communities continue to
Seek
Opportunity, but face poverty at
every turn.
To the point where it took a
major lawsuit.
To disrupt
These
Practices.
To disrupt the practices and to
Regain.
Once again our footing and our
place.
That is rightfully ours in this
state.
Mr Speaker and
Gentlemen.
I'll close.
I want to in the name of my
grandparents.
You see the through hell,
Roybal.
The Centa Roy ball.
My father Felipe through hell
roid ball.
Cayetano Maria.
Oh,
All of my ancestors.
On whom
I
I'm blessed.
To have their blood.
Their courage.
Their strength.
Runs through my veins.
In their name. All of my
ancestors names from time in
memorial with their presence
that Beetle Mansell to Pueblo in
this state of New Mexico.
And for all from my two
Children, my four grandsons and
all the generations to come.
I stand.
As a co sponsor of this
legislation.
And I am Plourde.
My colleagues to join
The gentleman.
Plantain and all of us.
With a resounding
Vote today.
In support.
Of House Bill 134 as amended.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
There is further debate that
gentleman of from Chavez, Eddie
and Otero County representative
towns. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero counties.
Thank you, sir. I have a couple
of questions.
Um do you know how many
Children? Yes.
Um
Will affect on
I guess it would be in is it
what the expenditure picture
only a curl on tribal lands or
will it occur?
Outside of tribal lands. I'm
just trying to understand.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, would
you? I didn't hear the last part
of your question.
Let me up. I should not phrased
it accordingly.
Um, can you tell me how many
Children this bill will affect
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
estimated 40,000 Children in New
Mexico.
And
Uh,
Will these expenditures, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen only occur
on tribal
Lands.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. No,
they will not. They will have
full accountability to helping
all students in regards to where
they go to school at within this
state.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
just so I understand, Say a in
In a community. Uh,
Magdalena, New Mexico.
My
The little bird just set over my
shoulder.
If
If there are
Children of
Tribal heritage.
Will it be taught only in those
classrooms or will it be taught
in any classroom? Whether there
are are there are not
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So the
reason why we give full autonomy
to the tribes themselves to
determine how this funding will
be utilized is if in fact a
child lives one of the Navajo
Nation child, for instance,
lives in Madalena.
That is still one of their
Children, so they would they may
receive that benefit of the
Navajo nation's deems necessary.
Okay, well, that that was
important to me. Uh,
Because
I think, um, that is the intent.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, with
this expenditure
Can you tell me what the
difference is between?
The
Funding.
Provided for
All Children, including
including tribal through the SCG
formula.
And this What's the difference
in
The amount of funding
Per chop per child. I mean, how
drastically will affect it Is
that basically the derivative of
two and $2.5 million a year
divided by 40,000 Children, plus
the SCG formula is that
What we're talking about.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Great
question.
SCG funding is strictly used for
public education functions for
public education in schools for
public schools in this state.
This funding that we're talking
about here?
Would be directly structured to
go to building that tribal
capacity as I mentioned earlier
for tribal programming for
culturally relevant curricula to
which the tribe deems best in
terms of how to teach their
Children.
And and that's kind of where I'm
trying to understand, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Will this
Bill.
Provide funding for education.
That will be taught to all
Children in the Mexico.
Regardless of their heritage in
order to inform them
Of your heritage.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. No,
sir.
Okay?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would be remiss.
If I did not, um
Thank you.
For bringing this bill forward.
You and I locked horns a little
bit last year on $100 million
expenditure that didn't go
through this body.
Um, that I took great exception
to
Not because how what it was
spent for, but the process that
occurred
I applaud you for bringing this
bill to the house for it to be
debated publicly and openly and
for that.
Or your co sponsor,
representative Allyson in
yourself.
Thank you very much. There is
further debate. The general lady
from McKinley representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from McKinley
County. Thank you. Mr Speaker
Just wanted to make a couple
again blast from the past
comments, and then I did want to
make a statement. I appreciate
the time. I just wanted to
mention that since 2001. I have
reason I have represented a
predominantly native American
district.
And I visit the chapter
reservation areas a lot. The key
issue that I hear consistently
is around education. There's no
question about that that
education and education concerns
are always raised.
Um, which is primarily the
reason I was honored to have
carried House Bill six, which
dealt with the impact aid bill
and making sure that at least
the federal allocation of money
that comes into the state
through the budget process, then
goes to the appropriate school
districts.
Of course, that was that work
was built on the shoulders of
people like former speaker
Luhan, former speaker Martinez.
Former state. Rep. Lovejoy,
former state. Rep. ORT Shirley,
former state. Rep. Ray Begay.
Ah, and most recently, of
course, representative Al Cohn,
who always carried that bill.
So a lot of work had been
Done. We just never could see
the finish line with that
particular issue.
But what I wanted to ask and
just for clarification, Mr
Speaker since the funding is
going to the tribes to enhance
Education. That means that it
does not deceive equalize.
The public education process is
that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentility. You're
absolutely correct.
I think that's one of the
clarifying points here because
it's not going into a school
district.
It's not as though a school
district is receiving more
dollars.
And this equalizing which, of
course, was the whole thing
between behind
The issues with impact aid, as
well as the Aussie versus
Martinez lawsuit, And just as
another fun fact, will. Amina is
my constituent.
So
She's one of those ladies that
would always talk about
education. I know both to me and
representative Johnson about her
concerns in the with the school
district there. I'm glad she had
the fortitude to come forward
and actually follow legal
process to get some things done
it really it really helped us.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
Again because the funding goes
to the tribes directly for
their, uh, educational design.
In it is based on them
determining who is actually a
member. Whether it's through C I
b number Whatever.
They would have that
responsibility. Is that correct,
gentlemen?
Mr Speaker and gentility. Yes,
ma'am.
Already. That's all I had. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you,
Um gentlemen, Hope everybody
votes for this bill. Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from rural Re Pa.
San Juan and Sandoval. Yield,
please.
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I've
been following the debate and
kind of doing a bit of research
here on the fly and
According to the Public
Education Department. There were
about 35,000.
American Indian students in
public schools.
And New Mexico and about 6000.
And Bureau of Indian Affairs
Schools that are tribally
controlled is that
Good information.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Lee County. That's a good
estimation. There.
Okay. And as I understand it,
this bill is allocating into a
trust fund.
$100 million to be allocated
every year increments.
Of $12,500,000.
Is that correct? I believe I
heard 2,500,000. But
Uh, that seems to be a
discrepancy.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
amendments made along the way to
Twitter to how we got here today
amends the bill so that it is
actually 5%.
Of the corpus that it will be
distributed, distributed and not
a dollar figure. Okay is the
$100 million allocation still
accurate?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
$100 billion figure is
Is hopeful while we got 50
million in the LFC wreck and in
House Bill two, and it's in the
Senate, we're look, we're
looking forward to the willpower
of the Senate and hopeful that
they may be able to satisfy the
rest. But as it is, we know that
we've gone through the process
as representative Townsend
mentioned before is that we've
transparently gone through the
LFC process to the point now in
HB two.
Where it's now in the Senate
side, so hopefully will retain
that. But the hopefulness is
that somewhere down the line, we
would get to the point of $100
million
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen for that
clarification, so
This. This and funds would be
primarily
Benefiting.
The 6000 students currently
enrolled in school on tribal
lands. Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
would go back to the some of the
students you mentioned before,
which is 41,000. Plus that would
benefit from this type of
funding such that their tribal
communities include them in that
type of funding for the
programming.
So, Mr Speaker, some of this
money would actually go into the
public school system. Is that
true?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, no,
not into the public school
system at all.
This funding is strictly for
programming within communities.
tribal communities across the
state. So I made mention, and I
gave the example earlier of
perhaps the Navajo Nation has a
student that lives in Magdalena,
New Mexico.
By virtue of them being in
Navajo nation member
And if and if the nomination
said, You know what we want to
create a programming where we
have an online language language
program to learn. Donate.
That student of Magdalena would
be able to appreciate that type
of programming from this type of
funding.
Okay in that student could very
well be in the public school
system in Magdalena. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Absolutely. They
could be in the public school
system anywhere in the state or
be one of the members that
attend school at one of the B
III schools the bubble of the
Bureau of Indian Education
schools on on the tribal lands.
Yes, sir. Okay, that does
provide some clarification. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I very
much appreciate the answers.
That's all I had.
There is further debate The
general lady from Chavez
representative is ill.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Rio re percent of
all of San Juan? Yo, please.
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady from Chavez County.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Gentlemen. I was kind of a
standard whenever I was first
reading your amendment because
it took out all the amendments
from House education and House
appropriation, So I was kind of
taken back, and then I got to
reading through it. Thanks
Started getting a little bit
clearer there.
But I do have a couple of
concerns. Maybe
Um
On your Let's see, that would be
your Fifth Amendment.
That we just passed off of here.
It says the public Education
Department Shell distribute the
annual funding from the tribal
education Trust fund
distributions as provided in
subsection D of this section to
New Mexico tribes, according to
an Ecuadorian equitable formula.
And that was one of my questions
during the House Education
Committee. If you will remember
the how this would be equitably
split up.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
can you
Pull it up in your mind What
Your answer to me was
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, so
Thinking back to when you asked
me that question, and then now
reflecting on it.
It continues to be the same that
when you provide tribal nations
in this state, the authority and
the autonomy to create equity
within themselves. That's what
the sovereign notion of being
tribes is all about. So it's a
meeting of minds between those
tribes to which we've now
established a process based on
the interactions with all the
tribes over the past several
days and how this amendment has
come to this body today.
And Mr Speaker. I understand
what you're saying there, but
whenever it's given whenever the
PD is given the authority to be
able to do that, I just want to
make sure that it is equitably
distributed throughout the
entire state. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I also have to
Have I have concerns here? I was
reading rereading the F I. R
under other substantive
substantiative issues.
And, uh, in February of 2019
this whenever the first District
court
Made the ruling consolidating
the Martinez versus New Mexico
and Yossi versus New Mexico
lawsuit.
And
The courts did not specifically.
They didn't specify any
remedies.
They differed those decisions
that would come back to the
legislative body and to the
executive branch of the
government.
So I'm kind of concerned.
Because there
They continued to say that the
courts continue to say.
That the public Education
Department
Oversight. Excuse me.
Bless you.
Thank you.
I lost my train of thought the
courts did rule that the public
Education Department
Oversight was deficient.
How are we going to be reassured
that the P E. D
Will be successful this go
round.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, so
Reflecting on peds function in
this role.
Their function is simply
administrative. They're not
creating distribution formulas
on behalf of the tribes in in
this legislation.
And so their role today was
simply be to disperse money to
the tribes of the tribes
determined equitable.
And so going, then back to your
your question about how this
ties in
To PDS capacity.
And how their role continues to
be. Maybe, in some cases, not
only put words into your mouth
deficient, but
As as we look at their role now
induced helping to solve Yossi
Martinez issues.
This legislature has taken great
steps.
To trying to help push
initiatives to help get to the
point where we can be a solution
to Yossi Martinez.
To this day.
We have yet to see or hear about
any type of of draft programming
draft plan from the public
Education Department of New
Mexico.
So this legislature has taken
great steps.
We are hopeful. Bless you were
hopeful that somewhere soon we
will get a plan of action from
the Public Education Department.
But these types of actions here
that we may be taking
independently are being done on
behalf of making sure that
While we will we, We agree that
Yossi Martinez was ruled
correctly.
That we have to. Somehow, some
way begin to step up for our
Children and our communities to
make sure that we don't have to
wait for PD to draft a plan that
we have to take the
Pulled by the horns.
I knew you were going to say
that.
And and do something for our
people.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I am
not arguing with that one point.
Therefore, the accountability of
this who will be providing that
who will be providing
accountability to what we as a
body?
Have pushed forward to get these
settlements in place and get
them rolling.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. The
tribes would be the ones as
outlined in those
intergovernmental agreements.
Of this piece of legislation.
Okay, Mr Speaker. I didn't to my
dismay just now.
Saw that I did not write down
where I was reading this from
So is
The assistant secretary of
Indian education.
Going to be serving in that
capacity, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. No, ma'am.
Well, that person be serving in
the ex officio capacity only.
Mr Speaker and gentle Lady, the
assistant secretary of in and
education for the Public
Education Department of New
Mexico will not be serving in
any capacity.
Okay. Like I said, I apologize
for not writing down where I was
reading that. But that was
coming from my notes from health
education.
So it might be a moot point Now
I'm not real real. Sure, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen of
The the questions I had and and
represented there was another
representative during our House
Education committee that asked
this question regarding one of
our community colleges, which is
the eastern New Mexico
University at reduced, so and I
thank you, sir.
Sufficiently answered that
question for me, where they
would be included, as far as
what we're trying to get done
here because
Reading.
Everybody that was listed.
Earlier during that committee
meeting.
They were omitted, and that is
an integral part being right
there next door to the Mescalero
reservation, so I think that one
was answered to my satisfaction
there. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
appreciate you taking the time
to answer my questions. Uh, Like
I said, I was a little bit
stunned, but it makes sense on
what you have done here.
As far as your amendment that
was just passed earlier. Thank
you for answering my questions.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is further debate in the
general lady from Bernard Leo
Representative Little Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
from Sandoval yield
I yield to the gentle lady from
Bernardino County.
Thank you very much. I Tuesday
and as a proud co sponsor of
this bill.
And I again I'm surprised at
just how well this this
discussion today dovetailed to
the experience that we had or
that you all joined you in this
morning and that was welcoming
the students.
A Santa Domingo elementary
school.
And the
The board members of CNN today.
I watched, and I acknowledged
all of this happening.
What was important, uh, not only
to have my elementary school
CNN here. It would have been
wonderful to have you and M here
because I did graduate from you
and M.
And what I wish to say today to
add today.
Is the experience.
Of not having that knowledge
that education shared early on
as a child.
When I was first, um, entered.
At San Filippi Head start
program. I was one of the first
class of of
Students who came into the head
start program Back in the
sixties. I moved on
As I mentioned before with the
elementary school and so on.
My point here is that you and m.
I acknowledge and I give a lot
of credit, too, because it was
not until I entered you and M.
That I actually received.
The history.
Of Native America. More
education about tribal
governments.
More information than I ever
would have expected to receive.
And I will say
I'm going to date myself if I
haven't done that already.
But this information I did not
receive until I was well over 50
years old.
50
This this education while it was
at a much advanced level.
Never received.
Early on in my education, and if
it was, it was very brief.
Moments, snippets of it in a
history class of New Mexico,
where we're kind of
Acknowledging land, Perhaps
And the experiences but there's
so much more so much more that
My family. My community
contributed in my education.
It was not just the public
school system, the federal
education system.
And that was key.
And so it's important to me to
be a co sponsor of this and
signing on because there are a
lot of these students.
In the public school systems,
charter schools and so on that
are in
Urban communities, very large
cities. They
They will benefit from this too.
And it is my hope that our
leadership tribal leadership is
going to acknowledge that and
make sure as my colleagues have
who have spoken before me.
House said that they wish to
have them included in this, and
I am very proud to know that
this is the intent behind it.
The contributions also that my
colleagues brought up you know
who would also benefit from this
from this trust fund.
It will be.
All of the Children in this
state when our Children
Like myself can share this
information with them proudly.
And not just have it as a
footnote. And Oh, yeah, you
know, we did this to we were
also part of that.
It is important and I think it
Elevates the classrooms that
elevates discussions with their
instructors with their teachers
who are so vital to this
But I'm looking forward to
seeing that these programs and
Curricula is established by
these communities, the very
communities from which our
Children come
So I
Encourage my
Colleagues to support this bill.
I think that the others who have
spoken before me have
Captured Mr Speaker. So much of
that which I feel.
And I'm very proud. I'm going to
look at my notes of you. Forgive
me just one moment to see if
there was not anything else I
wish to address.
Thank you. There was one little
piece that I asked that I wanted
to ask you all is to reflect
Please reflect and think about.
How you might feel when you
finally have those lightbulb
moments when you're in college,
and you're finally learning
about some of your tribe. That's
That's a big one. For me. I
think that there's trust
This tribal the tribal education
Trust fund is going to help to
ensure
That our students don't have to
wait until that time.
And that they will be this will
help them become
And help others to become more
knowledgeable, productive
citizens of this state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. My fellow sponsors.
There is further to me that
General Lady from Katherine
Sierra Socorro in Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady from Katherine
Sierra Sikora and Valencia
counties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you Kind. Gentlemen. I am
concerned.
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman about
my, uh Native American students
that attend Magdalena.
That live in Magdalena.
That deserve
As much.
Ah there as if they lived on
tribal lands. So can you tell
me, Mr Speaker Kind gentleman.
Is that money only going to be
spent on tribal
Uh, lands and tribal entities.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady from
all those counties. It's a great
question, and I think it goes
back to an answer that I
provided earlier in this
discussion that when you have
Children removed from their
homelands. In this case,
Children living in Magdalena but
are from the Navajo nation.
The Navajo Nation being
beneficiaries of this trust
fund.
However, they seek to utilize
that funding and in many cases a
lot of the funding that this
would go to would be for tribal.
Uh, language programs.
And so
Hypothetically if the Navajo
nation chooses to create an
online program for language,
understanding or learning.
Those students remotely might be
able to participate and benefit
from this type of fun. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Kind.
Gentlemen. I'm I'm disappointed
in that.
I'm Welsh will support your bill
because I support all Children.
But that's my disappointment as
well. Mr Speaker, Kind Gentleman
is
It may not help all of the
tribal Native American Children
across New Mexico.
Which I think is the whole point
that we're trying to do because
of the, uh, specifically,
everyone calls out the the Yaz
Martinez lawsuit.
And so, Mr Speaker. Kind
gentleman. Um, As I said
earlier, I support all Children.
I sat on the Magdalena School
board.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman for
over 15 years.
Ah, until I
Got this free job, Mr Speaker,
Kind gentleman, and so where I
didn't feel like I could give
that the, uh, the attention it
deserved.
And so, Mr Speaker, Kind
Gentleman. Magdalena Element, or
Magdalena Municipal School is
45% Native American.
Ah, we run Busses several
Busses.
But also Mr Speaker Kind
Gentleman Avenue, Palawan.
Navajo has their own school.
But those kids should have a
choice. Just like all of our
kids should have a choice on
where they want to attend
school, and I think that it's
unfortunate.
That
The Children that are choosing
to attend Magdalena.
May not get
What you're trying to do may not
be the recipients of what you're
trying to do. Even though I know
the hypothetical Mr Speaker kind
gentleman is that they could
attend online. Uh, things like
that, But
Possibly if Alma Navajo is
listening, Possibly they will
run a bus.
Magdalena.
To pick up Children so they can
participate in that as well as
we run a bus. Magdalena runs a
bus to Alamo to pick up the
Children that want to
participate in Magdalena School
district. So, Mr Speaker, Kind
gentleman. That is my only, um
Issue with this, and I hope and
pray.
That it works. Um and that makes
a difference to, uh
To do all the things that we all
wish and hope for in this in
this education, uh,
Supplemental education program
and try to bring more unity
across the state of New Mexico
because Lord Norris, we could we
could use it. So thank you, Mr
Speaker. Kind gentleman. I just
wish that it it did a little
more.
Mr Speaker, and generally if I
may really quickly before we end
this discussion, I think that
the example that I gave you in
regards to the hypothetical is
very It's very detailed.
But that is there are many
strategies that again once the
Navajo nation does receive. This
type of funding could could
could definitely put into place
to help those students in those
particular situations. So
absolutely I think this is what
the what the funding is for, and
it's not to exclude people. It's
not to pick winners and losers
is to make sure that we have the
capacity so that if there is
that need for the students out
there
Now we have the funding to make
it a reality. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I I I I
I'm like I said, I hope and pray
this is a reality and really
does, um, touch all of those
students and I would really,
really, uh, want everyone to
know that I'm going to be asking
Alamo Navajo to see if they
received this funding.
Because Mr Speaker Kind
gentleman.
Sometimes they're not treated
fairly, and I will stand with my
alma Navajo friends and
neighbors every day of the week
so and with other tribes, But
those are my friends and
neighbors, Mr Speaker Kind
gentleman, and there's several
of us in this chamber that, um
those are our friends and
neighbors. And so I'm I'm really
hoping this does what? What We
think it's going to do.
And I'm I'm proud to stand in
support of your bill. Thank you.
Mr There is for the debate. The
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Does the gentleman from
Rio Reba Sandoval and San Juan,
you?
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
counties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
Before.
Right before the session. I
intended the Mescalero Apache
tribe.
Inauguration and everything that
I heard.
From all the elders and all of
the new
Tribal elected officials.
Was how much
They wanted to bring back their
language and teach our Children
And
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I have. I've been a neighbor
with Mescalero for
The better part of 30 years, and
they're my friends.
And they're my family, and I
know that there
They're super traditional.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
How am I? How am I going to be
assured that these funds are
going to make it to
The Mescalero Apaches.
And they can carry on their you
know their traditions and their
language that they're asking
for.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
those counties, that's a great
question.
And that's why we were able to
include them in discussions over
the past several days to make
sure that they were satisfied to
in regards to the language of
this amendment into the overall
meaning of this bill, and so
By all means. This means that
that not only would they have
access, but they have the
autonomy to create that
culturally relevant curriculum
to whatever they feel they want
to teach their Children. This
would provide that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. That's all I've
got.
There is a debate the gentle
lady from Berne L. E
representative Borrego.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from rear Reba
Sandoval and son Juan Yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady from burning Leo.
Thank you, gentlemen and Mr
Speaker, Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
know that I was raised in
Espanola.
Um
You know for many, many years, I
saw
Injustices to certain people.
Um throughout New Mexico, and
especially, um, sometimes in
little villages and towns.
Um and Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
you know that I obtained a
master's from the University of
New Mexico. Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I did not know that.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
The reason I bring that up is
because it's always been
ingrained in me by my family,
especially my parents that
education is the key to getting
out of poverty.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
you probably have heard and
probably statistically, we know
that there's quite a bit of
poverty in New Mexico.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I've
heard
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, and
the reason that I brought bring
that up is because I do believe
that education is one of the
main keys for Children escaping
poverty. Um, and that
opportunities are created,
Especially when you look around
this room, and you think about
people that grew up in
Rural communities. Opportunities
are created through education
for all of our communities and
all of our Children, Um, having
grown up Mr Speaker and
gentlemen in Espanola, Um I was
surrounded and and Espanola was
considered a community of color.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um,
when I grew up my brothers and I
surrounded by Santa Clara, San
Juan, um P. Goodies number test
Suki, Rocky, Emma's and
sometimes Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I noticed that there
were kids that were treated
differently.
And, um, oftentimes, those kids
were coming from families that
were, um considered poverty
level and I bring that up
because not a lot has changed in
the landscape of New Mexico. We
still have that situation. But
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
bring this up because
Um, regardless of, uh, in those
small communities of our
economic status or others
economic status, we all
participated together in our in
our basketball games in our
parades in many things that you
know we could participate in as
brothers and sisters.
And often times, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um
Those people, um all of our
populations.
We didn't look at each other
differently. We looked at each
other equally, regardless of the
color of our skin or our
economic status. And Mr Speaker
in Albuquerque. Now we have We
are also now that I represent
Albuquerque. Um, not much of the
landscaping has changed. I look
around and I'm surrounded by
Ysleta.
India's Santo Domingo. Sample
Leap Coach E T Z a Santa Ana
Akama Laguna in Zuni, and it's
It gives me great, um, honor to
grow up and still continue in my
in my later years. I'm not that
old yet, but I'm working on it.
Um
To be surrounded by my brothers
and sisters from the pueblos and
the Navajo nation and all of
these places, But Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, the reason
The reason that I bring this up
is because some of those
injustices from the past
And when I was growing up, I saw
people without housing without
water without adequate education
without some of the basic needs,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that
others have been afforded the
opportunity to have and part of
that is because of education.
And so with that, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen
I offer my support to my, uh,
native brothers and sisters with
regard to improving education
and New Mexico and throughout
the country. Um, I do believe
that this bill will help to do
that.
Um And I can't stress enough
that, uh, many of our native
brothers and sisters have not
been afforded those
opportunities over the years and
this particular bill, even if
it's a small start. It's a
start. So with that, Mr Speaker,
I encourage everyone to vote for
this bill. Thank you.
There's another debate. The
gentleman from Bernard McKinley,
So Carlos and Juan Valencia
representative of Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Speaker of the gentleman
from Real rivers in New Orleans
and one please feel
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from all of those
counties. I mentioned him.
Not really, Mr Speaker Anyway,
would you gentlemen? Hell to me?
Mr Speaker. I yield again, okay?
Representative, You know, I had
concerns when you introduced
this bill and House
appropriations.
Because you as you well know, Mr
Speaker and find gentlemen, I
represent both Navajos.
And pueblos.
You know, and
I'm glad you brought them
together because I I just saw
this deal from the Navajo nation
and I'm really glad you worked
on it to bring them all
together. And I do support your
bill. You know, I I just have
some concerns, which I stated
earlier, and one of my biggest
concerns is like representative
Armstrong and mentioned a little
bit ago about the kids in Alamo.
and you answered the question by
saying well,
The Navajo Nation provides
Internet for him and stuff like
that they could be on board and
the situation is Mr Speaker and
fine, gentlemen.
A lot of these people don't have
Internet out there and we don't
want them to fall through the
cracks.
You know what this funny is
good, but it's not going to be
enough.
To do the needs of these people
need out there and, you know, do
you have an answer to that, Mr
Benjamin?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I
What I can. First point to is
that I know that this
legislature appropriated and was
also given by federal funding. A
lot of do it money for
Internet expansion, broadband
expansion.
And yet we still have this issue
in homeland that we represent
right?
Perhaps there's a better way to
utilize those resources in cases
of maybe laying fiber optics is
no longer the option, but we
look to satellite so I think
there are options in regards to
your specific question. But as
you look to the to the
programming dollars that this
may provide, absolutely, it's a
continuation of that type of
opportunity that
In this case, the Navajo nation
might want to implore to help
people within the Alamo chapters
or any other chapters that you
may represent, respectively.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, you know
You know not only even the
problems that are struggling,
you know you have problems in
your district, and they're also
struggling with the Internet and
connectivity for a couple of
reasons. A lot of people can't
afford it. You know, because
they're most of them live in
poverty, and I'm just using all
Amoako that's in my district.
You know, Mr Speaker and fine
gentleman. I have chapters in
the Big Valley between farming
tonight and
And
To ruin stuff and they're just
as bad as sheep as anybody
else's. And these are just
concerned. I need to express so
people know that they are not
leaving and they're not going to
be left behind.
You know, because I know there's
a big issue. You know, like an
All the federal money came out.
Mr. Speaker, You know a lot of
time you listen to what they're
going to do and the dinner, they
say it's not feasible because
these people live too far apart
from each other, you know, you
know your district.
Like Mancino and stuff. People
live 510 miles away from each
other and to put connectivity to
all of them. It's almost
impossible. It needs to get
done. But you know, these are
just my concerns. High respect
for what you're doing.
And I do support your bill. But
we need to keep these people in
mind. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Signal for the bait. Gentlemen
too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
for the dialogue this afternoon.
So on behalf of those ancestors
that never had this chance for
all those kids that are here
today, and for all those yet to
come and not move that house
Bill 134 as three times amended,
Do not pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 134 is
three times amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 68 in the affirmative zero in
the negative house. Bill 134 is
thrice amended has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I'm moving on a bad
order Business committee
reports.
No objection. It is so ordered
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 242 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass. But the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 242 do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of non favorable
Committee Report on House Bill
242, but a favorable committee
report and House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 242. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
All supposed to say the
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 19 has had
it under consideration, reports
with recommendations that do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair, Mr
Speaker. Move adoption adoption
of a favorable committee
reporting house Bill 19. All
those in papers saying I
The eyes have it coming to
report adopted?
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee has been referred
House Bill 128 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 128 do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker. Move
Adoption We are on an
unfavorable committee reporting
has been 128, but a favorable
Committee report and House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for elderly 128. All those in
favor signify by saying Aye, a
Habit committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 182 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 180 to do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption Adoption went on
favorable community reporter in
House Bill 182, but a favorable
community report and House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for husband 182. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
Proposed name.
The eyes have it can be report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 186 has had it under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations Do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr Speaker. Move
Adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report on
house Bill 186. All those in
favor signify was in, I suppose.
Nay, the ayes have it. Committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred House Labor Veterans
and Military Affairs Committee.
Substitute for house Bill 236
has had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair, Mr Speaker, Move
Adoption.
We are on a favorable committee
report on House Labor veterans
and Military affairs Committee
Substitute for House Bill 236.
All those in favor signify by
saying Aye, those opposed name
The ECE committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred. House Consumer and
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for house Bill 239
has had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do not pass but that a
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Consumer
and Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house Bill 239 do
pass respectfully submitted.
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker. Move Adoption. We are
on adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on House
community Can House Consumer
Republic First committees.
Substitute for house Bill 239.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
I did that all wrong. I'm sorry.
Can we start over?
Can you read it again? I'm just
a freshman up here, okay?
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to miss been referred
House Consumer and Public
Affairs Committee. Substitute
for House Bill 239 has had it
under consideration reports
mammoth recommendation that it
do not pass, but that house
judiciary can be substitute for
House Consumer and Public
affairs Committee Substitute for
House Bill 239 do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr Speaker. I move adoption Put
me in, Coach put me in. We are
on adoption of an unfavorable
community report for House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for
hospital to 39, but a favorable
community report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer
And public affairs Committee.
substitute for house Bill 239
all those in favor.
That was supposed name.
The ice have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Memorial. 30 has had it
under consideration. Reports
with recommendations that do
pass as amended, Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Your hardest
working committee move adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report and
has memorial 30. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed NAY. The
Islamic Committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Memorial 45 has had it
under consideration, reports
with recommendations that do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker. Move adoption of our
Favorable Committee report on
House Memorial 45. All those in
favor signify by saying Aye,
yeah, it's Habit Committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 196 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for house
Bill 196 do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker, Move Adoption. We
are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report and
has been 196. But a favorable
committee report on the House
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for Alfa
196.
All those in favor signify by
saying nine supposed name.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and finance committee to has
been referred House, rural
Development, Land Grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for house Bill 251
has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report and has built
251 all those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Supposed name? Yes, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 288 has
had it under consideration,
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair adoption adoption of
a Federal committee reporting
house Bill 288 All those in
favor state of opposition. I
suppose Nate yes, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred house built to 98.
Has had it under consideration.
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption adoption of a Federal
committee report on house Bill
298 All those in favor say if I
was in I was supposed name, the
committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your Appropriations and
Finance Committee to miss been
referred Senate Bill 153.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
community report on Senate Bill
153 all those in favors and if I
was in I was supposed name. Yes,
I have a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, Your
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee to has
been referred House Bill 71 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
Respectfully submitted during
White Guy goes chair.
Mr Speaker. I move. Adoption of
the committee report were an
adoption of federal Committee
reporting hospital 71. All those
in favor say if I was in, I
suppose in a report adopted Mr
Speaker, your your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
248 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation and Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Dorian
Wide Diego's chair.
Speaker. I move adoption of the
committee report adoption of a
favorite committee reporting
House Bill 248. All those in
favor signify by saying nine
Supposed. Nate Committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker. Your agriculture is
Cicadas and Water Resources
Committee to has been referred.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 37
has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted
submitted Susan K. At a chair.
Mr Speaker Move adoption. We are
an adoption of a federal
committee report on the Senate
Judiciary Committee. Substitute
presentable 37. All those in
favor signify by saying nine
All those opposed nay.
The committee report adopted
Got him.
Mr Speaker. Your transportation
public works in Capital
Improvements Committee to him
has been referred House Memorial
46 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Dan
Hoffman be wheelchair. Mr.
Speaker, Move adoption. We are
an adoption of a favorite
committee report and house
Memorial 46. All those in favor
signify by saying night.
Supposedly
The report adopted Mr Speaker,
Your transportation public works
in Capital Improvements
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Tax, Business
and Transportation Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 88
has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee.
Respectfully submitted Dana
Hawkman field chair.
Mr Speaker Move Adoption were an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate.
City transportation business
Senate Tax Business
Transportation Committee
Substitute percent of your lady
ate all those who've ever seen
of opposition. I am
Suppose name report adopted
Mr Speaker, your energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee to has been
referred House Memorial 42 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
respectfully spitting Matthew
McQueen chair adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Memorial 42. All those in
favor signify by saying nine.
All those opposed nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, you're
enrolling into grossing
committee tumor has been
referred House Memorial 53 has
had it under consideration,
reports saying that has the same
has been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Eleanor
Chavez chair.
Mr Speaker. Move adoption. We
are the adoption about favorable
committee report on house
Memorial 53. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Well, they're supposed name.
Yes Habit Committee report
adopted at the record reflect
that the duly enrolled in gross
copies of House Memorial 53 were
signed by the officers of the
House in Open session. Mr.
Speaker, you're enrolling in
engrossing committee has been
referred House Bill 171, as
amended has had it under
consideration. Reports, the same
has been duly enrolled in and
gross preparatory signed by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Eleanor
Chavez chair.
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption of the
favorable Committee report on
House Bill 171 as amended. All
those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
I was supposedly the upcoming
report adopted that the record
reflect that duly enrolled and
it grows copies of House
Memorial Apologies. House Bill
171, as amended, were signed by
the officers of the House in
Open session.
Gentle lady from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker when we go to that order
business messages.
See an objection. It is ordered
clerk to read message from the
Senate. Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee.
substitute for Senate Bill 129.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 148.
Senate Finance Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 300
request The concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Sherry de Lune Johnson, the
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Your lady from Berna. Leo, Mr
Speaker.
Now being 1159 am I move? We
adjourn until 1201 PM will come
to order.
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rosy beast with
some suspended and that the
journals show that all those
present this morning session our
president this afternoon session
Objection. It is ordered Mr
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that the
journal has been read in full
and approved subject to the
revision and approval of the
Rules and Order of Business
Committee.
There's an objection to this
ordered happy Friday members.
We're happy Wednesday. I don't
know. We went backwards from
quite understand this, but here
we are generated from Virgilio.
Mr Speaker and moving, Go to
battle order business third
rating of legislation.
Objection. So ordered members.
We are going to continue on the
third reading calendar. We're
going to go next to item number
15 on the third reading
calendar. Gentle lady from Santa
Fe. Are you ready on that item?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Would you get
me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
seven, as amended on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentle lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm very
pleased to present to you all
members. House Bill seven as
amended, which concerns the
health care Affordability Act.
This bill addresses an issue
with the distribution to the
fund that has the potential to
impact access to healthcare for
tens of thousands of new
Mexicans. This fund was
established in 2021.
And it has enabled New Mexico to
create successful programs.
To reduce consumer costs on the
state's health insurance of
thousands of new Mexicans are
receiving discounted and no cost
premiums, increasing their
purchasing power on the exchange
and helping small businesses
across the state.
And the problem that we are
trying to address and House Bill
seven. Is that the distribution
of revenue
To the fund is scheduled to drop
significantly starting in FY 25
The fund currently receives 55%
of the revenue generated by the
surcharge, but this will drop to
30% indefinitely if it is not
fixed.
Mr Speaker. We adopted an
amendment to house Bill seven so
that hospitals have it no longer
impacts the FY 25 budget.
The distribution will change
back to 55% in FY 26.
Um, And with that I would stand
for questions. Mr Speaker, there
is to be the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, will
General Lady yield
I would yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, one of the things that I
see.
It's almost consistently with
all of our bills, and what's
been passed is there's a tax
taken for that specific thing.
And then half of that tax or
some of the tax goes to the
general fund.
And
To me. That's frustrating. If
we're gonna we're gonna do a tax
on um, you know?
MBD and its for road tax. That's
what that tax ought to be used
for. If we're going to do a
liquor tax, we ought to use that
liquor tax just for that. And if
we're going to use this tax than
it ought to be used just for
that, and it shouldn't be used
for the General fund.
And for that reason, General
lady I'd like to make an
amendment.
Mr Speaker. I move for Amendment
one.
On house, Bill seven. You got
it, sir. Why don't you all walk
it up to the restroom to the
clerk so we can get it passed
out and explain Mr Speaker, Can
I have a roll call vote as well.
You've gotta roll call. Thank
you.
Gentlemen, I believe the
amendment has been passed out.
Thank you, Henry. Will you
kindly read the 2 to 8 number?
Yes, sir. Mr Speaker General, or
the number is 0.2 to 8 to 70.2.
That's what's been passed out,
gentlemen to explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. What This does is
starting in fiscal year. 2026
This amendment takes lowers the
current 3.75% surtax to 1.65.
It, uh it what This will do is
it will make that fund hold and
they will receive 236.5 million
in fiscal 2026 and current years
thereafter, it lowers the tax
for the state of New Mexico and
new Mexicans within the state by
$300 million.
Gentle lady from Santa Fes is a
friendly amendment.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I, uh
from San Juan. I want to thank
you for bringing this amendment.
Um
I will say that it is
Mostly unfriendly, Um
The, uh it maybe I can just
state a little bit of y.
Mm.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I agree
with you that the majority of
not all of the funding that is
generated by this or tax should
be spent on healthcare programs
and health care affordability,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen and Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I really
appreciated the conversation
that we were able to have just
before the floor session. Um
Regarding this amendment, Um,
product as a practical matter
for this legislative session,
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee has worked incredibly
hard on building a budget that
is balanced and that strikes
that balance between the
revenues that are coming in and
the expenditures that are
planned.
Um, And because I appreciate
gentlemen that you have reduced
the rate of the surtax in this
amendment, however, um
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Were you aware of the volatility
of the health insurance premium
Certain Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I'm not aware of the
volatility.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
So thank you for that, And I
think that is one concern. I
have because we can look back on
the last couple of years of
revenue and see some volatility
there and we can look ahead.
And know that we potentially
there could be quite a lot of
volatility because there is a
lot of variation and how many
people are covered.
Um and, hey, the health
insurance premium star attacks
on a yearly basis. A lot of that
number actually depends on
variations in federal policy
that impact Medicaid. And so in
a year where
Medicaid enrollment drops
significantly or Medicaid has
made changes to its eligibility.
Um, the health care the health
insurance premium surtax will
drop significantly in years
where Medicaid enrollment
increases and we have more
people.
That's her tax will the revenue
from that surcharge will
increase. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
I? That was a long way of
explaining, um, I am
Would be very happy to work with
you.
In advance of the next session,
too.
Address.
Directing all of the health
insurance, um, premium
surcharges to
Healthcare uses, um and and
discussing what that is and
discussing what the right amount
of these are tax should be, but
because of the volatility, I
can't in good conscience except
as a friendly amendment.
anything that might damage the
solvency of the fund.
Right there. The debate on the
amendment gentle lady gentlemen
from Dona on there is debate on
the amendment. Okay,
Representative from Lee
Gentlemen from the present of
Scott.
Scott.
Will the gentleman from San
Juan. Yield, please?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, only
I'll deal.
Hmm.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, with
respect to the volatility
What
Fund suffers as a consequence of
the Vala till a T. I wonder, Is
it the General fund?
Hmm. Yeah.
The subsidies.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it
would be the General fund. It is
not this fund.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do
we know what kind of percentage
of all until T is out there with
respect to
People coming and going off of
these programs.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I do not
know what that volatility or
what the percentage would be.
But Mr Speaker statewide, I
would question
That number being more than a
few percent because of the very
large number of people enrolled
on these programs.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there's about $14 billion in
that and fiscal year 26. It's
proposed to go up to even
further so I don't know what the
volatility would be.
And under current
Under current conditions.
Roughly a third of that, say.
$4.5 million goes into the
subsidies.
The rest of it goes into the
General fund.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it looks to me like
We could take a historical look
at the volatility over the last
couple of years and come up with
some way to accommodate those
fluctuations. Still yielding
A fairly significant tax cut.
Does that seem reasonable?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, it
does. And that's what this
amendment does. This makes this
whole
Um
236 would make this fund hole
completely. All of it would go
to this fund, and none of it
would go to the General fund.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
looks to me like
General fund suffers in the
instance of volatility.
This fund would get
More revenues.
And any circumstance.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes,
that's correct.
Looks like we just solved the
volatility problem, doesn't it?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen from San Juan,
Gentle lady from Berna. Leo. Mr.
Speaker. I moved to table the
amendment tabled Motion and
House floor Amendment number
one.
There is a roll call vote of
yes, and the amendment would
have been tabled A vote of no
and we are back on the
amendment.
Well, it's about to close.
The borders are closed by what
of 43 in the affirmative 22 in
the negative house floor, a
minimum number one to House Bill
Seven as amended has been
tabled. Gentlemen from San Juan,
You have the floor.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I'm
I'm disappointed because in a
year when we have so many funds
that are available to us, we can
specifically target the
insurance fund here, and we can
send it to that fund without
sending it to the General fund.
We can make up the General fund
with all sorts of oil and tax
revenues. So
I look forward to working with
my colleague in the interim.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. There's for the
debate. The gentle lady from
Bernalillo representative but a
horn.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I gladly yield to the Lady from
Berna, Leo, Mr Speaker and
dental lady.
Premiums are really a major
concern for many of my
constituents.
For a lot of consumers these out
of pocket costs like
deductibles, copays. They can be
so high that people aren't
actually able to get the care
that they need.
Um, personally, I have paid
hundreds of dollars in
Copays and deductibles and I
really want to know how this
affordability fund addresses
this issue for my constituents
in my district for myself for
young people for everyone who is
trying to access care.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you. Mr Speaker and General
lady. Um, I'm
I grateful that you ask that
question because it gives me a
chance to describe one of the
programs that the health care
affordability fund currently
enables, And that is a program
to reduce deductibles. Copays
and the maximum amount the max
out of pocket as we say that
enrollees have to pay. So this
program has been used to fund
plans on the exchange. So these
are commercial.
Plans. They are called turquoise
plans and half of
Um all enrollees actually signed
up for a turquoise plan this
year, So that's half of all the
people on the health insurance
exchange. Be well, NM have
signed up for these turquoise
plans. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'd love to give
you an example of how those
turquoise plans work.
Um, for example, a family of
four in the north stay in Mora
County, making about $38,000 a
year.
Can get a plan with no
deductible.
$3 primary care visits.
Without, um, without any out of
pocket assistance. So without
this affordability fund program
that family of four
What typically face a deductible
of over $13,000 with primary
care visits, costing $25. So
this program is basically
allowing for the exchange to
really create not just
affordable products, but
actually quality products that
offset the cost of care.
And that's what this 55%
distribution will help ensure
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you for the answer To that
question. My other question is
in 2023. Congress passed the IRA
The Inflation Reduction Act,
which includes some enhanced
subsidies through 2025 on the
New Mexico Health Insurance
Exchange, as I understand that
is that correct, gentle lady, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker and General Lady from
Benaglio. Yes. So
These will be set to expire
then. And so how will losing
those subsidies impact new
Mexicans in our communities? Mr.
Speaker, Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and Lady from
Benaglio when those premiums
subsidies that are currently
being funded by the inflation
reduction act when those end and
they are set to end January, 1
2026 or December 31st 2025.
When those subsidies and we
could face without the Health
care affordability fund
programming those premiums could
go up by up to 53%. And so that
is one reason why the the future
stability of the fund and
maintaining the percentage at
55% is so critical for the long
term.
So that the superintendent of
insurance office as well as the
B well in M Health Insurance
exchange can plan for these
programs Long term.
One of the challenges is when
you have fluctuations in revenue
throughout the year. You can't
cancel or raise someone's
premiums in the middle of the
year. You need if you are really
trying to make affordable
healthcare
Access, Then you need to be able
to set the premiums for an
entire year and you need to be
able to offer these programs in
a stable way to ensure that
people have access to this
commercial healthcare insurance
for the long term.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Would
you expect then for people to
come off of insurance if it
became so expensive, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I think
that's one of the hard
situations that families have to
navigate. Um, when we all we all
know that terrible feeling when
you get your bill for something,
and it's much higher than you
might expect, and so when a
family would go on to the
exchange without this program,
they might experience
particularly at the end of 2025.
They they may see a significant
increase in those premiums and
then have to decide. Do I risk
the chance that maybe no one
will need to go to the doctor
this year? Do I risk do I risk
that that maybe we just rely on
the urgent care the emergency
room? Um do I? Do I figure out
how to just cover the bare
minimum number of family members
who need medication or other
services and
And try to save some money on
other people that we hope will
be healthy this year.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady that concludes my
questions. There is further
debate The gentleman from a
federal representative block.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker
with the Continental Lady from
Santa Fe, please yield. I will
yield to the gentleman from
Otero. Thank you so much, Mr
Speaker General, waiting only
had a few questions on this one.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, I
wasn't here in 2021. So I'm not
sure exactly.
What the fund was intended to
do. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady, is it my understanding
Just from what I'm reading here
that the fund is meant to help
people on, I guess.
People who need healthcare, the
most who can afford it. Is that
mainly what this is trying to
help shore up, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, and so this would
not include people who would be
on Medicaid. Is that correct?
This would only be people who
are on the market. So to speak,
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, Yes. All of the
affordability programs, Um,
relate to products on the New
Mexico Health Insurance
exchange.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and general leading because that
was my my big concern here
because I know a lot of people,
at least in my community. They
They're hurting right now. With
inflation going up and
everything and they barely can
afford insurance. And then Mr
Speaker, General Lady
I've seen the plans that are
available on B will and M. And a
lot of the plans. I see at least
the ones that I fit in. In my
bracket. It's like an $8000
premium.
For maybe a $60 copay.
When I go to the doctor, So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, How would
this affect people who are let's
just say they're they're low
income, but they're not in such
a low bracket where they do not
qualify for whatever this bill
would entail. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
this program
The programs that have been
established by the office of the
superintendent of insurance for
the Health Insurance Exchange,
apply to currently based on the
funding that has been available
to people who are families and
individuals who are under 400%
of the federal poverty line.
So significantly above
Um there the income
qualification for Medicaid. So
these are
Um, not just some of our folks
who are living with lower
incomes that these are middle
class families as well.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
Internal lady, So I guess my key
concern here is I want to make
sure with this legislation. If
we do, indeed, pass it with this
extra funding.
Previously on the 2021 Bill.
Madam Speaker General Lady has
this directly
Lowered costs for premiums for
health care insurance. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen. Yes.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General Lady. That's all I
needed to hear. I like lower
premiums for my constituents.
And I'm happy to support your
bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Next. We have the gentleman from
Sandoval County representative
Martinez.
Hmm. Thank you, Madam Speaker
will the kind lady from Santa Fe
yield
I yield to the gentleman from
Sandoval.
Thank you, Colonel. Lady. I just
have one question earlier, you
Said that when house
appropriations was building the
budget
That were required
constitutionally to have a
balanced budget.
They did They use these figures
from this tax bill of 300
million to balance the budget,
Mr Madam Speaker and and
gentlemen, um
The
The budget was based the or the
and the Revenue estimate was
based on
The predicted lowering of the
distribution.
Which is why we didn't
amendment.
To extend the date that this
would then increase the
distribution so that we wouldn't
impact the work of LFC.
And I have house appropriations
and now Senate Finance Committee
on the FY 25. Thank you, Madam
Speaker in General Lady from
Santa Fe. So
My fear was that if for some I
mean, it looks like this bill is
going to pass on to the Senate.
but if we got stalled in the
Senate
I was wondering, Are we going to
kind of have to come back and
redo the budget? If these
figures were included in the 25?
So this one actually impact the
budget.
Madam Speaker, General Lady Till
26, Madam speaker and gentlemen,
that's correct.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General lady that
That's my one question.
Thank you, gentlemen. Next we
have the, um, generally from
Bergoglio and Sandoval,
Representative Cates.
Thank you. Madam Speaker does
the general lady from Santa Fe
yield
I yield to the general person
from Bernie, Leo and Sandoval.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, I
have some knowledge of how the
health care affordability as a
small business owner.
Um, can you tell me how this
fund helps small businesses?
Yes, Mr Madam Speaker and
General Lady, Um
Actually, the majority of the
revenue is being spent at this
time on a credible program that
is a small businesses around the
state. Um, currently about 6000
businesses around the state are
benefiting from one of the
initiatives under the Health
care affordability fund, and and
the way that it works is it's
directly reducing the premium
that small businesses and their
employers.
Pay for a small group coverage.
So if you have a small business
under 50 employees, you can
purchase um, a small group plan
through these programs. And what
the health care affordability
fund has allowed is for a 10%
discount to be applied across
the board on those premiums.
Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker and and General Lady
from Santa Fe. When you say 50
employees constitutes a small
business that's 50 employees
participating in the insurance
plan. Is that correct?
Madam speaker and General Lady.
Yes, It's so good. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and and General
Lady. It's hard for is it hard
for small businesses to sign up
for this initiative?
Um
Madam speaker and general person
from, uh Sandoval. It's actually
pretty simple because the
discount is automatically
applied. So if you are a small
business that qualifies to sign
up, um, on the exchange with in
the small group coverage
category, the discount is
automatically applied. So you
didn't have to actually put in
any special paperwork or
anything like that.
I thank you very much. And thank
you, Madam Speaker and General
Lady from Santa Fe. I know. Um
I my previous career. I've been
an executive nonprofits they
constitute as a small business
if they have 50 employees or
fewer participating insurance,
uh, insurance is that correct,
Madam Speaker and General Lady?
Yes. And and if we don't Pat and
Miss Madam speaker and and
General Lady from Senate, but if
we don't pass HB seven
How would this impact small
businesses?
Hmm.
Madam speaker and General lady,
because the small business
program is such a significant
portion of the health care
affordability fund programs, Um
The the likelihood if we if if
we keep the distribution at the
lower level
Um and house Bill seven. Does
not become an acted likely the
small business program would
have to be phased out or greatly
reduced so the discount may not
be able to be offered, or maybe
even number of employees may
need to go down or other ways of
adjusting.
To accommodate the lower
revenue, Mr Speaker and Julie
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and General Lady
from Santa Fe. I know that, um
as an individual who's run many
different nonprofits that have
minuscule margins.
Being able to provide healthcare
insurance has been essential. As
for those people who are serving
their community, and thank you
very much I yield
Thank you, general person in my
apologies on that.
Next. We have the general lady
from Katherine's, Europe's coral
and Valencia representative
Armstrong.
Thank you. Brother. Nickel Lady
from Santa Fe Yield.
I ru field to the general lady
from Katherine's Diarra, Sikora
and Valencia. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. How much money does
this premium tax? Bring in?
Madam Speaker? Just pause for a
minute while we get that exact
number And I do want to
introduce my expert who is Colin
bio of the office of the
Superintendent of insurance.
Madam speaker and General Lady.
It's 240 49 million. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and General Lady
and this is a tax
That we charge insurance
companies.
To do business in the state of
New Mexico. Is that correct?
Madam Speaker and General Lady.
Yes.
And Madam Speaker, General lady,
then we turn around.
And we
Give the
Possibly businesses and
employees of the state of New
Mexico discount.
To do business with the
insurance agency that we're
taxing.
Madam Madam Speaker and General
lady. Yes, and we are able to
leverage some federal funding
through the exchange based
programs through that.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, I
thought the federal funding was
going away and that's why we
needed to raise
This tax or their distribution
of this tax. Is that not
correct, madam Madam Speaker in
General Lady, the Inflation
Reduction Act, premium subsidies
will expire on January. 1 2026.
Okay, Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General lady, And so I do
remember when this bill passed
Um in the house, and I was
unhappy with the bill. Madam
Speaker, General lady, because,
um
We had an administration at the
federal level that did away with
this tax across ever across the
U. S. And then as New Mexico, we
decided to put back in the
premium tax. Is that correct?
Madam Speaker General Lady.
Madam speaker and General Lady,
that is correct. And and I think
part of the discussion at the
time was wanting to ensure that
those dollars remained in
circulation to offer
affordability programs rather
than premium staying at the same
level.
Um and not reflecting the
decrease in the federal tax, So
that was certainly part of that
conversation with which you
remember very well. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady and so
You know, I just find it.
I'm all about helping new
Mexicans. But I'm also all about
fairness. And so we are in
Ah!
A time in our lives, where more
than
Most of us need some help with
some things.
Say it be insurance and and I'm
all about helping small
business. I'm happy to do that.
The numbers I see here, Um,
Madam Speaker General Lady is
57,000 New Mexicans 6000
businesses 41,000 employees have
received about a 10% decrease on
their insurance premiums.
And Madam speaker, general lady
As we sit in this chamber and
and I appreciate first of all
your your amendment to extend it
to not implement this for
another year.
But as we sit in this chamber
and want to save people money on
their insurance while looming in
the hallways, Madam Speaker
General Lady
Our bills that will actually
hurt employees and employers of
the state of New Mexico and cost
them more.
And so we can't do both.
Madam speaker and general Lady,
um
We can't say we want to help
them.
And then turn around and hurt
them. And with that, I'm
Done. Thank you.
Next. We have the gentleman from
Lee representative Scott.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield I will yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Faker. General lady. I am
totally confused here.
Look back! Look fresh,
articulate my understanding if
you will.
Is that we charge the insurance
companies.
3.75% tax on the premiums is
that step number one.
Mr Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Lee. Yes. Only
part of that was added at the
time that the health care
affordability fund was
established, so there was some
existing premium tax.
Prior to 2021.
And thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
So 3.75% is the current tax
rate.
And we turn around.
And provide state subsidies for
premiums.
With a portion of this tax
revenue.
Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Lee Yes.
So, Madam speaker in General
Lady or all of the people.
That are participating in these
insurance programs.
We're saving a subsidy or just
some of them.
Mr Speaker, Madam Speaker and
channel meant I apologize. Madam
Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, Um
So there are there are, uh,
about five.
For programs. I think you could
group them that way for programs
under the health care
affordability fund, they're all
slightly different, so a number
of them are premium discounts.
Um, but there's also a program
that drops the out of pocket
cost. So, for example, I could
purchase um uh
And and this is a completely
fictional set of numbers. But if
I could purchase a low cost plan
on the exchange that might be a
very low monthly premiums, a $10
a month or $20 a month.
But the out of pocket cost and
the deductible could be five or
$7000 something like that. And
so one of the programs would
actually allow for that, out of
pocket costs to be covered. So
now not only am I paying a low
monthly premium, which is
already set and unaffected by
the Health care affordability
fund, But then it's also
wrapping around and saying
And in case you really do get
sick or have a serious injury
that needs to be dealt with.
You're not going to be out
$5000.
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Appreciate the answer. That was
a little bit in the weights.
I would like an answer to is.
Is. It appears that about one
third of the monies that are
being collected or going back to
the citizens in the form of
subsidies.
Is that accurate, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, with the current
distribution as it exists today,
55% is going to the health care
affordability fund.
And all of that funding.
Is going towards these programs
that are premium that our
premium assistance and the other
ones you that we've been talking
about.
Okay. That's the number that I
was trying to get to so of the
3.75% gross tax.
Eight on those insurance
policies. 55% of that is scoring
back to provide subsidies to New
Mexico citizens.
Is that accurate? Yes, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. Friendly
Yes.
Okay, so for those citizens not
receiving subsidies
They're paying a little bit more
for their insurance is that
Reasonably accurate.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
from leave the the premium
surtax that exists now is the
same as it was pre 2021. It was
just levied by the federal
government. Part of it was
levied by the federal government
at that time, so
Um, when you compare to pre 2021
The there was no change in the
taxation level and
I'm not sure.
How to attribute.
Premium increases or reductions.
I mean, I will say Madam speaker
and gentlemen from Lee, we
actually have the lowest health
insurance.
The lowest health insurance
premium costs on our exchange of
any state in the nation.
Member speaker, gentle lady. I
can appreciate that. However,
the question was for those
people in the system by an
insurance in Mexico.
Paying a 3.75% tax and receiving
no subsidy. They are in fact
paying a bit more for their
insurance. Then there won't be
without the tax.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Lee. Yes, that's correct without
with with your addition on the
question of without the tax,
Madam speaker and and gentlemen,
I would just add our our health
insurance marketplaces more
complex because we do have an
incredibly high percentage of
individuals who are covered.
By Medicaid, Medicare and
enrolled in the exchange
program. So, um, it
The majority of new Mexicans.
Um, aren't necessarily seeing
that come out of there.
They're not necessarily writing
a check for that On a monthly
basis. I guess I would say it
that way. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Yeah, Madam Speaker and General
Aidid. We are currently on the
same page and I am advised that
55% is scheduled to go down to
30% in FY 2025. Is that your
understanding? Also Madam
Speaker and gentlemen? Yes.
Okay?
Uh, Madam, Speaker and channel
later.
Have had a couple of years of
experience with this now and as
I understand.
On the representative from San
Juan.
Introduced his a moment There
was some concern over the
volatility of this program and
how we needed to be collecting
these excess funds going into
the General fund to compensate
for the volatility.
Yes. Is that was my
understanding correct?
Matt, Madam speaker and
gentlemen from Lee.
I would say I am concerned about
the volatility of the fund, but
not to the point that
We need to dedicate so much
access to the General fund. I do
believe it is if we wanted to
look at adjusting the premium
tax level.
And or where those funds should
be properly distributed. We
should sit down with some
economists and go through what
is the predicted volatility the
funds so that we could decide.
Okay, this would be an
appropriate percentage. And this
is the desired uses of the fund,
which include health care,
affordability, and this is
something that we can bring
forward knowing.
That we're not sacrificing any
of the programs that are
currently underway. So that so
that Mr Madam Speaker and
Gentleman from Lee. It is what I
would like to do with the
gentleman from San Juan, and the
interim is look at some of the
programs and I know there have
been some other members, Madam
Speaker.
Who have been interested in
funding some other healthcare
healthcare initiatives out of,
um out of this fund, so I think
that's subject to ongoing
conversation. But
Madam speaker and gentlemen from
Lee. I don't today want to make
an assumption about what? The
expected revenue of the fund
might be and make a mistake that
will impact people's coverage.
Madam speaker in general Lady.
Hmm. What the with the
30%
Going forward into 2025. It is
It appears that we're collecting
about two thirds more money.
Then we need to service this
program. It would also appear I
believe I was just advised that
there is some $450 million.
Pardon me. $149 million
Currently the foot is that your
understanding?
Madam speaker and gentlemen from
Lee. It is about 108 million in
the fund balance currently and
part of the reason that that
fund balance has accrued um one
because there have been
significant appropriations out
of the fund over the last few
years. The corpus is not exactly
where it should be. But secondly
Part of what happened when this
fund was created was they knew
that it was going to take time
for these programs to be
established? You know, insurance
programs because you are
basically doing open enrollment
one time a year. You have to
spend all of this planning time
get people enrolled and then
cover them for the coming year.
So that fund balances there so
that the programs can withstand
the 30% the reduction to 30% on
the distribution.
So the so the balance is not, um
sitting there as a unanticipated
consequences. The balance is
there because that is needed to
withstand this 30% reduction for
this one year.
Ah!
Madam Speaker, General lady Now
I'm confused again, so they
A subsidy is going from 55% down
to 30%.
Which would seem to indicate
that the balances in the farm
would increase did that not that
I do that wrong?
Madam speaker and gentlemen from
Lee because the distribution to
the fund is going down. The
remainder is going to the
General fund. It is not going to
health care Affordability fund
balance.
Speaker and general Lady.
With respect to the
representation of volatility, it
was program spending effect now
for a year or two. Do you have a
volatility index or some data
point that you can
0.2 that would support the need
for this continuing level of
taxation. Madam Madam Chair and
gentlemen, from Lee, there is an
interesting portion of the LFC
Not sure which volume Maybe
volume three that there that
does discuss a little bit of the
volunteer E of the health care
afforded the
Excuse me. Health insurance
premiums are attacks. Um, it is
something I think that
We should sit down with an
economist and sort of go
through what is the projected
whether they projected federal
policy developments in state
policy developments because the
sort of tax rises and falls
depending on how many people are
covered in the cost of premiums,
And so it is a complicated
calculation that is less stable
than you would think.
Madam speaker and General Lady,
but from a mile high index of
the volatility.
The program is not available.
Is that what I heard you say?
Um Madam Speaker and and
gentlemen, I don't have it right
now. But I'm happy to look for
it and follow up with you.
Um
And speak with we're happy to
meet with someone who would be
knowledgeable about it as well.
Okay, Madam Speaker General 82%
is a lot of volatility.
And I'm going to submit that
over a broad base of insurance
coverage that is unlikely to be
The actual volatility is
unlikely to be anywhere near
that, and I would strongly
suggest
That you at least consider some
form of the amendment. That was
that was introduced by the
gentleman from San Juan. Because
it looks to me like we're
collecting what a more money
than we needed this point.
Thank you. General 80. Thank
you, madam Speaker for the
answers.
Next We have the gentleman from
Lee County representative
pedigree.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. This
is general Lady yield.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
other gentleman from Lee.
Thank you very much. I think I
have one pretty straightforward
question, Madam Speaker. Uh,
Do I recall?
A bill from 2021.
Where
We changed the index from 1.25
to 2.5.
Very similar to
Do what
Madam speaker in general Lady
what we're doing today from
2.5 to 3.75.
Madam speaker and gentlemen. Um,
I think I would suggest that
perhaps a gentleman is
remembering.
The original bill establishing
the health care affordability
fund.
Um, I do want to stress to you
gentlemen into the body. This
bill does not increase the
surtax.
So
Madam speaker that gentlemen
from Lee, the second part of
your question or the second part
of your statement.
Um
Is not related to this
legislation because this
legislation does not increase
the percentage of the health
insurance premiums attack.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you gentle lady. So
Just to re clarify that.
No additional cost to the
insurance provider private
insurance provider will occur.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
firmly that's correct.
Madam Speaker and General Lady,
Could you please define how that
occurs?
Or in this case does not occur
because the way I read the
legislation
It does not seem to be an
accurate statement, not
suggesting something.
Something bad. It's just the way
I'm reading the legislation. At
some point in time somebody has
to Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
This legislation does not
address the current level of the
health insurance premium star
attacks, so that percentage
remains the same.
What this does do is address the
percentage of the revenue that
is dedicated to health
insurance, health, healthcare
access and health care.
Affordability. So
While the level of the premium
star tax will remain the same.
Where that funding is going
would change under this
legislation.
I don't speaker in general
ladies, So we're that funding is
going
Let me try and
Bring this back around.
Where that
But with respect to that.
The reason why the 2021 bill
happened is because or the
defense at the time.
Um
From the gentleman that
presented this
Was that we needed to maximize
what we were receiving and and
and from.
Our healthcare providers so that
we can maximize the amount of
money we were getting from the
federal government.
Madam speaker in general Lady I
heard in part of your debate.
Where
We're trying to offset what
we're no longer receiving from
the federal government. So,
Madam Speaker, General Lady, can
you get me there?
Madam speaker. Gentlemen from
Lee. That's correct. So at the
end of 2025 January 1 2026.
there are certain federally
authorized premium assistance
programs that will end
However, we are not changing the
percentage of the surtax in this
legislation. What we're doing is
saying
We see a need for ongoing
funding for health care
affordability, and we believe
that that need is at least 55%
of the revenue from this fund.
So that we can continue these
affordability programs for small
businesses for families for
middle class and low income
families so they can get those
discounted premiums and Mr
Speaker Gentlemen from Lee, I
would also just I just want to
mention that
These programs help people
obtain commercial insurance.
And there's been a lot of
discussion. Um, during the past
couple of years about how we can
shore up our healthcare
providers and our our health
care delivery system and one of
the beautiful things about these
affordability programs is that
they offer commercial
reimbursement rates, which means
that providers are receiving a
higher reimbursement rate. It
also
Because we're getting people
covered that might not otherwise
be able to pay for care.
We are
Reducing the amount of
uncompensated care at hospitals.
We are reducing the amount of,
sort of our ICU visits and other
unintended long term health
consequences that come when
people have to make choices
between
Um, putting food on the table
and buying those that medicine
or buying this health insurance
or
Um, taking a chance that maybe
they won't get sick this year.
So so I'm I hope I'm
Painting the picture for you
gentlemen and Madam Speaker.
Madam speaker in general Lady.
Yes. I appreciate that. But
At some point in time, we have
to get to an argument point
where we sit there and say
Um, you know, Yesterday there
was a floor substitute for the
tax bill, which would have
significantly reduced the cost.
And what taxes were being paid
to almost all new Mexicans.
And we're not wanting to do
that. Madam Speaker and General
lady, But right now we're
wanting to help them through a
subsidy.
And I contend, Madam Speaker in
general lady that
Bill colleague of mine
represented Montoya ran this
year that was tabled on the
cliff effect.
It's something that
Maybe the state of New Mexico
does not want to address they
would rather see everybody
Under
The umbrella.
State subsidies instead of
allowing them to actually
succeed.
In a career.
And grow their family to appoint
with not needing that.
Madam speaker and general Lady.
I see where you're trying to do.
I cannot support your bill.
Thank you.
Next. We have the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Thank you, Madam Chair. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield
I yield to the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero?
Thank you, madam Chair and
gentle lady.
I'm going to try to get this in
my mind because as eloquent is
representative Scott is on math.
I don't ever want to challenge
him on math, and I feel like I
get a math lesson every time I
hear him.
Ah, Madame Speaker in General
Lady, So New Mexico imposes
3.5%.
Surtax on all the premiums that
are generated from small
business and
Um, actually small business and
private consumers. Is this
correct?
Madam speaker and gentlemen from
Lincoln and Otero.
I just want to point out two
things. One. The, um
The
Taxes imposed on
Health insurance premiums.
90% of this revenue actually
comes from the federal
government through Medicaid.
And the amount you Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, use 3.5, so the
amount to be corrected 3.75.
Thank you, madam Chair and
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Yes,
3.7% 3.75%.
And then, uh,
Just so I'm clear this is in
addition to the premium tax on
insurance policies, correct.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
this is the premium surtax.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady from Santa Fe. So
combined taxes on insurance by
the state.
Are nearly 7% correct.
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Yes.
Okay, so all insured that
Mexicans are paying an
additional 7%.
Just just one moment. Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um
It is a little complicated, so
the self insured plans do not
pay.
The tax.
Um, the programs that come
through the health care
affordability fund.
Um people actually received more
than the tax
And because 90% of the premiums
paid in the state are related to
Medicaid.
We act. The patients and
families do not pay the tax.
And the federal government
matches the tax and Madam
speaker. Gentlemen, I wish I had
a quick chart to show you
because I was a very complicated
answer, but
Who are privately insured.
Um, that would be
Finding part of that tax, but
the majority But then 90% of
this tax is actually being paid
by the federal government due to
Medicaid.
Thank you, madam Chair in
General Lady from Santa Fe and
I'm glad to hear that This is
complicated because I'm sitting
here scratching my head going.
Am I getting this and it's just
It is very complicated and I
just want to make sure before
I'm voting on something that you
know, I'm not, um, I'm not
making people's premiums even
more because Madame Speaker in
general Lady
Ah, I'm not going to share it
here. But you know, my insurance
premiums are through the roof,
and I know what it's like and
So do I get insurance or do I
not get insurance? Well, if I
was younger, maybe not. But
since I'm getting older, I
really need that insurance
policy, You know, just for
catastrophic things that might
happen.
Madam speaker in general Lady.
So the last question that I have
is what effect is the 7% cost of
private insurance premiums?
What's that? That 7%
Madam Chair. Madam Speaker,
Gentlemen, would you mind? Um,
repeating that question?
So I've figured here 7% and all
insured.
New Mexicans are paying an
additional 7% on their insurance
premiums. What effect does the
7% on the cost of private
insurance premiums?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, we
we are going to have to get back
to you on the fiscal. Um
And the estimate of what that
cost would be, But we can
definitely get that to you.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady. That's
all I have.
Seeing no further debate
generally need to close
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you members for this
wonderful debate on the
importance of health care,
affordability. And with that I
now move that house Bill seven
do now pass as amended.
We're on final passage of House
I was about to close.
And a vote of 51 in the
affirmative 14 in the negative
and the negative House Bill
seven as amended does has now
passed this house.
Next we go to the general Lady
from Benaglio on item. 16. Are
you ready?
Yes, I'm ready. Madam Speaker,
can you get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for policing
House Bill 28.
As amended with an emergency
clause has been subject is on.
Subject to debate amendment or
substitution, General 80 to
explain the bill.
Yes, Madam Speaker House Bill
28, as amended with an emergency
clause is the public project
revolving fund projects. My
expert witness is Marquita
Russell, CEO of the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
This spill.
Um
That I'm carrying is being
carried on behalf of the New
Mexico Finance authorities
Legislative oversight Committee.
As amended. It authorizes an M F
a to provide loans from the
public.
Private shoot sorry from the
public project Revolving fun.
The PPR F 238 qualifying
entities included in the bill
based on the terms and
conditions long established by
the N M F A P P R F legislative
authorization carries a three
year period.
PPR F enjoys a triple A rating
from S and P and passes the
benefit of that rating to the P
p r F borrowers. And with that,
I stand for questions for the
debate. The gentleman from
Travers, Eddie and Otero County,
representative Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the generate yield
Yes, Madam Speaker. I yield to
the gentleman.
Gentle lady. Will you explain to
the body just how this works?
Yes, Madam Speaker and
Kind, gentlemen.
Uh, authorities school Civic
organizations, tribes fill out a
form applying to the MM fa,
Their financial officer or
authorized person fills it out.
Once it's bedded, it can be on
the list. They record that list
and requires legislative
approval and which is what this
spill is its annual bill.
And then they're eligible to get
low interest loans.
And Madam Speaker, General Lady,
Can you explain to me how they
are vetted?
Madam speaker and kind
Schellman. They go through an
extensive internal process and
then aboard process with the
enemy Faith board.
And Madam speaker in general
Lady When you say an extensive
process What does that mean?
So, Madam Speaker and Kind
gentleman. Great question. They
So, Madam Speaker and Kind
gentleman. Great question to go
through to internal committees,
uh, to look at their
Financials and it goes to the
Then it goes to the boards
Public Lending committee and
then at the fourth stage is
going through the full enemy. If
a board for approval to join the
list
And Madam speaker in general
Lady to all of the entities.
Which
Request funding are they all
afforded the same interest rate?
Madam speaker and kind of
element. It's based on the terp
that that terms like they might
get a 2.4% for a 10 year rate.
2.9% for 20 Year eight, So it
depends on the terms.
Madam speaker and General lady
if they are requesting or
applying for a 10 year term, do
all of them.
Have the exact same loan
structure.
Madam Speaker. Come, gentlemen.
Yes.
That's what I wanted to know.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is further debate the
general any from Chavez
representative Diesel
Madam Speaker. Thank you very
much. Well, the general lady
from Burnley Oyo, please. Madam
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady.
Madam Speaker. I have a question
on Page seven of your bill.
Item number 30.
I'm 36 is
The General Services Department
for land building equipment,
furniture, machinery and
refinancing projects.
I need more of an definition of
where this money is going to be
spent.
Other than just General Services
Department, please.
Madam speaker and kind, gentle
lady. Um, my expert witness will
chip
And Madam speaker and kind,
gentle lady. Well, my expert
witness checks. Um
This allows them they might not
ask for all of those that once
she thinks it's probably through
the
The State Building Bond act, but
she is double checking.
Thank you very much. I will
continue to wait.
Madam speaker and kind
generally, my expert witness
says that they tell
They'll say the type of project
but until they actually do this
specific project
But we have located what it is,
and it's the fourth Baird and
Green bonds which were expiring.
We have found the correct
answer.
Madam speaker in general, I d
appreciate your expert witness
taken the time to find that
because as looking through all
of the projects that are listed
here that is the only one that
is not specific to a certain
area, So it is certainly in that
is going to fourth Baird and my
understanding that right Madam
Speaker and kind, gentle lady.
Yes, Madam Speaker. I appreciate
your taking the time to look for
that.
Madam speaker and general Lady
also see that there's an
extensive list of projects that
were brought forward in the
amendment of why were those
added on at the end? My concern
is
Because it
There's a certain amount of
money that's to be expended
here.
But how do we keep adding what
was it 28 more projects? Is that
right?
38 more projects. That's an
awful lot. Can you tell me why
they were added on
In the form of an amendment
instead of into the bill itself.
Madam speaker, and, uh, kind,
gentle lady.
Because the first list has to go
before the oversight committee
that's cut off in October, and
then it's the standards since
1995 that they add additional
projects after that, via an
amendment.
Okay, So Madam Speaker and
General Lady, I'm assuming that
we are still within the
boundaries of what the
appropriation does.
Does authorized Madam speaker
and and gentle lady. There's no
appropriation. This does not
come out of general general
case. Maybe. As I said that
wrong I didn't mean
appropriations. Pardon me.
But am I understanding that
right?
Madam speaker and gentle Lady.
FAA has capacity for all 138
projects listed.
Okay, and Madam Speaker, General
Lady and there's there's
something that's troubling me on
page 11 of your bill.
Starting on.
Item number 5455 and 56 of your
bill and I will let you get to
that area of the bill itself.
Are you there? Madam Speaker
Kind Lady. Yes, Madam Speaker
Whenever I'm looking at Project
number 5455 and 56. It's talking
about the Mesa del sole
development.
And madam chair many many years
ago whenever I think maybe I was
a second semester sophomore
I might have been a first Mr
Sophomore.
As you know, Water is very near
and dear to my heart.
And there was some
Entrepreneurs all be polite
here. There was some
entrepreneurs that went around
buying up certain water rights
out of
The P V. A. C D district
And that is the area. The
district that I live in.
Pickers Belly Artesian
Conservancy district. Those
water rights were bought up.
Due to the fact that some of
these lands that were involved
in the P V A. C. D.
We're part of the conservation
is grant of, uh
It loud. Some of these people to
let their land life fellow.
Okay, so they were not using
their water rights, but they
still owned him.
These particular entrepreneurs
went around buying up those
water rights.
Trying to get them transferred
out of basin.
To go to a development in
Albuquerque.
It was not authorized by the
office of the state engineer at
that time.
And whenever these
This development project was
first coming up the Mesa deal
sell. My question was, did they
have water rights to make this a
sustainable development?
And they said, Oh, yes, we have
the water rights.
My next question That them was.
Is this where water rights
They did not have the water, So
my concern is
Whenever you're talking about
the Mesa del, so
Uh huh.
Improvements.
There's including in here public
utility electric water, and it
says that in every
All three of these items that
are listed there. Can you tell
me where that water is coming
from?
Madam speaker, general woman,
gentle lady. I That's not part
of this spill. Their public
improvement district is an
eligible entity.
And each of these projects had
to go through those four
committees.
Before they could get on the
list. Well, Madam speaker, I
understand that I really do.
But if we are going to put money
into a development
Whenever there is a possibility
of no water being available. I
do have a concern about that. So
Madam Speaker, General Lady, I
will let that lie. But that is
something that this body needs
to be aware of.
We're going to be spending money
on a development that
potentially does not have the
water to service the customers
that are living there. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Seeing no further debate. Gentle
lady too close.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now
move a do pass for house Bill
28 as amended with an emergency
clubs.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 28 as amended with an
emergency clause. The vote is
And photos about to close.
In a vote of 65 in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house Bill 28 as a minute with
an emergency clause has now
passed this house.
Next we go to the gentleman from
Colfax and all those other
counties. Are you ready on item
25 getting to that point.
We're on final passage of house.
We're on final passage of house
Bill 22 seventies amended
gentleman to explain the bill.
Madam Speaker House Bill 270
does is it puts money into the
Technology Enhancement Fund,
which provides matching funds
for federal grants for research
facilities for universities, and
now it's time for questions.
See no further debate. Gentlemen
too close.
Ah, Madam speaker right now
Moving the house. Bill 270 as
amended, Do not pass.
Right now. On final passage of
The vote is about to close.
By vote of 62 in the
affirmative. One in the negative
house. Bill 270, as amended, has
now passed this house.
And we go back to the gentle
lady from Bernie. Leo. Are you
ready on items? 17, Madam
Speaker, Can you take me to that
point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Bill 29.
On final passage has been taken
and there is no subject to
debate amendment or substitution
General lady to explain the
bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker
House Bill 29 is the enemy face
public project revolving fund
appropriation spill again its
annual bill it appropriates a
total of 13 million from the
public.
Uh, project revolving fun again,
Not the General fun 6 million to
the drinking water state
Revolving loan fun 2 million to
the local government Planning
fund. Those two are administered
by Mm Fe and 5 million to the
cultural affairs facilities,
Infrastructure fun held at the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Seeing no further debate,
General lady too close. Madam
Speaker. I move a do pass for
house Bill 29.
We're on final passage of house
Bill 29. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
63 in the affirmative zero in
the negative house. Bill 29 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from burner, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business messages so
ordered
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm director to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 17.
Senate Bill 106 as amended
Senate Bill 108 as amended
Senate Health and Public Affairs
committees. Substitute for
Senate Bill 135 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
surety Luhan, Senate chief clerk
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in engrossed copy of House Bill
171, as amended, has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in Open
session in return, same year
with respectfully submitted
Gentle lady from Bernal. You
Mr Speaker, and then we go to
that order, business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Any announcements.
Gentlemen from Bradley or
Presentable medal. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your House Education
Committee will meet at 830
tomorrow Room. 309. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. You're welcome,
Gentlemen. Member signal,
gentlemen from McKinley and
Civil Our representative court.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after we get off the floor.
Uh, if you want to go to
basketball game and I go to the
community, it's okay with me.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we are all going to
the basketball game and you are
are starting forward.
Members before before I forget,
I do want to give a big thank
you. And maybe you can join me
in a round of applause to
representatives here, Garcia and
going for red chili chips.
I heard that Alcoa and paid for
them, and Garcia delivered them.
Gentlemen from Sevilla bottom
and I took the credit for him.
Even better, Okay?
Gentle lady from early Oh,
Thank you, Mr Speaker, House
Health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow at
8 33 07 take note.
Speaker. Health government
elections in Indian affairs will
meet tomorrow morning 830 Room
305 Thank you Note Before we
break for the day, we're going
to a little bit of intro.
Won't take long. Just as an F Y
I
Any other announcements.
Okay? Got a couple of
announcements to make.
Um
In consultation with Majority
leader Chase E and Minority
Leader Lane.
There is a generic bill members
and I'll read the bill number
and the 2202 number slowly.
Everybody follows along.
But that will be house Bill 16.
202 number 2 to 7.
876.4
Again. That's house Bill 16.
227
876.4
Sponsored by Representative
Diego's
I'd like to remove it from the
House Rules Committee and
referred to the House
Appropriations in Finance
Committee.
And again, that's in
consultation with both
leaderships, and I think we all
agree that it's going to do
that. So see no objection so
ordered.
Second announcement. Senate Bill
159
Also in consultation with both
leaderships as well as the
chairman of House education. We
are dropping the House education
referral to Senate Bill 159.
Again that Senate Bill 159. We
are dropping the house education
referral, so the only referral
remaining on that bill will be
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
So, you know? Objection. It is
so ordered.
Generated from burning Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
While we wait, I will officially
deputize any member of the staff
to play in tonight's basketball
game.
And if anybody ask Robin told me
that I'm speaker and I could
order I want so
Any member of the staff can play
basketball.
It is ordered.
Victory. House Joint Memorial
three introduced by
representatives Cruz, Paragon
Johnson and block
A joint memorial requesting the
governor to declare October as
fentanyl overdose Prevention and
Awareness Month House Joint
Memorial three injuries by
representatives Dela Cruz are
home Johnson and block
How's your Memorial Three
Haven't been written twice by
title is other prints and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 129.
An act relating to cybersecurity
amending the Cybersecurity Act,
adding a definition for public
body providing for rulemaking
establishing reporting
requirements for public entities
receiving state appropriations
in certain situations, requiring
certification of compliance with
certain information security
standards, changing the
membership of the Cybersecurity
advisory committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 129
Senate Finance Committee,
Substitute Percent of Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Centerville. 129
haven't been raped twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to
The House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 148.
An act relating to taxation,
phasing out and repealing
administrative fees imposed for
collecting, distributing and
transferring certain taxes and
other fees, allowing an
administrative fee for certain
distributions. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 148.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Centerville 148
have been raped twice by title
is referred to the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 300
Act relating to the public
peace, health, safety and
welfare authorizing the issuance
of severance tax bonds for
certain transportation projects,
establishing conditions for the
expenditure and appropriation of
the bond proceeds and for the
reversion of unexpended balances
of bond proceeds authorizing the
issuance of state transportation
bonds.
Establishing criteria for the
bonds and requiring reports
making appropriations.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 300
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Centerville 300
have mineralized by title is
referred to the House
Transportation, Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee Senate
Bill 106 as amended
An act relating to cultural
affairs, creating the semi Quint
quintessential commission plan
to vote and implement
celebrations Commemorating the
250th anniversary of the
Declaration of Independence and
the founding of the United
States of America, providing
powers and duties making an
appropriation Senate Bill 106 as
amended syllable 106 is amended
have a million dollars by title
is referred to the House of
Relations and Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 108 as amended an
act relating to the election
fund, creating a distribution to
the election fund to ensure that
the balance of the fund at the
end of the fiscal year is $20
million.
Senate Bill 108 as amended.
Senate Bill 108, as amended have
been rates was by title disorder
is referred to the House
Operations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 135, as amended an act
relating to health coverage
amending the Healthcare
Purchasing Act, the Public
Assistance Act, the New Mexico
insurance Code, the Health
Maintenance Organization Law and
the nonprofit Healthcare Plan
Law to modify the guidelines
relating to step therapy for
prescription drug coverage.
And eliminate step therapy
requirements for certain
conditions. Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 135
as amended.
Senate health, public effort,
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 135, as amended, as
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate Bill 17, an act relating
to healthcare and acting, the
healthcare Delivery and Access
Act, imposing on certain
hospitals, healthcare delivery
and access assessment.
Creating the healthcare delivery
and access fund, creating the
healthcare delivery and access
Medicaid directed payment
program.
Providing that revenue from the
assessment being used as
additional reimbursement to
certain hospitals.
Providing a distribution to the
healthcare delivery and access
fund, providing that the Tax
Administration act applies to
and governs the healthcare
Delivery and Access Act,
providing a delayed repeal,
providing a contingent effective
date making an appropriation.
House Senate bill What 17
Senate Bill 17, having been read
was by tunnel is referred to the
House of Creations and Finance
Committee.
Gentle lady from Burleigh. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business.
Tina Objection. It is ordered.
Alright, Final chance for
announcements.
Gentlemen from Eddie Chavez and
potato
Do you remember from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez? Any
announcements?
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Sandoval. I think
that your chief of staff should
be our star player this evening.
All those in favor say Aye.
I was supposed to me the ice
habit It is ordered.
Generated from Santa Fe, Los
Alamos and River River.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, your
House Judiciary Committee will
be meeting tomorrow at 130 or
15 minutes after the floor
session, and I think members
should also plan on meeting on
Saturday at Let's say nine
o'clock in room 309.
All right.
Oh, further announcements
Generally from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker of the house down in
recess until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Friday, February 8th 2020 for
the House and Senate recess
until 10 a.m. tomorrow and do
not come back without a trophy.
