Thank you manager I have special
guess you're.
However he had alcohol county
day.
And so.
And i'm gonna say the way we see
the south was if you.
County day and and so we have
some wonderful people to guess
of mind that again we're going
to connect with the capital with
the superintendent was to get
get part and the student.
I don't know them all my name is
we're we're just as far as a.
We're gonna just gonna have a
tour but so I can't call mobile
name.
But they're they're blessed at
their superintendents reinham.
Than just having a civic class
is to actually be on unsight and
listen to the.
Put your record
but it is david.
Okay.
Yeah.
Permission this school is known
for football
they can so how many years sir
this three how many total do we
have to even know the street was
back.
And our latest.
But while long was a streak it
was like it was I think six five
seven three
manager for seven street in
football they were the of the
state we used to in the word
that they were always winning
the champions.
The heck of these guys doing
down there it's the water i.
One right now six minute
football
needs.
My congratulations illegal so
far.
Manager
being here only think it might
be pushed by button
thirty two
different classification but
it's a great
no matter
where you are they with what
we're with and if I could just
require these young man right
here needed to win a game to
fight their winds this year.
And we're not denied and a last
second touch
blocked their way stored in the
field it was a glorious moment
this year would not be
young men did a heck of a job
this year
I love
the commonwealth or no matter
which it is the bills character
in the young.
But thank you for coming but i'm
a website with global though
we're going to go.
Yeah.
Once again welcome again.
Thank you mister chair.
And they give rebuilding for
being here today I deeply
apologize for the snapper but
we're back on track
i'm here to present house bill
one eighty eight which would
establish a revolving land fund
alone for an essentially for
landgrads that happened to to
acquire land it is a loan
program so and we're hoping to
capitalise it
with an eight million dollar
preparation landgrants will
be able to apply for loans to
purchase land
at that could will complete
their their landgrant are they
can use that land for economic
development housing
growing growing food wranching
it is the number one priority of
our language communities across
the state over several years we
have heard.
We have heard the need to the
land grants and you think the
leadership of folks like
representative media garcia
we've able to do some really
incredible things and this is
just the next step to meet the
needs of our landgrounds
i'd like to turn it over to my
expert witness mister are to let
there to explain the bill in.
Members of the committee.
Thank you for the option to be
here this morning to sort of
present this son and this
legislation essentially as as a
representative or this mentioned
that what the bill does is it
creates a revolving loan fund
it's it's really.
Provides an opportunity
a mechanism to allow landgrants
to be able to to finance
property with acquisitions are
over a longer term
the the fund itself would be
administered by the landground
council they would be low
interest loans it would be fixed
between two and four percent or
anywhere from two to four
percent in the terms allowable
would be between ten to forty
years the fund would require a
one time capitalization and in
future growth in the fund would
come from two sources one would
be the interest earning.
The pay back on the loans and
then the other one would be with
this bill would also do as
redirect some funding now that
gets reverted to the general
fund that goes to the language
may said assistance fund so in
twenty twenty two the
legislature created the language
that assistance find which
provides for a guaranteed
revenue stream for landgrants
and the way that fund works is
eligible and grants that meet
the sort of eligibility
requirements i'm in terms of
having all the reporting done on
to the state
the distributions are based on
your annual revenues so if I let
end it and the revenue tears are
tied to the same tears that the
state audit act has so if a land
grant has less than fifty
thousand dollars in revenue they
get a hundred percent district.
Landgrant makes between fifty to
two hundred fifty thousand they
get a seventy five percent
distribution from the fund so
that extra twenty five percent
just sits in the fund and then
at the end of the fiscal year it
gets swept and reverts back to
the general fund this bill would
allow that money to.
Grow that bill over time to be
able to keep pace with inflatio.
The lands that would become
acquired would be
come non transferable so any
property acquired to be a non
transferable asset that would be
held in trust by the language
for the benefit of the local
communities however there is a
provision that would allow the
land.
If a landground acquires some
property they could do an
exchange with the bureau of land
management for.
Or with the local governme.
The.
The reason that the fund is
necessary is and grants
currently don't have access to
any mechanism for it for loans
to be able to do this kind of
acquisition so right now even
though lengrants might have a
revenue of let's say fifty
thousand if a property comes on
the market and these are all you
know transactions were where
there's a seller offering
property for sale and a lot of
our communities are landgrants
of lost a vast majority of their
common lands either through the
adjudication process through the
liquid taxis by the state
or through adverse possession or
encroachments in a lot of those
parcels have then you know maybe
they're in the hands of absentee
owner.
Sort of management or care for
those lands and then eventually
those go on the market and if
the the market price is higher
they can then they can afford in
any one year and then they
really are limited in the
options or before a purchase.
There are no languages aren't
really eligible for conventional
loans partly because the the
state assistance finished so new
and so you know banks want to
give my traditional loan there
are no programs we we've had a
couple language that had been
seeking to buy a larger parcels
and we've gone to us the rule
development they don't have any
current programs that sort of
for just land acquisitions they
can fund programs after the
lands been acquired to help them
sort of.
They can do stuff like community
facilities but they don't have
anything for just acquiring
vacant lands.
And at the state level the only
sort of programming.
Kind of fits is the
new mexican finance authority
has a public place removing loan
fund
language are actually have been
eligible for loans from animal
fee since its inception in the
nineties however we've never
successfully gone an application
through the entire process of it
anymore.
Historically the issue was that
language didn't have a
guaranteed revenue string to
take a pledge and so mfe
the way they're lending policies
work is that you know they're
used to working with the units
of government like counties and
minister polities and so they
finance loans based on the
ability to intercept gross
receipts taxes or property taxes
and so
most entities never even have to
make the loan payment what
happens is the the nmphes ab.
Off the top from the sta.
And because of the way the
mistake assistance fund work
there isn't a mechanism that
allows for that and so it would
have to get intercepted at the
department of financial
administration and we worked
really hard to try to come to
some agreements that will allow
for that to happen but because
of the language that assistant
fund it's not a guaranteed
revenue stream DFA had concerns
that if the if the loan for
example repayment requirement
was more than was available on
the fund that year they wouldn't
want to take a an entire
distribution.
Forty even goes to the and so we
realize that there's some real
challenges to how how can we
actually fund.
A program that would allow
language to acquire property and
pay back because they have no
problem investing in their
communities through a loan
program is just there aren't any
available.
You know the only sort of option
the language have now is to ent.
And the problem with that is
often times that terms aren't
really good and we have current
languages has the opportunity to
acquire i'm in there here today
the months on a language about
eight hundred acres which is a
huge kind of like once in a
lifetime opportunity for them to
acquire this acridge on that
land grant was down to about a
hundred.
Some properties to allow them to
engage and not only management
for the watershed but also you
know turn that into sort of
active production for for
different purposes I do benefit
the community and so you know
the the only option for that for
them was an actual real estate
contract and I think the terms
or something like twelve percent
interest over a short period of
time so they only have I think
th.
Or not not the loan but just to
pay on that project on that
project
and the payments come out to be
like almost ninety thousand a
year so in a real estate
contract if they miss that any
one of those payments then it's
going to default back to the
owner they're going to lose the
funding that they put into it
and they're not going to get the
property so this is obviously
not something that not a policy
that would want on doors right
so.
There really is a need for the
fund
and as they said language are
more than willing to pledge
moneys that they have in
revenues that they received a
sort of take out a loan they
just need longer terms and an
affordable interest rate that
i'll allow them to reduce those
payments so that they're
manageable i'm so in that
instance for example with this
point what what would be able to
do is actually set a term that
could range as long as forty
years maybe it doesn't need to
be that maybe it only needs to
be twenty years now but it would
just be something that would
bring it within range of maybe
thirty thousand a year for the
language to be able to please
pay that over it and not be
worried about sort of spending a
hundred percent of the res.
You know why is it important for
length grants to acquire these
properties I think most of your
nope from last year we kind of
talked about the history
language there was a a large
loss of common last communities
that really impacts i'm not just
the local community but that the
region in the state in terms of
water shut health management.
Access to natural resources like
fuel wood that the communities
rely on for their not only for
their surrival but also for the
preservation of their cultural
integrity
in a wildlife habitat
language that have common lands
engaged in like stock grazing on
that allows their c.
Put me in the in the freezer for
the winter so it's not just
about the economics have been
able to sell the lifestock but
it's al.
We also have landgrands that are
you know specifically targeting
keeping agricultural landed
production in areas like to may
you know they've been successful
at purchasing several parcels
that are aglant that are you
know there's kind of a mood now
because.
And so once that egua is
developed into a housing lot you
lose around the ability to put
that back into product.
Acquiring parcels that they're
going to be able to keep in
production that allows future
generations to farm.
The integrity of land but also
the water rights that are
associated with those lands
also you know we talk about
climate change carbon's request
ration is important to be able
to sort of keep those grasses
and maintain those not just the
grasses but the trees.
There's also the need for
language to acquire a land for
community development purposes
this could include the placement
of community facilities like the
community centers.
Senior programs are you programs
affordable housing projects we
have.
And grant has already done one
successful affordable housing
project on their common lands
and they're looking to do
another one where they do long
term.
Actually stay in the community
and and be able to you know
afford putting a home on there
the other thing is acquiring
eastman's to ensure access so we
do have some landgrands for
example in the.
The vegas area there's some
landgrands there's also some
landgrands every language
actually faces issues with
eastmans ridiculously once the
common lands were sort of cut up
sometimes you'll have landowners
acquired portions of the former
common lands that now want to
close off an access meant and so
the community has no way to
actually access those resources
or there's always a fight as as
ownership changes hands in this
would allow them to sort of
acquire eastminster to ensure
guaranteed access for those and
then also hunting and fishing
and recreation on the common
lands for those language that
that you have common lands now
they're able to to a sort of
manage for that they're able to
actually work with gaming fish
to allow that to open up hunting
access for other individuals i'm
often times they'll get out
permits as part of the
dependation pro.
The.
Um.
You know trading the loan fund
will help the state also meet
its constitutional obligations
the arch the constitution does
include the protections of the
treaty what will be all goal
which are the property
protections for all of these
communities and being able to
assist language and reacquiring
some of those lost common lens
so that is in the spirit of of
that constitutional provision
and protection
as I mentioned the language
aren't looking for a hand out
there only looking for the
ability to finance will property
in a matter that's reasonable
that's affordable and we'll
protect their community
interests
language or more than willing to
invest in their communities
through the acquisition of a
loan and particularly when the
interest proceeds are that loan
will actually grow the fund on
for future land acquisitions
from for not only their
communities.
Mr chairman.
Everybody in favor of the bill
you.
Anybody in favor.
And zoom please.
Read your hands and we can get.
The.
If you're when you can hear me
if you like to test a plan his
bill in favor of you got two
minutes if your hand is raised
we will call on you.
So there's an evil you got two
minutes.
The.
The.
Hello.
The.
Can you ask myself.
The.
We can
part.
Loco steep a lot we got two
minutes if you can hear me.
This is staple argo can hear me
yes we can hear you.
Yes I would like to speak on
examples that the terrible
language has as has gone through
on proceed common lands we tried
going through some kind of bank
loans but they wouldn't
recognize this so we went to
real estate agents and they
offered us
a real estate contracts and we
found that if because of the of
the assistance plan are funding
very through the years as more
people from the language of
apply and there's less money in
the loads in the pocket for us
where anybody else because it
goes down so in in acquiring a
property with the real estate
contract if we're not guaranteed
that we could pay that contract
throughout the years however
long we go if we got twenty or
thirty forty years
the less money there is in the
plate so we we we we we will
probably have to lose out if
winners have default under
payment we will lose out on the
monies that we have put in also
the property that we have done
because we have the faulted we
need to have a guaranteed flow
of money to be able to pay for
these properties that we
purchase and a related state
contract is not the way was it's
trying to use this money the
best way we can because it is a
taxpayer's money and by doing
this having this revolving fund
will be able to to purchase our
properties and not have to
jeopardize state moneys tax
payers moneys on real estate
defaults or anything like that
so and banks.
Your discussion his next up
would be.
You got two minutes.
Yes.
Mr barrier either.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Mr lewis can you.
Thank you mister chairman
numbers of committee numbers the
background council I think is
bill is very important for the
fact that
that some of the bothers since
we had our common lands taken
away we have really limited
resources on generating revenue
for that band so we rely heavily
on the
midset of assistance fund for a
for our off day to day
operations
this bill would help just this
long crowd program would help us
acquire but we've been trying to
apply over the last year since
i've been on the board of
trustees are we've been trying
to acquire some of the old
buildings that belonged to our
original settlement which I
think is a very important
historical place in the state of
your next go as well as for non
bent and I think yes this bill
would help us purchase those
properties as well as other
properties that are
that we would like to for
example some of our sore
cementaries that that are in our
area I do lie lie with another
blm
boundaries so if we are able to
purchase some properties that
work that came up for sale maybe
we could trade some of these
properties like mister let the
administration to be all them to
get off some of these properties
back so that's pretty much
that's pretty much all they have
on and that subject and and
thank you for allowing you to
speak
thank you mister gregors.
Next up we have.
We can
hear us.
Can you hear us.
Man said they'll we'll look in
your heart.
Mister chairman this is all
letter martinez when the sound
canada chairman langrent
we started support of house bill
one eighty eight
also be private of our common
lands in its part to purchase
properties through a commercial
banks right near that and also
normal forms because they just
don't mention grants because of
the status that we lay in
we have a properties to come up
for sale that had been offered
but we can't get the
many of the commercial banks to
live as the money could purchase
in so we stand a strong support
of house bill one eight eight
thank you mister.
Thank you.
Mister barrel can you hear us.
The.
Are do we have anybody against.
Mister.
Can you hear.
Yeah.
I think we'll just one is
anybody against room.
House bill one eighty eight.
Comments from the audience going
to.
Mr chair.
Sure person.
The grand support so one eighty
eight.
Bill
to worse in the panel school
area.
People the community to put the
force entry to
a piece of property for a
consolidated cemetery in in our
area and this would be I will
mean to be able to avoid them
next resource to be able to
pursue are objected to trying to
get to that cemetery again thank
you for your time appreciate
your support and.
Mr members of the community.
Yeah.
One.
Yeah.
Anybody else.
Mister chairman members my name
is and I am president of the new
mexico non brand new circle
second and president of the town
to my landground and we stand at
one hundred percent support of
this bill as we stay on earlier
this is going to give us an
opportunity to gain plans that
were either stolen from us
were sold for wrong reasons and
just adverse possessions the
reason we want these properties
like you said until man we're
trying to preserve our
agricultural lands
because we have people coming in
and turning them into housing
complexities and we're looking
the ability to form
we also want to use the land for
potentially for for building
homes or providing affordable
housing for communities for
maybe somebody if we need some
kind of a clinic if we have the
land to put that on we can do so
so we're one hundred percent one
hundred percent support of this
and we ask you all support it
please to allow us to have.
The kind of future that we're
hoping to give our students are
children you know are.
Mr chair
my name is jason kingdom
president
president i'm secure so.
Oh.
We've all had lost
all of her and sisters have come
here from somewhere else in at
the time that they came here
money.
The thing that I see that we are
losing the most that we are
trying to bring back is people
to their communities the
children to be able to stay in
their communities and if you
don't have long to stand on or
you don't have that support them
or the the
infrastructure to for the
children to be able to move
forward they're gonna have to
move somewhere else this this is
about in on bringing everybody
back together we we have an
example of where everything else
on the computer zoom and we're
trying to bring everybody
together in real life on the
lands or we've tried every other
avenue with trying to get loads
so this would be
this would be great for all of
us and I think it would be
really really good for the
future generations to come they
have a place to go to the other
place the thing not was there
they can look too for help.
Hundred percent support.
The.
You've heard from people all
around the state we we heard
from folks throughout the entire
language in terms of committee
over from june until november
again this is the.
The biggest thing that people
need is to have access to the
capital to
to do to connect with the land
the let land means everything to
my community to.
Are the folks who came here so
early.
Please eat them and and they do
we stand for questions.
Okay.
The.
My question.
Yes my question is.
Mister chaira representative of
great question.
So it's interesting because
technically the landgrands have
been eligible to seek loans
from.
Nmfa prior to them even becoming
political subdivisions and mf
was created in the nineties and
there was in their enabled
legislation.
In two thousand four or language
became political so divisions
we actually have gone to them on
several occasions seeking to get
loans so the first time we went
was with the conway language who
has an actual I had independent
revenues generated from
cell tower revenues and they
probably had an annual budget at
that time of a buds sixty to
eighty thousand dollars a year
we thought they're a good
candidate to be.
I can't remember exactly they
were trying to purchase some
property and to to do it some
expansions or something in at
that time ff turn down the loan
solely for the reason that they
and my faith operates on because
they typically lend to
government entities they operate
off of an intercept process so
they are counting or minister
body that gets plenty from them
they'll intercept their tax base
other grocery seats tax or their
property tax directly from the
state so they have interst.
Allow that we need to come to
them prior to even getting
distributed distributed to the.
So they they flat out turned
down the conwell and grant
because is that we don't have a
mechanism for intercepting your
revenues we have no guarantee
they will get me back me back
and we're face of very very
conservative lending arm and it
should be I mean it's the money
for the state and it's the
lending on but they do have sort
of strict policy lending
daylights that the language
didn't me
after the language the after the
guaranteed revenue stream was
created through the language
that assistance fund a couple
years ago we thought he great
now there's a guaranteed revenue
stream
could probably use the pledge
against a debt service and this
should be something that we
could go in and so.
When the monzano language was
looking to acquire property and
we went to animatha a year ago
and we had been in discussions
with new mexico finance
authority for over a year to try
to work away to make it happen
and the problem is.
The language that assistance
fund even though it's like a
guarantee but we consider to be
a guaranteed revenue stream it
does have corks right one of the
quirks is that it's tied to the
gross receipts tax I be so that
the mountain the fund can
fluctually depend on how the
economy flows right the amount
of of distributions is is based
on the number of eligible
entities so there are twenty
seven landgrands that are
potentially eligible to receive
a distribution
last year there were seventeen
that met the requirements and
those requirements include you
know having your all of your
audit reporting requirements and
i'm.
And so all those languages that
were eligible met all of sort of
the checks there was seventeen
of them so that.
Last year the fund had one point
six million that was divided up
by the seventeen language a full
distribution was about ninety
seven thousand dollars seventy
five percent distribution was
about.
So that was kind of that that
the base but if next year let's
say that fund.
Grow slightly but relatively
stays the same but then there's
twenty five land grants that are
eligible that pine now got cut
smaller right so the department
of finance administration had a
concern if we enter into an in.
Back these loans if at any time
the loan or the the amount in
the fund.
That's going to get distributed
dips below the loan amount we
are essentially taking aw.
In terms of of just being able
to operate right to then do a to
do audit for next year so they
can.
Animate they had some real
concerns
and
the way that to address that in
in the way we kind of try to
address it in this original
station is to specifically
target for those acquisitions
and provide the mechanism and
the the terms that allow the
council when it makes loans to
be able to sort of recognize
what what are the sort of those
trends in terms of the amounts
and then make them over a long
period of time you're the
problem with the enemy loans as
it if they're going to default
that animated th.
And that would be managed for
the specific purpose of
returning common lands and
conservation the council would
be able to then work with those
languages let's say we know that
in one year distribution is
going to be smaller we could
allow for the lower payment and
then advertise just add to the
end of the loan amend the no and
add the subsequent payment
you'll just give an extension in
time
and will have more flexibility
to do that to ensure that the
landgrant I can have enough
money to operate on the fund
wouldn't allow a language to
pledge more than forty five
percent of the revenues so it
would it would sort of be a
sideboard so that the council
could feel and this year we can
only take forty five percent so
if you got a major reduction in
the amount of money you have
then we're only going to take
forty five percent of whatever
your revenue is and then we'll
have add to the back end of the
l.
And this would ensure that the
asset which is being acquired
would be remaining the in the
community for those uses for
protection of water shared
whether before community
development work before a
community.
And so you know animal fee and
we thought that the public
purpose revolving loan for would
work this time unfortunately.
And they're they're they are
more like a tradition.
Feel that it will be appropriate
to have a fund that just targets
the specific need in the
specific asset in order to
accomplish those goals which are
logicals of the state in terms
of conservation of lands of
protection of sort of our
natural environment as well as
sort of just community.
Fund.
Mr chair
representative is like I said
we've been in conversations with
and in may for a better part of
a year and really trying to
figure out how to make this work
you know they have said look if
if if we were given the
instruction to sort of either
manage a fund that was
specifically for this purpose or
we had sort of in our
regulations the ability to do
that you know
mf has not only sorted the
guidance that they're given in
terms of their legislation and
sort of legislative direction
but then they also have their
internal policies that are set
by their lending sort of board
and stuff and so there's I think
multiple layers of sort of those
changes you know that is
something that's possible if it
could be worked out like our
purposes to try to get langrans
access to a fund that would
allow them to sort of you know
make these purchases the only
sort of challenge and we'd have
to sort of work with them on
changing that policy would be mf
doesn't have it of long of
lending terms I think there's
like the twenty I think they may
be able to go thirty in some
instances
and their mechanisms for
shortage being able to address
the shortfalls is probably a
little bit more technical a
little bit different in terms of
what they're required to do but
you know at the end of the day
they also sort of agree they
don't want to sees an asset
that's a community asset their
hope is to sort of get these
things or would they been
helpful to try to work as to the
process it just hasn't we have
been successfully able to get
across the fin.
Thank you
what are you chairman i'll just
call you.
We heard yells bills last year
and they all of this is such a.
In my mind.
This was going to solve these
problems for you.
The moves that.
In the.
The.
Town ships and stuff all
through.
Struggles.
With ability.
The.
All these sounds have no stores
left in the.
The.
Properly tax.
The may were craving a private
night.
Struggle with.
The.
One question.
On this the of the pay back.
The.
The.
After this.
The.
A reimbursement of the.
The.
Yeah.
The.
It will always stay in the land
brand.
The.
Mister
representative and the way the
bill is currently drafted that
that's I think this take the
correct um you know I I worked
for the north central economic
development district for many
years and I ran three revolving
loan funds in each one of those
loan friends had different
sources one of the revolving
loan funds sources.
And so the way that when it
worked is and you know we could
structure something similar with
this is that it revolved them
once it revolved once there was
a pay back and then the fund was
grown t.
As money was lent back there was
a portion that was.
Additional capitalization and
then eventually because the
money had turned enough times
all the money and the fund was
now new money in the fund and
that original capitals.
It is possible to set up a
structure that would allow for
that so that this would just be
an initial capitalisation that
could get paid back.
General or the state.
That is the bill stay in.
Legit the worst I i'm.
The.
Excuse me yes I have some.
The.
The create th.
Advisory for.
They don't really they don't
they don't come out there their
record.
Opportunity.
The.
Yeah.
Minor.
In right.
The attorney.
They have a.
Sent its acquisition of real
property.
Would accord.
Conservation.
Just think the.
Well verse mister chair on.
Madam chair I mean sorry mister
chaira.
Mister chair I just to answer
one of your points the concern
about the real property that
actually we.
I think it was more just a
drafting language error
and so that would be an actual
easy fix on the last speech of
the bill section five which is
land purchased in home and part
would just need to change that
to real property.
One section to the other the
language consistency.
It wasn't intended it was just.
Yeah.
So I would offer the.
You know i'm gonna i'm going to.
The.
Echo some of the concerns that
we have here in this committee
it's that and many more for me.
Or excuse me mister chair.
All of.
We all in our districts have
similar situations similar
political.
And so we we find ourselves in
this situation where we would be
essentially voting for our find
specifically for just this.
When we have this in all thirty
three counties all seventy
districts h.
I
think mister chair
representative that this
committee has really tried.
The.
In in following what you had
originally said to us.
That
if you make this political
subdivision that will help.
Other access to funding etc.
We did that we did that we
listened and we.
You know we just passed that.
Is that right mis.
Missed mister chair
representative assessed language
remain political subdivisions in
two thousand four and there were
land grassmen said this that
were added to the list.
So that that is what happened so
so mad mister chair represented
what we are doing with trying to
make him and said.
Legislation where this one is
that one's not we made it.
The.
And so.
I keep hearing.
But you know things like the
cemetery and other acquisitions.
What what if I could ask you
chair how much are these
acquisitions that we're talking
abo.
The.
Mr chair representatives I don't
know the specifics on some of
the properties there are some
challenges in some of these
areas for example like the bill
and properties
if or we have some language that
have don't have similar to
access and they would need to
work with the four service so
they have to do an exchange so
th.
The interested in.
That's kind of one example in a
lot of times if it's smaller
parcels and land mrperiod chair
and representative of those
aren't really the issue a length
grants do have the ability to
finance them either with their
internal budget then grants do
have access to capital outlet we
use that process often to be
able to acquire land the
challenge here mister chairman
represent us is that
sometimes parcels come a big
become available and it doesn't
so we have to be a big parcel
it's just paid to the price that
are outside the ability for that
land grant to get with their
revenues and then maybe the
capitalist so for example I mean
that's another challenge that we
have with with anything so
the monzano line rented this
acquisition you know was
attempting to get.
Purchase of the property they
were running out of time in
terms of actually b.
The they have.
Pledges of capitali from some of
the representatives and and
senators that said they will
give you money to purchase this
nfa once the loan is made you
can bring a capital
appropriation to the table at
the finance answer it'll be c.
But you can't animates
restricted by statute from
allowing capitality future
capitally to pay download
service that right so they they
they couldn't do that even if
their leg.
And so that timing issue sort of
his issue so for the language
it's really about having access
and and if it would be admitting
it worked that's that's fine
it's just having the ability to
go somewhere to say look we're
willing to invest not just the
dollars we have to day but our
future dollars to service debt
we just and we can bring
capitality the table we can
bring other programs to the
table the match we just don't
have the inhouse capacity there
is no program that allows us to
go get that loan right now and
that's the issue but mister for
everybody's time you know for a
sick of time you never told me
how much.
Sure we're looking at so so my
apologies mister chairman I
represent us I don't know the
exact one on the similar
purchase but I can tell you a
couple of purchases that have
happened recently with line
rents the acquisition for
monzona which was at eight
hundred acres was a eight
hundred thousand dollar purchase
okay i'm such about a thousand
and acre and then the time their
language has been able to
acquire some eggland it's got
water rights and those ones have
been about three hundred and
fifty thous.
So mister chair representative
of the reason i'm telling you
this look i'm a few day I know
how much it is to do first of
all cemetery property if it's
already dedicated to materi.
If you want to purchase it
really i've been working at.
Um cementaries like
the nation.
Thirty six years.
In probably two acres.
A semit.
The same amount of time the
opening and filled up half an
acre and so my my point that i'm
making is.
The people.
Parcel.
Small part of you know small
partial to make that happen.
Really might my big proble.
There is the loan process what
we're t.
Essentially for just landgrads
and I think we you know we're
not talking we're not even
getting it you can see that
there's a lot of things that are
not finished on this bill things
such as who's gonna be on the
board what is your application
process what is your loan racial
long value durational what is
your you know
what is what what is your debt
ratio you hit your hitting some
of these points but then you
have some things that are non
reverting at the end of the day
I just want to let everyone
know.
This is the each and everyone of
our responsibilities as.
Districts into the people.
The.
The.
Pay attention how were spending
the money it's it's not it we're
not talking about eight hundred
thousand dollars we're talking
about i.
And this is not.
I agree with her
sanchez and mason where
this is the wrong direction I
think this has to go through an
established.
Structure this what can happen
just so i'd let everybody know
what happens when you create a
bank.
It can become a political.
Pon where depending on who's on
the board who gets alone if your
own process there's a cannot
worms it can be opened just by
not properly.
Creating this in the right way
and I think that is my huge
concern okay I I don't I don't
want to take my all my banking
background and sit here for an
hour going over all the each
little detail but I can tell you
that that is my number one
concern is the amount of money
why eight million.
Why are why are the the the set
senators and representatives not
using their capital outlet like
we have to to acquire in
purchase property there are
other avenues where people can
make get into or either the
language could get into these.
Uhm contracts will stay
contracts with the deferment of
a payment.
Are carry the long there are a
lot of ways to do that they're
also other ways mister chair
where they can buy a parcel and
see you know what we want you to
release so you don't lose a
whole thing release it as you we
go along we have dates of
release you know what i'm going
to buy hundred bakers but you
know in five years when I pay
this much.
I can see a lot of other ways to
make this work especially with
your rep.
But that is something that could
be worked out.
That's an avenue new musical
finance authorities and other
avenue I don't think.
That is another
that is an even um they were
going to do by rules and and
have loose.
Does I really have no we again
we have.
Mister chairman.
I I think you for for your
comments I think that.
This bill I just want to clarify
couple things the language
councils are stated.
The fa.
The.
It is true that the loan terms
will be clarified by rule there
are some guard rails already in
place in this bill you know the
land council as a language
council you know as a state
agency you is is able to do the
the rule making around it to
ensure that the that the loans
that are given are
you to meet certain thresholds
and we we do we have some guard
rails here regarding terms and
interest rates and penalties and
and things like that so I think
it's insurportant to it to
recognize that and this is the.
Committee that is very focused
on on landgrands and this is you
know specifically for landgrants
and the reason why we are
focusing on landgrants is
because.
We don't have enough capital
outlay often for landgrands to
you know cobble together a eight
hundred thousand dollars
purchase for instance you know
that's you you have to go out to
all of the members that you can
find cobbling together you know
a purchase amount and it it's
only once a year that they can
even do that and lench as we
know me I live in an area you
know the language that I am
representing in my district are
should have beholden to at the
market conditions we it's
impossible almost defined less
than when they do the cannot
wait us for another cycle rate
for that acquisition they can't
wait for a cycle to go to the
the the representative in trying
to get twenty five thousand
dollars from you know from ten
of us are twenty of us and so
this you know with the language
council as a state agency with
rules and requirements and all
of that
uses that process and allows for
a landgrant to to get the land
to you know apply for a loan and
purchase the land you know in
that sort of off cycle time but
I I sure you're concerned about
animal faye we have had
conversations with mfa and.
This is this is the sort of the
cleanest way that we have found
to make this happen.
The.
So mister chair represented let
me explain.
I don't know how many hou.
Represent.
I'm the only representative I
have two centers he senator in
the past justice last cycle had
w.
About eight hundred thousand
dollars in.
Five billion dollars.
We had three.
So i'm not talking about twenty
five thousand dollars for secure
representative i'm talking about
us at that representative of
that center really care about
this acquisition.
They can make the there are ways
and to say you know what we're
gonna go ahead and we're going
to purchase this amount in your
right you can't go back and pay
captain with capital I
understand that so you you go
all you see.
I'm gonna buy a hundred acres
were up I i'm gonna i'm gonna
put two hundred fifty thousand
dollars on my capital out
because it's important as I have
million dollars acquisition
we'll see I appeal to fifty you
don't want to separate contracts
you purchase that and you take a
and on the other you you get
another alone you carry it for
that for the year and and that's
just saying that's one
representative.
If you get a senator in in in
accommodation you should be able
to accord those of its that
important
there are other ways I I don't
want to go into all financing
here but what my point is we
need to find another way I don't
think that we have anything
showed me here that we're going
to follow fair landing knacked
by making a.
In in banking before.
You know we have to be careful.
And to put it there and allow a
loan to be.
Created through new roles that
you as you can come in yesterday
and guard real but who's going
to be on the board what is the
loan application process what
are those wrote those things
that I stated earlier is what
might my concerns are th.
The.
On these langua.
Mister chair.
For that question a language
actually do have income coming
in thanks to the the language
merced assistance program bill
that we that was passed last
year there before so there's a
dispersement already we went
through the tears like full
dispersement seventy five
percent dispersement so there is
income coming into those
language that have been done
their audits and are recognized
so there's income other
languages have income like
cardinal language we were just
there a couple of months ago.
They've got lots of different
income strings coming in right
so that they've got there's like
there's a bar a brewery they
have leases from pn so they have
streams of income you month on a
landgrand is is similar should
it leave many many streams of
income for several these
languages it it's not so much
that the language can't you know
afford or not afford to take out
a loan is that there's no
mechanism to get the loan and
are and I and I must address of
representatives have assessed
concerns and comments that you
know and.
You know that senators and
representatives can work
together to give them capital to
to do acquisition that's very
very important to me very
important in I am and I give
language my capital outlay for
for acquisition which is which
is allowed but it's just a not
enough and the timing is off I
have two hundred fifty million
dollars of requests for my
district rate and I can't you do
too I bought you do we all do
you rates of this loan program
is the way in which they can
when which land grants did your
not gonna get alone unless you
have an income stream I think
that's I think that's really
really important here right and
that income stream can be added
to with with capital capital
outlet to support that and we
will con.
But sometimes a piece of land
comes available in january and
you need to act quickly and the
language council which is a
state agencies has its own rule
for have the way the make up of
that council is created which I
will ask mister elaborator
appointed by the governor right
so that that's already
sort of set that said in statute
so I I just want to you know if
you have a piece of lime that
comes on january we're not in a
position to you know give that
money to capitalise that entire
purchase until you know june or
july.
And there are lots of other
competing things and so I just I
just wanted to kind of clear
that up.
Yeah.
Judge just to address that I
mean that that is sort of the
root of the issue right is that
language are willing to invest
moneys that they have they just
don't have the ability to
purchase all at once right and
so and and the mechanisms that
are existing now aren't working
am I appreciate representative
there are some kind of the
creativity that you came up
because we we went through that
same exercise as we've been
trying to find somebody's larger
projects in the same thing and
part of the problem with even
the having a the purchase like
as it releases in in time is
that if that's all up to the
owner right and so the salarken
said the terms that they want
and so that that's one of the
challenges that we have and so
whether it's this ponder if it's
fixing animal fa the root
problem is being able to access
a loan program that would allow
languages to invest you know the
legislature has in the past i'm
done set aside specifically like
for example the colonial's
infrastructure fond or the
tribal infrastructure when were
there just actually sitting
aside a portion of money that
goes directly to those purchases
right we're not asking for a set
aside we're seeing just
establish a program that
langrance can then people get
alone to pay back and grow a
fund at all after the purchase
is to happen it's not a straight
set aside it's really and you
know if it would be structuring
if if it were a separate program
that would be structured that
that the original principle
would eventually revert to the
state after it revolves
you know you know what a couple
times so that it grows once or
twice then you know I think
that's something that the
language would be support above
and it's really about or if it's
figuring out how we fix an email
to allow for them to to get the
funding
you'll senators and legislated
representatives do are willing
to give their capital dollars to
fund these things and some of
them are willing to pledge it
over time i'll give you seventy
five thousand every year that
wouldn't work to pay back alone
with animated the under the
current rules you know that
wouldn't allow them to be able
to fund it and if the owner
isn't willing to to do a
realistic contract or if they
want all the money up front
there needs to be just a
mechanism that language can
access that and then peer back
there they don't have a problem
with pain alone and servicing
debt it's just they don't have
the money to do these large p.
Wired.
Because I have some concerns it
you know that might happen that
they.
Specific.
Madam chair
mister chairman it is as a
representative as mentioned that
the example she gave of the
bruise actually in the language
it's it's it's within the grad
you know the the intent of this
is to actually purchase the
properties that are going to be
adjacent to communities that are
going to sort of provide for
that I think the only instance
where you could
see where they would need to be
maybe a purchase outside would
be if it was for an exchange if
like the for example sign
together the.
We're trying to acquire a track
and they worked with the agency
in the circle cable if you buy
this land over here and then we
can trade it because we're
really interested in prop.
For what we need then they
language acquire that and then
do a trade.
Mr chair I I don't think that
it's that specific in the bill
so that's something they need to
be fixed to sort out how to we
create that
I think part of the struggle
there was just where you'd had
you to find the boundaries
because some of the landgrants
the issue is that if you for
example use the term pattern
boundaries and what kind of back
and forward that with the bill
drafter is that not all and
grants receive their pratten's
property so for example the
language like similar the bottle
the feds took the majority their
common lands and only left a
private allotment so using that
trum would it fit i'm so it
would just be figured out a way
to like spell it in a way that
was clear that it would be l.
The use of historic original
boundaries the problem with that
is there is no sort of like
specific survey tied to it but
we could definitely that's
something that that is of
interest we could figure out
what that would look like to
make it specifically clear that
it's got to be within those who
know within.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Mr
water.
Absolutely mr chair absolutely
thank you.
The.
Our two years.
The.
Table.
That we're going to bring it
back.
It's a good bill.
I don't think I can make a
comment and make.
Miss mister
you're right you cannot make
that and anybody who votes on a
tab.
Unless somebody else makes it.
So sure.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes
no.
And
mister terr do you mind if we
just take a quick pass.
The.
