The.
But you ready
yeah saying him cherk as the
owner
is awkward but thank you
all right.
Cheer custom I just want to
remind you that we are in we are
in s.
We're not going to take any
action on the spell.
The.
Okay thank you so much and thank
you so much for bearing with the
early start and for those of you
who were able to make it a
person i'm so c.
House bill one eighty eight is
really born from.
Yeah.
How important is.
Access to capital to
to acquire land.
But even equipment for many many
purposes.
The.
Of really celebrating and
celebriting heritage.
This this bill which which
developed server revolving land
fund would allow for a language
of borrow money.
And that will be paid
to the state.
Over a period of time and it I
believe that this is the number
one.
Concern issue
the thing that the language
across our state want the most
is the ability to bring bang
lands back into their boundaries
for so many purposes economic
develop.
I'd like to turn it over to
mr are to let th.
Mr
that's very sensitive
madame sharer and a mission
chairman.
And members of the committee
tendence.
I want to thank you for the
opportunity to present this bill
today this is the number one
party for
the land grants throughout the
state as well as the new mexico
mangrand council has endorsed
this legislation house but one
eighty eight
essentially what it does is it
creates a revolving loan fund
that would finance property
acquisitions real property
acquisitions by landgrants other
political so divisions of the
state it's a revolving loan
program
and it'll be administered by the
landgrad council the loans would
be made at a low interest rate
ranging from two to four percent
that would be set in in the in
the bill itself
and in the terms would be from
10-40 years the fund would only
require a one time
capitalization and all future
growth of the fund would be
derived from the interest earned
as well as and with this bill
seeks to do is redirect some
funds that are currently
getting reverted back to the
general fund so in two thousand
and twenty two or twenty twenty
two i'm sorry.
The
landrate were said assistance
fund was created in that's kind
of like the guaranteed revenue
stream bill for landgrants the
way that bill works as that
land grants receive a
distribution that is
proportionate to their revenue
tier alike bosing line with the
state auditors tears and so are
for example if a langrant hazard
annual revenue in the previous
year of less than fifty thousand
then in their get a hundred
percent distribution but if they
have revenue over fifty thousand
but less than two fifty they get
a seventy five percent
distribution more than two fifty
but less than five hundred they
get fifty percent distribution
and and then if they have five
hundred thousand or more and in
revenues and they get a twenty
five percent distribution
because of that percentage in
the way it works the
distributions
and the resulting in in balance
left over in the fund so if the
language only gets seventy five
percent then that extra twenty
five percent stays in the
finding at the end of every
fiscal year it reversed to the
general fund this bill would
allow that money instead of just
reverting it would go into this
fund and which would help grow
it for a land acquisitions
the property that would be
acquired through the fund would
be non transactions for a
blasset that would be held in
trust by the board of trustees
for the land grants and managed
for the benefit of the local
communities
however lands the purchase could
be exchanged with other
government entities through a
land exchange so for example if
and the landground acquired
property and could exchange that
property with let's.
For a piece that's where reduce
into their community or that
better service.
The fund is necessary for
several reasons the first one is
and their arkually know funding
mechanisms available to land
grants and again this is a loan
program so it's it's not it's
not a hand out it's actually it
would be alone that the language
would get and then would be able
to pay back over time the
problem is most landgrants even
with the the new revenues that
they receive from and the
language that assistance find
it's not enough in any one given
year for them to finance large
parcel purchases or even small
parcels that are just have a
high value i'm that are outside
of that annual budgetary range
and the reason there's no other
sort of option is one language
don't qualify typically don't
qualify for conventional loans
mortgages because they just
currently they don't have enough
history in terms of the revenues
that they have and they're just
sort of AAA different entity.
And then there are no current
state or federal loan programs
available to landgrads for those
funding options so there are
some federal loan programs but
none of those programs target
the acquisition of property
specifically so that there is in
any sort of specific program
that a language could apply to
for these funds we've tried
we've gone to usda rule
development to see if they have
any funds that are available for
this type of acquisition and
they do not
and then the other sort of the
option at the state level is the
new mexico finance authority
which is like the lending norm
of the state right and so
the new mexico finance authority
in its enabling statute in the
nineties actually included
landgranses as an eligible
entity but their lending
policies and guidelines don't
actually allow language to get
through that process I mean
that's largely because the
pay back for animal fees tied to
an intercept I typically most
entities that they lend to our
venicipalities or counties that
have a tax base and they're able
to intercept that tax pace in
order to
pay for the loans prior to the
communities and getting it taxes
are collected by the state.
We were assuming that we would
have.
