ELISA LFC analyst close
Thanks to touch on the
differences from the house.
Um, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, so my name is
Julissa Rodriguez and I'm, the
LFC analyst and we're talking
about the tourism department and
I am joined today by Monica
Tapia, who is a DFA budget
analyst as um, so quickly just
to touch about the talk. Talk
touch on the differences.
Of the LFC recommendation
scenario that came out today.
Um overall, the HFC recommended
the LFC recommendation or
adopted the LFC recommendation.
um, which increased the tourism
general fund revenue by 4.3%.
Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee for Special
Appropriations. The executive
recommended 8.2 million more for
specials appropriations than the
LFC. The main differences
include the executive recommend
recommended separate funding for
Route 66, while LFC included it
in the 15 Million Special for
national Advertising.
The executive recommended 2
million for the Marketing
Excellence Bureau and 2 Million
for statewide beautification and
litter control efforts, which
the LFC did not recommend.
LFC recommended 300,000 for the
Special Olympics.
The executive recommended 1.5
million more for the destination
forward Grab program, then the
LFC.
And HFC, Mr. Chair. HFC adopted
the LFC recommendation for
specials and there are two
differences that came out in the
substitution. Today. One is a 1
million increase for national
marketing and advertising. So
that takes it from 15 to 16
million as well as of $400,000
increase.
For destination forward, So
we're taking that from one point
5,000,002.
Mr Chairman members. Pleasure to
be here with you this afternoon.
I will be quick with this know
that time is valuable.
Um, again. My name is Lansing
Adams on the acting Cabinet
secretary today. I'll just be
going through. Um, you know,
some of the some of the data
that got us to this point and
then talking about the
differences
Ah, I wanted to just start by
centering everyone on our vision
and mission because I think it's
important. Our vision is to be
the primary destination for
ventures from travelers, and our
mission is to grow New Mexico's
economy through tourism.
Some highlights for this group
are
We have 60 FTE authorized our
current vacancy or our average
vacancy rate in FY 23 was about
13%.
And we're currently at 13.3%
with two positions that are in
recruitment.
Um, that's very important to us,
and I had a lot of success in
hiring this year. Thank you.
Thanks to
Jennifer Saavedra and others.
Um we are very effective
spending the money that we are.
What you did.
So when you look at our
reversion, we reverted less than
1% of our General fund in FY 23.
Um, when we're talking about the
fiscal recovery funds and ARPA
we were awarded 38.5 million
Um, of which all has been spent
or obligated, except for four
South 4734 or 0.012%.
So to go to slide to just to get
everyone caught up on just
visitation numbers. We continue
to realize record breaking years
in terms of our visitation. So
we are
We're up in terms of our total
trips 4.7% in 20 22/20 21, But I
think what's more important than
that is that we were up 9.3%
over 2019. So we are
Um, you know, we're continuing
that trajectory of record
breaking growth.
Um, Additionally, we're starting
to see business travel pick up
again, which is encouraging.
We're seeing the length of stay
increase. Which is encouraging.
So what does that mean? If you
go to slide three
This is the economic impact that
we're seeing in the state. Um
Each year. We conduct economic
impact in a visitation studies,
so 8.3 billion of direct visitor
spending. We're very proud in
this department to return
dollars back to the to the tax
base and to provide communities
with economic opportunities.
So, um, on slide four. You'll
see our tourism economy
advancement model. This is
really important for grounding
us on our programs. The way we
look at things there's uh
There's 22 pieces to it that are
Very linked. There's the drive
demand peace, which is the
marketing and there's the
sustained growth trajectory,
which is the tourism
development.
So on the marketing side, just
to really important pieces that
relate to the budget, our
national marketing, so we were
in eight priority markets. We
have a four season campaign. We
recently added the San Francisco
market, thanks to the
investments appropriation from
this body and the governor.
So we're appreciative for that.
Um, are cooperative marketing
program also has been very
successful. We've entered the 2
to 1 match for the past couple
of years, and we intend to keep
that.
Um, as a 2 to 1. It's really
improved our rural
participation.
On the other side of that coin
being the development side.
Three just really quickly, you
know programs to highlight we
have an events program. This is
our second year that were in it.
We've grown that significantly.
We feel like events or a huge
driver for tourism in the state,
so we'll continue with that
program. Destination forward is
an infrastructure type of
program that was born out of
some work that we did with the
Council of Governments
identifying all of the tourism
related infrastructure on
The state and then identifying
and then creating a program to
support some of those needs. So
we have 10 projects this fiscal
year funded at a total of 1.9
million.
And then, lastly, the New Mexico
clean and beautiful program very
important to us in terms of
making sure that we are of great
stewards of of our lands and our
communities. We compliment. I
think the work in duties on the
highways and byways by doing a
lot of, um in community
cleanups.
So to get to the some of the
differences
I wanted to first just say
again. We're very appreciative
over the years about how, uh,
the Legislature has appropriated
funding to us. Um and I think
with those appropriations, we
have shown that those
investments have made a big
return.
Some minor differences, but some
more significant on the
recurring budget side. The
difference is about 794,000.
Dollars. That is, um
About 175,000 in, uh, personal
services and about 618,000 in
marketing.
So when we look at what that
could potentially constrain,
it's just the levels of our coop
and our events program.
Additionally, as was mentioned
the LFC recommendation had 15
million for national marketing
and Route 66 and two supports
ISO brah.
The HFC recommendation did add a
million dollars to that with
some language saying that up to
2.5 million can go towards Route
66 theme projects and up to
100,000 can go towards Zebra as
out of that 16 million. I want
to just kind of call your
attention to a couple lines
down. We had requested 2.5
million standalone for route 66.
Um so essentially right now,
we're at a gap that a million
and a half for route 66.
That we're really seeking to
make up.
On the infrastructure piece.
That's the destination forward.
Thank you to the you know both
recommendations were currently
at 1.9 million. So we're seeking
1.1 million to bring that up to
three. Current Grant cohort is
at 1.9, and we had about 4
million requests.
Two other pieces one. This is a
time I think a critical time to
make sure that we're
Cleaning up our state,
providing, um, those
opportunities you know for
education and also the direct
service and work. So we're
requesting 2 million to augment
our clean and beautiful program,
which is traditionally funded
from vehicle registration fees,
And it's it's the distributions
capped. Um, we're seeing the
need for these clean and
beautiful grants.
Um, just every year outpace the
amount of money that we are,
we're able to put towards it,
and I think this is a critical
time to to take that serious.
And then lastly, um
House Bill 233 passed last year,
setting up the marketing center
for Excellence. Um, basically,
you know, tasking the department
with having the responsibility
of coordinate coordinating
marketing and communications
among state agencies We are
seeking, uh
We're seeking an appropriation
of $2 million to see the
contract to get that work going.
Our concern is that if we don't
have any kind of funding to go
towards this, it will be sort of
diverted from our existing
resources.
And so, um, with that again,
really appreciate this committee
And here I stand for any
questions. Thank you.
Chair.
So it's as I look at this
And I tried to look at this.
Did you actually take it? A
budget cut in in the current HB
two, or is it Mr Chairman,
Senator share? We did take an
effective cut. If you looked at
all the well if you looked at
our operating versus, you know,
versus our executive versus HP
to executive versus HP to our
Our request versus HB two. There
is a little bit of ground to
make up to get us to our
request. So there is some
rearranging for example, as I
mentioned
There's 16 million that was put
towards national advertising. We
have 15 million, but we also had
2.5 million for route 66. So
what we're seeking is another
million and a half to make that
route 66 hole and basically hold
harmless or 15 million from
marketing national marketing
campaign, So there is some
rearranging their 450,000 for
Connie Mack, which he didn't put
in.
Um
But
Last year compared to this year.
That would be correct. Alright.
Alright. Thank you, Mr
Mr Chair members of the
committee again. My name is
Julissa and I'm the LFC analysts
for the Economic Development
Department and we are looking at
this purple packet in front of
you. And that's agency code for
19 and I'm joined today by
Acting Secretary Mark Roper and,
um D F a budget analyst Simon
Miller.
So Simon and I will just go
quickly go over some of the main
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendations. Um,
and we'll also be talking about
some of the differences.
Differences from the HB two that
just passed House
appropriations. So, um
Overall, the executive
recommended 650,000 more in the
general fund than the LFC, with
the executive recommending an
increase of 8.7 and LFC
recommending one of 5.3. There's
a couple main differences in the
recommendations, um, mostly in
the economic development
division for film and for
creative industries.
Um, the LFC increased funding
for personnel by 856. And that's
for five extra FTE for the key
industries, a main street
representative, um and a program
coordinator for the Media
Academy.
Um, the executive recommended
300,000 more for the Media
academy compared to the LFC, um
as well as, um, an additional
500,000 for local grants for
creative industries, which the
LFC recommended 200,004 and then
finally, another difference in
the reoccurring budget is, um
The executive recommended
100,000.
1000 increase for the agency's
contract with New Mexico
partnership.
Um and then quickly on changes
that happen in in H D F H A F.
C, um HDFC added 5 million for
the Climate, Water Energy
Authority and Program Fund,
which is contingent on the
passing of HB 237 this session,
pass it over to Simon for
specials.
Thanks, Mr Chair members of the
committee again. My name is
Simon Miller. And I'm an analyst
with D F A, um, quickly go over
some of the non recurring
differences. That's really
where, um The biggest
differences are between what the
house has passed. And, uh, we're
sorry What HFC adopted versus
Um so to start with Lida
The house included 13 million
And the executive recommendation
was at 25 million.
Uh um.
For the media Academy management
and operations of the Media
Academy through fiscal year
2026. The executive
recommendation had 4 million and
HFC did not include an
appropriation a non recurring
appropriation for that purpose.
Um
For business marketing and
recruiting companies from around
the country and around the world
to New Mexico. The
Executive recommendation had 1.5
million. Non recurring for that
purpose, and, uh, HDFC didn't
include an appropriation for
that.
And
Finally, um there was a 2
million
Recommendation from the
executive for, uh, to launch
high tech companies here in New
Mexico try to commercialize some
of the innovation going on
within our universities.
So that was a 2 million requests
for a pilot program. And, uh,
that was not, um, funded by HFC.
So, um
Those are the biggest difference
is right now between what HFC
adopted and what was in the
executive recognize. I'm sure
that Secretary River will have
more to say about that.
Thank you, Simon.
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
First of all, I want to thank
the Legislature because of the
funding you have provided to the
New Mexico Economic Development
Department in the past has
worked.
Um, and the numbers and the
numbers prove it. Just recently,
New Mexico was ranked
10th nationally and new business
applications that 20.4% increase
that beats our neighbors to the
east that commonly is called the
best place to do business by
16%.
We? We also, um um, having
people move into the state.
We're showing an average age of
people 3035 years old coming
into the state, and what's even
more impressive is that their
annual income is at 50 K and
above.
One of the main things that
they're able to do when they
come to New Mexico Has it become
a homeowner?
Ah 48% of the people that are
moving into the state.
Acquire a home within the first
year of business.
And most of our newcomers are
coming from bordering states,
Texas and Colorado. But we're
also seeing a growth.
From the state of California.
If you'll move to slide number
two and also shows how the
monthly employment growth
Has changed into Mexico as
compared to the United States is
you Look Since January of 21,
you can see where New Mexico has
outpaced the average and New
Mexico. If you look at that
decade prior to that.
Many times you referred to as
the last decade.
From the recession of 2008 until
2018 where we consistently paced
behind the national average and
and growth, so monthly
employment growth as you can
see, it's like to have steadily
increased over the last 18
months and has outpaced the
national average.
Move to slide three. You can
also see where those numbers
continue to say.
It's working.
We're doing the things that
we've set out to do.
We've increased the wage growth
into Mexico. We're now on the
top 10.
Not only top 10, we're number
one and wage growth number one.
And wage growth. 6.5%, Mexico
topped the top 10 list and wage
growth and as you can see, that
corresponds very well to the
average wage that that has
steadily increased in J tip, as
well as the leader. Average
salaries that are moving through
one of the other.
Things you'll note on Slide
three is recently we had a
collaborative job fair with
Intel.
And the Department of Workforce
Solutions. Along with economic
development, we work together
and there was over 1100
applicants that attended that
one day event at until for the
for the jobs that they were they
were hiring.
Numbers are working. People are
getting higher paying jobs and
creating better career paths
into Mexico.
As you also look onto slide
four.
When we look at Lita and we look
at the investments that we're
making in companies across the
state.
You know many times we look at
this as a cost to the budget.
But when you look at the return
that we're getting on this
investment
It's substantial.
And as we look at these
investments, we need to look at
these investments in the same
way we looking investments into
our 401k and other investments
that we make.
We're getting a solid return on
our investment.
The leader return the fiscal
return. When we talk about
fiscal return, we're talking
about just those monies that are
received by the state of New
Mexico opiate personal income
tax, corporate income tax and
gross receipts tax. We're not
talking about growth and
economic impact and those other
positive things. We're talking
about direct impact.
If you look that's a 35% return
on investment if you roll all
the incentives
We're talking about Lida.
J tip, high wage. We're all
jobs, manufacturing, investment
tax credit, etcetera were still
showing a 9% return on
investment.
If you take into account the
Economic impact to the cities
and counties where these
investments are being made. You
see that the numbers
dramatically increase 320% and
against all incentives, 232%.
These are real.
Impacts that you're having with
your investments that you're
making through your budget and
through economic development.
And quickly through slide. Five.
We'll show you just some recent
Uh, announcements that are worth
noting, especially those coming
from outside of our borders of
the United States. Maxi on
solar, headquartered in
Singapore, Tex antenna
headquartered in Germany.
Star Scientific, headquartered
in Australia, and hotel
industrial manufacturing,
headquartered in Taiwan. Those
are all new foreign direct
investments that are being made
into New Mexico.
And let's not forget what the L
and leader stands for local
economic Local Economic
Development Act, and as you can
see, it has an impact in the
rural spots that are so hard to
create impact like noisy water.
Red River Coast, Aluminum and
Monte in Santa Teresa and Calgon
carbon that we just recently
announced in Bloomfield into
Mexico.
These are the impacts that
you're making. And these are the
impacts that we thank you for
investing in New Mexico and in
the future.
So we go to the final slide
weren't asking you to continue
to invest in a stronger economy.
You can see the difference is
that Simon outlined, Uh, when we
printed this, it was prior to
the passing of or the proposed
HB two coming in coming out. But
as you can see, Lita, uh
The recommendation was zero and
now shifts at 13 million, so $12
million deficit and then Simon
did a very good job of outlining
the other, Um
Matches and, uh, specials that
are there. I want to point out a
couple of points on the base
budget.
Specifically
300 K for the media arts
collaborative operations.
We have a sound substantial
investment into the media arts
collaborative.
In last cruises and in
Albuquerque.
We have state investment
dollars.
We have city investment dollars.
We have higher education,
investment dollars.
Accumulated tive investment
between those entities of about
$63 million
We need to be able to operate
those facilities.
Ah, building them is great, but
we need to have the operation
capacity, So I strongly um want
to point out the 300 K. That's
part of the media Yogic
collaborative and a recurring
based budget to help cover those
operational costs.
I also want to point to the 500
K and the creative industries.
The house budget of 200 K is
nice, but the great you know,
the great news is
We now have an FTE of that newly
created into division within the
Department last year. The
Legislature was kind enough to
create that division and they
gave us $2 million.
In grant funding, which we have
already
Put out the door.
Ah, And now this year we have
the funding for an FTE. Thank
you very much for that.
Um for a division director and
to be able to do that, But now
we only have 200 K and grant
money. I would strongly urge you
to look at that and try to get
to that 500 K that we requested,
Uh, in there And then as you
look at the special
appropriations above and beyond
leader
The healthy food initiative
again, but very similar
situation to where we are with
the creative industries. We have
now changed the position from a
temporary position to a
permanent position and now
We have zero grant funding for
them to administer, So I
strongly encourage you to look
to the healthy food. Uh, program
as you look into this special
appropriations again. I want to
thank you for your investment in
New Mexico. It's working the
numbers prove it.
And I'm happy to stand for any
questions.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you Step
Um
