The.
Yeah.
The.
Is
all
shooting beyond.
The.
The.
The.
All goal is close we have a
quote
please rise for today's occasion
led by the gentleman from sunday
while the representative
harpered.
The.
Our father in heaven we come
before this afternoon with
gratitude or hurts and thanks.
For the privilege of being here
on this beautiful earth.
We're grateful for all those who
serve.
Here in this house in this
legislature all the staff and
those who serve throughout this
beautiful state and our counties
in our cities are want forcement
our first responders and those
who serve overseas to keep us
saying if we ask you to please
be with all of them.
In at this time father.
We are still help us though we
can be instruments in my hands
for a good.
But where there is hatred we can
bring love.
That where there is offence we
can br.
Where there is.
Darkness white where there is
despair hope.
Nasty for these things in the
name of that I stand you.
German from current debate when
I look at results and begin
representatives of more leaders
in the pledge of religions.
Gentleman from the killing
similar representative
leaders in the pledgeable in the
solution mexico flag.
The.
Your lady from berlier chase.
Mr speaker I will be going to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business in objection it is
ordered good morning almost
afternoon members.
Happy friday.
Announcements still early from.
The.
In leo representative welcome by
it.
Thank you mr speaker
estimator speaker in his college
get on that list and abandon
either i'll group all flamingo
elizabeth as gracious but is
that a key connel so better
compared to it susan says is
pinolas normally he cannot lost
fairly see bamels unless the
siamounts mutual exit all in
quality care future get score
hand in los angeles sean prayer
mr speaker and colleagues i'm
proud and honor tune troduce the
error as enteral of normal of
new mexico normal medical the
brain child of it on a catalyst
a veteran educator and former
dancer at yesterday's the
american flamingo repetory
company and wacking and seniors
director of he asked us
the other then throughout north
of new mexico was created to
ensure quality education and the
arts and academics for our
children while facilitating a
deep understanding and practical
application of new mexico's
cultural roots and traditions
they succeed at a dressing that
a critical need for generational
continuity of new mexican
culture through academics
spanish language art and artists
are near their education of
philosophy is founded on the
principles that are well rounded
education includes the study of
academics art and artists are
near.
These disciplines are hands on
creative and intellectual by
nature this perspective provides
students with a positive sense
of identity and belonging
regardless of their background
before I formally introduce the
don't screw by diet to call the
attention to all my colleagues
of the fire that was left on
everyone's desk from theater
then throughout new mexico
outlining their legislative
priorities and I would
appreciate and am grateful for
whatever my colleagues can do
and supporting the ever and then
through a normally hit or
order are they land there
continue and then through of
normal medical enjoy
we've got these are performers
the answers from the iran and
trouble take it away.
Mr speaker I failed I am not
apologies to introduce the
dancers by name which I believe
is a critical imponent of my
introduction sorry.
If you may I will at this point
ask all of the dancers when I
introduce you to please stand
up.
Calap garcia.
The.
Say it river.
Jason mando hannel.
Caitlyn got c.
Yeah.
Many seller matter.
Feet cast deal.
The.
Jade lovaton.
And darian florida.
And their proud sponsors but
only catoris.
Not in senior.
And jennifer.
Email the school ba.
The.
Hello
No
The.
The.
The.
The.
Only.
The.
The.
The.
Double.
The.
Yeah.
Welcome to an intro another
incredible school in the heart
of district eleven and downtown.
Fury no no you know.
Thank you for that beautiful
performance.
Ah members we've got a couple of
very special guests here up on
the rostroom guest of my self
and also the gentle lady from
donald percent of good year goes
but you're here in honor of
enemies you agged they of course
I said wait a minute it was in
that last week but apparently
everyday day at the new mexico
has a representative
so many ask early is too very
special guess who rise was only
come their names that they can
be recognized by the house we've
got some gay goes as cousin
prima
in a member of the amount I
bought at any christine through
here welcome to the house.
And also another very special
guest
if you wonder aware of some goes
gets her charm smites looks and
everything it is her mother
alice was here with us all the
way from them last clue says
welcome to the house miss barra.
Although you should know she is
wearing beautiful u and m
trickles.
Welcome welcome to the house I
hope I hope the generation
bunian is taking you somewhere
very fun for lunch.
And she'll bring us some as well
let's go next to the gentleman
from sunday violent
representative harper with an
announcement and easy
certificate and some
introductions.
Thank you mister speaker and
ladies and gentlemen the house
it's great to be with you this
morning I believe all of you
know by now um I am a scale
master and I love the scouting
program uhm of course it's a ton
of found to go camping and
hiking and really my favorite
part is the cooking outdoors I
know I don't look the part but I
just love to cook it it outdoors
there's just something amazing
about it I just love it
in of course the wonderful
principles that we teach you
know believe no trace right we
leave the areas better than we
find them right great things to
so I I just love the scouting
program but
uhm I have some special guest
that all introduced here in a
moment
you know when I think about what
are the two most important
things about scouts to me is
that the teachers young people
they can do hard things.
And in our society that's not
often something we're taught
we're taught you can you can uh
you know play computer games but
you can do hard things is
something that I I think it's
just so important and the other
is that uh teachers wife skills
and provides training and and
allow an and really sets these
young people up to contribute to
positively to society to their
to their families to their
neighborhoods to stick to their
country
so that said legal scale is the
highest rank
and it is super rare to achieve
even among scouts it represents
a turn of work and I am just get
a highway today the community
service aspect and so i'll just
say uhm members if you look at
these young people up on the
rostrum each one of them
represents hundreds of hours of
community service to earn the
eagle rank
and if you add that altogether
warning at thousands of hours of
community service and the made
the major one of the major parts
of that is the eagle scale
project and so what i'd like to
do is i'll just introduce one of
these young people they can
stand all mention the real
project and will at the end give
them all the route of a plus
we'll wait wait for the police
but
will start off with jackline if
you get please stand up uhm
eagle project was to organize a
community team to replace
fencing uh around one of the
properties of happy rascal ranch
it's pretty awesome and let's
see you have a rebecca merchant
stand up next she designed some
super highly professional
outdoor signage containing her
high school's mission core
values and some helpful location
markers and with a team of
volunteers over several weekends
put in the contrary and install
these all around her high school
uhm eastman high school
and we've got a rebecca most
she will concrete stairs at the
sportsman's club loss alamos and
also used rebar and welded
railing for that project.
So that's pretty awesome uhm
breach up next we have a luke a
few stand built a community see
library at parital environmental
education center in los alamos
uh in manual future and next
created small pignet tables and
benches for little students at
the children's guard and
monasory school in santa fe and
this allows them to you know sit
down and take off their shoes
and he launches in such with
other feet dangling just a
really sweet place for these
young people so so thank you for
that next week tyler if you'd
stand tyler built a mud kitchen
for the playground for his local
emergency school in his area
did a great job with that uh
nicholas if you'd stand um he
divorced and constructed two
types of canine behavior
barriers for the animal humane
society of new mexico
there is a a transportable
barrier and then when other was
a fabric barrier fence for
surrounding off lease yards so
thank you for for that and then
finally supposed to if you stand
did conservation efforts are
coached lake and with conduct
you know with a bunch of
volunteers clear the short line
using can news and also did a
fixed trail repair and in those
trails were in pretty desperate
shape so anyway if you could all
stand up if we can give all
these young people around the
place for the great words that
they do.
The.
Thank you so much mister speaker
and ladies and gentlemen if I
could just add one thing before
yield my time mister speaker.
Um on your desks uhm ladies and
gentlemen of the house you have
a nice lunch and I wanted to let
you all know that launch was
provided by the society of women
engineers the new mexico chapter
and also the new mexico society
professional engineers and of
course being an engineer you
know my i'm a little you know my
heart you know is with my my
brothers and sisters but they
are a huge part of our economy
and they just wanted to thank us
for the work that we do so I
hope you enjoy your lunch from
the society women engineers and
the side of professi.
Thank you german and welcome
eagle scouts on your day thank
you for all the wonderful work
that you do the future new
mexico is bright with folks like
you uh i've been coming and also
to the society a woman engineers
thank you for that wonderful
lunch and for what you do
grandmother across please.
Generate from send well and
better leave your representative
with an announcement
thank you mister speaker today
is liberal legislation day and I
just want to let you know that
the librarians
play a vital role
in the education and culturalize
the new mexico people libraries
open the doors to information
literacy opportunity and our
communities just for a moment
III just like to share a
personal story I
for a moment for when I was a
child growing up there is a
family is six in a two bedroom
one and a half bath
town house of the little blank
wall at the bottom the steps and
my mom I stayed home would take
us all to the library every week
and we will once a month uh
check out a print of a master
that would hang on that wall and
our coffee table book will be
forward the histories in the
arts and the places in which
that artists came from and it
allowed this
this child with a limited means
to be able to experience the
world outside them and so I want
to think
our libraries and know that
other libraries have been around
for centuries here in the united
states they've been open to
everyone to despite what your
economic racial or background
and i'd like to uh thank them in
mister speaker would you mind
introducing them on the ruster I
would be happy to get lady we
have have you rise and then
we'll give you a big round of a
plus at the end of from your
mexico highlands university and
the laboratory association
president we have ruben at a
gone.
From aps we have natasha cardi
from the UNM indigenous nation's
library program janice kawemi
from unm binancial library
doctor barbara ovator
from hemis brings public library
janet phillips.
And in the gallery we've got the
new mexico average association
and mister john sabatini welcome
to the house.
The.
In thanking for the wonderful
work you all do in our
communities in in so many of our
communities you are the one stop
shop for everything from
education to work for
development.
Social services and supports etc
so thank you for the work that
you all don't
also in the gallery we have a
guess of representative it let
our students from the sanity
indian school
we've got sunshine value
to median abeta.
Andrea garcia.
Arianna charlie.
General chibaner.
Kinda through here ali's warrant
a message nibarte.
Emma lewis olivia joe.
Brian my millenna.
Shia mourning of.
River rometo.
In time michael sanchez welcome
to the house certify indian
school.
New announcements gentlemen from
sort of one thank you mister
speaker it's a great honor and
produce me today to introduce
three of my guests on the floor
this morning who are students of
a very important school in our
state and in my county nabo
preparatory school for those who
aren't familiar with naval prep
they do exceedingly excellent
work in preparing students in my
part of of the woods and they
actually service students that
actually from all across the
country and one of the things
they're they're very well known
about as they have an
international backlert
deployment program at never hope
prep and I want to introduce the
three students who who are with
me this morning the first is
marisa more
hurt plan is the the sin g kina
and that means the honeycome
people clam she's a student
ambassador for naba who perhaps
she's a junior she aspires to be
a journalist and a ten nyu and
hopefully come back to new
mexico which is done
so welcome to her welcome to the
house.
Uh mister speaker my second
guess this morning is aspin
cascala and her client is the
scene see god which is the clamp
treat people
she is aspiring to be a
professional violinist and
pursue music and college she is
also a student represent for
never have prep and she is a
sophomore
while compared to house
in my final guest this morning
is one nito w martin one it
though is a junior his clan is
the tony zoni which is the
tangle people claim and he likes
to rode you including bowl
writing bare back riding and
team roping.
Welcome to the house now about
thank you mister speaker.
The gentleman gentleman from
donate representative thank you
mister speaker I have the honor
today of having a shuttle with
me I will give a reason for a
new mexico seek university camp
program mister reese's a twenty
two to twenty twenty to graduate
or dimmy high school and he is
currently studying
physics yeah to see that's out
of my rainside or what it is so
he's studying physics and he has
a strong appreciation for
philosophy and a great interest
in this legislative process and
I want to welcome uh giverland
and and all those fellow
students that are here with us
are they landing thank you
welcome to the house
up camp incredible educational
programs that so many of our
universities across the country
happy and honor to have you here
sir.
Other announcements.
Gentle lady from reading the
legal and send about
representative keys and thinking
mister speaker just at point a
personal privilege please
I was not a part of this lovely
lunch that was provided by
christie maes but I have to do a
shout out that christimates was
a local restaurant in
albuquerque who kept every one
of their employees employed
during covered by a providing to
go lunches for the essential
workers and they have the best
turkey green shilly part piece
so I just want to make sure that
we know that they're supporting
the community as well thank you
generally on the corner of some
petrol and constitution
shameless plug in now my
restaurant to see in.
Announcements still lady from
santa fe recently thank you
mister speaker I just want to
take a moment introduce my
shadows from towers high school
I have with me walking in rose
and lucy schreiber welcome to
the house.
Announcements alright.
General gentleman from nope okay
do you live from brilliant
representative chasing.
Mister speaker I moved we go
that order business committee
reports.
See an objection it is ordered.
Mr speaker your energy
environment natural resources
committee to him has been
referred house bill one thirty
three has added under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house energy
environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one thirty three
due pass and then refer to the
judiciary committee respectfully
submitted mathematically share
move the doctor we're an
adoption of an unfair committee
reporting house but one thirty
three but a favorable committee
report on house energy
environment and natural reasons
this committee substitute for
house but one thirty three
although it's in favour since in
eye was made the eyes have it
you got really close at the eyes
habit coming to report adopted.
Mr speaker you're all
development language and
cultural affairs committee to
him has been referred house
memorial fifteen has had it
under consideration reports in
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
christina or testing
move adoption where an adoption
of a favorable committee
important house memorial fifteen
or those in favor of scene of
ubank and i.
Oppose me.
The ice have it can be reported
up to that.
Mr speaker you're transportation
in public works and capital
improvements committee to him
has been referred house bill
twenty eight has added under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
dan hocken behild chair mister
speaker and we've got option we
are an adoption of a favorable
college report on house will
twenty eight all those in favor
center for by saying I oppose me
the ice have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to him
has been referred house bill one
forty six has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then referred to
the appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
dan hochman view chair.
Mister speaker move it off where
adoption of a favorable
committee important has been one
forty six or those in favors and
if I were say no opposite the
ice have a committee reported
opted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works in capital and
provence committee to has been
referred house bill one fifty
three has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully smith a
day and hockey veil chair this
speaker will adoption where an
adoption of a favorable
committee reported house bill
one fifty three all those in
favors and if I were saying i.
For posing the saving committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker you're consumer in
public affairs committee to him
has been referred house bill
fifty two has had it under
consideration reports thing with
recommendation that I do pass as
amended and then refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
you and j for our chair.
Mr speaker move for adoption
where adoption of a federal
community reporter in house bill
fifty two all those in favorites
and if I was in ireland proposal
the isa recommended productive.
Mr speaker your consumer in
public affairs committee tom has
been referred house bill one
twenty seven has had it under
consideration reports in with
the recommendation that it do
pass and then refer to the
judiciary committee respect with
military for our chair mister
speaker move for adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house bill one twenty
seven those in favor of school
of everything I
was named the eyes have a
committee product.
Mr speaker your consumer in
public affairs committee to them
has been referred house bill one
twenty nine has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the judiciary
committee respectfully smithed
you and for original is the
speaker move for adoption
adoption of a federal community
report in house but one twenty
nine all those in favor of
representative of was name the
eyes have a committee reported
opted.
Mrs be greater consumer in
public affairs committee to them
has been referred house bill one
thirty seven has had another
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the judiciary
committee respectfully submitted
to anger for our chair is there
speaker move for adoption where
adoption of a favorable
community report in house but
one thirty seven all those from
favorites in eye opposed to the
I
have it.
Committee reported out.
The.
Deleted from earlier cheese to
receptlada.
Mr speaker with an extraordinary
businesses business messages.
See an objection it is ordered.
Click to read.
House executive message number
forty two speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuing to
article for section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill two
thirty two a bill creating the
infrastructure planning and
development division of the
department of financial
administration.
Reorganizing the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration.
And transferring functions
personnel appropriations money
property contractual obligations
and statutory references we
spoke for the euros michelle
hungerson governor message will
be entered.
House executive message number
forty three speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article for section five b two
the new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature's second session
submission of house bill one
zero two a bill making the
magistrate core a court of
record providing that appeals
from magistrate court are made
to the court of appeals.
And repealing sections thirty
five dash thirteen dash two
thirty five dash thirteen dash
three thirty nine two dash five
and thirty nine dash two dash
six ms nineteen seventy eight
being the last nineteen seventy
five chapter two forty two
section ten last nineteen sixty
eight chapter sixty two section
one fifty one and laws eighteen
sixty five
chapter forty five section three
and four as amended respectful
years michelle luncheon governor
message will be entered.
Julia from brilliant.
Mr speaker we've got that order
of business introduction of
legislation.
House built two hundred and.
He was really ready see an
objection it is so ordered.
Correct read.
House built two hundred and
sixty two introduced by
representative ferrari for the
legislative health and human
services committee and act
relating to veterinary medicine
making non-competitive
provisions in veterinarian and
veteran areas technical
agreements unenforceable house
build two hundred and sixty two
introduced by representative
ferrari.
House bill two hundred and sixty
two have been requested by title
as order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House build two hundred and
sixty three introduced by
representative scott and act
relating to notaries increasing
certain fees that may be charged
by a notorious officer for
notorious acts house built two
hundred and sixty three
introduced by representative
scott as well two hundred and
sixty three have a minute to us
by title is ordered not printed
in the food to the house
house built two hundred and
sixty four introduced by
representative harry garcia and
act relating to taxation
removing the sunset date for an
income tax exemption for armed
forces retirement pay house
built two hundred and sixty four
introduced by representative
harry garcia.
House will two hundred and sixty
four hundred minutes was by
title is gentleman pursuant to
article force section five b one
order principle and refer to the
house and labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
the house sexation and revenue
committee
how's joint resolution twelve
introduced by representatives
pedagroup block and mason a
joint resolution requesting the
congress of the united states
under article five of the united
states constitution to call a
convention upon the application
of two thirds of the states for
the limited purpose of proposing
amendments to the united states
constitution to impose fiscal
restraints on the federal
government limit the power
injuries diction of the federal
government and limit that terms
of office for federal officials
and members of congress house
joint resolution twelve
introduced by representatives
pedagro block and mason house
dirt resolution twelve hundred
minutes was by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections and
in the affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee
house memorial twenty six
introduced by representative
block a memorial opposing the
removal of candidates from part
primary and general election
ballots and encouraging
disinfranchised voters in other
states to move to new mexico
house memorial twenty six
introduced by representative
block has memorial twenty six
seven minutes was by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
and indian affairs committee.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by representatives
block and lord a memorial
condemning governor michel lu
hung grisham's issues of
executive order two zero two
three dash one thirty in
direction to issue a public
health order prohibiting the
possession of a firearm as
unconstitutional and amounting
to malfeasons in office thereby
warranting her impeachment and
removal from the office of
governor house memorial twenty
seven introduced by
representatives block and lord
has memorial twenty seven have
been read was by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in in the universe.
House memorial twenty eight
introduced by representative
saramea and thompson a memorial
proclaiming february ninth
twenty twenty four as new mexico
speech language and hearing
association day in the house of
representatives house memorial
twenty eight introduced by
representatives haramiel and
thompson has memorial twenty
eight have been ripped was by
title as ordered not printed in
place on the speakers stable.
Stand by waiting for a few more.
Bills to.
The.
Did you leave you from valencia
percent for hardo in the
vicinity for a joke.
Can she text a joke to somebody
and then they can relay it on
the floor.
House build two hundred and
fifty eight introduced by
representatives armstrong dunkin
vincent and harper can act
relating to taxation
distributing a portion of the
premium tax from health
insurance businesses to the
emergency medical service is
fund house bill two hundred and
fifty eight introduced by
representatives armstrong dunkin
vincent and harper has will two
hundred and fifty eight have
been read twice by total is
deemed remain person to article
four section of everyone ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee then the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House build two hundred and
fifty nine introduced by
representative serator enact
relating to public finance
authorizing a percentage of the
severance tax permanent fund to
be invested in private equity
funds investing in climate
technology.
House bill two hundred and fifty
nine introduced by
representative serado as will
two hundred and fifty nine and
have a minute was by title is
ordered not printed in referred
to the house rules committee.
House build two hundred and
sixty introduced by
representative montoya and act
relating to finance requiring
the new mexico mortgage finance
authority to conduct a study on
affordable housing making an
appropriation introduce a house
bill two hundred and sixty
introduced by representative
montoya has been two hundred and
sixty have a minute twice by
title is deemed your main
pursuing to article four section
five b one order printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House built two hundred and
sixty one introduced by
representative monthly and act
relating to taxation increasing
the value of an investment
voucher that may be claimed as a
tax credit pursuant to the
affordable housing tax credit
act from fifty percent to one
hundred percent other than that
of an investment made for an
affordable housing project house
bill two hundred and sixty one
introduced by representative of
montoya.
As well two hundred and sixty
one hundred minutes was by title
is deemed remain pursuant to
article four section five be one
order printed in effort to the
house health human services
committee then the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House memorial twenty five
introduced by representatives of
montoya and javier martinez a
memorial urging the president of
the united states the new mexico
congressional delegation and all
other members of congress to
address reducing the cliff
effect and ending generational
poverty house memorial twenty
five introduced by
representatives montoya and have
you ever martinez.
Is this the one that gets five
committees I would.
Totally kidding has a more
twenty five minutes was by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections in indian affairs
committee.
The.
Chile from believe.
This is speaker I move you go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business.
See no objection it is ordered
at a couple of bills well not a
couple four bills that we're
going to.
Remove from rules pursuing to
executive messages uh august
slowly so they can follow along
standby.
All right folks house will two
fifty one introduced by
representatives dunkin there are
some lunch vincent endbird.
Was sent to the rules committee
upon further consideration.
It is deemed remained pursuant
to work on four section five b
three.
The.
Described from the rules
committee order printed and
referred to the house.
Rural development.
Mangrance and control refers
committee.
Then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one zero two.
Introduced by representative
channeler.
Deemed remained under article
for section five b two house
executive message forty three.
It is discharged from the rules
committee order printed and
referred to the house.
The.
She committee events the house
appropriations and finance
committee that is housible one
zero two.
House bill two thirty two
introduced by representatives
dickson armstrong hotmain
behale.
Didn't remain personal to
article four section five b two
house executive message forty
two.
Discharge from the rules
committee or printed.
Enreferred to the house
protection public works and
capital improvements committee
events.
The.
The house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two thirty three
introduced by representative
local.
Deemed your main pursuit to work
on force section five b two
senate executive message thirty
five it is described from the
rules committee order printed in
referred to the house helping
human services committee then
the house judiciary committee
house bill two thirty three.
Okay we are announcements any
committee meeting announcements
are lady from really your
representative thompson mister
speaker the house helping human
services committee will meet at
nine am tomorrow please beyond
time someone ask if they could
bring breakfast but I don't
remember who and so i'm
expecting breakfast but I don't
know what so beyond time room
three o seven member six noted
whoever asked the answer is yes
breakfast room three o seven
tomorrow health human services
committee gene lady from dynamic
representative ferrari thank you
mister speaker your house
consumer in public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow
afternoon after the floor
session or one thirty member
state note gentle lady from
those salamos and sundal
violence on the fair district
got the best of me
the anchor mr speaker i'd like
to remind people that your house
judiciary committee is meeting
at one thirty today in room
three oh nine and on saturday at
one thirty in room three oh nine
look forward to seeing everybody
mr speaker generally can you
make sure the ac is blasted
please
it was a little warm wasn't it
mr speaker I guess I have to do
my own clerical work and now i'm
going to work on the
air conditioning where you get
the book books generally.
Don't know from donator
president small thank you mister
speaker your house
appropriations of finance
committee will be meeting
approximately two pm in room
three oh seven today thank you
mister speaker thank you I see
that you moved from three four g
we have taken it out of the
conference from.
Any other announcements.
General from.
Any other announcements
gentlemen from any.
Sorry chab is any note that a
percent of thousands.
Thank you speakers republican
caucus will be monday morning at
ten thirty member side note
monday morning ten thirty
republican cockets folks there
will be communities this
afternoon there will be
committee meetings tomorrow no
floor session tomorrow we will
plan on being back here on
monday uh keep in mind we're
getting to that time in session
for those of you who are new
build introduction deadline is
coming up
so be beware that that line I
work with your respect of
caucasus to make sure you get
all your priority bills in
also financial disclosure forms
do at the end of this month uh
the end of january so early next
week those we do.
And lastly starting next week
will start planning some evening
floor sessions as well as we get
further into session and into
third reading so make plans
police.
The.
Gene lady from her lion.
This was a speaker I moved the
house standard recess and tell
eleven fifteen on monday morning
january twenty ninth.
The house have said a research
until eleven fifteen monday
morning.
The.
