It's close we have a quorum good
morning members.
Please rise certification it led
by the gentleman from been a
legal Representative them to go
to see a.
These words of wisdom by another
tennis a.
As a player to New Mexicans.
And our ancestors.
Reigned in this these words of
His words to the fullest.
The father the son and the Holy
Spirit.
If you're a kind.
Zoom selfish economy motives.
Anyway.
If you are successful you will
overnight.
Anyway.
Find serenity and happiness.
Jealous.
For this to have.
Yes.
In the final analysis.
Deliveries and wonders American
is this in the pledge
allegiance.
Representative C. leaders in the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
objection it is so ordered clerk
to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate
finance committee substitute for
the on Senate chief clerk this
is to be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
adopted the conference committee
Mr winter.
to your calendar.
the back page conference
committee item number one
gentleman from some of what it
was and want to be ready on that
item.
certain with the courts we
cannot hear you clearly.
Is that better that's better
right thank you.
Good morning members.
days I want to thank those LFC
staff that are here with me
today is in Jennifer for always
being steadfast and
knowledgeable and everything
related to the economy in New
making sure that our bills are
prepared in a timely fashion and
in a way where we can it makes
us look good but knowing that up
on that fourth floor there
typing away in their proof and
two days into one document and
so with that being said I wanted
to start with that appreciation
and also know that what we see
mention of my first discussion
here on this floor is really of
volume of work of thousands of
pages of ideas tax incentives
New Mexico but we for condense
those thousands of pages into
this document that today is
sixty nine pages worth of of tax
their respective tax committee
conference package and their
approval of it I watch the
Senate.
Pass.
The conference committee report.
want to for optics reasons for
transparency reasons one that
the speaker Bly's me with to
pass a tax package that was
done.
At night we wanted to do this
The Senate last night went to
went into their meeting with the
fear that it would be
filibustered in in some senses
of the word and so that's why
they went back at midnight and I
Not evident there was no wish to
filibuster anything in relation
to how this committee report
came back.
Items that were discussed the
most was.
And I have to say Mr speaker
bodies that that legislative
process is hopefully one that
they saw us here on the house
side based on how we work here
Develop the process that was
deep and respect.
State and transparency.
because the narrative around the
discussion last night was one
that I took away of of unity and
appreciation.
And so again their pride is one
That way and I mentioned that
when house bill four five forty
seven left this chamber the
first time it was one of process
That's why when this body.
Has not passed out the omnibus
tax bill the first time with
bipartisan support we felt that
it was a product we're standing
family and a focus on our
communities.
The house version of house bill
five forty seven.
With the amendments made on the
floor if I can remind folks is
We then also remove those top
brackets in terms of a
compromise between Republican
members and democratic members
we listen to the public to make
sure that they feel comfortable
with something that we could
in regards to our changes that
we were going to make knowing
that there was a possibility
that in the Senate they were
gonna make some changes as well
those changes were made in the
this past Thursday was met in
the evening for one time we set
the stage and along with the
team that I am so proud of here
on the house side which includes
Mr Harper that that the gate
himself to the process.
That we could defend something
left to with in a way where we
could feel proud about the
process that we were going to be
gauged in and yesterday we bid
for three times and last night
we finally passed out a.
if you would please Mr speaker
allow me just to simply read off
what the tax package looks like
today.
The tax package look like today
with the committee amendments
We maintain the personal income
tax cuts for New Mexicans so
that there is no tax increases
to personal income tax at all in
will get more support from this
tax package low income families
with children will get more from
the child tax credit which is
retained in this document as
well.
Related to military retirement
For the foreseeable future not
have to worry about it being
sensitive.
Related to social security tax
exemptions they will be indexed
Find the tax exemption for
supplies purchased by teachers
to help them cover their out of
pocket expenses that was in
addition in the Senate side.
Increases the tax credit for
It rations of all sizes equally
charging the same corporate
income tax rate.
Relating to capital gains rebels
the forty percent capital gains
deduction for equity and
million dollars of income to
make sure that those who invest
their sweat equity into their
business in New Mexico.
To protect their hard earned
work.
Related to G. R. T..
Budget measures to try to reduce
Judy Judy cuts so we kept those
We created a child a child care
G. R. T. deduction to help
childcare providers four to
provide service to make ends
meet in a revenue constrained
industry.
came from our our of our caucus
chair from the Republican side.
An idea from her.
Related to health care five
more than doubling more than
doubling the current number of
participants at two thousand two
recruit more health care
providers in rural New Mexico
and I want to thank
representative Garcia for his
healthcare practitioners and
encouraging doctors to expand
their practices.
There is now a Jedi deduction G.
R. T. deduction on home
their own homes and I give
credit to Representative K. for
bringing that idea for.
Related to alcohol and tobacco.
There was an attempt to.
general fund verses the alcohol
legalization fund that we have
created here we thought we
pushed back to make sure that a
hundred percent of that money
continues to go to those funds
people feel different about
these issues the fact is is that
this is the first tax increase
on alcohol that this state has
seen in over thirty years.
And if you want to call it
way that we are getting the ball
rolling in the right way.
Related to tobacco there was an
attempt on the on the Senate
side to add a a hike of thirty
have more time to study the
issue to understand it more to
understand the factors around
how we can create equity in
regards to tobacco vaping
tobacco stuff left here we
retained a twenty five percent
tobacco tax increase on cigars.
Related to renewable energy.
electrical electric vehicles and
charging tax credits related to
energy storage systems and tax
credits we kept those in the
bill as well.
Related to storage facilities
industrial revenue bonds we kept
geothermal heat pump P. A. T.
and C. ID credits of thirty
percent of cost with a maximum
of nine thousand dollars.
The Senate that also the push to
thermal electricity generation
facility it also creates an
ejecting deduction for the sale
of property and services in
connection with the construction
and equipping of geo thermal
The bill faces in seventy five
percent of the motor vehicle
excise revenue to the road fund
twenty five percent of the
transportation project fund
which means local roads
means electrical electric
vehicles will finally be able to
be able to contribute to the
road fund by having their mobile
vehicle excise taxes directly
benefit roads Furthermore
will in total raise road fund
revenues by an additional
seventeen million dollars one
thing that was also mentioned in
the Senate that was really
Film film was it was a large
part of of their tax package by
which.
The film tax credits were
developed.
There is a cap on non film
partners.
languages for film partners to
attract bigger productions
beginnings and television series
with a cap of up to forty
million dollars per year the
bill increases the amount of
film tax credits for
with partnership of CTE programs
and the like around the state to
ensure that when that five year
since it hits.
Those non resident workers can
leave people can take over.
area is not is is now the urban
city hall and not the county
line which will allow our rural
areas to receive a much more of
in the state so with that Mr
speaker and and body of again
super proud of of the team that
would that that led us to this
point super proud of the team
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Santa and
Bernalillo it's really to yield
to the gentleman from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker I I rise in
felt like under the leadership
of of chair Lente we sent out a
great package and we talked
about that that there was you
know some things in there that I
We sent over to the Senate and
the they made some changes and
some of them are good actually
many of them are good but they
did make several changes that I
Because of the amazing team that
we had here what we are getting
back I personally believe is
actually better than what we
to keep the personal income tax
Brackets that we we sent another
house here
it's it's more progressive we're
we're we're putting right now we
there was some pushback from the
Senate on that they wanted to
send that and we will stand firm
and say no this is the right
thing for New Mexico so that
that was a huge win.
when someone puts all their
blood and sweat equity and built
their business over the years
and then they sell it as their
nest egg for retirement the
average business is about a
million dollars and so it just
factor in there that is real
reform
for for a corporate income tax
and even made
At the Senate's request an opt
percent year to rate reduction
that is huge that helps all
families in the state that helps
all businesses it even helps
with transmitting.
And there was some discussion
know we could come in and maybe
delay one of those reductions so
so it really was a good measure
to make sure we still receive
that point five percent
Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm I'm very grateful that we
all to keep the rural health
care practitioner changes from
from sure Garcia in the bill and
which I really appreciated was
right now copays and
deductibles.
Doctors and and health care
your tea on that so we just need
it.
And that's been you know just
something that's really been a
problem for a long time and so
as we're looking at how do we
help doctors the session right
with the metal medical
able to get it up to a hundred
percent
so so again that's a great
testament to the team here and
what we're able to do.
I'm also very excited that motor
car we'll go to help roads and
that's something that we all we
all know our roads
infrastructure could use that
money's that's huge.
problem which artists explained
when you look at how you tax
beer and wine and spirits it's
really tax based off of the
alcohol content that's all
almost all other states do it
did was we actually maintained
that philosophy was this change
where we do a twenty percent
increase across the board so we
can continue to maintain that
yet here's tax less than one
been fighting for for the last
you know ten eleven years that
that revenue most of us going to
the general fund and over the
years we've been slowly setting
it more of a to the county D. W.
finally in this bill all of
which are excise tax is going to
go to those those programs not
the general fund that is huge us
When you look at the film that
was added in the Senate
that was really a huge ad and
really took us all by surprise
but Mr chair
and gentleman I am so proud of
this team and especially the
but that we should be focusing
on building our our our team
here at the trade here to the
a way that I think now it's
about ninety one million dollars
once fully implemented so so I
think it's just a huge
improvement on that portion is
transparency working.
Broadly.
Across this entire chambers that
we have something we're very
proud of and also Mr and and I
want to thank the the the
best and in the speaker
and body I want to see I want to
just encourages all to accept
this this package if there are
There is for the debate on this
motion to adopt the conference
committee report the next will
go to the gym lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
touched on by Representative all
Harper I'd like to know a little
bit more about the film issue I
if you could please.
everybody that I'm not the film
expert on our team the film
expedited team is the young lady
from Dona Ana County but I will
I will do my best to answer your
first time but as we discussed
things and to the point of the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
is that.
Wanted to focus on not using our
tax dollars not using the
that we could promote here
within the state that has the
potential to have and a positive
return on that investment so one
thing from the beginning that we
thing for New Mexico which would
allow rural New Mexico to focus
and be included in these tax
package is related to film so
The second part of the the the
the the last three are those
that we talk about.
Wanting to make sure that we're
issues related to for instance
above the line above the line
wages for film partners to
attract bigger productions
television series
all and so the above the line
individuals that we're speaking
of are those
directors and those people that
are when you when you see the
film credits rolling are the
that that forty million dollars
a year by which the Economic
Development Department of our
state was was very.
Part of of but I will say openly
say that we just need more money
they have to prove why they need
more money they should approved
by way of numbers from the past
from the present and into the
and non film partners those
increased to ten million every
year for five years to give the
film industry in New Mexico room
to keep growing again with the
which for us was a little bit of
a harbor because why are we
gonna incentivize bringing Jews
in from out of state to work on
productions when we have our own
people in New Mexico and so when
own communities that have the
capability and we need the jobs
so they can go to work but not
but excluded from this
opportunity so we put that five
developed and I think rising CTE
programs throughout the state
begin to present ourselves on a
platform in the past so that our
people can then there after
within five years not have to
Representative not on board with
the film stuff and I made that
clear in the Senate but it's one
of those things that when when
looking at the discussion
related to the conversation of
comments Mr speaker but I'd like
to know what the cost is going
to be and at the end of the day
how is it different from what
we're already doing if if we
could Mr speaker Mr speaker
So Mister speaker how are we
going to handle the existing
contracts that we have are those
going to be pro rated or how
does that work.
based on how this tax package of
changes things now.
Mr speaker gentleman I'd also
like to know what is the total
cost of this tax package.
across the state six hundred
this is a weird number six six
six.
Six hundred sixty six million
dollars
million FY twenty six seven
hundred twenty six million FY
twenty F. I S. it is sorry FY
twenty five seven hundred twenty
six million FY twenty six nine
Tax cost after next year will be
seven hundred million.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
are correct.
I I think that's fairly
expensive I'm gonna vote for
this package but I think that's
expensive thank you Mr speaker
thank you Julie there's further
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
today but I just want to.
I guess go over some numbers to
when you talked about
get some clarification Mr
increases no that wasn't a
that's why I'm asking for
clarification and air taking
notes and trying to understand
that because it that was part of
the discussion earlier on that
and that you're to those
wondering if there is anything
left the house which is a
reduction of point five percent
but the only thing we did
differently the spread out
across four years thank you Mr
speaker that that's a
clarification you thank you so
One from Santa in those certain
counters you'll please Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Lee County.
Gentleman.
The oil light comes in several.
I am.
Strongly in opposition to.
And I would like to speak for
industry four hundred and fifty
eight dollars.
It should be noted.
Four thirty percent refundable
tax credit.
No amount that is.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
If they spend two billion
dollars well them three hundred.
Know what this tax package to
increase from a hundred million
to one hundred and forty
million.
Mr speaker.
Ninety two percent of the
activity would not.
In this state absent.
and Georgia and Florida
indicate.
That won't get back.
About fifteen cents on the
dollar.
the dollar with more volume
Furthermore.
This was.
Revenue stabilization and tax
Each New Mexico full time job.
Course the state.
Gas industry continues to fall
money through the door.
Thanks people will leave the
state faster than they can get
on the airplane Mr speaker let
me let me just leave you with
Six percent of that income
taxes.
Three thousand dollars in the
Please vote for this tax package
look at this worst form of
corporate welfare thank you Mr
speaker thank you to thank you
gentleman there's further debate
will the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield to the gentle lady from
those counties.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so could we review the
Mr speaker then we give us a
quick second.
These computers tired so we'll
give it a second.
Mr speaker and gentleman join
the club.
way the tax package left this
chamber.
This shows that in FY twenty
four it will cost of five
hundred thirty one million.
nine hundred seventy three
million.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for that answer and
could you tell us Mr speaker and
Mr speaker and gentle lady in FY
twenty four.
FY twenty five nine hundred and
fifty million FY twenty six the
one billion dollars.
FY twenty seven FY twenty six a
little over one billion dollars
numbers included the film tax
credit
piece.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes
ma'am.
And Mr speaker and gentleman and
the conference committee costs
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
the conference committee costs
now for FY twenty four.
FY twenty six nine hundred and
seventy eight million and FY
twenty seven one point one
billion.
point deduction Mr speaker and
gentleman over three years is
that correct Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and gentle
lady you're correct point five
Mr speaker gentle lady yes ma'am
okay thank you very much Mr
speaker and gentleman so is it
fair than to deduce Mr speaker
Mr speaker gentle correct but to
also cut film and their initial
proposals as well.
we had to extend out our cut on
G. R. T. and Mr speaker and
gentleman and our team thank you
worked very hard to trim back
the film tax credit and I
the potential and I don't call
it an attack on the Ph.D bracket
that we initially sent out but
also defending of those Ph.D
brackets thank you Mr speaker
that we shouldn't be using G. R.
T. cuts which everybody in this
room and every family in this
extending it from two years to
four years so we're delaying
those benefits and in large part
Mr speaker and gentleman to pay
doing what you could.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
hope that people don't fill them
up you're defending film by by
any means I mean it was
something that took us by
and a hundred percent hundred
percent this is not at all a
criticism of the team because Mr
speaker and I think you did an
awesome job given what you are
you know I just want to make
sure people are coastal clear
about how we're paying for all
this Mr speaker I do wanna also
command all of us who supported
a number of initiatives in this
working families in the state Mr
speaker and gentleman the G. R.
T. tech medical G. R. T. tax
deduction incredibly important
Mr speaker and gentleman and I
those things as well so
Hundred percent support this
package recognizing that we were
put in a difficult situation and
again I want to commend the team
conference could report we're
gonna go online to the generated
from million Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman please yield.
The house of negotiated or had
the better package
what we had to.
Accounting.
the Senate was going to barely
make it so that we brought up is
alcohol excise tax from nineteen
ninety three dollars to twenty
their package and we negotiated
that out as well as we
negotiated out the tobacco.
be able to cigarettes we
negotiated that out the Senate
had a better package in the
house did and we negotiated
deaths in health care.
All the rebates that we're
giving our families our Nolan
void.
Asking that you please refrain
from questioning the integrity
of this chamber by questioning
transparency.
Representative Gail Garcia
brought up in his
Speech this morning his
innovation
There is for the debate.
From the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and towards
Representative Lord.
San Juan.
And we're.
Okay I was off by one sorry.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
hearing a lot about the film
package I know we've heard that
a lot
very disappointed that Alec
Baldwin is going to be getting a
rebate check on that but Mr
based in California and what I
see with a lot of these
companies what they're doing is
they're coming in they're making
a movie and then getting out
in a Malibu and in the San
Fernando Valley so.
I found what I was looking for
but I did have questions about
what we're considering New
Mexico resident.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
So according to this if they
domicile in the state for any
part of the tax per year that
would mean in if they did a
percent of the year okay Mister
speaker German so I'd be going
back to that and I'm not I know
this is it's a lot information
here but I was looking on this
ammendment page thirty four it
says.
Mexico resident need to
says one hundred fifty five days
so was it one of the other
because it does say or or does
it have to say both the maybe to
sit and in their Mr speaker
done.
speaker gentle lady of of from
from the staff it is defined in
the tax code but I think it that
this point it's one that in in
this package.
defined quite well okay Mister
speaker John I guess I'm looking
here and when I saw the or that
to me implied if I was a
business person and I was going
when we do make movies there for
longer than six months so that's
still going to be applicable and
that that's one of my Harper
into this is that
I know I know that.
especially if the producer the
director does that are maybe
rent multiple units and they're
still going to get the budget
and not live here because what
I'd like if we're gonna be
putting out this much money Mr
gonna see this is a giant
gigantic loophole because you
could tactically rant for six
months and a day four hundred
eighty five days or more and
I want to make sure on.
The tobacco.
So on the tobacco taxes
originally had this twenty five
gentleman that's going to be for
a ten dollar cigar in a premium
cigar that's going to be two
dollars and fifty cents per
cigar in taxes that correct.
So we don't have that many
premium cigar shops we have
about six in the state I've
talked to two of them and
somebody wants to smoke a cigar
and somebody wants to buy a
cigar they should be able to and
I don't I can't see penalizing
this one business over another
to tobacco products Mr speaker
gentle lady no.
Okay Mister speaker it's on vape
and it's on cigars and little
scars and cartridges okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
but we exempted I want to make
sure that we accepted our craft
distillers is that still the
case Mr speaker John Mr speaker
want to make sure because
there's a lot in here
Was that it was just straight
across right the tax increase on
Three percent verses like eleven
percent it's all the same no
matter what the alcohol content
is Mr speaker down.
less is basically spirits on top
one in the middle there on the
bottom in terms of a percentage
right right and and understand
that ma'am Mr speaker genesis
wondered and so I guess it has
more of the whole content but I
see it's a flat rate.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Tennessee to have another
question on this.
five percent tax credit for
films in rural areas and and we
define rural areas just sixty
miles from the urban city hall
can you because I have a very
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady that change that was made
by by way of of of verbiage in
the bill is that it used to be
definition was changed to sixty
miles away from the city center
of any one particular urban
areas so that they would allow
Mexico will now be able to
receive this benefit from Phil.
Okay Mister speaker gentleman at
so from clarity like in Torrance
County.
definition on this Mr speaker
John.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
the the city centers would be
Albuquerque or Santa Fe.
Mr speaker daily no just those
two cities okay thank you okay
that was my question is I guess
it must be done I have the urban
I have Albuquerque and have
Torrance County so I need to be
able to explain it to my people
unhappy enough that I I it's
it's hard because there's some
really good parts in here and
there some very frustrating
parts in here and I don't think
everyone is going to be totally
happy on this
this one it was a sunset clause
that was removed out of that is
that we said this morning.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
we left the house there was a
Committee excuse me that was a
the weights in the bill now.
Okay Mister speaker and
gentleman and did I understand
correctly so that was your
deductions now for co pays and
deductibles.
Mr speaker gentle lady for the
copays and deductibles a hundred
percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman is out
for everyone or just people at a
certain income level.
Repair but that was I thought
you said that was for people
with Medicaid is that what I
understood.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes okay.
debate on the motion to adopt
conference committee report
thanks will go to the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
supported Osama Kwan and
Balenciaga Representative Garcia
all those counties my my veteran
hero.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
the gentleman all.
Local question I was gonna ask
already been asked but I just
huge I mean we we want to honor
those that protect our freedom
and so to put this in a tax
package of this magnitude will
fetch years and years of of of
how much effect that had on the
honor roll we go people's state
of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
those of five hundred or
thousand dollar rebate
respectively that will go back
family in some cases you know it
could go into a checking account
they may never see it just
depends on on the on the the
level income then and the
factors around how people live
in their respective communities.
them it is usually just said Mr
speaker gentleman because at the
end of the day sometimes either
you
My groceries or gas in your car
as a the rural communities Mr
speaker and gentleman my
District is almost from tier
compared to most of them don't
know it all of Mr speaker
gentleman.
concerns and I was very very
important to a lot of people
listed in New Mexico the tax
package is a good package Mr
speaker gentleman that to me.
Are you normal better and I'm
and I'm I'm I work hard to help
veterans out and I thank you for
doing that exemption it's
important and I think for all
you're doing for the state of
Mr speaker I yield the gentleman
from Bernalillo county Mr
speaker and gentleman for
whatever for whatever it was
worth I asked that that the
gentleman folks is a little too
much chatter please if we could
we're almost there a couple more
hours let's keep the chatter
down thank you I am proud of the
said a good compromises when
both parties are dissatisfied.
I think we have that quite
perfectly Mr speaker and
gentleman.
represent us to the best that
they can and every member here
is sent here because we have
strong opinions.
Because we have strong opinions
Author Dr Robert Moeller said
they'll be difference of opinion
in just about every intelligence
analysis that you make.
And while I Representative I
That was put into this package
is not to be taken lightly and I
am incredibly proud of the work
that was done Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Body.
And.
the body feels the same way when
we explained this type package
at.
Benefits are individual
districts our communities but
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate on the motion and
gentleman from the you know
Representative small thank you
Mr speaker with the gentleman
from Bernalillo from Rio Arriba
and Sandoval you Mr speaker I
committee as the other members
of this house have Mister
speaker gentleman you have
executed a transparent and
inclusive process the speaker
gentleman an incredibly strong
package Mr speaker gentleman and
you've done it with input with
engagement and Mr speaker
compliment again to you we're
committee second Mr speaker
gentleman just to go through a
few pieces
all of the core structural
all of those started here in
this house and the exactly the
same in this bill as they left
this house correct Mr speaker
as the members have talked about
in a few key areas whether it's
the appropriate removal of the
sun set for our military
that Mr speaker gentleman so I I
just.
Those are all tweaks that you've
added here Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle and yes they
are we're proud of that thank
you Mr speaker thank you
treatment the the peace on
focusing on teachers of focusing
on seniors Mr speaker and
gentleman compliments again into
Senate Mr speaker gentleman it
seems to me that we're making a
very big commitment with this
package we're doing it based
our teachers valuing our
veterans Mr speaker German all
those are reflected here
and the road pieces Mr speaker
gentleman for planning and
responsible way making sure that
we will have the funds to pay
and keep up our roads and our
transportation system Mr speaker
did that's right Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman yes you did
okay Mister speaker gentleman
and you have I think in a
mindful of to make sure that we
didn't create too much
initiative right now but at this
point time your your sentiment
is correct that in twenty seven
that's when we finally meet that
volatility as as we've done in
as we talked about on this for
the Mr speaker gentleman we're
making some sort of commitments
and and putting our structure
the speaker bringing us here in
the morning when we're fully
fresh Mr speaker gentleman and I
want to close Mr speaker
gentleman in just sort of
reflect including on film Mr
Mr speaker gentleman Mr speaker
gentle and you're correct thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen it's also accurate
that we produced the most oil in
our history last year Mr speaker
get used to as New Mexicans and
in this chamber we are in a time
where we can be the very best
we've ever been where we can do
that you lead the transparency
you and so.
Just to the pond and you're
bringing back to us today there
are assumptions built into it
there there is uncertainty that
we always have to acknowledge
that builds very squarely on New
Mexico's history our heritage
our values and positions us Mr
speaker gentleman I think the
very best we've ever been
My community teaches me that you
should never apologize for
showing emotion but this morning
I got a little choked up when I
looked at the at the young
gentlelady from Dona ana county
our inclusion to the process and
so for those reasons to see a
young of woman of color to step
up in that way was amazing and
so Mister speaker without
not pass.
Gentlemen we're gonna pass it
but we are adopting resolution
to adopt the conference
committee report on house
taxation and revenue committee
substrate on house bill five
forty seven three types
From Santa
members I'm going to direct your
attention to concurrence
Senate has asked that are this
body receded from our house
floor amendments to.
Senate bill two fifty
amendments to Senate bill two
fifty to run a motion to recede
from house amendment to send it
to fifty of those in favor say
of us in line.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
morning the list has been shared
with minority majority
leadership
I items on here.
director let the record reflect
that elections are for places at
about one forty six three times
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to expand the
bill.
taxpayers this was presented to
rest up.
and I'm just going to quickly
summarize what's in this bill.
happy to protest them it also
clarifies all valuable property
close to the same property
protest process so protecting
It also the last two items Mr
speaker makes use of zappers and
phantom where which are for
devices to fraudulent records of
this changes that the clock
starts for the department to
review that at a complication
once it is complete.
And then it reduces that time
period from eighty one hundred
that the talent Department can
assess is taxpayers twenty five
dollars and the minimum amount
that a taxpayer can protest is
twenty five dollars it raises
that Senate bill one forty six
as amended do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate one
forty six is three times amended
the vote is now open.
yes.
What is it would have sixty four
in the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate bill one forty
six three times amended as long
as this house.
I was doing it.
The record reflect that election
is there for you placing Senate
bill one oh six as amended
with an emergency clause on
final passage of been taken it
for medical folks psychologists
pharmacists and physicians
assistants so this is just
adding them in to make sure that
we keep as many health care
providers as we can with that I
passage of Senate bill one zero
six as amended with an emergency
clause a vote is now open.
Was about to close.
The critical those members of
six as amended with an emergency
clause passes house.
To delay from Santa Fe are you
ready on item number forty three
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker last year we passed the
venture capital fund that Fund
and that really invested about
thirty five million dollars we
could use to help increase
investments over on from yours
practical we work with NMFA on
these changes and there I do
things I want to note about it
wanted allocate fifteen million
dollars more to make the fund
more usable to a replaces the
allows them to invested
differential rate for economic
development and finally it
includes IP protections for tech
trade secrets etcetera and
business information without I
Speaker gentle lady.
The matching requirements could
you elaborate on that provision
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen yeah this was a real
big concern with the NMFA
because what happened what are
found when trying to implement
the original program was that
that was not available to on for
new or is at the rate that we
wanted and so it allows them to
still makes more investments to
report on how those investments
capital funds can now be a
hundred percent taxpayer dollars
with private investment.
Required thank you Mr speaker
comes as a second stage would
typically happens at the
beginning is that you have angel
investors through the initial
seed and and create the
opportunity on so there is
private money going in already
I don't some curtain answer to
the question.
Tax.
Hey.
stage at First funding that goes
through so no that is not
possible Mr speaker gentleman.
So.
The second stage of the process.
The second sentence.
lady could you tell me what
resources the state is available
to bring to bear to lose weight
council but they've already been
able to do and we've been doing
more investment of this on for
no real stage so there we do
have that element as well.
they did not chime in for this
bill.
The gentle lady do we have.
Just.
stay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen that so what the
VC stage on we'll go back this
fund is only a year old at this
point and so this what the
rules and making this a workable
fund it can actually be used
these were their recommendations
and that's what we were able to
put into place.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Valencia thank you Mr speaker
thank you generally.
tell me the dollar amount of the
funds that were expended out of
this account.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
would be able to do more
investments than we had ever
before and so Mister speaker
gentle lady there how much how
much money is in the fund right
now and how much did we put in
the can do invest investments
there and so the I was a pulling
those together because when you
look at it from an investment
point of view there's more
dollars in a good way going to
making sure we're growing
businesses in New Mexico
the state of New Mexico is that
what this fund is for thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
just.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I will I would hence the the
Mexico that are getting hammered
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady seen over the
majority leader close thank you
Mr speaker thank you buddy I now
move that Senate bill four oh
The clerk to call those members
of that recorded both
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
Those little forty seven in the
He's ready now.
Thank you Mr chairman the record
of also like to move the
foreman of the house floor
amendment one of the
consideration of for this bill.
that's what I have gentleman it
is being passed out let's give
it a minute well it gets passed
out.
And I hope the sentence really
concur with this amendment
Gentleman I believe the
amendment passed out German to
explain the amendment.
of so there's no concurrence for
the amendment I think you're
just trying to make a sergeant
at arms work extra hard this
morning.
I apologize miss and thank you
that all coaches will be trained
both in CPR and ADD with the
recent tragedies we see in in
common than others we see the
importance of trainers and
countries had a support of
illicit representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker those the
gentleman from Valencia yield.
Thank you Mr speaker definitely
through with your amendment Mr
speaker and gentleman because a
this is an unfunded mandate.
Mexico once again and I know
you heard this and probation but
you know we have a teacher we
have coaches that coached one
Places that come to rural New
Mexico to be able to train in
this
in this of what your what your
mandating care.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
again speak for the need for
this.
Sorry gentleman there's a lot of
chatter and.
Making sure that members can
hear the debate and understand
what they're voting on thank
within a shorter time the nasal
implementation for this bill
what is doing is it's causing
the is rising or need for this
the trainings but also for the
purchase of a committee.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so I'm just concerned
about the cost for rural New
Mexico to implement this in the
school systems
really feel good needed thing Mr
speaker gentleman I stand up
against this thank you Mr
speaker there is for the
legislative from Chavis
yield please thank you Mr
speaker digit ID you will to the
kind gentle lady from Travis
county.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
too have a concern with what is
particular that gives me concern
Mr chair Mr speaker and
gentleman he we are talking
about coaches and and all the
different departments throughout
that's not what I'm asking this
would include girls board sports
as well as voice point so I'm
assuming volley ball basketball
football golf.
all of our city and so Barbosa
is force for both men and women.
Mr speaker I guess my next
question is what this include
rodeo coach is.
in the past whenever my kids
were younger and a bunch of us
jumped in there and
Really helped us to a I do
fire departments located around
the rural parts of the state
that there are a C. P. R. T.
trying CPR technicians that
will.
for all these coaches.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady there's a number of
people that have the license to
train in a container your school
outside agency that would have
to come in to provide the
training you may have parameters
within your district that can
find this at no cost to the
individual or to the school
district Mr speaker I do
exactly for them to.
Have the parents reassured that
if something happened to their
small child that they would be
able to respond and we had our
local fire departments that did
our school as well gentleman
thank you very much.
The gentleman from Lincoln in a
better sentences.
Thank you Mr speaker does Jim
o'neill.
kinda stole my thunder little
bit but I think that's a really
good program we have initiated
that program where I live and we
as well as our police
departments and they're always
willing to help out the schools
and the coaches and everything
like that so
ride and when we get ready to do
the a EDD the eighty days and
you're gonna of purchase some I
want to sign on to that bill
You to my friend and colleague
from Valencia County.
Thank you Mr speaker I wanted to
and gentleman I wanted to rise
and support of this as a
online which does not include
that AD and there's so many
instances when sometimes were on
the bus and the only in the
number with the only ones that
coach that is there helping our
students is trained in
compressions and not just being
able to patch up a cut so I one
You to my friend and colleague
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I just wanted to stand
up and thank you for bringing
community can support this
training so that
The costs are not necessarily
borne by the school districts or
discussion colleagues with that
Mr speaker I now move that
Senate bill four fifty as not
amended do now pass we are final
passage of Senate bill four
Close.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes voters will vote of sixty
point affirmative you're in the
negative Senate bill four fifty
places in el Public Affairs
Committee supposed to present a
bill to forty six SO I some and
that a final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment for.
I'm so sorry is it item number I
I meant item number forty
apologies to our board operator
and there you go the gentle lady
to expand the bill thank you Mr
substitute for Senate bill two
forty six as twice amended Mr
speaker makes various necessary
changes the uniform on our town
little close thank you Mr
speaker I now move that the
Senate spot.
Bills substitute for Senate bill
two forty six is twice a minute
now do now pass where final
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
It was on my vote of sixty four
in the affirmative zero in the
paper that is on your desk
majority minority leadership
have agreed to this consecutive
and to placing the following
memorials enjoy memorials.
memorial I House memorial twenty
three can house memorial eighty
three.
Is there objection to placing
these memorials joint memorials
on final passage.
memorial eighty one House
memorial I House memorial twenty
three and House memorial eighty
three of final passage has been
taken.
twenty three and House moral
eighty three do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
memorial for as amended house
The vote is now open.
We apologize for those my phone
you need to actually preserve
button.
Okay the phone is open.
What's about to close.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
The vote is one of sixteen
affirmative zero in the negative
To the formerly Representative
Chasey.
Members we have.
The a number of memorials on the
speakers table that the majority
and minority leadership have
memorial eighty five House
children Morial three in house
joint memorial fourteen as
amended is there objection to
placing these house memorials
and Senate Joint Memorial on
For those of you following at
home or at your desk it is the
back of the.
I see none of the record for the
elections are for placing House
memorial eighty five so Senator
memorial three and senator more
fourteen as amended on final
passage has been taken.
consent of the house the record
show that the rules been called
all members from present voted
in the affirmative.
Spent motion show all members of
memorial three and senator
memorial fourteen as amended the
vote is now open.
fourteen as amended has duly
passed this house.
you Mr speaker I just wanted to
take a moment to thank you I
think the body for tremendously
productive session I have never
caucuses I consider all of you
my good friends and thank you
for a wonderful year.
Thank you gentle lady.
Thank you members
It's only ten o'clock we got a
couple hours ago.
The gentleman from.
Thank you Mr speaker what the
top two new dollar members of
this house thank you for all
you've done you know I've been
here for this my seventy year
and this year's been the best
appreciate all the people that I
look forward to seeing you next
year enjoy the summer time for
we'll see around food in New
Mexico somewhere thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
security custodial staff the
people who feed as and I'm no
I'm missing people but they
really do make our lives so much
Announcements the gentleman from
some devices may be more
representative of Martinez.
But I have to say that under the
leadership on the leadership on
our side the leadership on the
Mexico and we have not always
agreed but because of leadership
we remain disagreeable.
We didn't have to.
the leadership the cooperation.
because I think that led to a
very very productive session and
body and I wanted to thank the
leadership on both sides the
leadership in the speaker will
be in the speaker on the speaker
staff but I'd also like to thank
What you've made the transition
Thank you to the chief clerk in
your staff thank you gentlemen.
The gentleman from Katrin state
the captaincy of the support of
an as a representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker I just
smell it throughout the capital
and that's politicians in bunny
Mason Jennifer I don't know
Jennifer's last name.
us fed and made it feel a little
bit more like home with home
cooked meal someone just because
it is incredible thank you I got
some yesterday.
Thank you.
Is delicious.
In in in as many from you.
I think you made sure that
everybody in this chamber had a
voice.
you displayed leadership
I am so proud of the committee
that you gave me I am proud of
this body
it was it was a wonderful
appreciative to you you know how
much I love you thank you thank
you Jim lady and to elicit thank
you in the state of.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker
from a different perspective and
convene actually in transient
in this building and watching
all the people how hard they
hard are our assistance work I
want to give a shout out
to the people that were in our
thin and they were there the
you know bring us information if
we needed that they were there
Serra Salim do us angel Martinez
cold Elaine Patrick it goes
Allison one twenty if we were in
our office but all of the
it out to see it from two
different perspectives
outside looking in and inside
pleasure to have been part of
this team Mr speaker you listen
to when we needed it.
Thank you.
for joining us this on your
first session.
The young lady from Bernalillo
Representative Cologne.
speak so thank you.
I want to thank the staff.
Because I mean they.
There were just stunned that
pulled me and help me for
everything all the people around
hundred questions every I mean
that's and everybody was so
patient and so helpful I'm
really proud and honored to be
in this house so thank you so
you thank you for the right who
was so patient to the same
answer and teach me thank you
thank you generated we've
learned so much from you as
Penske thank you Mr speaker I
wanted to take a moment to
recognize our freshman class it
is such an honor to serve with
all of you so I just wonder if
the lady from Santa Fe was part
of the freshman class made those
remarks I wanted to congratulate
all of our new members I am the
state incredibly impressed and
and you took to heart and that
you educated us about and we're
very happy to have you with us
thank you thank you Jim lady the
everyone at the restaurant
around this place for feeding us
but on a serious note I want to
thank our families for allowing
us to be here those we left at
allowing us to do the work for
the people of New Mexico.
the whole body you know it was a
different field this year I
think everybody worked hard I
think we had a lot of fun we met
some great freshman welcome
year so you freshman I don't
have the title I like to
acknowledge at time Frasier Mr
part of.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Members we we're probably going
to Senate recess of you can call
the chair
I just want to thank
share Romero from the house
Education Committee he's been
such a great leader and and
we're educators and I want to
thank the chairman for just
creating that atmosphere we
pretty much said every other we
don't have like Republicans on
wisdom says and so many
qualities but I want to thank
each person on the committee for
just being.
The middle run some really tight
ship over there.
Anything else months members be
Mr chair I did want to stand and
say thank you to this this body
at the all the old timers had us
all scared to death what was
To add to them a freshman and
hello I think I'm probably the
oldest freshman and ever had up
here.
A teller buddy I should build
know maybe some people out there
they'll be friends forever.
At.
We have.
You know it's a it's been an
The summer I'm gonna go visit
Benny soon get a pair conflicts.
Hello hope they give discounts.
big difference I I consider
myself still freshman because of
first year we came in was COVID.
It was such a different
atmosphere and it was just it
when your when your debating and
so it was very it was wonderful
and I loved everybody working
together Baca said are are you
of my closet to look good but he
does always look pretty good if
you could be I'd love from come
work at the Marjory with me.
first grandson in the next few
in the next few days or hours
I'm not sure in Japan though so
I couldn't go I will otherwise
be a blessing and thank you for
four thank you everybody for
putting up with our long debates
and and and and just putting up
with each other but we did a
beautiful job thank you Mr
Representative Hernandez think
of the last one I want to do a
joke but I also would like to
say that I am deeply hurt by
calling him the best dressed I
think I'm giving him a run for
There's a large number Hey
votes.
they got the entire session last
sixty day session set and we
worked really hard and we got
along very well with that we we
Gentlelady from Los Alamos thank
you Mr speaker I too want to
acknowledge my house our house
bipartisan votes on our
committee and I just want to
thank everyone on the committee
for working so well together and
with me and supporting me and my
participated actively in so
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana thank
what we get to hear great bills
but we get to warm up
Representative Townsend and
representative Scott
Representative Montoya and
representative Nibert so they
can do really well on the floor
opportunity as well to thank our
incredible staff.
throughout the building from
Legislative Council Service and
for keeping us fed at all hours
our security staff for law
enforcement in the M. TV's who
keep us safe thank you thank you
thank you all of our committee
the please know that we see your
work and we appreciate working
with value work of the folks in
the on the north side of the
to help us do our jobs.
I want to thank
personally just thank my staff
at the speaker's office led by
easy thank you all heather
buttons my my.
My right hand person here on the
floor who knows all the motions
and all the things about for
procedure to our staff inside
the leadership offices you were
always so welcoming and not only
welcoming to us but to our to
our constituents and our
projects that she didn't think
she was going to take but
currently Chavis where are you.
I mentioned clear because she is
she's of my senior policy
adviser but often times or
special projects that would come
from either members of the
majority or the minority.
I want to thank members of
leadership
our leadership team of the
democratic caucus leader Chasey
whips a pass key chair Lara as
building of two months ago that
we would work together and that
we would try to find ways to
move forward given when we
I believe we achieve that we had
a long debates we had committee
meetings that were rough at
times but we tried our best to
Easy.
We're not is complicated it's a
testament to the leadership in
the majority and the minority
ways that are productive for our
caucus for our chamber.
In for our legislature so thank
you all be crowned will pause
for each of the.
Thank all of our members.
from our rookies.
Two former senior members.
I got to spend some quality time
with all of you.
And your backgrounds your
convictions your ideas.
had a couple of scuffles era
including on the on the hardwood
on the basketball floor.
and perhaps in conference
committees but but we survived
and we we Representative our
us to ensure that we got the
people's work done.
To the members of the press up
there thank you for doing your
job thank you for shining a
bright light on the work that we
do here.
Jobs and communicate or work to
the public without you so thank
you for
for for the long nights here
We cannot it is volunteer work
without the support of our
families spouses partners
children grand children pets.
and give each of them of big big
hug.
Appreciate.
How much the sacrifice for us to
be able to do what we do.
So to our families be rental
plus.
trying to do more listening than
talking so I sort of miss.
Please change I I just wanted to
have tried to be helpful not
only two of our members but to
the members of our colleagues
across the aisle they have
appreciative of the blue a lot
of the salon HF of staff I
regain my assistant and I have
an I'm so proud of our major
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee and
I I I hope we've been helpful
and if there's anything you need
major analyst and we have really
tried to keep everyone informed
We're we're open for business
during the interim and welcome
your feedback and ideas and and
really want to keep trying to
help our confidence and really
the whole house of
representatives but I couldn't
particular staff that we've been
just really blessed to work
together and with all of you and
thank you to your to and so
much.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker I I guess
insulated Shusterman out order I
today so Mr speaker I I want to
say a couple things first to my
caucus I I can't tell you how
appreciative I am of each of you
your trust in me means a ton.
Home elasticated only the second
term and put your trust in me.
I know I've been mistakes along
the way but.
Appreciate each of you.
offices well they've been
tremendous
it's amazing how many things
that we have to deal with those
legislators whether it's
preparing bills whether it's
to do my chief of staff there's
been a number of times the
state's talking off the ledge
so I appreciate him very much as
well.
there's the the real temptation
to abuse that power I know that
we have as human beings and the
chair amero and chair
There are a lot of people in
this building that I trust
implicitly without question he
is he is on that list.
So I think you representative
Nibert.
This body in that that term
starts in the top with with the
speaker.
You know I think there was a
there was a time and place where
where was common that you would
When someone makes a promise but
I can I can tell the body that
you know there are times that
the speaker and I.
disagree on much
way I can continue to give the
speaker a hard time.
Keep keep very I out of New
Mexico.
But
best thing I could say about
someone even when you disagree.
and I know we had are the norm
so phone you know private blow
up so to speak and we're able to
So Mr speaker thank you for for
your work the session.
Thank you.
Well see no debate.
Generated from Bernalillo.
Business messages no objection
it is so ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred and house amendments
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate rules
committee since two for Senate
bill two eighty as amended by
the Senate and further amended
by the house Senate bill for
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
shortly thereafter.
Closer to noon and adjourned
seem to be a.
doesn't want to be placed on
either of those committees let
me know.
You've got about thirty minutes.
Emitted from Bernalillo.
