Well as close we have a quorum.
Mr speaker I want to do the
prayer of my language first and
then all translate because.
and it's an ANSI I'm not it's a.
It's one of our needs and where
No this the one that the cut
the.
As a whole.
Because they become non they
where and the hood of the past
the scope.
The local can I just leadership
Sikandar unit with a couple of.
reserve it was honestly the leaf
was honestly it was honestly
honestly honestly.
Thankful for the pain
sensitivity that brought us
together two months ago to
today.
In the state of the birds
thankful
to be able to look around and
see the splendor of your
creations.
constituents.
From the four cardinal
directions of our great land of
enchantment we can work together
to plan for a better New Mexico.
one in Mexico one nation.
Thank you for the gentle.
And that one was succinct.
local and national leadership
that our fellow colleagues and
constituents as we and our sixty
day session.
Blessed with peace and safety as
we travel to our home
feelings that came upon our
families friends and relatives
in our absence Medicine stated.
Some harmony with an abundance
beauty above us in the it is
finished it is finished it is
finished.
This for this we ask this
The gentleman from Santa
resentment is this in the pledge
of Mexico flag and if possible
and Spanish as well I don't know
it but we could try.
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
addition is so ordered good
morning members.
Happy St Patrick's day.
Generated from burning towards
with and I was.
Mr speaker.
Today we are honored we had
actually eight members that
Fernandes Christmas cord that
Christopher and Christopher
Chris Morgan park's also could
not make it today however.
We have one of our own.
Thank you Jim lenient thank you
for that beautiful rendition we
appreciate you Sir and thank you
for your service.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker we're gonna ask a
gentleman to come down from.
Mr speaker I rise on a point of
personal privilege thank you
for.
Mr speaker I have today with me
agency pricing with New Mexico
since the age of five and has
lived in one hundred and seventy
six foster homes until the ages
of eighteen.
She currently lives in
Her foster mother Darcy star and
Maryland back have been the
strong support system and she
would like the body to know that
foster children are people too.
She would also like you to know
that she thanks you for hearing
her voice her concerns and for
representing children in this
children who are in need thank
you so much please welcome rain
welcome to the house right.
Announcements deleted from
Bernalillo towards thank you
again Mr speaker first of all
rain.
You don't know this but you're
the inspiration for Google my
bills.
So I thank you for that I
green chili back Piper bagpipers
and two thousand seven a group
of firefighters and different
agencies New Mexico came
together to form the highland
bagpipe and drum band called the
eyeless Gaelic words which means
duty honor courage until that
time there never been a bagpipe
and drum band in New Mexico for
public safety.
the grandchildren bagpipe and
Celtic when not on in the state
were added to the insignia to
the band most member the band
serve to honor serve on honor
guards and the respective
agencies and have a vast
recognize member The Irish
American animal society New
Mexico because members come from
law enforcement fire service and
non uniform uniform symbols
state of New Mexico as well the
United States for memorials
various funeral services and
other events with no cost to
surviving families and not for
profit organization of many
have some of them working here
also the roundhouse and I'm so
incredibly incredibly incredibly
grateful for them thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
Mr speaker it now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we we
adjourn until twelve oh one PM
the house will come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
that the rules be suspended that
the record show that the journal
has been read the full and
improved subject to revision and
approval of the rules in order
fifty two as amended has had it
under consideration for the same
with recommendation that I do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mister
speaker.
Moved up.
nineteen and two fifty two as
amended all those embarrassing
of us and I.
Of the supposedly the as of a
committee pointed out that.
available committee report is
Senate bill three fifteen all
those in favor say if I was in
a.
All the supposed a the as of a
consideration and reports of
an exit report seems
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted document
the chair Mr speaker move
adoption word optional Federal
I suppose in a the eyes of a
committee board.
Mr speaker you're enrolling into
grossing committed to is been
referred house bill eight as
amended house bill seventy six
as amended house bill one
eighteen as amended house bill
one forty five house bill one
house bill four sixty six as
amended house agriculture is
sick as in water resources
committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty five with the
emergency clause has had them
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're in adoption of federal
committee report on house bill's
eight as amended seventy six as
amended one eighteen as amended
I guess and water resources
committee some super house bill
two fifty five twenty five five
twenty five with emergency
clause.
goes copies of the house bill's
aid to as amended seventy six as
amended twenty eighteen as
amended one forty five one
ninety eight two zero seven as
amended to fifty three as
amended to sixty nine as amended
Gently from Bernalillo.
This is bigger that we go to
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
be participating Mr speaker to
celebrate really an
extraordinary individual Mr
speaker that gentleman is up
there on the rostrum with you
here today that's Mr William
with Mr Valdez who I've only
known as the House
appropriations and finance
committee chief of staff and
who's so many have known in that
time Mr speaker somebody who is
incredibly gracious in the
amount of time that they give
responsibility upon himself Mr
speaker I've seen someone who
with some significant health
challenges was in the office
over a few years really is I
think a testament to an entire
career for the same commitment
to excellence to mentorship to
thank you bill thank you for
shepherding all the way through.
A process in a way of
need to do whether it's junior
you know seventy five thousand
dollar junior allocation that
you make sure is done correctly
be others who want to speak
thank you which is the
certificate read first Mr
speaker yes please click to
read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
developers is a member of the
distinguished Santa Fe family
included in there a director of
the public employees retirement
association and the deputy state
and raspberries devotion to St
Michael's high school runs deep
for the special passion passion
for basketball and we're as
devoted as has been the public
And we're as billable does work
for more than twenty five years
at the taxation and revenue
department and retired from the
department administrative
services division in nineteen
eighty nine.
And we're as billable does begin
And we're as billable does serve
to many distinguished chairs and
vice chairs of the committee
including representatives Max
call Henry Kiki Senator lucky
Dodge junior Joseph L. Sanchez
Nathan P. small and Meredith a
Dixon.
And we're as billable does
recognized him as a friend and
an ally and in effect invented
collaboration between
appropriators in the house and
Senate and what has the third
floor railing at the state
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition and
appreciate appreciation be
extended to William Bill Valdez
for his exemplary service to the
the capitol in the City of Santa
Fe.
Jan lady from McKinley
resemblance from.
in two thousand one as a
freshman legislator admit bill
Valdez for the first time in
those days HSC at all the big
names leading the state budget
Larranaga internet Wallace.
Of course we had next Salazar
the longest serving member of
the New Mexico house who every
day who wore his signature red
in subcommittees so in those
days and bill will remember this
every member heard every
presentation that we never got
out of that committee before
eleven PM each day.
we're both former athletes and
very plain spoken.
As you remember with Kiki it
doesn't make combat people.
Larry chaired for one term and
Republican bills actually
Democrat but it didn't matter to
Larry he recognize bill for who
he is a true professional and Mr
speaker and twenty seventeen
served as my vice chair and I
remember bill spending a lot of
time with each one of those vice
chairs I I don't know Mr speaker
how I could go through so many
vice chairs in such a short
process didn't matter if we were
cutting budgets in twenty
seventeen for working up budgets
in twenty twenty to build L.
he had some health issues when I
called him I said bill we need
to we've got a big budget we've
got of a lot of
Programs that we're trying to
Have some fun go drink Bill bear
with Ron for a day and David
Abbey in the guys go have some
McKinley Bernalillo support
someone and balance here
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr bill
all business certificate that
decades.
And as an auditor was CPA firm
in Santa Fe preparing and
audited financial statements of
the state the government
agencies identifying and
reporting a lot of fighting
first gentleman I met was a
Mister bottle there's can guide
been appropriations since two
thousand sixteen Mr all this is
a living will no matter what to
big asset to the state of New
Mexico can all
we're going to miss you bill
you're good man.
And you've always been good to
As well as a representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker I
to rise.
To say thank you bill.
And yeah you're a walking Google
and you know what you're doing
and I appreciate that more than
you'll ever know thank you Mr
speaker.
thank you to Mr Valdez for being
welcoming and supportive and for
all of us artwork thank you
thank you to leave the generated
for the halls and running around
for a long time and and
Knowing all that the work that
you've done and I just want to
say thank you speaker thank you.
bill when I showed up and I was
on probation he not only help me
figure out what was going on he
by all is chairs but I know Kiki
especially loved him and so he
he would see them a lot and on
the the budget got done there is
to you bill chairs.
The gentleman.
I'm gonna get it by tomorrow.
probation and when you go on to
LFC it's oftentimes said that
it's like drinking from a fire
hose it is I assure you the
To.
Understand this so that I can
understand this so I can do a
good job it was always bill well
this and he was so quiet so on
in that head and I I appreciated
my appreciate is his willingness
to pass that knowledge on and I
can tell you that whenever I got
steadfastness bipartisanship to
us the the ability to weigh
things accurately in the keep
those numbers and I appreciate
him making that the fire hose
all you do and appreciate you.
Committee.
greater privilege to know that
there are people like bill who
were there holding it all
together.
Mr speaker I
go ask bill and and so every
time I did he had a ready answer
and I came to admire his memory
and his some people cities like
Google well I'm old fashioned
wish him the very best in
retirement.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
teacher and a very kind man the
the human Google or encyclopedia
Britannica is one hundred
percent true it always amazed me
going to totally give up I mean
I know you're retiring but are
you still going to follow and if
we call you are you still going
to know which page and line the
I was a little intimidated when
I first met bill because he has
sometimes a gruff exterior
stated earned through time that
he has and.
money in the budget for a
particular item he was always
kind and generous and I really
thank this this.
speaker I do rise to say thank
you to bill
Mr speaker I only had one term
on probation but bill left a
lasting impression on me because
just as all the rest my
colleagues have already said
special I mean it didn't matter
what it was you go in there he
would help you out he would tell
you the line number he tell you
where to look he would tell you
wonderful time in retirement
either.
Thank you gently the gentle lady
the gentleman from Bernalillo
speaker a thank you bill for
being there for us all all these
years and is the most because I
just want to state that the.
More so as the most Baker he's a
popular of Hispanic community
here in Santa Fe and Santa Fe
County.
And I've always a.
In a kind of a the brother.
And Mr speaker
He's and he's been to.
starting with Mexico on the so
he has is vast.
Come on no entities as the to
With that knowledge base that
you're going to the.
This chamber this legislative
body.
And also some speaker
I'm going to get to know the
secretaries.
It is always been going in there
ever since I got elected in
ninety seven.
You know on the agenda and this
or that so I've been doing that
ever since I got here you know
and in the last couple years as
the most Baker
because in thank god this is the
one you give me one of the
indigenous
kind of gentleman bill is is the
most because he's always
accommodating.
He's a he's always respectful of
friendship that we've kind of
established with them.
The body with one major thing
that that bill has done is that
he estimates because this year
lot to the staff they're
appropriation of finance to see
more of them almost yes but I
have is patience and so when
they say patience is a virtue it
definitely describes bill and I
just want to say as a new member
of the Appropriations Committee
and the many times I ask
questions over and over and over
Appropriations Committee but to
the to the entire legislature
and thank you thank you gently
gentleman from me the local
Katrin and grant Representative
us us thank you Mr speaker
speaker I called my my friend
because of that you still
learning so you want to know who
you can trust we could we should
call themselves friends of of
childhood friends with many of
them without also Senator banned
you've been up here a long time
I'm working on on some language
on capital outlay
what I'm doing I don't want to
mess up the word scramble some
words or anything get this thing
says his office they do know
what was as new and and this is
a guy of your once the film that
I was and Representative was
Corso's all through COVID and so
yeah.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker this is been a
wonderful tribute to the
incredible man gentleman public
servant New Mexican The bill of
all that is is Mr speaker though
I want to recognize and I think
sitting along the wall there we
have incredible staff and this
Charles Lee and David Abbey who
came here to see Mr vault as a.
They they wanted to be down here
Mister speaker because the staff
is truly the backbone of HSC led
by the nerve center that is
about the bill Valdez thank you
Do you have been an inspiration
in agency a few years ago and
you were always tough with me
you ask me the tough questions
and you were always so so
helpful I love uses of humor I
would walk in and ask for that
you are truly a treasure in this
building the national that about
thirty minutes ago I was on the
phone I but I was on the phone
So time to pay a bill.
Thank you on.
Mr speaker I move to the next
order of business Mr justice in
objection it is so ordered click
to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
request the signatures of the
offices the house respectfully
submitted sure you do the one
Senate chief clerk Mr beard.
Message from the Senate I'm
of the Senate in open session
and requests the signatures of
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted sherry do
on Senate chief clerk Mr to be
entered.
and signed by the officers of
the Senate vote session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted sherry do
them on Senate chief clerk Mr W.
ninety two respectfully
submitted sure do though on
Senate chief clerk Mr be under.
Message from the Senate.
Speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill two eighty as
distributor.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill seventy eight
House Bill three oh nine House
Bill three seventy five and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted sherry do
go on Senate chief clerk Mr be
entered.
seventy House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
commerce and public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill three oh six house bill
four oh seven as amended by the
chief clerk message will be
under.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill three sixty
chief clerk Mr reenter.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house rural development
land grants and cultural affairs
thirty seven House Bill three
sixty eight as amended by the
house and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
sherry do go on Senate chief
clerk Mr W. under.
House joint memorial two and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted sure you
do the on Senate chief clerk.
Mr to be entered.
miscellaneous business objection
it is so ordered.
I just want to point out for the
body that I don't believe
Representative Montoya or
neighbors are wearing green
today.
Okay just checking the fair
warning if you don't have green
go get some on.
Representative lane is no we're
Mr speaker and we go to that
this is third reading of
legislation Sen objection is so
ordered members we're gonna have
a long floor session today we
have a list of bills that we're
Well we're gonna start with item
number forty six generated from
Santa Fe are you ready on that
item yes Mr speaker we give me
to that point but the record
reflect that all options are for
placing Senate Judiciary
protections without a stand for
questions.
There's a gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Rehm.
Yeah madam speaker I'm Mr
Chair Mister speaker gentleman
this is providing affirmative
legislation to protect privacy
prevent discrimination related
to abortion and gender affirming
gentleman this bill is sending a
clear message message to
providers and patients that New
Mexico will not attempt will not
participate in the other states
attempts to stigmatize and to
healthy and to thrive disprove
bill additionally creates the
privilege for certain protected
health care information so that
patients and providers can
continue to receive and provide
Mr speaker so essentially this
is affirmatively protecting what
we're seeing with egregious and
predatory the laws that are
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you that does not mean hone in
on one of them so if we have a
doctor from another state who is
performing whatever activity in
reproductive health that you're
talking about and the other
cooperate in providing the
information that is state.
Mr speaker gentle and so there's
a I think a couple questions
within that question I'll try to
break it down so firstly you
having in New Mexico license if
they're practicing here Mr
speaker gentleman the bill
itself is very clear about what
we're protecting and how and
states are are still on the
books and we would still honor
those laws this is about what
we're seeing to protect those
providers in those patients from
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
So can a doctor be licensed in
two states.
Mr speaker gentleman yes they
can't.
another state and the other
state just for you know they
send you a subpoena for
information on what
Mr speaker gentleman so the bill
itself is to first defines what
that endeavor in their job in
their workplace Mr speaker
gentleman we would not submit
private information regarding
that practice to ended another
you would not allow the
information to be sent to
Mr speaker gentleman this is
honoring this the laws of this
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think we're I'm sorry I didn't
explain it well enough which was
soon now the other state it is a
Mr speaker gentleman if that if
that information was performed
or provided in New Mexico the
sovereignty of our state and our
that's one of the problems I
have you know we have interstate
compacts that we cooperate with
different states and
doctor's arrest would you allow
the extradition of that drive
legislative Mr speaker gentleman
so we do not have interstate
compacts for health care at this
that is legal in the state Mr
speaker gentleman and so it's
completely unprecedented for
another state to now criminalize
activity that's happening in our
different laws and it could be a
violation but let's take a
different law was take B. C. L.
a date it was in the legal and
it's not against the law New
Mexico so we won't extradite.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
again we're protecting
the governor will sign into law
what you're discussing but what
we're talking about is
unprecedented territory for what
we're trying to protect here
Mister speaker gentleman.
other states and other for that
reason one reason I can make a
support there's other reasons
and at there's a lot of people
who want to speak on this so I'm
gonna go ahead and pass the Mike
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady here please yes I
will yield my friend from
me with unconditional love I was
very fortunate to have that and
I aspire to do the same with my
own family and with the people
around me.
unconditional love is also
expressed.
I believe.
That New Mexico.
protected I believe that many
New Mexican values are and
always have been a Tanami
acceptance and affirmation.
And special I might add as a
culture.
So to me this means that we.
Trust
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I'm trying to
understand as well with those
barriers are.
It's legal in our state.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
why this bills brought today
attacks on these communities of
people who are being threatened
or been threatened with lawsuits
even third parties friends
be thrown in prison.
And the fact that they couldn't
actually seek after health care
to not only support the lives of
their loved ones but to support
these attacks across the country
New Mexico is still that safe
space what we're doing with this
law is ensuring that those
doctors that those family
members and those folks who are
from individuals they've gotten
even more creative in dubious I
may be honest about how it is
that they're forming these laws
that isn't the government
we're seeing on the books now
we're we're going back to the
to where we were during the
years of civil war.
gentleman gentle lady and so
with that that is why we're here
today to propose this law and to
ensure that New Mexico will
always be a safe space for folks
the lives of individuals that is
it's always protected in the
state Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker.
My home I like to think of my
we have unconditionally in our
homes is going is threatened and
so I appreciate the this bill
and I will be supporting this
Thank you.
Mr speaker religion would yield
I will yield to the gentleman.
C..
In some of these.
Gender affirming or.
of this legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman this bill
does not change any consent laws
in our state Mr speaker
gentleman.
One of these facilities is
affected by this legislation.
Translator so you.
Parent of a child that took
advantage.
Of one of the services and as
soon.
Thanks facilities and something
went wrong.
Currents ability to secret
directors Mr speaker gentleman
so I I think you're asking about
perhaps medical malpractice this
doesn't touch that whatsoever if
there was a situation where
Thanks facilities will remain
a liable for malpractice issues
the state Mr speaker and
file a lawsuit they are fair
game Mr speaker gentleman.
Gentlelady to assess.
Legislation in the.
sorry can you clarify that
question restated.
Speaker gentle lady.
If a group of protesters as.
One of these facilities to is
this.
Legislation in front ability.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
completely outside of the scope
Lawfully.
Participating in with first
amendment rights this bill would
not impact that at all is that
not at all Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker I apologize for that
will the gentle lady from Santo
yield I will yield my friend
from Santa Fe thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
the offender as a person has
children that we have to do this
because I look at this and I'm
I'm really trying to think of
another time when you can take a
this essentially ensure that
activities in New Mexico which
are legal an individual cannot
be brought up on charges because
they took place took a deep did
those activities with our state
talk about is is is what it is
in this body is that when people
make difficult health care
decisions or complicated hot
health care decisions with their
tell us how to run our house a
home I'm concerned that they're
getting in the way of a person
and their doctors that how you
also see it ma'am yes Mr speaker
gentle lady I see it precisely
four hundred bills across the
country targeting trans youth in
particular and LGBTQ communities
for these types of predatory
because they see it as a safe
place for them to live as a
transgender individual and to
raise their family and to bring
more community that has our
values and and who sees New
that is on welcomed the doesn't
share family values that that
truly is is against individual
lit the living their best lives
making did that come a decisions
for themselves their families in
Mr speaker gentle lady not only
are we seeing OBG lands fleeing
into New Mexico to feel safe
we're seeing their patients come
with we're seeing the entire
Lee those doctors on because we
don't know what's coming next as
well these laws again have been
so COVID were at a rapid fire
pace so we're you know basically
just trying to defend doctors
doctors and so I know what we
have we've had different debates
in this space Mr speaker gentle
lady from healthcare perspective
I've heard also from doctors and
providers and those that train
the next generation of doctors
and they have the same thoughts
the C. individuals coming to New
same feelings from my read of
the bill Mr speaker gentle lady
this applies directly to public
bodies is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady part of
ensures that individuals are
protected but the it from public
bodies acting in a way that may
compromise their safety is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
ensure the health and and
overall happiness of our
communities and the long term
well being of our communities
are asked to ensure that is the
just extend that to the
protection of private actors as
well so we're talking about
private practices and things of
that nature that would be
affirmatively protected here as
when we're asking patients to
make complicated decisions about
their health care at any stage
of pregnancy as they're raising
their family in new frontiers
that they may be unfamiliar with
state is allowed interfere that
so I appreciate you coming my
anger and I appreciate what
you're doing about this thank
you Mr speaker the gentle lady
there is further debate the
a dash over there and it was
supposed around sorry I was.
Skipping.
Mr speaker gentle lady please
yield I will yield to my friend
from C. pack thank you.
age here was eighteen but was
twenty one in taxes and someone
came over here and drink that
actually was a taxed and they
committed a crime they want to
extradite him with according to
okay so I guess.
When we get into a look at the
bill I know in FY are.
Them some commentary about the
representatives and senators to
try to make the best decisions
about bills and they're allowed
to vote on bills and they have
it easier to access abortion.
It seems like this bill.
And superseding their right.
and then people come here and
I'm not saying to necessarily
vilify them but what I'm saying
is they have made that decision.
And so now.
that would dictating to these
other states Mr speaker delay
that we think our rights are
more important than your state
rights because this is really
what this boils down to at the
abortion another states decide
fifty plus one we want to be
tough on the border less wrister
have more restrictions.
And what we're saying is we
Mr speaker I have a very
different.
I have a completely different
approach the different look at
this having been raised by an
abortion doctor who did the
And if another state decides
that they don't want this they
should have the right to do
whatever they want when somebody
including of somebody came over
taking away the rights of the
other states make their own
decision I thought that's what
will be Wade was all about when
they when they made the Supreme
Court decision to give it back
to the state I thought the whole
like we don't want them to
propose their beliefs or we
would all move to states that
feel aligned more with the
belief systems so Mister speaker
bill in the state of New Mexico
we are sovereign state we make
our own laws here imagine if
Texas wanted to tell us how to
about states rights Mr speaker
gentle lady if Texas could tell
us how to do our jobs here boy
would be in a totally different
place when we Mr speaker gentle
lady that's the point of this
Is not a crime Mr speaker gentle
lady it's not a crime it's not
illegal and therefore we are
affirmatively protecting that
against other states from coming
to call it a shield law yes we
affirmatively shield people in
our state under our laws Mr
speaker gentle lady and what is
Mister speaker gentle lady so I
appreciate you actually
highlighting the importance of
this bill and ensuring that
other states don't tell us how
to live our lives on how to make
absolutely but if you're coming
here to get an abortion nine
months and that's restricted
another state that's a
completely different thing now
but technically it's still not
legal on a federal level you
still cannot purchase a gun you
still cannot carry gonna be
impaired under the.
do something illegal it be like
anything pick anything if in our
state it was a free follow
something was legal and somebody
else flew in here to have an
illegal activity.
They're subject to be penalized
in anytime they want and
literally say that marijuana is
still illegal that's a thing
that could literally happen and
you cannot purchase a gun even
though there some people who
governor has an executive order
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady so every
law that we create is based on
precedents for this however we
have seen laws like this could
proposed in other states and
affirmed by their legislatures
as well.
Mr speaker gentle it is a very
the right to do that Mr speaker
gentle lady yes we do Mr speaker
gentle lady there's a process in
which all legal forms subpoenas
come through and we go through
this band in another state house
that applicable with the
military Mr speaker John lady Mr
speaker gentle lady that's
outside of our jurisdiction
that's federal law.
problem is I'm a very firm
believer I do not want this to
be the abortion haven of New
Mexico I do not want to see
people to come in here and
violate their laws just like I
wouldn't want them to do with
anything anything that is in
their state that is illegal for
want more questions or in other
states as we do want more they
have the right to do that that's
what we also the right of
mobility to move to other states
in line more with our beliefs so
Mister speaker July two what I
I was an activist and the
majority of the people in our
State Farm moderate Hispanic
you can come from other states
flying and get an abortion flat
I just I I have a really really
hard time with that so
definitely not be supporting
this bill but I appreciate the
debate thank you Mr speaker
generally we've talked a lot in
this body over the last.
Eight weeks about.
Young people
about that.
That that affects trans young
people that when they try to
receive gender affirming care
and they cannot.
in many circumstances can lead
to really detrimental outcomes
not only for that individual but
for their family folks who are
facing that types of those types
of discrimination where they
from depression
suicidal ideation often leading
to suicide feeling ostracized
from society Mr speaker gentle
lady when they can't simply be
their own self identity and Mr
speaker gentle lady what we've
seen across the country even
since the start of this year one
legislative sessions went into
into session over four hundred
not only atrocious but fifteen
of those states of those four
hundred bills have already
enacted these laws.
And so we're already seeing the
for those folks that are seeking
health care seeking their this
is B. themselves and so what
we're doing here Mister speaker
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
so.
If someone from another state
where gender affirming health
care is not allowed came here
to.
being able to recognize someone
for who they are Mr speaker
gentle lady when they can't
access that and they're not
feeling like they're members of
the community or even their own
school or at home it's just
community activities that we're
talking about Mr speaker gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlelady out so but but if
a.
state to receive care would be
protected.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and the the health care
do not have to risk any sort of
fear of of lawsuit of
criminalized activity that
they're protected and this is
what we're seeing across the
Mr speaker gentle lady that you
are safe here and that's
important for New Mexicans and
non New Mexicans to understand
the in New Mexico we are a safe
in that process that you are
fully protected here in our
state thank you gentle lady
thank you Mr speaker over the
last you know fifty nine days
I've gotten a lot of phone calls
that we have fought so hard to
protect the rights of trans kids
and where kids and and I I I
look at this legislation I think
feels safe that they can see the
care that they need and they
health care providers that
provide that care will not face
retribution
I I look at the at the stats and
people are in by the the higher
rates of suicidal ideation and
suicidality it is it's appalling
to me and and this is how this
is what we can do on our and to
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe County
sections five six and I believe
it's a
Section five deals with abuse of
litigation identify.
I understand this correctly.
action is initiated to.
Peter prevent.
So passionate or penalize the
individual from
discuss first if a parent
obtains in order in a foreign
state to prevent their daughter
from coming to New Mexico for
Recourse under this act in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle men so in the
hypothetical you brought forth
prohibited from them from coming
and crossing state lines that
would be subject to those laws
Mr speaker gentleman so I don't
see how that affects what we're
That's the definition of abuse
of litigation and you allow
space suit to be filed in New
Mexico because they were
prevented from seeking that
you're presenting to us would
not.
Mr speaker gentleman I would not
so when we're talking about the
conduct of that would happen
here in New Mexico they would
gentleman so if even if they
were trying to
Received any sort of protection
from New Mexico laws of the
activity didn't happen here
Mister speaker gentleman that
wouldn't pertain.
Well I would draw your attention
Talks about
Well sixteen initiating a legal
Prohibited that child from
seeking.
The child's desire to secure.
The procedure in New Mexico
authorized by this bill.
action in aid for in state.
Mr speaker gentleman so let me
just try to unpack part of this
so firstly when we're talking
health care activity in our
state Baig another state cannot
come after them for that
protected activity so Mister
speaker and gentleman what we're
talking about third party
in our state they would not be
subject to that lawsuit that's
what this bill does Mr speaker
gentleman so I if that's the
sort of chain of
graph a on page five.
Says for purposes of this
section abusive litigation means
By initiating a legal action in
another state where civil or
criminal liability is based on
engaging in a protected health
So again in my hypothetical.
And action was filed in a
foreign state.
Presenting access to services
sue the parents in that instance
for the.
Lawsuit that occurred in the
foreign state and I think Miss
clear reading of that paragraph
the answer is yes.
on activity happening in this
state so we did we disagree.
Madam chair and gentle lady it
can't be just based on what's
Mr speaker gentleman again this
is about health care activity in
this state any other attempt to
to that effect in the in this
litigation and I think that's a
that's a concern and and those
the same thing would be true of
of if the foreign state.
The mother of the child from a
boarding that baby.
They could suit to prevent that
procedure and then again could
We look at that section six.
I believe that this is a section
speaker and and gentle lady if
there are emails or text or
other electronic communications
to a person that provides
Mr speaker the gentleman madam
speaker excuse me gentleman so
the first of course we define
speaker gentleman about
tent protected health care
activity with the intent to and
then we give the list of what
would be protected we're talking
what we're we're we're talking
about specific intent with what
we're talking about when we when
we discuss protection for that.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
communication you have to look
at the intent of the parties
setting that.
Of electronic communication to
The.
Individual eight apparently
aggrieved
for violation could you discuss
Mr Madam speaker gentlemen so
moving past section six on if an
doesn't just have to be monetary
there could be a civil penalty
assessed for violation of this
act in the amount of ten
thousand dollars or actual
damages resulting from the
Yes the
plaintiff in the case could
could ask for for all of these
Madam speaker gentle yes it's
both.
Yes Madam speaker and gentle
one is that what you're
referring to.
Actually on.
Money it's on page eight
when we're talking about
compensatory
unitive damages it's ten
thousand dollars for those
damages would be jam edges
whichever is greater.
If you're looking at the
sentence structure that it would
be a little different than than
what you just stated I and I
thought.
Seems a somewhat.
Confusing in that regard.
Effort that this bill seems to
do with respect to
Foreign judgments and and things
like there's some effort made to
maybe disregard some of those
items in this bill.
And could you maybe discuss some
from having some control over
access to those procedures call
for this bill in New Mexico Mr
speaker madam speaker
defined by the bill abortion and
gender affirming care those are
legal activities here in New
Mexico and should not be subject
You madam speaker and gentle
lady if if the.
I guess so it's a race to the
state line as to as to whether
For one state cross the state
line in this bill applies
regardless of any prior orders
that were secured in a foreign
jurisdiction and am I
into other states.
And so madam speaker and gentle
lady if there was an injunction
against that person from coming
to New Mexico but for some
reason they made it to New
Mexico that injunction would not
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that that would be a carve out
from our general notions of
Madam speaker gentleman's so
this is being specifically
attacks by other states so you
know of other forms of health
care take the top podiatry takes
Why don't you madam speaker and
gentle lady I don't think that
the.
The effort is attacking.
faith and credit to.
Court actions in other states
and so we're carving out
it seems to me we're carving out
Court orders that involve this
specific
activity and so I just the would
like the body to know that we're
we're doing that
state die I understand.
Why it's being brought forward
I certainly don't agree with
that
but
Representative Dixon.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Otero county
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I just have a few
questions here today so madam
speaker gentle lady and we've
talked about a tax that have
today so madam speaker gentle
lady can can you tell me what
specific is tax on New Mexico
have gone on that are making
this bill a priority madam
speaker gentle lady of
only goes after
providers but it also goes after
women and those seeking
reproductive health care
speaker gentleman when we're
seeing New Mexico as a provider
where many many folks from
neighboring states who see New
could be subject to other states
laws and those of the laws that
are on the books right now in
Texas seeking to criminalize and
penalize those who are aiding in
gender affirming care have also
been on the attack we're we've
seen across the country I think
I mentioned it before but I'll
say it again over four hundred
specifically in this law madam
speaker gentleman that's
precisely why we we need this
law in New Mexico so it's always
a safe space to receive that
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this line Texas.
What does that do to criminalize
these individuals madam speaker
and gentle lady is it one one
back into Texas with the then be
subject to those laws and then
madam speaker gentle lady if
that is the case.
How would this bill protect
those individuals wanted they're
Madam speaker gentleman's so for
in the hypothetical that you
brought up what this bill would
do for that individual who may
be left Texas to come here for
they received would be protected
and continue to be insure that
that information would not be
activity madam speaker
gentleman.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so it's just about
the information regarding that
procedure or that kind of
instance was getting this gender
affirming care madam speaker
there to their child goes to New
Mexico to obtain this and then
they let's just say have a P. I
legal facility legal filing in
Texas Madam speaker gentle lady
how would the state of New
Mexico then respond to that
madam speaker.
think we could determine what
that would look like at this
point the point of this bill
Madam speaker gentleness to
protect of folks receiving
health care in our state and
subject to ensuring that that
that information would be sent
to any other state that they're
safe here in New Mexico.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady then.
so madam speaker gentle lady do
we know how many other states
have enacted similar laws such
as this one that would.
gentleman there's no wall in
fact what we're trying to do is
ensure that those who are in our
state are subject to our laws
and only our laws Madam speaker
of their doctors Washington
Connecticut Massachusetts
California our laws actually
propose today it is quite a
narrower than some of the other
states that we've seen like
communities that we're trying to
project
I think the gentleman may have
personal experience with that
but that said
Madam speaker gentleman what
gentle lady so then my next
question is regarding.
I guess either not all doctors
they could be.
PA's or something who are
chemical abortion so madam
speaker gentle lady let's just
say Texas has a law I don't know
if they do or not they might the
has a law that says you cannot
get a chemical abortion in the
in New Mexico if they separate
over to Texas and since Texas is
the legal over there would that
be allowed then and this bill
madam speaker would we still be
subject to Texas's laws and what
we're trying to do here is
protect any sort of information
from being sent to New Mexico to
Texas if anyone was asking for
but let's just say this
individual drive or.
Prescriber does fill the
prescription for an individual
individual would taxes be able
to see that doctor if they broke
that law madam chair our madam
speaker gentle lady.
now so that's that's not covered
under this law we were talking
about that it's just it's that's
just not happening.
Okay thank you madam speaker
gentle lady so let's just say if
person sent that those pills
over the state line to taxes via
the mail for instance madam
chair Madam speaker gentle lady
would that person be subject to
doesn't exist.
what you're proposing
essentially this protects
patients and doctors in New
Mexico so I don't know the laws
exist and secondly it would not
pertain to this law.
Okay madam speaker and gentle
lady so I'm just been crystal
doctor prescribed these two
drugs that facilitate abortion
to someone in Texas if this did
happen and Texas did have a law
Okay madam chair madam speaker
gentle lady I I hope you have
because if this does happen I
wouldn't want to be putting any
What about prescribing any other
kinds of gender affirming care
like hormone blockers or
anything like that madam speaker
gentle lady if the individual
answer applies to your second
hypothetical that doesn't exist.
Okay thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady and I sure
hope it doesn't exist I just I
certainly hope it doesn't so
instance Madam speaker gentle
lady let's just say that there's
a parent who has custody of
their child and then one of
their friends take some across
state lines.
from whatever Texas's laws still
be in place or with those rights
be suspended while the child is
in New Mexico madam chair Madam
speaker in order Madam speaker
gentle lady well I I certainly
hope it doesn't apply and I
certainly hope that that
parental rights that are from
Texas carry over to New Mexico
chair representative gentle lady
since the I know that the people
of the PPO plans that are from
Texas let's just say and they
want to use that PPO plan in the
procedures at all or Senate
we've a pass other legislation
says that you have to have this
as health care providers so.
know I still have way too many
concerns about this legislation
Madam speaker gentle lady I
don't want to be one New Mexico
to be isolated as its own little
I also want to ensure that we
protect parental rights and the
parental rights even of folks
who are in Texas wanted to make
sure their children are safe and
any kind of.
Procedure or some kind of drug
that could hurt them so madam
chair Madam speaker
Representative I unfortunately
Thank you
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Santa Fe you I will
yield to my neighbor from Santa
Fe.
and as of.
Committed
Representative in my community I
feel like this is this is a.
experienced in and what is
represented in your legislation
is as a key is a key elements of
what is been going on nationally
Have the right to
To govern their own bodies I'm
sorry I get a little emotional
about this and speaker gentle
Speaker gentle lady and I feel
like we have good Legisla- we
have to come up with legislation
there another
parts of our.
Countries that are.
Telling us that we are not
valued and we do not have the
We know we need for ourselves.
And those protections have been
trampled on and I just want to
stand here and and rise and
support of this piece of
legislation madam.
in regard to what everything
else is going on is.
One of the most important things
that we need to be doing in this
during this legislation session
When we gather together.
In any any room that I've been
in and we have.
ourselves and having a Tanami
and having HSD this is been the
forefront of those conversations
and I want to say.
conversation what what this
really means to us and what it
means our future what it means
to a
Anybody that's.
and I was happy I could tell
them that we had this piece of
it legislation because there's a
lot of concerns out there
they're just so grateful and so
help happy that this is coming
point I want to say thank you
something that we we are we are
supporters of in in in my
community but.
And so many other places
settlement and speaker gentle
about.
Detecting information.
unrelated to.
Hebbe.
On on page three under section
three new materials.
our new material here public
body prohibiting prohibited
that section is intended to do.
Madam speaker secretaries Mr
speaker gentleman so essentially
information provision so
essentially this this health
care would but remain anonymous
would remain protected it would
criminalizing medic activity
it's such a.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady how would that be
determined that what their
for public information that
suggests what that information
is going to be used for Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentlemen so the
We we would need to provide that
information for that purpose Mr
speaker gentleman that those
public bodies would not release
that information specific to
Requests and you have a
different section for subpoenas.
but this Mr speaker and gentle
lady is just a plain if request
I put money aside funding for a
state run.
facility
and an abortion clinic
how how if the if the request is
not for hippa related
information how would the state
the public body.
we're protecting here is not
only for an investigation so
when we say disincentive
investigation mean from other
states coming into our state
investigating court proceeding
very specific Mr speaker
gentleman when we're talking
about what information we're
protecting regarding the care
that's received in that specific
targeted patients targets were
very specific about what we're
trying to protect here Mister
speaker gentleman.
and I know it's going to be a
hypothetical I don't believe
that you'll be able to say
something that wouldn't happen.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
brought over from another state.
And
there is an investigation into
that individual Mr speaker and
information related to that
sector trafficking activity Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman so firstly
sex trafficking trafficking
and those seeking care under the
auspices of the fact that they
are being trafficked are often
found to be in that circumstance
because of these care providers
when receiving these types of
care so Mister speaker gentleman
we will always honor those laws
and it's completely legal to
traffic any person and often
vis providers have that don't
even ask that question Mr
speaker and gently I Mr speaker
I recently went to a podiatrist.
including.
whether or not I felt safe in my
home Mr speaker and and gentle
lady I was just that
but Mr speaker and gentle lady
The.
In the case of our
this because we've had people
who have gone in.
With the tort pregnant and went
in and they were never asked any
of those questions none of the
questions that other doctors ask
About perpetrator whether it's a
sex trafficker.
Or or the neighbor of the family
And then just taking care of the
the underage person gets
impregnating come to New Mexico
for a safe haven because Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Even to to back up.
Because this is a protected
under section three prohibited
release of information related
to a protected health care
activity.
Even if it's a state.
that seeks to impose some sort
of criminal liability some of
speaker and gentle lady as as I
stated before all the doctors
is not astrea relief at least
not consistently and we've been
able to prove that because women
have gone into these clinics to
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
nothing has happened there and
then there's an EBT per request.
For a subpoena the speaker and
gentle lady says it doesn't have
agree that this at least poses a
potential problem for the
investigation of part a
perpetrator of a crime.
Mr speaker gentleman so your
suggestion that a health care
their information is already
protected when it comes to those
fleeing those forms of abuse Mr
speaker John and the suggestion
that health care providers are
not asking these questions about
doing their jobs in asking those
questions is is offensive Mr
speaker gentleman they go
through the process of caring
for every single patient
answer that question and like
you said no matter who it is Mr
speaker gentle and they have to
answer that question I don't
know about the last time you
went to an OBGYN or abortion
that who ensure that their
patients are protected and when
those fleeing violent situations
whether it be a shelter or
health care provider Mr speaker
whether it be at home or
otherwise Mr speaker gentleman
that that information should
stay private it regardless of
even talking about health care
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady saints offensive but we
have eyewitness testimony that
that is the case so Mister
speaker and gentle idea maybe
offensive but it's truthful.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
the idea.
There's no exception it says the
that that this is Missy of.
choose not to prohibitive some a
speaker and gentle lady I see
that as very very very
problematic some speaking gently
with a lawsuit but this is an
all this is this is an all
instances because Mr speaker and
gentle lady there's nothing on a
request for a public request for
is a this is a blank
prohibition.
I'm sharing information.
Of because you you'd have to
assume.
Mr speaker gentleman so let's go
back to the bill section three
we're talking about specific
information that's protected and
these are those foreign
care activity what you're
suggesting if information needs
to be released Mr speaker
gentleman there on health care
information et cetera the is not
subject to specifically that
the release of the requested
information so Mister speaker
gentleman in the circumstances
you're talking about with it for
of course we wouldn't want to
subject folks to this because
that's being used to target them
that we're protecting from that
release in order to ensure that
these folks are protected in
that information but we're
talking about an entity that
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
there anything on the it pro
request this once again very
specific question is there
anything on there it per request
question for you when I was a
when I was chief of staff for
lieutenant governor Sanchez we
often got it per requests.
criminal proceeding there is
nothing on the form that is
filed.
Or just a letter head that says
gentle lady so how would this be
determined Mr speaker gentleman
so we're talking about private
health care information number
one so that should not be
an April request even by a state
run hospital or information that
would pertain to your private
health care information so let's
just fully reject that
opportunity it doesn't exist Mr
that are targeting doctors that
are targeting individuals
regarding that form of health
care.
That there are coming from out
of state practitioners out of
gentleman so that's what we're
protecting here when we come to
health care information that's
always private when it comes to
the activities pertinent to
purpose that we're protecting
here they can practice their
health care they can practice
what it is that we're we're
affirmatively protecting in this
bill Mr speaker gentleman
There is no way to determine
that.
And that is my concern there are
other legitimate.
a pipeline for trafficked
victims.
There should be but there's not
an exemption.
For this is matter fact Mr
compromised in some way and is
being forced to participate
under threat by a trafficker
there is nothing that would
We know Mr speaker and and
gentle lady every.
Business every.
Good and bad actors in the oil
and gas industry bad actors in
the oil and gas industry should
be able to be brought to justice
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
there have been
dentists across the country who
have been able to be sued for
believe here is that every
abortion provider is altruistic
and and and I just I don't think
we can go that far Mr speaker
six and we're going to talk
about sections six.
Seven.
An eight.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
about seven eight as it it
applies to section six.
Mr speaker gentlemen so section
six affirmatively protects
this act predatory early in
order to target doctors their
offices hospitals clinics
abortion clinics reproductive
health clinics Mr speaker
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady under section six.
What
gentleman so what we're seeing
in in other states is that if
you sent a text message Mr
speaker gentleman to a friend of
yours where you were seeking a
subpoena if you were texting a
friend or relative or health
care provider Mr speaker
gentleman that information used
to harass humiliate or
intimidate that person for
using right now Mr speaker
gentleman to incite that type of
fear upon the folks who are
receiving that type of care and
essentially be subject to
communication between again
health care providers of friends
relatives and those who are part
of
could expand on harassed a very
broad term.
Mr speaker gentleman I feel
little harassed by you from
when it comes to some of my
me humiliation or intimidation
so you know we're talking about
the the way the communication is
being used to intimidate to to
threaten to harass right so
sightings your full that
behavior or preventing that
person from being able to engage
in that activity because they
feel that that form of of
harassment humiliation
Harasses very very broad so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
harassed with this include.
Save a protest outside of the
facility.
That there's going to be people
who are protesting and I send.
A for the organization let's say
of their friends and says
we're going to be praying
outside of the abortion clinic
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
outside of that facility on the
street bringing attention to
what's going on in the facility.
be liable as is in sections
seven.
At eight.
Either by the Attorney General
reproductive reproductive and
gender affirming health care
protection act.
In the amount of ten thousand
dollars.
private health care
communications we're talking
about the pertaining to this law
Mr speaker gentle and so outside
communications would not pertain
legal sense Mr speaker gentlemen
so a judge would have to
determine what Karass meant one
roof one received humiliation or
intimidation etcetera we it
decided by a judge in order for
that to be proven so the that
said Mr speaker gentle and it's
a very narrow way in which we're
trying to protect that health
care information and and so what
that at all in this bill thank
you mispronouncing protection
for electronic tronic Lee
transmitted information related.
this maybe humiliating.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
but it could very easily be
activity which is defined at the
beginning of this
at the beginning of this bill
some speaker gentle lady what we
gentle lady so if if if we had a
doctor that maybe wasn't the a
at the very good doctor and
be no recourse for that drive he
just for just the same type of
activity Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Abortion care.
And.
A gender reassignment or
anything that goes with that Mr
For electronically transmitted
information related to a
protected health care activity
so Mr speaker and gentle lady.
New Mexico right to life for
street advocates of Los crucis
or something like that.
That are going to meet it seems
gently the moment somebody takes
a picture of the announcement
and then it is transmitted
electronically Mr speaker and
either in a private civil
litigation which is section
eight.
Four of the potentially
give the opportunity to disagree
with this but I don't know how.
This is not for private health
care information.
Mr speaker gentleman so again it
to protect Mr speaker gentleman
we do not touch on free speech
what we're talking about Mr
speaker gentleman is protecting
health care information.
Pertinent to this and what you
speaker gentleman that intention
of actually going after a person
is a very important legal term
and that's what we're trying to
inside another to harass
humiliate or intimidate that
individual or Tivity and so on
and so forth so we're very clear
about what it is that we're
just the reading of section six
this has nothing to do with
health care information Mr
speaker and gentle lady it says
related to a protected health
New material hi protection for
electronically transmitted
information related to protected
health care activity it doesn't
statement standing on its own
section six stands alone as a
new section of law that
heightened protection for
electronic the lock
Which is up to interpretation to
harass humiliate or threaten.
And then it says that if you go
to the subsequent sections and
of legislator Asman cause us the
most broad harassment
of protected health care
activity so Mister speaker and
is taking place if it's done
electronically.
I already into the credit here
question there Mr speaker the
come localist leader and.
It move on to the other sexual
your amendment comes I have an
amendment I have a hand in.
more because Mr speaker and
gentle lady do you know where.
This language already exists in
law there is a place where this
does exist Mr speaker and gentle
the bill.
Mr speaker gentleman we talk
about what protected health care
activity is specifically and
define it in this law so any
changes that you are suggesting
read our definition of protected
health care activity thank you
Mr speaker so I will and
definition as used in
reproductive and gender
pharmaceutical and medical care
services and supplies provided
to support an individual's
gender identity that section A.
B..
care for assistance or assisting
an individual who is seeking
receiving or providing
reproductive or gender affirming
health care including providing
It says nothing about private
health care information Mr
speaker and gentle lady what you
have told me repeatedly is that
under HIPAA this is not meant to
protect that information you do
have a section which relates to
foreign subpoenas.
relate to that Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Further.
In section seven.
act so the Mr speaker and and
gentle lady not withstanding the
previous sections which talk
about subpoenas
for the ability for them to be
section six if they are able to
enforce these penalties.
This penalty the penalties of
enforcement.
and gender affirming health care
protection act in the amount of
ten thousand dollars for actual
damages resulting from each
violation whichever is greater
so Mister speaker and gentle
Of which would be could be under
the heading of harassment not
threatening not a threat.
but harassing and humiliating
now this is not just the section
the majority of the discussion
and the answers and and talking
the the the issues from from
from.
versus says in section six.
that this
activity could be related to an
individual's for for entities
that would mean Mr speaker and
gentle lady to whatever degree
an abortion clinic would say
that they're being harassed this
that is protected free speech Mr
speaker and gentle lady if that
free speech is somehow
transmitted.
Electronically Mr speaker
gentleman's so I don't
specifically talking about in
the normal course of business in
electronic format transmission
of information related to
protected health care activity
violation so Mister speaker
gentleman when we're talking
about information related to
that individual or entities
protected health care activity
individual or family member
safety is at risk it's that
information that is protected Mr
speaker gentleman so all of this
all of the ability to enact in
protected information and is
solely regarding that protected
health care activity in as you
read off the debt definition
we're talking about reproductive
or gender affirming health care
Or entity Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentleman yes health
care provider.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
the individual so Mister speaker
and gentle lady that is why
initially the the reason I don't
have the amendment here yet is
because initially I was going to
speech could not be hindered if
they are talking
in a negative way about the
entity not about an individual
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
This legislation has been
enacted.
In.
in.
Canada Mr speaker.
I.
Just a brief.
Will search in this and the
speaker and and gentle lady in.
an abortion clinic for praying.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Twice Mr speaker and gentle lady
first time in twenty twenty two
pry prying outside of an
abortion clinic Mr speaker and
gentle lady and that activity
was consider harassment.
stop is right there I think your
amendment is here and we do have
freedom of religion in this
country not sure about the
specifics of the Canadian
constitution but in our country
Thank you Mr speaker we are
from.
Okay.
Thank you Mr hold on the second.
Thank you Mr speaker
and by the way they do have a
freedom of religion in
in the Great Britain as well
Mr speaker this language is the
language that exists Mr.
Before we go there gentleman we
have the amendment would you
like to move the amendment no I
want to continue my line of
you're intending and I'm not
suggesting that's what you're
intending Mr speaker and gentle
lady when we pass laws there are
stated going to read it.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
the clear reading of this bill
harassing of the entity not just
an individual but the entity as
is written in section six.
That the unintended consequences
potentially.
from with if the district
attorney or Attorney General
were to pursue that so Mister
speaker and gentle lady section
Everything prior to section six
and including section six so
Mister speaker and gentle and
gentle lady I am moving an
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that there would be no doubt
that free speech would continue.
bill thirteen and the two to six
number is two two six three
three six point one and I would
like to have a roll call vote
for a real gentleman we have the
Of this amendment.
Just as strikes section six.
Senate bill thirteen.
Individuals or
entities which are legally able
to protest or to share the lead
providing gender or altering
services for whether they're
surgical for pharmaceutical Mr
speaker that those who truly
transmitted electronically Mr
speaker.
Well the lady is a friendly
amendment Mr speaker I just have
a question for the gentleman on
humiliate or intimidate those
who are seeking gender gender
affirming or reproductive health
care is that the intent of this
ammendment no Mr speaker and
friendly amendment we'll go
through this and I do have the
other amendment that districts
entity.
Mr speaker gentleman so
information has been used to
abuse folks
private information on that
should be kept private Mr
look at how we're protecting
health care providers and
specifically this category we're
at this information has been
used
in the ways that we have seen
have
that those laws on the books
regarding the protection of that
sensitive information should
remain protected and those folks
that are are subject to section
Torrance Representative Lord
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman please yield.
I yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you yes Mr speaker and
gentle lady that is the purpose
of this amendment is to make
sure that we don't put law
enforcement our attorney a
speaker and gentle lady that
would happen if a simple text
message for to go back and forth
that was stated previously by
lady section six thousand just
say the individual it says or
entity that the entity providing
services could not be harassed
electronically Mr speaker gently
possible but to make sure you
know we're outside the room the
brown house we were sending text
messages back and forth about
what we were going to do and I
find that to be very concerning
because if I send a text message
know what's going on and now I
see them Mr speaker them and
they're they're now part of this
lawsuit.
Mr speaker and gently that's
house.
From San Juan your motion is out
of order.
Please proceed Mr speaker my
emotion is out of order for what
reason Mr speaker.
for the members of the house to
come to the house to hear the
debate on this bill where is
that out of order Mr speaker Sir
I would refer you to the rules.
generated familiar positive
Chasey Mr speaker I can continue
debating this bill hello
absolutely at the rebuilding the
floor I know I am not giving up
that.
Amendment is on friendly
because it doesn't.
section six per tax protected a
lot of chatter in the chamber
please folks respectively.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
so again section six is is
necessary for this bill because
individual or entity who
seeks to obviously because that
individual to suffer substantial
entered in another state those
based on conduct for which a
cause of action exists in New
Mexico on this is important for
that protection of that
information it's still subjects
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady but none of that relates to
section six as our debate you've
you've you've brought up again
the sections that I'm not asking
A fine of up to ten thousand
dollars or other remedies
essentially that the Attorney
General or or district attorneys
of an individual seeking a
procedure the individual being
threatened the individual being
humiliated Mr speaker and gentle
lady but this doesn't stop there
speaker and gentle lady this has
nothing to do with those other
sections just with.
As it is right now the free
speech that takes place
electronically.
lady is if someone were to look
at
The
the the there's a video out
Electronically Facebook.
A taxed Mr speaker gentle lady
and they were to say this
right your the legislator and
asked them and to to not support
this activity and maybe on to
the legislation that has been
passed Mr speaker and gentle
gentle lady and as I was stating
earlier where this has been
enacted in other places free
speech has been greatly
harassing this just says
electronic lock the leg tronic
Lee
transmitted information so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
call in the house so we could
all vote on that section Mr
speaker and gentle lady but to
be clear Mr speaker gentle lady.
we are on the amendment and we
were on debate on the amendment
funds and I you're debating back
the gentle lady so there is a
bit on your amendment from the
generated from Bernalillo.
understand as a matter of trying
to protect the right of free
speech with your amendment.
And is it your contention in
before this body that the first
We have passed other
legislation.
That to some degree.
Takes away and redefines what
free speech is.
past that you have the right to
to free speech we don't have the
right to.
Make make threatening.
Comments Mr speaker and gentle
And Mister speaker it changes it
that they cannot feel harassed
and Mr speaker and gentle lady
To whatever degree I'm not even
we're doing now is for an entity
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is providing the services that
we take away the free speech if
does this further curbs
language as we have done we have
done this already with
threatening comments for things
speaker that has already been a
legal restriction on free speech
Mr speaker and gentle lady
speaker and gentle lady.
Would be altering free speech
would be limiting free speech in
that area as we've done
elsewhere and Mr speaker
let's say some let's see the A.
one of the local priests here in
Santa Fe for to send something
to his congregants that says
people as you can so that
everyone will know that we're
here outside of that facility Mr
speaker and gentle lady if that
is sent electronically very
for electronically transmitted
information related to a
protected health care activity
which is clearly defined in here
that health care activity is a
speech what I'm saying is free
speech gets redefined under this
and in New Mexico that this free
speech concerning this one issue
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
been a long time since I took
constitutional law but.
Are you saying that I think it's
more times or Solomon which laid
From protesting.
Peacefully within the legal
boundaries six.
Of
Hospital.
in in you actually think that
there would not be first
amendment protections under the
to go to court to fight for that
again that this the plan writing
of this bill.
If it were to be enforced prior
to some sort of.
of of rig requirements under
section six of this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman
was very clear that this section
of law exists in New Mexico to
protect young people from.
out so are you saying that those
individuals have cleaned first
amendment rights and have been
law's enactment Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
my understanding from those the
from the of abuses that can
occur on the internet.
And so are you saying that those
this proposed statute Mr speaker
and gentle lady no as a matter
fact if you were listening to my
part of the debate as well as
there's not an incident that I
can think of in New Mexico where
there are protests of someone
gentle lady there are a lot of
protests outside of abortion
facilities Mr speaker and gentle
lady most Mr speaker gentle lady
they're peaceful there are
threatening and peaceful.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
We've added a new term harass
It is mentioned one two three
four five six times in section
six or entity.
And the speaker gentle lady I'm
and gentle lady they have moved
into gender transitioning care
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
that facility that would not be
separate facilities so once
the speaker gentle lady it this
bill basically says either one
of those two activities so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
I'm trying to protect the rights
according to section six if
there's anything electronic
stated about it that could be
considered harassment and they
would be potentially up for a
old term it's gender affirming
care and hi understanding at
this point in time is that that
but I guess what I don't
understand Mr speaker and
gentleman is your contention
Involved in this and if we
don't.
If we don't protect.
there to be a protest is is that
what your concern is Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I'm saying is they're free
speech there's free speech that
rescind the amendment.
That I have before the body
because I took out section six
speaker gentle lady I took out
individual and that so I I so
I'm gonna take protecting the
rights of the individual off the
table and.
And instead I just want to
remove the phrase that's
the sake of process or you we
drawing house for member number
one yes Mr speaker I am and I am
And just to be sure we are
And Mister speaker
instead I have delivered a
different amendment.
And.
Mr speaker I now move house
amendment one.
The two oh two number is two two
six three three seven point one
six three three seven point one
and the gentleman has requested
a roll call vote the gentleman
to explain the amendment.
And the amendment is posted
online the gentleman to explain
the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the
amendment is very simple and
section six online nine line
eighteen line twenty one line
Mr speaker and and and body that
the purpose is to not take away
the rights of churches.
Reprehensible and this is this
specifically does not take out
the language it leaves in place
the language of an individual so
individual would still have the
protections of not.
threatened Mr speaker and body
this the purpose of this is to
not further wrote the free
speech of churches and other
organizations like them.
amendment I would like to
explain why yes Mr speaker and
gentleman so we want to protect
us
Not only individuals but the
hired to perform their
activities and actions as
doctors is providers as health
care providers Mr speaker
that the auspices of that
facility those individuals who
are receiving the care and and
respect what it is that they're
doing Mr speaker gentleman and
sanctions perhaps subject to
lawsuit or even criminal
penalties outside of our state
so we want good business to
happen in our state Mr speaker
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo I thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman yield
Mister speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker gentle I my concern
activity so for example a
hospital or clinic has to a
follow the help of loss they
have to keep things private and
There may not be exactly correct
but when we enacted the Civil
Rights
law for the state of New Mexico
worked for the entity.
Responsible for that conduct.
I thought in.
responsible such as the the
sheriff's department rather than
the individual share of and it
seems that you're going the
Employed by an entity
It.
Actually going to have them take
the responsibility and not the
entity.
alone Mr speaker and gentle lady
no all this does is.
I move.
concern the church that sends
out I am a
message through Facebook to its
own members could be held
that I'm removing is the
business.
The abortion business for the
gender reassignment business Mr
liable for civil action for
criminal
action from and Attorney General
section six which you've now
left somewhat intact provides
heightened protections for
electronically transmitted
information related to protect
you're taking out in today so.
And that's the the
That that party to transmit
information to an individual.
Information can be transmitted.
Well it can be but if Ms
permission is transmitted to an
Mr speaker this is just to
remove entity from this for once
again.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
harass of the entity address one
of the entity is what I'm
concerned with Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
prepared a little earlier but
this was the first item on the
bill so are on the the the
docket today so I had to rush
through thank you Mr.
He dropped the Mike but it was
The folks who oppose these
procedures.
What they what they're sharing
would if they sent out please
share private information would
they violating this section
individuals.
Mr speaker gentle lady they
last portion of the on if online
six and seven related.
To the protected health care
violation of if they shared it
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is talking about.
Procedures anything related to a
protected health care activity.
I think you're right that was
still applies but the question
is whether people.
get out whether that would be
still captured in to remove the
word entity Mr speaker gentle
lady it would because it would
quite figure out where we're
going here so I'm going to stop
trying to figure it out and I
will allow somebody else to
debate the amendment is related
from Santa Fe percent of set up
gentlemen so my reading on this
ammendment when I compared to
the bill itself it seems like
we're removing entity from both
potentially discriminating
against and being discriminated.
really part of a lot of what I'm
looking at here so looking at
those that are being
discriminated against Mr speaker
gentleman that would have you
heard of different types of
and gentle lady there are laws
in place for that now and
there's a civil course of action
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
what this does especially if you
look at the next section section
provisions speaker delay this is
without going to court anyone
has the ability to defend their
business and their practices for
that were walking here and one
of the big concerns I have for
those that may feel
discriminated against is the
safety of the people to go to
work every day and the feeling
of safety and so well I know
specific section where you're
looking at to remove them from
is specifically electronic and
so all the protections that
would that would exist are the
you're referring to would still
protected Mr speaker German
speaker and gentle lady because
so many people do this
accidentally Mr speaker and
gentle lady if I if I were to
send something in on Facebook
I'm speeding down the road and I
don't see the stop sign that's
not an excuse we put this in
place because some grandmother
is unhappy with the with the
Doesn't spend a lot of time on
Facebook anyway.
What's that out there and says
something about it says this
video and says what they're
doing down there on third street
is awful we should organize a
protest and we should all go
down there.
the individual be protected but
no business is is is free of
harassment they can be harassed
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
I was in New York the last time
filled in danger for staying
there yeah a little bit but they
have the right to do it so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
what we would be doing under
this provision is limiting the
says harass Mr speaker and
gentle lady if there's truly
something going on there that is
slandering them if there's truly
something there that is
defending them Mr speaker
generally they have civil
and for a lot of people that are
in the work force you know I am
I am an elder of millennial if I
may say and what the my
generation has been raised
online in a number of ways and
so harassment doesn't come in
are forgetting any places that
may be necessary including if
they work at those locations and
today is we've seen online
harassment isn't what we'll get
to the actual to the other side
and a second but I will focus on
people are are navigating how to
harass and how to be within
first amendment speech no I
think we can both agree that I
know many of these cases they
won't necessarily go the way
that I want them to I don't
it is changing shape we know
that and this is something we
didn't you know uniform laws
earlier this you know the
session we had to include
that we are navigating a
continually virtual world and so
again well someone may not
intend to to and again we we
look at this this list harass
unwanted physical contact if
someone is encouraging some of
these activities online.
knowledge and that you can't
just out right you know
engage in a manner that is
threatening the what we
understand about modern time is
that we this isn't this isn't
earlier about you know just
yesterday we want to fix medical
malpractice law because and I I
heard from so many people are in
this chamber that they were
concerned that we were losing
don't want to bring doctors to
feel safe in one element and not
safe in a different element if
you are a provider you should
feel safe in the state of New
don't anticipate you want health
care facilities to fill the
right is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not because I'm not we're not
talking about threatening Mr
speaker and gentle lady that's
Mexico that the oil and gas
industry feels harassed Mr
speaker and gentle lady speaker
I was at an event three years
ago at the fund the hotel we
were rushed by people in masks
concerning the idea of the
environment they feel justified
in that and Mister and Mister
speaker July maybe even
emboldened in that but we're not
we're saying now is harassing
harassing could be saying
disparaging intentionally eight
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I should be able to say I don't
like that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
feel that if I then send
something in an email to someone
else that says what they're
be threatened to sue law
currently no business should be
forced to share the private
health care information.
Of of of to anyone else that's
to the point that it is
Is right now what we're looking
to do is to take the people of
they say so on Facebook and they
send it electronically they
could be fined up to ten
thousand dollars
remedies but Mr speaker and
gentle lady Senate disparaging
remarks and then ten million
eight.
Let's apply that to everyone
that's applied to the oil and
everything in New Mexico
especially education Mr speaker
and gentle lady that's what
we're getting to limiting free
speech online.
remedies because that's in
section eight and section seven
it tells law enforcement the
attorney general's office and
district attorneys that they can
just goes too far Mr speaker
gentle and I appreciate that
response I will say though you
keep referring to disparaging
remarks and I don't see that
language in here in section six
for disparaging remarks and how
health care that people may be
needing and a big concern for
money and this is why I think
it's important that we're
running that this bill is being
brought up that we're having
these conversations Mr speaker
government is that I think many
care is care after someone has a
baby and this is often care that
people receive because they need
you know and we can talk about
specific cases of one peri natal
landscape and and a big concern
for me is that individuals are
being harassed when they're
going to work because they're
establishment that they are not
feeling harassed in that way
we're not talking a disparaging
words and and again you you'd
brought up earlier in I feel
like it's tied together because
you brought it up and and I
think they are you know about
done in a way that was out right
to harass me or to harass an
entity I've not heard prayers in
a way that we're to to again
looking at these words humiliate
way we know and and you into the
kind of into you indicated this
earlier is that the line between
a threat and between humiliation
or harassment the it can be a
provided with oil and gas you
know it's it's apples and
oranges it's it's gas or
healthcare it's very different
the reason why I do believe that
is that when you're looking at
these these these efforts to
the person being being harassed
or being discriminated against
let's look at the individuals
that are just coming or the
entities that are discriminating
don't I don't know we'll find
out just what my concern here is
that I don't want an entity
harassing or humiliating an
individual I am concerned about
that because we as much as Santa
Fe maybe a large city we are
our state but if there is a
controlling entity you do not
feel the right to you do not
feel protected against that two
million eight being humiliated
being again I'm just looking at
not okay to happen and I and I
think we have to and I think
when I want to hear your
response on specifically
identity where a person I don't
that we want to see that kind of
thing happening especially as we
individual at that how are your
thoughts on infants doing that
to an individual thank you Mr
speaker German thank you Mr
speaker and gently that's why we
we're taking out is an entity
specifically that an entity
cannot be
pressured and Mr speaker that's
that's the term for grant for
Pressure so Mister speaker
gentle lady when I.
For those you don't know I was a
you member for nineteen years I
was a union steward for five
years and I negotiated a maybe
speaker and gentle lady the will
where we went was where the
operation of the business was to
the entrance into the coal mine
once again that's pressure on
purpose if this were not an
abortion clinic Mr speaker and
gentle and if this were not a
involved a very on the other
side of this argument Mr speaker
and gentle lady and so what I I
would be on the other side I do
not think that the collective
only time you'll find me
opposite of collective
bargaining Mr speaker and gentle
lady if we were talking about
collective bargaining.
service I have no idea that they
were that there was a protest
going on there when I made my
reservations when I showed up it
was like okay let's get out here
quick let's make sure that the
we came out of there got booed.
I had no idea that was going on
they had no idea that that if
they want to protest they can
protest but Mr speaker and
gentle lady what we're doing
type of facilities it just goes
too far.
And so all I'm asking for in
this once again I want to have
the other discussion earlier but
protesting a grandmother who put
something else on on Facebook
that is disparaging or says that
a certain amount of pressure
should be placed on these
ease of medical facilities that
goes too far thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
I want to be clear because we if
you the first one amid the first
online the team on in related to
an individual introduce the
healthcare that first of a third
party cannot do that Mr speaker
gentleman according to this and
long line then suddenly a church
or aid organization or awal
greens can suddenly start
harassing individuals now
harassing an individual does not
very different business decision
and that's of the sitting Mr
speaker German what we're
talking about here is that a
large organization that may have
a lot of power community maybe
it's a boys and girls club can
are definitions are all
aggressively do something no Mr
speaker gentleman we paint this
picture of an individual nice
grandma maybe we give her a nice
green shawl for Saint Patrick's
I spoke trying to aggressively
harassed someone that concerns
me Mr speaker Dona no matter who
it maybe now Mr speaker
governments when I'm looking at
this I don't want providers in
our state to feel that they're
being that they are under this
sort of attack and that they
should feel safe Mr speaker
looking at here is the name of
law that understands what we're
heading into Mr speaker
governments when we update for
example the uniform laws earlier
we added electronic on purpose
we're doing it here we're adding
that that it recognizes.
As you know with.
The future that we live in Mr
speaker gentleman that realizes
reality that any company I work
for you know I run my own
business anything that I do I
have to I want to feel protected
online and in person Mr speaker
gentleman and should not just be
life saving we know the
reproductive health care is a
life saving we know that
abortion health care is limited
and you can be lifesaving we
know all of these can be
lifesaving treatments Mr speaker
sure they feel protected I
appreciate the way Mr speaker
gentleman and I will and there
thank you Mr speaker deleted
from Bernalillo Mr speaker this
matter having been under
Speaker I have asked for a roll
call vote we're going to get to
the votes in just one second the
eyes have it debate is closed
gentleman Jim lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker I move to
time left so not sure what
happens at that point.
Let's not try to figure that
out.
The vote is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes it does include a forty
three in the affirmative twenty
four in the negative house floor
amendment number one to Senate
State couple words about the
vote I don't believe you do
gentleman Mister speaker you've
usually go back to the sponsor
at the floor.
We are ahead of time Sir finally
speaker we're out of time by
probably a good forty five
minutes on the amendment Mr
speaker I still have the floor.
Sir we've already closed debate.
Mr speaker I now move that
Senate bill thirteen do now pass
we're on final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirteen the
vote is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes vote is now closed a lot of
thirty eight in the affirmative
thirty in the negative Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirteen has
reflect that election is server
please and Senate floor
substitute presentable for
seventeen of final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment for
substitution.
The gentle lady to explain the
professionals to become teachers
in the career and technical
education field.
and with that I stand for
questions.
See no debate the gentle lady to
final passage of Senate floor so
to do for Senate bill for
seventeen the vote is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes voters would have sixty six
informative sermon the native
Senate floor substitute for
Thank you Mr speaker we came to
that point election assessor for
placing.
education department and the
state law back into compliance
with the FBI background check
requirements with that Mr
speaker stand for questions in a
division leader close thank you
What about close.
The clerk to call the member
with a recorded vote.
Jennifer ari.
The vote is now closed the vote
of six sixty seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate bill three eighty three
as amended as duly passed this
house.
The lady from Santa Fe are you
ready and item number thirty
seven yes Mr speaker would you
get me to that point the record
reflect that election is Sir for
places in the bill three thirty
legislation that we do to
authorized New Mexico finance
authority's public project
revolving fund this bill
authorizes NMFA to provide loans
move that Senate bill three
thirty two as amended with the
emergency clause to now pass we
are on final passage of Senate
bill three thirty two as amended
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
What is one of six to seven in
the affirmative during the
Permission granted I don't know
what the actual over ****
permission granted yes he as we
can.
Still in from you Representative
Lara.
Are you ready on item number
eighty.
Thank you Mr speaker we come to
the point that the record
reflect that all action
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker Senate bill three
thirty six has brought the horse
racing industry New Mexico
together senator Michaelia was
the horse racing industry in the
following ways.
Utilize one point two of the
twenty six percent gaming tax
for the purpose of providing
horse racing integrity and
safety authority insurance for
The game tax affirmative if its
current level it is not required
appropriation the legislation
contains language removing any
It doesn't emerge across that
federal compliance time
sensitive with that Mr speaker
this bill is intended to help us
the the the small guarding the
little guy and with that Mr
Nandyal please I will yield to
the kind lady Mr speaker after
lots of hard work on this
particular bill it did come to a
consensus and I'm glad to hear
jock insurance Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady in that
parameters.
Mr speaker racetracks I'm sorry
Mr speaker that's not quite
right.
Prior to that date it was the
New Mexico horsemen's
horsemen's association in we had
the problem with his the coming
down of for those of you know
that don't know is the
now if we did not get this bill
passed to even start of our it
would be in excess of four
hundred and sixty five dollars
to even put your horse in the
Mr speaker I now move that the
Senate.
Senate tax.
And with.
clause do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill three thirty six asked was
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
Thank you madam clerk we do have
a member without a recordable to
but.
Representative Ferrary.
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate tax business and
transportation committee subject
to percent about three thirty
six asked twice amended with an
emergency clause has duly passed
bill three eighty two as amended
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
three eighty two is the
organizations such as angel
investors or venture capital to
co invest in bioscience
companies that are based in are
And when the Bisons company
become successful The New Mexico
Biasa bioscience Authority cash
out the equity and puts the
process proceeds back into the
bioscience development fund
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind and gentle lady please
yield Mister speaker I yield to
my kind friend from the county.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle lady of the so we heard
about this bill in the house
appropriations and finance
really cool about the bioscience
Authority find is that it
encourages bioscience businesses
and more tech to come into New
funds to this fund so that it
can continue to have a revolving
a fact on all of these types of
businesses because once they
you tell us who would own the
intellectual property under one
of these arrangements Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
the company will retain
intellectual property rights.
gentle lady and you perhaps can
confirm this that this is akin
to a public private partnership
with that correct Mr speaker Mr
speaker gentle lady yes we have
amended do now pass final
passage of Senate bill three
eighty two as amended the vote
is now open.
The votes about to close.
No running.
The call the member without a
recordable Representative
Ferrary.
passed this house.
Gentleman from Chavis and one in
San Juan Representative Lente
are you ready and item thirty
nine yes this is going to that
point that the record reflect
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
thank S. and see the twenty
twenty three capital outlay Sir
can you please we believe cord
potential to generate long term
increases to make recurring
revenue SP three seventy eight
will ensure that the benefit is
realized the bill mandated
annual transfer for ten years of
estimates of the transfers will
have resulted in a hundred and
eighty five million dollars
additional money to the general
fund with an annual distribution
of forty one point three million
debate in a close speaking now
move that Senate bill three
seventy eight now do this.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three seventy eight
as amended the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the member of
the recorded vote.
Sentifi.
Representative I votes yes.
Santa Santa Fe and towers
Representative it up are you
ready on item thirty eight yes
Mr speaker get me to that point.
explain the bill Mr speaker and
body Senate bill three three
seven an axe the water security
planning at it authorizes the
Interstate Stream Commission to
the gentleman from Colfax great
Harding question again and you
Representative Chatfield.
Mr speaker phone review of the
bill us office things of Mr
Mr speaker upon reviewing the
bill I saw a few things of
concern set down with the
sponsor the state engineer and
Well the amendment has four
member number one to Senate
conservation committee substance
to Senate bill three thirty
seven.
Mr speaker I move the amendment.
out as we speak give it a minute
and then we'll have you explain
the amendment.
It looks like the amendments
maintains a doctor in a prior
appropriation that it does not
designate the.
Our condemnation to any water
It is a friendly amendment Mr
speaker embody we worked on this
together this is indeed a
friendly amendment I think it
gentleman from Ghali let me read
all those soft Colfax curry
Harding quay San Miguel and you
Neil please Mr speaker I yield.
where that is been changed.
Madam chair it's was changed to
see that the stakeholders.
Were.
The lady at the bottom of page
run the defined the
identification of regional
stakeholders and opportunities
Mr speaker I guess the gentleman
on page three what about.
In the body being named there is
being water right holders as
Then.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
six and seven.
Is state aid the identification
of regional stakeholders and
opportunities for stakeholders
collaboration I'm glad to see
Mr speaker and other concern I
had on this of on page four of
your bill.
equitable engagement.
For other uses insert in there
page four line for and I did
come across the word force
equitable has been stricken.
And
higher learning institutions be
able to be involved in this as
well such as our agricultural
school New Mexico State
Madam.
Mr speaker.
Then that might be a better
question for the sponsor.
If you is also fine gentlelady
from Chavis Mr speaker for
clarification what I was asking
and kind lady I can answer that
question yes when you do a
regional water district you're
going to involve the the
stakeholders and that and
certainly that would include our
institutions of higher learning
could be involved in this as
well Mr speaker let me see if I
can turn the page so Mister
speaker I get the best of gentle
you'll you'll you'll have a far
back here in a minute.
Mr speaker and gentleman on page
five of your bill.
Starting on line fourteen under
nations tribes and pueblos is
that premium is that language
their remaining the same.
Because the difference creating.
Mr speaker I guess my question
we are talking about right there
under item see on page five of
what is the.
But if the region wants to a
Yes Sir this in what line.
Starting on the line fourteen
under item C..
same as it was before funds the
amendment starts page after
management if if priority okay
Mister speaker I do see that
change their page five line
just ahead on my amendments
before I got to that particular
area of concern for me Mr
speaker of.
clarify for me if we're on the
bill.
Matt are you Sir we're on the
amendment and I think we had a
little snafu there following the
amendments Mr speaker one other
area of.
Mr speaker.
not seeing.
On page six.
Okay Mister speaker because I
guidelines Indian Mr speaker on
page six line twenty five I
wanted to definition of at risk
the state so I think that is
huge Mr speaker let me go on
there I had one more question on
you on this particular bill one
second please.
The city.
Okay and I do see that change
because on page seven of the
bill line fourteen.
B..
Is this to be construed as
permitting the condemnation of
water rights so I do appreciate
that being spilled out right
there at the very start Mr
do appreciate your amendments
and I do appreciate the
appreciate the gentle lady
saying that.
This is acceptable so thank you
very much both of you all.
I see none do you have an
amended bill.
Gentleman back to you.
Mr speaker I had some great help
gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
Senate conservation substitute
for three thirty seven as
amended do now pass.
The votes about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
committee supposed to present
about three thirty seven as
amended has duly passed this
house.
Gentleman from Santa Fe and
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three as amended on final
passage has been taking it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
in the comic era.
Beginning with the Manhattan
Project.
Unfortunately we are still
suffering.
The legacy of that.
In the northwest portion of the
state.
And we have the waste isolation
pilot plant.
Which just a few years ago had
an accident.
now a company called Holtec
international.
Wants to bring all of the high
level radioactive waste.
And we should not be the
nation's dumping ground.
Mr speaker members of the body
the whole to plan is bad for New
Mexico it presents an
country into New Mexico
primarily by rail.
Announces of the shipments
estimated as many as thirteen.
Accidents during the course of
shipping.
The speaker members of the body
the proposal cation for storing
the radioactive waste is in the
Permian basin.
And I know how much my
Why would we put the other risk.
Members of the body the proposal
is supposed to be quote unquote
temporary.
permanent repository in fact in
in operation.
So at the end of any years or
forty years whatever it is which
doesn't seem really temporary to
me.
It is localized short term
economic benefit.
To the area that wants to build
this facility.
No doubt.
Once the once the
So he was up and running says to
me that there would be about
fifty full time jobs.
But in the mean time.
once in the last three years but
I I can certainly remember you
know pulled out that magazine on
the back of the seat.
Insing the New Mexico true at.
retreating in the people
retiring all the things we're
trying to develop here in New
Mexico.
We've become known as the
nation's some sites.
changes to the existing
radioactive waste consultation
task force.
The prohibit storage of high
level waste until two things
happen one the state has
consented.
And the federal government not
pushing us around.
This is right in line with that
we are trying to give New Mexico
voice so the two requirements
are the state has consented.
It's not temporary if there's no
place else for to go.
In addition this bill prohibits
the issuance of state or local
subdivisions in the bill
prohibits the issuance of those
permits and licenses.
Mr speaker members of the body
idea that the federal government
can decide it's going to do what
it wants to do thank you for
infants the states including New
Mexico from interfering with
that.
Regulatory Commission over the
million transfer use and
disposal appearing in.
It is clear that.
The federal government has
specify the depth that needs to
be buried at.
We can specify the spacing of
the canisters that it's buried
The the atomic energy act does
not this is a quote.
Affect the authority of any
state or local agency to
regulated act to regulate
We still have authority over our
economy.
Our roads our construction our
air our water.
The state remains the retest
Authority.
statement for this project it
stated.
Holtec is required to obtain all
necessary permits and approvals
That's what this law is
addressing so yeah we're gonna
hear about preemption.
But this activity is not
printed.
Images the entire state.
No that'll stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from any and then Representative
Brown.
gentle lady I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
So I'm I'm glad that I get to
speak first
fifty five.
I have been following this
proposed project now for I think
it's at least twelve years as
long as I've been in office.
Mr speaker it started off as
local and our even regional
elected officials getting
together and thinking about what
Of the southeastern part of New
Mexico is sometimes referred to
at least the hot areas the
Energy plex there's a lot of
scientific stem type
pilot plant and there's your
Ranko which does uranium
enrichment for commercial
utilities and we have some other
projects there as well Mr
called the.
Eddy Lea energy alliance.
And
they worked on a number of ideas
and decided that this would
actually be a good fit for
southeastern New Mexico.
as this have been heavily
characterized already geology so
whether seismicity everything
for what was called the need
didn't come together and so the
question was what what could
that land be used for Mr speaker
gentleman it's remote location.
There's no ground water there
just has a lot of
good good characteristics to it
and so they got together and
started looking into the what
work of elected officials who
studied this extensively they
even went to various locations
to step to look at facilities
similar to it.
from oil and gas.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
a good way to do that.
So in attending those early
public meetings Mr speaker and
gentleman I was curious that's
have had a lot of reports on
during the interim.
With the radioactive and
hazardous materials committee.
Service has had a lot of state
oversight.
override the federal government
when it comes to nuclear issues
that Mr speaker and gentleman
there will be discussion this
afternoon about preemption
This area and there's plenty of
case law and regulation rules to
prove that and perhaps all for
someone else will go through
those in more detail.
says that the state must
consent.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
state already has consented.
That consent came in the form of
They are evidence of consent
they're valid and the the the
company that's looking at
building this consolidated
interim storage facility would
eighty million dollars in
pursuing this project and that's
a very long process for
licensing and vetting collecting
speaker and gentleman to started
in twenty fifteen when governor
Martinez.
Provided a written letter of
support for the project.
about regional participation
regarding this project by the
cities of Carlsbad and Hobbs in
Eddy and Lea counties.
It was mentioned that there is a
a lot about the site that is
actually ideal for this kind of
project.
The governor mentioned that we
United States.
they are being they have sued
the government because the
government the federal
government promised to find a
permanent repository for
So millions and millions of
dollars being paid in fines and
having a consolidated interim
storage facility would stop that
that would be able to apply the
It is safe and has been since
nineteen eighty four with no
adverse incidents.
Mr speaker John when I mention
eraser to fuel pellet.
There's no water involved and
these are put into assemblies to
power nuclear reactors is a lot
of energy and that material.
After that after they've cooled
to some extent and they're put
into dry cask storage.
And the governor pointed out
that there's been no incident
with that with this type of
system.
member cities and counties in
their effort to establish a
consolidated interim storage
facility in southeastern New
Mexico that will be regulated by
I'd like to share with you now
House memorial.
It was from the US session in
twenty sixteen.
I was the co sponsor of that
Was that the Blue Ribbon
commission on America's nuclear
future strongly recommended and
this is under president Obama.
memorial also mentioned that
nuclear power plants are very
important to our energy mix
because they are carbon free and
very reliable they provide
Mr speaker and gentleman
so the Blue Ribbon commission
up until twenty twenty and after
that so that's that's money
we've lost Mr speaker after that
the cost of these funds is
about.
Five hundred million dollars a
Energy Alliance purchased a
thousand acres of land that
would be used for this project.
The number one concern.
which is what would be used to
in in this in this project has
been used for more than thirty
years without incident.
the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission this isn't as I said
an international company that
has projects in a lot of places
it has passed muster with the
So Mister speaker and gentleman
there's something else in house
memorial forty that's the one
that I co sponsored with
representative Garcia Richard.
That goes to the fact that the
Here is from the memorial.
Whereas design construction.
Safety security financial
assurance and technical control
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
an acknowledgement by the New
Mexico legislature that there is
federal control four preemption
consent given.
It says now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico.
Of the Eddie Lacy Energy
And then finally Mr speaker and
gentleman this memorial was
submitted transmitted to the New
Mexico congressional delegation.
But that's not all Mr speaker
and gentleman.
An identical memorial was passed
Mr speaker and gentleman members
of the body.
The Eddy Lea energy alliance in
And the notifying him that the
final environmental impact
report for statement I should
say.
Was issued in July.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is other.
Indication of support for the
project and I won't bother to go
through all of these.
Resolutions have also been
passed in favor Mr speaker and
gentleman by the county
commissions.
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
They have seen the success of
the waste isolation pilot plant
they understand the role of you
when co the amendment Richmond
player Regulatory Commission the
more comfortable and supportive
they are.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I was
kind of a gnostic about nuclear
didn't know much about it so I
didn't really have an opinion
for or against but the more I
taken to make the nuclear
industry safe.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I received a little message last
night from a constituent of mine
poll showed at least something
like a hundred and twenty three
people are in favor of this
Holtec project only six people
didn't like the project.
So Mister speaker of we did a
trust their elected officials to
have done their homework and
that'd these this project.
basically effort to stop this
project.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I don't know why the groups or
the individuals who oppose have
really waited to turn up the
And when meetings were sometimes
called to discuss this idea of a
very few people showed up to
legislators in particular showed
The Attorney General of letter I
won't comment and opinion I
think one of the co sponsors of
this bill ask the Attorney
General for an opinion
get that this is a letter from
the Attorney General of New
Mexico dated July nineteenth
twenty eighteen.
The one of the co sponsors
requested answers to several
Two federal acts Senator waste
policy act and the atomic energy
act for controlling the states
the federal government Mr
speaker.
This Attorney General opinions
said.
That the Nuclear Regulatory
act that is still low today.
The Attorney General also
pointed out a couple of cases.
That.
In the skull valley decision.
These are
these are.
Clearly showing the federal law
preempts what the state of New
federal government and all the
states that must address the
problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
With respect to a question
regarding what legal quick
course the state would have if
the NRC licenses and interim
storage facility in the state.
predicate.
A consolidated interim storage
facility on the existence of a
permanent disposal site that is
also very clear.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
speaker and gentleman that one
of the latest efforts by the
state.
Was to oppose the license for a
CFI us of our consolidated
Mr speaker and gentleman a
number of members of our
radioactive and have a hazardous
materials committee have visited
that site
we we are quite aware of the
And the tenth circuit court.
Said that New Mexico loses on
that one the Mexico does not
prevail on that effort so Mister
here Mister or madam speaker and
gentleman.
And New Mexico keeps losing
because in part.
This is preempted by federal
law.
sorry Mr Mister representative
There is also a nuclear
regulatory commission.
final rule.
And that is still required to
still lost in the final rule was
promulgated in October of twenty
fourteen that is the current
law.
Anything nuclear if you have the
word nuclear in something there
a lot of people out of speaker
and gentleman who just react
of energy in the world.
We have small Marjorie with
reactors small modular Center
going to be bills not too not
I can read the guy's name Mr
stone one of the movie producer
saying get rid of your fear
about nuclear because we know
how to do it right we know how
I'll mention this Madam speaker
and gentleman.
They can actually use of the
ceramic fuel pellets that would
be stored.
recyclable material and that is
why the United States is looking
at interim storage so that
material can be retrieved.
used fuel because they're still
a lot of energy and in that
material.
It's kind of like taking a nice
committed to recycling France
did some time ago and it's been
very successful it takes the
will of Congress to make
something like this happen it
can be expensive to do it but in
Madam speaker and gentleman.
and I think that's an equity
argument that a company has
spent Madam speaker gentleman
eighty million dollars.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think we're walking into a
lawsuit if this bill passes.
It's very clear.
will lose out it would be very
expensive.
For no good reason Madam
speaker.
I think madam speaker and
of you can invest all you want
and then we're going to pull the
rug out from under you.
And I don't think that's fair.
FINS speaker and gentleman.
members on the interim
committee.
They have seen the designs and
the plans for this facility and
it's really pretty amazing it's
are shielded from the
environment for people.
Into silos underground very very
Speaker and gentleman people
have said well what if somebody
wants to attack the sorry.
Well first of all madam speaker
they be forced even try.
postulated that if someone flies
an airplane into the side.
Madam speaker and gentleman we
know from testing.
That plane would disintegrate
Mr speaker and gentleman in
addition to.
There's a lot of rebar this
design for the site.
words about the transportation
system.
Speaker and gentleman.
The transposition some people
tried to attack the
transportation system with
the of the licensing process but
that information has come out
when it needed to them when it
should have.
And it is going to be one of the
The cast that would be used to
transport these
these you Mr roles.
has all kinds of protection
around it.
There will be no release of
radioactivity if there is an
redundancy.
There would be a buffer will
Kohler.
There would be security armed
guards.
And these shipments wouldn't
forms madam speaker Mr gentleman
for example.
Newscasts have been dropped from
high distances on to spikes no
breach of the container.
breach of the canister discounts
have been burned in jet fuel.
For a very long period of time
and still no release.
I did have one gotcha question
material in very heavy tasks.
And someone said well you can't
do it on the existing rail
system it's too heavy.
Well the solution is madam chair
And one of our committee members
did a quick research and found
out that the cast would label
with way less than the
Madam speaker let me just I
guess one other thing I think
I've should bring up masters Mr
But we need to understand and I
hope this is for the body to
understand Madam speaker that
there's already a law in effect
the bank for decommissioning
with that time should come.
And the.
Propose project
This is a really good project
for the state of New Mexico it's
about a three billion dollar
project in the state of New
Mexico will receive revenues
from that.
This facility being built and
operated.
And I just want to say also that
And madam speaker and gentleman
the.
Clear Regulatory Commission has
studied that issue it's not just
And those comments are all
documented they're all
considered and researched and
then they are and who is the
operative word they are
educated.
And there was an effort to win
the administration changed the
the project as I mentioned have
say you don't support this
project.
And madam speaker and gentleman
those people have by and large
we can't today told me directly
that they were basically forced
And now wish they hadn't and so
Mr speaker and.
Madam Madam speaker and
gentleman I am.
reason to walk into a very
expensive lawsuit thank you
madam speaker thank you
generally there's further debate
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Speaker and gentleman if you
don't mind I'm I'm kind of argue
a little bit before I ask you
any questions without be
alright.
large swath of the argument that
says we have no ability to
prevent the this facility and
Jersey.
And that case held that the
state has a landfill that K. in
that in that particular case New
our borders to other states
bring their waste.
That's that's president.
And they said the state can't
isolate itself in the stream of
The company
They'll disorder facility so if
you build it they will come.
states who are benefiting from
clear power and I'm not saying
there's no benefit to nuclear
power I'm just saying.
That is I think the main concern
that we have to address here.
Permitting of facilities like
this just because.
Small towns.
S. serious environmental threat.
So I'm going to talk a little
bit about.
Atomic Energy Commission but
first I want to mention Harry
Reid because yucca mountain was
raised earlier in the debate.
the state of Nevada would build
a huge nuclear
dumping.
Clear waste storage facility.
politics until he died I thought
no.
And I hearing maybe was an
interesting character he table
the
Majority Leader in the United
good dancer but he was a good
fighter.
The right managed.
To keep the Akhenaton out of the
his beloved state.
Opportunity.
Mr speaker madam speaker and
gentleman.
Regulatory Regulatory
Commission.
Has some.
Our.
What states can do.
Exposure to radiation.
It is not right essentially
madam speaker gentleman's.
The madam speaker gentle lady
are a lot of things in there
that discreetly with
one thing she said that I agree
with is that the federal
government has preempted the
regulation of the safety aspects
the this disposal so we we are
we are preempted from that I
fully the I agree with that but
Mr speaker and gentleman is it
not the case that whole tax
environmental report filed with
the nuclear nuclear regulatory
commission in twenty twenty
Mr speaker jelly that is correct
they're that close in my opening
Holtec is required to obtain all
necessary permits and approvals
from other federal and state
the agencies including every
single New Mexico agency from
which approval must be gained
right.
Supreme Court decision in the
Virginia uranium K..
Probably the atomic energy act
does not preempt Senate bill
The court rejected the mining
companies argument that the
Virginia statute was preempted
by the atomic energy act.
million transfer use and
disposal of uranium.
But he pointed out that it did
not preempt the authority of the
state to regulate mining on
Forty of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission is based on.
For protection of public health
and safety from radiation
story of any state or local
agency to regulate activities
for purposes other than
protection against radiation
hazards.
ability of states to regulate
activities for other purposes
then.
Protecting against radiation.
Allows.
the justice Gorsuch corset
stated start with the fact that
this court has generally treated
field preemption increase like
this one.
Just depending on what the state
inquire into the reasons that
the New Mexico legislature
enacted the bill.
So for example disposal and
storage of spent nuclear fuel in
New Mexico.
We could also
the concern that the use of
groundwater by storage approve
or disposal facility would
Gentleman the tenth circuit.
House a.
This was in two thousand and
four and that was the skull
bill.
However the facts of the case
demonstrates that the decision
there.
The statutes at issue in skull
valley had been enacted by the
Utah legislature and the new
Mexico legislature added there.
that's an area in which the
atomic of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission has already that's
why that was overturned.
conclusions conclusion about the
scope of the I'm sorry
on Senate bill fifty three
because it's not based on health
So without this bill Mexico
could very well become a dumping
ground for the entire company.
Holtec building this facility in
To dispose of their own waste
and in fact we've been told
again and again.
The safest way to store nuclear
Disposal of its own waste and
that's not have to transport it
anywhere.
So the detriment of.
Are not they're not concerned
with their own.
The consequences of their
actions because they can find
some where else to put it.
forever decision.
We don't get to decide on let's
not do this anymore and taken
away.
So.
haven't their facilities.
Just address.
The efforts to table outcome not
out of Nevada say something
about that before I close.
prepare that for they ultimately
abandoned the.
and that was going to be the
permanent repository so we don't
have one.
there are some who are
definitely not in favor of this
bill and and yet I see no
benefit.
but for the sake of our clean
environment.
And our
Our beautiful state I urge
Thank you.
The gentleman from Santa and
Of the state of New Mexico.
Two three.
Blocks for this.
We consider in southeast New
Once course of action.
All of the roadblock to the
prosecution of this project.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you describe.
For the body.
That the task force contemplated
in this piece of legislation
what expertise with that task
force bring to bear.
task force already exists that's
existing law.
Speaker and gentleman
Pods or.
Sure this is not already been
considered in the permit
task force if if I may Madam
speaker Jim in the task forces
existing all those expanded by
the proposed bill the task force
shall consist of the secretaries
Affairs in the winter public
public plans.
That list.
Is a lot of expertise in New
Mexico and Mr speaker gentleman
Mr speaker German the best
Marvel impact statement report
prepared by the federal Nuclear
Regulatory Commission.
The perspective of the federal
on that task force that would
have the force.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Our.
environmental sensitivity.
Thank you our monitor for the
services of New Mexico what
Process.
Madam speaker John Tillman my
answer is New Mexico expertise.
Chair madam speaker and
example pods are we going to to
grant the quality of the year in
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman
The state of New Mexico.
Has not been in is not being
adequately represented in this
process.
air quality impacts through it's
a concern it's always a concern
but that's that's not on the top
concerns Mr speaker Tallman.
Speaker and gentleman so the top
would become a dumping ground is
that.
Consent to state.
talked a lot about how state the
the materials were when they
were in place.
Should talk about picking them
up loading the money train
incident that are existing
other.
There was suppose all facility
with.
It was an in place in order to
And it led to overheating and
there is a fire and radiation
the skate so Mister speaker
German safety is absolutely a
speaker gentleman thank economic
impact not the localized area
the community involved in the
state as a whole.
the good of the the majority of
the state.
Encino to this project because
it's bad for New Mexico.
bad for New Mexico.
Discuss.
Discuss the safety aspect to to
Mr speaker and gentleman I
suppose it depends on what you
mean by this material Mr speaker
Tallman certainly a lot of this
measurement originated in New
transported you know to its
current location Mr speaker
German I was curious about these
at this location these locations
and so I found the map of the
operating nuclear power plants
So they probably got the the
materials here.
For the Utah or in other places
where you find the uranium or it
was refined it was shipped there
this I think the most dangerous
time for this material is.
In transit and preparing for
that transfer.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
From her with transportation
issues that have occurred and if
so what safety issues were
it was used so for the if the
material if you're not talking
about the raw materials and the
whole process which I mentioned
if you're just talking about the
spent fuel the vast majority of
it is being stored at the
the nuclear power plants.
Mr speaker and gentleman
All with our nuclear navy.
are a nuclear capable
submarines.
Mr speaker and gentleman
wouldn't surprise you to know.
of literally been thousands of
Julie identical column were
truly identical to the
transportation projects that are
being proposed.
yeah I don't know how the new
the naval nuclear nuclear
reactors work I don't know what
they do with their spent fuel
rail infrastructure has been
neglected for a long time Mr
speaker German and as part of
the violent acts in the process
accidents Mr speaker gentleman
that sounds like a lot to me.
Thirteen accidents with no
Now and for.
To the.
If you will.
The south east New Mexico.
And so in order.
Yes.
Nuclear
storing at this location is
being developed it's being
manufactured.
and activities to our
neighborhood.
Mr speaker.
I would like to talk about next.
Mexico doesn't have mountains.
Trees we don't mention race.
What we have is.
Which.
That statement.
When will be degraded.
Of this legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
certainly heard it stated I
don't know with what level of
it's it's we can't replace oil
and gas so we should try.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
economy will close ups and downs
of a commodity based.
Create hardships when the prices
Back up Mr speaker and gentleman
was spent to date.
As a result of our funding them
to the state.
spend two hundred million
dollars.
Dollars now.
We do not have economic
development on our porch we were
in the state that will come
close.
General.
Is two hundred higher William
Bill.
What they do generate as a
training facility with another
fifty and all told six hundred
and fifty.
I have important point you
might.
That would.
That would represent this as a
dumping ground opportunity what
this looks like it is an
For oil and gas would generate.
Mr chairman I would not agree
because those are the numbers I
have so Mister speaker German
according to the this the
estimated workforce at Holtec
jobs are important in New Mexico
I get that for the list of.
Sort of the lake will do this
and we'll have some job maybe
Fifty five Mr speaker German Mr
speaker and gentleman I ****
predicated on phase one build.
Not.
Revenue sharing to the state.
Representative the documentation
I have.
Mexico in the form of.
speaker we don't know what.
The state participation would be
and that today and what the
local participation would be but
in any circumstance.
Subsidize dollars that is we
don't have to buy that work to
get it here those folks are
wanting to call.
We invited.
Not to pass legislation thank
you there is a debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sariñana.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
we store radioactive waste from
medical and research nuclear
facilities classified as low
level nuclear waste at the web
plant correct Mister speaker
constituent who's worked
extensively on this and she
urged me not to call it low
level because it is a
radioactive waste the call
tranger Annika don't really know
what that means it's dangerous
the casts you everything they do
they're they're not taking it
lightly so transuranic waste yes
we already have that.
my understanding is that with
this is built insult caverns in
the idea is that over time the
salt will in case and into rural
the the concern of course with
with with is.
That's all came from somewhere
and they can probably came from
active water resources and you
know at some point that could
include thirty million spent
spent nuclear fuel rods and you
said ten thousand shipments
you can waste is lethally
decline to level of natural
uranium for correct Mr speaker
gentle lady yes.
And Mister Mister speaker kind
existing sites and this was this
route with a found online and
percent the fear power plants
have already been deactivated
well that's what I thought was
Colorado Wyoming Montana Idaho
Utah Nevada zero nuclear plants
the vast majority of plants or
in in the east eastern seaboard
I'm sorry Mr speaker jelly I
could not hear your question
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so it is coming from
rail from all over the country
mostly east coast are
derailments very common.
recently so the you know it
comes back to sort of the
schedule we if there are ten
thousand shipments you know is
our thirteen accidents a lot or
the thousand developments in our
in our country.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I was
asked by Holtec to go visit with
other sites in San Diego this
summer Senator hi to me and I
we were at lunch just all the
sitting there all the people
who've gone and I was sitting
across from woman Mr mayor who
you've probably met if you've
been in any of the intermediates
or meetings here
part of the state for bringing
this high level nuclear waste to
New Mexico and I was taking a
little back I remember sitting
in a chair back in I remember
the people on this at the table
I asked her my first thought was
I after have you been to New
Mexico and she said no.
So woman from New Jersey from
Holtec is telling you how I do
Wants to make a lot of money.
During high level nuclear waste
in the in our state and I was
born and raised in New Mexico
one part of the state.
I believe we do have the right
to keep it to stop these part of
the state for being high level
Mr speaker German agility excuse
me
I don't know I don't have a
percentage I'd the gentle lady
from throughout the state so I
mean I go back to the issue that
would this be a localized
benefit yeah probably would the
state spend some money right
it's a huge detriment to New
Mexico and Mr speaker generally
dismiss say I appreciate you
sharing that story I mean that
They can just do whatever they
want and the New Mexico doesn't
have a say in this and I think
Mexico should have a say in
this.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman what a compressional
gentle lady if I may expand we
we also the jellies Committee
and we talked about a the letter
of clinical consent from a
former governor of the current
one of moral Sanchez was former
representative Stephanie Garcia
Richard of course is now Garcia
thank you Mr who is adamantly
the rest of our statewide
elected officials in expressions
of interest.
concerned that interim storage
side with initial forty year
lease but but propose for the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
the NRC licensed in New Mexico
would become this country's
And just a little personal I
have a granddaughter who is door
board during the session she's
almost six weeks old.
And.
I don't want her to look up in
forty years look at me and say
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe New Mexico has done
enough for the federal
government we have.
have uranium coming from the
Navajo Nation down to Gallup to
Laguna the federal government
has and hasn't done its part in
cleaning that up.
the bases are now but once I
figured out once building on
this committee rejected has
twice hearing everything that's
happening in our state.
My daughter will not come back
to the state because of what's
water basin we have the Permian
basin leaking CO two and
methane.
We have what we level nuclear
waste.
When we talk about economic
and I just worry that bringing
this is something we don't need
will hurt our state economically
and Mr speaker kind of moment I
believe this bill needs to pass
payments to local authorities
I think you said to the fifty
million a year I think you meant
to earn fifty million total Mr
they have whipped they think by
the time they're done will cost
ten billion dollars so the bill
though this project I think the
It would create a lot of jobs
the short term construction
project fifty jobs you know
going forward the risk of an
accident the economic disruption
for the most to the entire state
doesn't want to take this risk.
Knowing the downside and the
limited long term upside.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
the speaker with the gentleman
yield Mister speaker gentleman
yield thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen I had a few
questions much is been covered
this is that accurate Mr speaker
gentleman Mr Chairman yes.
Your gentleman what's the state
of Texas what's our position
about that facility Mr speaker
Texas is opposed to a facility
very similar to what we're
discussing here in New region
very similar to the one that
we're discussing here is that
accurate Mr speaker and
respected in the state should
have a say.
The gentleman I appreciate a
very.
That very much appreciate that
point Mr speaker gentleman I
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman
you're you're from a can I the
share with you Mr speaker
gentleman a little bit about the
gentleman the oil and gas
industry in the growth there has
been incredibly important for
our state incredibly important
for our nation in fact Mr
speaker gentleman incredibly
does in their share the Permian
Mr speaker gentleman.
A little too much chatter folks
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and are you aware that
understanding yes Mr chairman
that is my understanding as well
and this figure gentleman we've
had this conversation in
relation to a few things
including our budget but I want
to highlight that the speaker
gentleman when we are we have
our last and best chance to
diversify grow and make our
state the strongest it can be Mr
in southeast New Mexico what an
accident in that shipment could
that affect industries in this
that area it would impact the
entire state Mr speaker German
you know I I've lived in New
Mexico over twenty five years
now and what's interesting to me
New Mexico that's all of New
Mexico that tax everyone Mr
chairman I appreciate that point
and not being from this region I
think it is very salient Mr
importance of industry in this
region as it relates to our
state our nation and frankly to
the world is weighs heavy on my
these put the railways go
through highways are going under
over highways many other centers
that are essentially choke
points in in logistics and
support Energy derive from
nuclear power.
Mr speaker Germany's in actually
you know I I have Michael my
plants it when it limit the
development of the of these the
so called small plants that
people think might be coming it
does not affect the famous
friends agent I appreciate your
to to our kairos power here with
side here in our very own
Albuquerque in Mr speaker
gentleman I find myself when I
focus on carbon free power is I
power or at least be open to
that as a part of our energy mix
whether that's in our state in
our nation and our world while
still Mr speaker gentleman
standing up for our state
responsibility for which they
currently hold for the storage
next to these reactors and
offload that on to the state of
New Mexico in my opinion Mr
from Bernalillo Representative
but.
Thank you Mr speaker in the
interest of time I will try to
keep this short one of the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
yield Mister speaker Dalia yield
only twelve miles from where an
existing nuclear facility Mr
speaker agility I I don't know
that they were close but I
Mr speaker gentle lady there
certainly land use components to
it.
Mr speaker and gentleman so my
at between three hundred to a
thousand acres of nuclear fuel
rods.
Laced into the ground that
contain radioactive spent fuel
Mr speaker and gentleman
I have heard that this is really
and local economic development
Mr speaker telling.
This is one point seven trying
to make in the course of this
debate is that
the jobs are specialized I don't
know what what's all involved I
do think that once the facility
is constructed it is fairly
static so I so I don't know the
and gentleman I couldn't agree
with you more that the this is a
statewide issue this is not a
local
because this is actually a
transporting fuel through the
entire state not through just
one little region but this could
map showing the real lines it
really affects every area of the
state.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I definitely agree
speaker and gentleman are you
aware that in twenty eighteen
the City of Albuquerque and I
was on the city council at the
radioactive waste in New Mexico.
Mr speaker telling me I wasn't
aware that I have a whole list
of communities that oppose this
and the City of Albuquerque's on
a brownfields program for the
City of Albuquerque that did re
use of property.
want to tell you just a really
quick little story so we did
some development on the corner
of second and silver Avenue
housing and we were also doing
some reviews of the railroad
property up for housing.
the property at second and
silver Mr speaker and gentleman
and on the railroad we found a
lot of chemicals and.
there we were able to reuse we
took the bills out of the
property and it took about
almost a year just to take.
Out of the property that was on
we did a level mediation and
still have not been able to
build housing on the railyards
so Mr speaker and gentleman the
not only are we bringing it in
nuclear
rods to that
be extracted at some point in
Sorry my microphone has been
acting up ever since I got here
but thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen I just
wanted to point out that this in
and the long term impact that
this could have under the use of
this property is very concerning
thank you Mr speaker thank thank
you gentleman this visibility
from Bernalillo Representative
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentleman I am carrying have a
copy of a resolution from the
thank you I just wanted to share
that with the body
and I am also aware that the
attaching nations are also in a
further debate the gentleman to
close.
Gentleman Mr speaker members of
body excuse me thank you.
I understand.
benefit for one region it will
put the region at risk kids put
the state at risk as one person
described it approving this
proposal would be economic
House Sen bill fifty three as
amended do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
Thirty five in the affirmative
Julie from Santa Fe
Representative Romero you're
ready an item.
Number.
percent of fifty as amended on
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
deleted expendable thank you Mr
speaker so this is the right to
repair act we do have an
amendment this is been
contractors the right to repair
on this is on new building
construction Mr speaker what
this does is allow for a
negotiation really did take
six number Mr speaker is two two
six three two two point one
regimen as we passed out I
believe.
It's about to get passed out.
Yes give a minute we'll get past
that please.
okay the phone apologies that
back row so working with.
Wait a couple more minutes.
And it is being passed out
gentlelady to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
so this ammendment came out of a
intermediary step in the sense
between
the the the builder or the
contractor and the person's
this right to repair they have a
cause for action and that
process Mr speaker there debate
on the amendment the gentleman
from Santa Fe Mr speaker gentle
the debate on the amendment lady
from Caltrans Santa is to
support Representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker to the does
the gentle lady yield I yield to
If the if the the purchaser
rejects in writing.
Then there's they can take
action is that what I'm reading
Mr speaker gentle lady exactly
the actual step there is this
basically this this intermediary
place where there's a reasonable
rejection of that offer to
Doesn't this take us back right
back where we are right now.
Mr speaker gentle lady no it
does not and the reason I would
say that is because essentially
to reject something without
having to involve lawyers
without having to go to court it
just creates the intermediary
step for if there is a
disagreement it doesn't end up
an amended bill back on the
bill.
There's a gentleman from Chavis
sitting at that Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady LA I will yield to
legislative sessions there has
been.
Kind of a brewing problem.
And I suspect that this bill is
an effort to address that has it
sides of this issue both
builders and advocates for the
builders and contractors as well
as the litigators and lawyers
have come together and been able
to to discuss how it's gone over
the years and and here we are
today hoping to get this to the
governor's office Mr speaker
gentleman.
Thank you ladies some of more
texting me right now saying
will June twentieth I will yield
to the gentleman speaker gentle
lady who makes the call.
This is a repair that the nice
bill it was called the purchaser
they would basically call upon
the builder to come back and
review the work that was done
due to an errant
that work that had been done so
would create that process of
making sure they came back and
and evaluated their work and
corrected if there was a
mistake.
was a violation of that Mr
speaker gentleman then they
could come through this process
to revise any sort of issue that
they may have had with
claim.
Mr speaker gentleman just give
me a second I think it's it's
right in the bill I believe it's
thirty days.
time if it's not in the contract
there's about ten years
depending on the warranty of the
the actual job that was done Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman so this
market into parts of this bill
that are in the law depending on
the building itself so there's a
statute of repose that's already
depending on what the actual
build out would be the purchaser
in the in this bill Mr speaker
gentleman shall ensure the
dwelling is made available for
depending on the type of build
out it is those statutes of
repose are different.
Mr speaker gentlemen so we this
would pertain to new build outs
and perhaps all of those
categories that you discussed
and depending on what the
situation would be in their
turn typical contract today.
Then it in terms of this one to
the and how long that might last
the seller we would be able to
verify that without knowing what
that contracts stated.
Speaker gentle lady.
speech there Mr speaker gentle
and so on average it's about two
years for the general contract
that we're we're talking about
so forgive me on that the ten
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady from Santa
Fe you'll please yes I will
yield to the gentle lady okay
of your bill online fifteen.
Reasonable period of time and
then I'm also seeing other the
of the other statements in here
addressed throughout the bill
would the area that you're
talking about on page seven Mr
speaker gentle lady is about
after the construction defect
the process but this just means
after something has already been
repaired
following that there would be a
reasonable time to get it
inspected Mr speaker gentle lady
so Mister speaker this comes
professional Mr speaker gentle
lady it it really depends on the
situation and where they are in
the process but essentially the
bill Mr speaker gentle lady and
whether or not they had to hire
a third party again it's
dependent upon the the actual
situation so Mister speaker this
could potentially drive our drag
period of time not being defined
in this Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you very much.
There is a division from
Bernalillo Representative
How has to statute Mr speaker
gentle lady related to the
impact anything that may be in
standalone document what this
provides is the of the proposed
way of dealing with any
potential litigation where if
come in and fix a problem that
they may have caused without
having to go to courts to impose
that repair upon that dwelling
this is a process that allows
Mr speaker gentle lady of the
in the year to sponsor the bill
this did some group come to you
and ask you to
don't know that we want to spend
time on the floor wondering who
brought what bill I thought I
would appreciate it if we just
keep this on the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
houses and what they are
generally incredibly frustrated
by the effort that that they're
actually would increase the time
and the steps they would have to
go to in order to try to get
the seller or for the
that
part of the purpose of this
legislation Mr speaker gentle
lady so the purpose of this
legislation is to ensure there's
create the timelines in statute
for resolving those issues
without having to go to a lawyer
without having to wait on a
court process to ensure that
have all come together to not
oppose this bill but to work on
how to come to that agreement Mr
speaker gentle lady so really it
clarifies the process and
gentle lady I'm not aware of
that I am aware that I just
inherited this bill from the
Senate and my Senator to help
with this effort and to to help
Of Mr speaker gentle lady
yeah I I appreciate how
difficult it can be when you
inherit some cases but
but I do have one more quick at
least one more question and Mr
At at forms of informal
resolution such as mediation of
considered as a way to shorten
the process and avoid high every
including arbitration mediation
but this is the part that
everyone has come to agreement
when and how it's made it so far
in the process.
Mr speaker gentle lady not to my
knowledge no this just creates a
process for the right to repair
okay Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you for the answers I
have had trying to get redress
on these kinds of issues I
I have concern that this might
actually delay the process I
amended do now pass we're on
final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill fifty just twice
amended the vote is now open.
Close.
What is a good lower forty six
in the affirmative fifteen in
the negative Senate judiciary
committees of the present above
fifty as far as amended has duly
The lady from Bernalillo you
ready for on item sixty one.
Yes I am Mr speaker.
There's.
Let the record reflect all
action necessary replacing this
substitution the gentle lady to
explain bill thank you Mr
speaker members.
I'm really pleased to have the
Senate sponsor hair Senator pulp
Act updating it and making sure
that some kinds of secret
operations are not recorded and
that if there's a camera
stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Speaker gentle lady for New
Hampshire Mr speaker I yield.
Was the process just to record.
Previously recorded material at
the end of the low.
Mr speaker this bill does not
individual officer has a
malfunction that's all this bill
addresses Mr speaker gentle exit
determination when it should be
defines what an undercover
operation is so when there is an
undercover operation by
definition
nobody's going to be responsible
turned off his in under cover
operations console to
representation.
This is bigger General Services
really short bill it's three
Mr speaker gentleman is bomb
Officers are required.
Time to have a camera.
Mr speaker and gentleman no it's
when there's a specific
What was the circumstance bone
disposal with the.
Mr speaker gentleman it's turned
off because the electronics in
the camera could actually put
the officer in danger.
Thank you Mr speaker.
final passage of Senate
Judiciary substitute for Senate
bill three sixty eight the vote
is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
By a vote of fifty eight in the
affirmative two of the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
The lady from Santa Fe are you
ready for the and for item
number forty one thank you Mr
final passage has been taken and
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker this bill
for twenty three The New Mexico
finance authority operating
programs the primary care
capital fund behavior health
capital fund and child care
facility loan program all right
now that allows them to anyway
programs and offers greater
transparency and then three it
allows NMFA to recover actual
cost administration without a
stand for questions.
the vote is now open.
of fifty seven the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate bill
for twenty three has duly passed
the house.
for ready for item number
seventy five yes Mr speaker we
give me to that point my
apologies eighty two yes Mr
speaker let the record reflect
all action necessary for please.
speaker this established as the
civil rights division within the
office of the Attorney General
with that I stand for questions.
Montoya.
Thing is the only from center
field.
Yes I yield to my friendly
debater over there.
Thank you Mr Kirk
is the purpose of this division
within the attorney general's
office Mr speaker gentleman it's
right in the bill the civil
rights division shall have
authority to investigate civil
rights violations and intervene
lady so we just passed the.
Changes to the Civil Rights Act
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
This with the.
in the other US states
surrounding us we just haven't
had the opportunity yet to
actually have this office inside
the AG's office.
The speaker in June and January
violations currently of the
Civil Rights Act Mr speaker
gentle lady that we need to
create an entire division for
this.
don't know yet what what sort of
violations may calm because we
just haven't had this place in
the AG's office before.
concern Mr speaker and gentle
lady what we're looking at doing
it appears is weaponizing law
enforcement Mr speaker and
gentle lady for the purpose of
bill but this is fruition I
would say of the concerns I have
with the last bill that you and
I debated thank you miss and
gentle lady.
Thank you.
Fe thank you Mr speaker that is
correct don't ever ask me to
choose between the two cities
because I won't Mr speaker
gentle lady Attorney General's
for those folks already doing
this work to be and that's
absolutely the fact Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gently can
you just give me a couple of
things that will improve by
Mr speaker gentle lady so first
my experts here is James Grayson
with the attorney general's
office he's whispered in my ear
to do that type of work and to
know that somebody is there to
respond to these types of claims
if maybe and give advice from
the state to understand what
what would be needed and how to
There is further debate the
gentleman from Travis at the end
of terrorism is Representative
Townsend thank you miss the
out in the weather and they
didn't have a place to sit as
they were working and I just
wanted to clarify these people
do have.
They're representing people I'm
trying to figure out.
What are the benefits are there
efficiencies derived.
What happens and why is this
needed.
perhaps numerous staff people on
if we get this office up and
running to respond to those
demands so that's efficiency
number one Mr speaker gentleman
if you look to the FIR is very
Workforce solutions others
that don't have a place really
to go to send these types of
claims or interests to given
body so now they would be able
speaker gentleman in Michigan
gentle lady will they stay in
the same offices in the same
building they are currently I
mean they're not moving is that
right now Mr speaker gentleman
another box around the around
them on a
The.
Hierarchy chart the.
we create offices quite often we
created the Google this session
Mr speaker gentle and so all
this would do is just house it
within the off AG's office
other than doing that Mr speaker
gentlemen were that's that's
where would be And Mr speaker
gentle lady will there be
additional staff hired.
Mr speaker gentlemen so the
understanding through the budget
forget me not in this bill but
the staffing would be about five
you gentle lady doesn't sound
like there's many new
efficiencies just additional
costs we agree to disagree Mr
speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Mr speaker gentleman so again
What is the.
Changes how many civil rights
be brought to the AG's office
officially which case there is
no data on on any of these
because they haven't been
brought before because with we
don't have the office.
To the entities office all.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct so again going back to
Speaker gentle lady.
or these complaints going now.
forth by the government and
therefore will the government
the AG's office cannot hold the
government accountable.
Okay
do we know today.
Of those cases or act.
across the state I understand
that the Human Rights Commission
is looking into how to be able
to obtain that data but it to
date it hasn't no.
To.
prosecuted.
Mr speaker gentleman we don't
have that data now.
Speaker gentle lady seems a bit
freelancers.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker gentle lady of the
gentle lady yield I will yield
Mister speaker and gentle lady I
In the open government division
according to the tourney
generals officers one point five
million in personnel costs for
those fourteen full time
be needed to operate the civil
rights division of which would
be about one point six five
million on this would amount to
fifteen staff of thirteen
attorneys into court staff but
office space for of the square
foot per full time employees is
what I'm getting at so we are
going to be seeing this
reoccurring cost.
going to take to staff this new
division.
yes Mr speaker gentle lady so
that again fifteen staff
thirteen attorneys when it if it
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady so today
organizations like the ACLU or
the center for lawn poverty can
now does not have an office to
bring these types of claims into
it to be able to to ensure that
we can hold government
accountable.
regarding the new full time
employees and what it's going to
cost in the recurring cost for
office space and all the work of
the work staff that goes with
that really does stand out for
me is the workforce solutions
department Mr speaker gentle
lady have you had a time to look
at that and evaluated yes Mr
might be a potential conflict
with the federal equal
opportunity commission I don't
Mr speaker gentle lady.
there I don't Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker could you
explain why you don't think
there be a problem with CYFD.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
bet about how it is that this
will be enacted Mr speaker
gentle lady and so all in all
this is meant to protect the
civil rights of the folks in our
state have a place in which to
make those claims of those
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker I
guess my concern there with the
CYFD analysis is the disclosure
part of it and the
that as being a problem Mr
speaker gentle lady so you know
in the space of the legal
practice you keep that
information confidential to the
FIR said let's just be careful
about this the speaker gentle
lady I would assume that
everyone that would continue to
keep that information private
which is meant to be private.
And Mr speaker gentle lady may
experts here just reminded me
that in the bill there's
specific provisions to ensure
that the data that is kept
requested would be remain would
remain private.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
does put in a request within
that information be devolved.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'd like
to point you to page three
be made public or used for
purposes other than
investigations and prosecutions
brought by the civil rights
division so again that
information would remain
private.
the past couple of years is
transparency within that come
into play under what section if
it's saying on page three.
Mr speaker gentle lady not if
regarding private information it
would not be subject to that.
Mr speaker I think there might
be a little bit of a conflict
entail the amount of dollars
that amount of reoccurring
dollars amount of lawyers that
will be involved plus the added
space that we're going to have
Mr speaker I think we're going
lady for answering my questions
that's all I have thank you
gentle lady thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
for that my questions are just a
I just a question of clarity
just because based on the of the
bait
earlier it was said that the
the have the ability to do that
yes but unfortunately without
the provision of this office
they cannot bring them forth at
this time.
of I understand the meeting the
staff of the already have the
staff and they have we have tort
law in places that correct that
they would have the ability to
is that through the provisions
of what the AG can do there's a
question of whether or not they
would be able to do that they
would if they work wanted to
bring these claims forward they
would first have to litigate
to ensure and fortify that in
the law right now they could try
but because of the risk of
litigation about whether or not
they had that power we believe
authority to try the cases is
that correct that clarifies the
authority absolutely thank you
so much that's all I have thank
you Jeff thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from with that county
Representative block.
yielding all day and the you
never know around this place so
madam speaker gentle lady I had
a few questions about the bill
so.
Mr speaker are madam speaker
gentleman yes it I mean we we
have a new civil rights
litigation laws on the books
their AG's offices of Mr Madam
speaker a gentleman this would
just put us in line with the
authority that we would like to
continue to give to the AG's
The AG's office is not currently
doing this at all Madam speaker
gentle lady correct madam
speaker gentleman's okay thank
you madam speaker and gentle
lady and I think what I heard
earlier was fifteen new
go and madam speaker gentle lady
madam speaker gentleman's so the
budget contemplated this year
they're hoping to hire five new
Okay thank you madam speaker
gentle lady and do we know how
many current pending lawsuits
are out there that would be
wondering how we arrived at this
figure of this many attorneys if
we don't currently have any
litigation that we are.
Facing madam speaker gentle lady
Madam speaker gentle and
Okay thank you madam speaker
gentle lady so we're talking
about a lot of other states what
other states have these kinds of
divisions and their Attorney
General office Madam speaker
the AG's office has this office
of civil rights.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so do they also have
civil rights acts like we do in
all I don't know the laws of
those states entire in its
entirety but what I understand
from why those civil rights
divisions
why they why they have them in
those states is because they
gentle lady so then I'm
wondering about what's happening
on the amendments from the
Senate madam speaker gentle lady
established by law that's the
one thing we just change some
technical stuff so madam speaker
gentle lady did those changes in
the Senate fundamentally change
the purpose of this bill It
anyway madam speaker gentle lady
Page three F. I think it's a
line seventeen on the original
bill madam speaker gentle lady
it talks about.
The I believe it's talking about
would not be able to be.
Put out by if for any other way
madam speaker gentle lady madam
speaker gentleman's so private
health information and the work
gentle lady because my one
question about this is regarding
CYFD Madam speaker gentle lady I
know that we have many issues
with that department currently
and we are wanting to make sure
sure that this does go forward
and we do of compliance with our
laws with CYFD and then madam
speaker gentle lady I'm also
were wondering about the new
information that the AG was
having under the civil rights
claims provision madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker the gentleman so
confines of what their roles and
responsibilities would be within
that job description and of
course their management of that
so when it comes to private
information Madam speaker
information that should not be
made public Madam speaker
gentleman okay thank you madam
speaker and gentle lady so then
what whatever that information
Madam speaker gentleman's so
specific to CYFD and I think
private madam speaker
gentleman's so would not be
subject to it for a health
information that you brought up
other work product information
between an attorney and their
information is going to the
Department I know that let's
just say if I had a lawyer and a
civil claim that lawyer would
have a.
Confidentiality agreement with
claim how with the AG's office
go about that madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman's so
when it comes to that attorney
what litigation would look like
and how would they be subject
subject to in the eyes of a
quarter or trying to figure out
how to mediate a situation madam
all the conversations they have
with the individual or with his
office they would all be sealed
forever I guess madam speaker
gentle lady until the time that
in any way shape or form Madam
speaker madam speaker
gentleman's so if you wanted to
make anything public about your
claim that's up to you if you
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so you know I see
in this bill we have a lot.
We use the word public body a
lot madam speaker gentle lady I
this division then.
The work in tandem with the new
provisions that we put into the
Human Rights Act Madam speaker
gentle lady madam speaker
basically they would I look go
with you and and see whether or
not that claim is valid and see
what could be brought forth
madam speaker gentleman's.
Commission did forwarded to the
AG under the Human Rights Act
and they didn't act upon this
and madam speaker gentle lady
all those information that would
correctly madam speaker
gentleman if the Human Rights
Commission state had a suit that
we wanted to bring fourth
anyone can go to private
practitioner and and ask for
that issue to be brought.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
that's prosecuting this instead
of them have we talk to them
madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman's so the
okay thank you madam speaker
gentle lady so then.
They would not as we said
earlier the representing
individuals who were filing
claims against the state it
acts are that we passed in the
state madam speaker gentle lady.
distinctive representation of
folks would be who they would be
representing madam speaker
gentleman.
thing would cost and and the
AG's office madam speaker gentle
lady looks like.
A few hundred thousand dollars
for over three years it's about
two million Madam speaker gentle
lady I'm just not sure if we can
dialogue and and I like the
thought process behind the bills
thank you madam speaker thank
you to Andy thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo in
C. back please yield I will
yield.
Okay I do have some questions in
regards madam speaker I have to
write that down.
I love the fact that we have a
woman up there thank you by the
Do they represent the child or
do they represent the state.
Madam speaker gentlelady they
represent the state.
I mean as you know I brought up
numerous times some of these
records are so horrific how do
we make sure that they are being
held confidentially.
information today this is not
contemplated at all in this bill
madam speaker gentle lady it's
it's about what would be kept
private within the office of
civil rights.
investigate only civil rights
violations occur within the US
state limitations.
Supervise it arm to be provide
representation but does not
identify the source funds and I
For this SB four twenty six
Madam speaker Madam speaker
gentle lady although I don't
know where you're referring to
the bill the budget for this
office comes from the state.
understand the thought process
on this but I seem to have so
many questions on this.
I worry about the records still
and I want to know can I claim
termination this year action Mr
speaker I'm sorry madam speaker
and gentle lady.
Can you clarify that question
madam speaker gentle lady just
so I understand what the.
Madam speaker deliver move on to
another question real quick by
the way can I get the name of
your expert please yes madam
investigation if so what
information.
what about what the if for a
request would be so depending on
what the information is that's
requests that would be evaluated
and then depending on what
speaker gentle lady we're very
specific about what information
is meant to be kept private
within this bill as it relates
to any
civil rights
Madam speaker gentle lady so we
just clarified the what the
office of civil rights would
need to go by in order to keep
that information private private
Madam speaker Julie could give
me some examples that would not
Madam speaker gentle lady so we
sort of talked about this before
but went again CYFD has
able to pursue something like
this that would continue to be
made private so any other
information that they would
request on behalf of
the the case in the suit brought
Madam speaker and gentle lady
would law enforcement
investigations be part of the
effort that would be released.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
some.
Of requests made to law
enforcement will be made public
on if they are
the private information that
should be kept private it would
remain confidential.
keep that information private
and ensure that those
individuals information was not
released and that would either
compromise that individual or an
investigation.
investigation no one second
please
I worry about information
getting out because now we have
this other entity that is now
Outside entity now and I'm
concerned more than anything
else about how things are being
So the last question I have is
can you explain then speaker
gentle lady can explain what it
on going investigation is for
this doesn't expand any
provisions under it for a Madam
speaker gentle lady if there was
information that law enforcement
required to be private they
would continue to be private.
the more dig into that the more
issues of a scene I just don't
want anything compromised with
these very delicate cases and
gentlelady yields I will yield
to the gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
we've talked a lot about the
Representative and gentleman.
It's not here yet I'm sorry to
say that but please prepare
accordingly for the dinner that
will arrive at six thirty.
But since it's not here I will
continue
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady yield I will yield we
talked a lot about the data
driven materials and built a
and you turn general's website
he was very active and has been
very active in this civil rights
so I'm I'm just curious
Madam speaker gentlemen are you
talking about civil rights
actions.
Madam speaker yes.
website too but again this is
not part of this bill.
Madam speaker gentlelady I guess
my question is
Okay thank you madam speaker so
when the question was asked
earlier it has the attorney
general's office do you normally
Madam speaker gentleman we're
trying to create a new office
within the attorney general's
office that pertains to civil
rights today madam speaker
gentleman's so that is why we
need this law in order to create
that office.
Madam chair
engaging with civil rights so
what authority is are they
coming forward in this and what
authority do you have.
border commission or any
employee in the state and is in
his official capacity that is
the duty of the Attorney General
today.
Civil Rights ari B. to being
taken care of in the attorney
general's office Madam speaker
gentlemen we're making this an
express Authority within the
Madam gentlelady so if they're
sixty six sections that are
recent and that's their words
not mine who's been doing that
referring to something that's
ongoing in other states but
that's must be a multistate
signing ability for that to
happen madam speaker
gentleman's.
understanding is that yes that's
happening but again without the
express authority to do so we
cannot do the inside of our
state.
know what you're referring to on
the website I'm not going to
conjecture what that might be
but all I'm clarifying for you
madam speaker gentleman is if
there is no express authority
Otherwise they would have to
litigate madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady
This leaves me with more
questions now than I had when I
started this so I'll leave it at
that so thank you.
kindly the yield I will yield.
Soldiers going up on the line of
questioning the my colleague
So madam speaker kind lady he
would be in charge of holding.
All the laws in the state of New
Mexico is that correct Madam
His office would be.
In charge of prosecuting that is
that correct.
perhaps this is a point of why
we need this bill when we talk
about what the Attorney General
is that is has the duty to do as
a present without having the
gentleman's don't have the
express authority to do so so
while they have broad authority
to prosecute defend actions and
proceedings in the state we want
to make it very specific that
what the express Authority is
and why he needs that madam
speaker gentleman's so when we
make laws that have definitions
those guardrails around them all
those side boards to make sure
that we know exactly what is
already they would have so
without expressing the in the
law there's confusion as to what
under the Civil Rights Act to
make it known and that's what
this is intended to do madam
speaker gentleman's.
So madam speaker currently the
gentleman they could the
unfortunate bit about that
however is that they would
likely have to litigate prior to
pursuing that any further that
don't have that express that
they already in the law to do
so.
So madam speaker earlier debate
you said that the the attorney
budgeted for this division but
this division doesn't exist.
One of those attorneys doing now
Matt Mr speaker gentleman so
get all of our bills passed that
pertain to the budget so Mister
speaker gentleman those
attorneys are not yet hired that
would be necessary for this bill
but I think I kind of fall that
one last question.
So all the Civil Rights
Stature to we've passed this
session what's going to happen
to those.
I've seen a few and and Human
Rights
these pastors Civil Rights Act
a couple years ago but that Mr
speaker gentleman if they don't
have the authority they can't
investigate they can pursue
those claims so if we do nothing
with this piece of legislation
we don't pass it we
Show madam speaker kind lady
I I.
I'm even more confused now but I
Mr speaker thank you German is
the major lady from countries
had a supporter of women's
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker does a gentle
lady yield I yield thank you Mr
speaker did the attorneys
Madam Mister speaker gentle lady
it's part of the budget request
I'm not sure when in the process
they requested the amounts I
don't sit on probation I bet you
division to better investigate
internet crimes against
children.
And an expansion to increase the
consumer environment protection
division.
percent funded vacancy rate Mr
speaker kind lady and we hear
all the time how hard it is to
hire attorneys Mr speaker gentle
committees one on each side and
I think it was of my personal
opinion was that it was a last
minute decision and it was not
initially requested thank you Mr
Mr speaker and gentle lady be
patient with me I'm not an
attorney.
But instead a holiday analyst I.
I didn't play one on TV.
Help me out in two thousand and
twenty one we passed house bill
four four to the Civil Rights
Act.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as as
thousand twenty one legislation
because.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't know if it was rulemaking
lady that might kind of getting
to the crux of the situation Mr
speaker gentlemen so again these
actions that are being taken
already in our state or private
And the lady is I went back to
the hospital for in funny thing
that indicated that I had to go
through the AG's office so
that's exactly correct there's
no with authority under the
Civil Rights Act or anywhere in
the law currently that gives the
express Authority for the AG's
folks to bring these claims
fourth to the AG's office
specifically.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
then this is not meant to be
Sanchez I thought that that was
critical it would have been
placed in that look legislation
at the time can and I understand
that we can't we're not gonna.
What what you if if you were in
the that bodes.
Why you would not have put that
in there because.
Some some other department could
Mr speaker gentleman so again we
continue to build upon the good
legislation year to year Mr
speaker gentleman this is this
current law Mr speaker gentleman
were merely creating the
opportunity to be able to bring
those claims fourth within the
AG's office outside of what has
happened happening privately
around the state.
process is probably been working
very well.
In through the conversation
through the debates that I've
heard with different
Mr speaker gentleman was there
question there.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
guess I'm trying to get to a
point where we're I hear
something that says the system's
thousand twenty one.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to to
this point in the debate none of
that information is been
provided.
in the debate no specific
information is come from the
bill sponsor.
Right now this says this is
critical this is where the issue
understand your comments I would
be happy to entertain a
question.
What has happened Mr speaker and
gentle gentle lady what has
happened over the last two years
something for Mr speaker
gentlemen so we're bringing this
forward today because of the
fact that the AG's office would
like to be able to pursue these
types of claims but they do not
law hopefully sending this to
the governor so that the AG has
an office to bring these claims
fourth and protect the citizens
of our state for these claims
bringing this today is to be
able to give the AG's office the
authority to do so within the
state without that we don't have
that power Mr speaker gentleman.
this as the attorney general's
of it was expecting this
anticipating this there's
nothing in there with respect to
that's a favorite of mine it's
called the field of dreams and
there's a saying inside of that
the if you build it they will
come in that Mr speaker and
gentle lady that's what I see
Potentially they will have a job
to do Mr speaker and gentle lady
I cannot support this thank you.
There is for the visually
familiar Representative Chasey
thank you Mr speaker will the
legislation did pass the house
Judiciary Committee unanimously
and but it wasn't without
questions this is something new
and the only thing I hope is
Attorney General to actually
collect damages on behalf of
clients because right now the
bill is going to change patterns
that especially the children who
have been damaged really need to
be able to collect damages but I
and leader of the set.
Is a division lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Herndon.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady LA will yield my friend
back there thank you very much
New Mexico Attorney General
prepares and files because Kerry
Abrams that's very different
from following a brief a civil
rights brief on behalf of the
people of the state of New
they can't take action and so
the other item that is brought
brought up madam speaker I'm
sorry Mr speaker gentle lady is
what about the budget that was
now and has a a maybe a
different I cited a different
port side in terms of how they
turn it doubles up as performing
is that correct the gentle lady
that the length of time is
perhaps this previous AG but Mr
speaker gentle lady the
attorneys that are contemplated
in this bill actually file are
budget they're provided for they
didn't expressly because of
without the litter the the
current legislation there's not
a separate line item so they
actually getting convert in the
gentle gentle lady from the
general is so thank you very
much so those.
Attorney General fighting for
the people of the state of New
Mexico and having the authority
to do so and for that purpose I
stand in support of this
legislation and thank you madam
Mr speaker gentle lady is the
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
If I recall this legislation.
The.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
that was the case and our
committee hearing test.
M. Mr speaker and gentle lady
the does this legislation allow
yes they would have the ability
to investigate numerous and all
of agencies under the state
Mr speaker and gentle lady the.
but as I recall we did find a
definition for the word person
did we not Mr speaker gentleman
yes that's correct you Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
are in the role of an official
governmental position and would
be subject to the act as a
result of their official
position not individually is
that correct that's absolutely
that the we need to give the
Attorney General some ability to
look at some of our state
agencies and to make sure that
some of the things that have
someone within state government
to stand up and make those
corrections and forces
departments to to adhere to
certain principles and make sure
identical I now move that Senate
bill for twenty six as amended
think thrice amended or twice
amended do now pass we're open
businesses of Senate bill for
Would not close.
Representative Ferrary votes yes
what is a close the vote of.
Fifty one in the affirmative
thirteen in the negative Senate
point directly funded elections
server places at a Judiciary
Committee subject to percent of
seventeen of final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
of gentlelady to explain the
standards to be separate for
dental plans excuse me.
Dental insurance is a considered
standards transparency and
accountability for dental plans
that will allow patients to
better understand their coverage
and receive the care they need
lady of speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
The lady exactly how will this
help the patient population of
New Mexico.
with the prior authorization in
helping patients understand
basically their coverage it is
Simon to budget aspect which
network leasing would require
companies to give notice when
renting or selling their
provider networks and with rest
companies to provide see three
payment methods Mr speaker
speaker gentleman.
Thank you delays so is this this
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
bought by the dental association
and negotiated with the
insurance industry.
Process claims fours I mean it's
not about providing better in
should have better dental care
it's about.
arguably be better Care because
the it gives more input for the
patient to
have access.
Through their through their
Is Tom Scriven from the
speaker I do now ask the S. B.
seventeen a pass.
We're a little passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee supposed to
resemble seventeen the vote is
now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes we're we're the vote is now
closed voted six to three in the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate Bill Senate judiciary
committee's observer Senator
that election is replacing
Senate tax business and
transportation committee subject
to present a bill to seventy
three asked was amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution ability to explain
mental health and substance use
disorder budget at the same
level of benefits as for medical
and surgical care and with that
bill two seventy three as twice
amended do now pass for a final
passage of Senate tax business
and transportation committee
subject to present a bill to
seventy three as far as amended
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
what is a close vote of fifty
two in the affirmative thirteen
in the negative Senate tax bases
and transportation committee
to that point.
When we get myself to the point
first.
The director of federal actions
refer place in Senate bill four
ninety one of final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
superintendent of insurance
manage the insurance tax premium
collection and distribution
programs distributions to the
law enforcement protection fund
range between sixteen million
casualty and title insurance
premium taxes.
The law enforcement protection
fund governing statutes do not
include health insurance premium
taxes in accordance with statute
that was a house bill one sixty
two bond twenty nineteen Mr
speaker and exclusion of the
health insurance premium taxes
protection fund twice based upon
revenue that improperly included
the health insurance premium
taxes and distribution increase
coupled with a revenue decrease
has caused a current and
projected shortfall to fund.
and returning revenue to
previously anticipated levels
that can support legislatively
approved increase distributions
from house bill one sixty two as
a result
Thank you Mr speaker after all
of that I now move that Senate
bill four ninety one do now
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill four ninety one the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call that member
without a recordable
Representative Ferrary.
Senate bill for anyone has duly
passed as house.
The gentle person from
Bernalillo and someone ready and
substitution the gentlelady to
explain the bill is Senate bill
of one eighty one modifies
requirements that states
emergency number nine one one
requirement if health care
providers are providing.
Health care in a facility in
which they can observe the
patient for two hours and be
Travis it he noted
Representative Townsend thank
you Mr speaker of the gentle
lady of.
Yes I gladly yield to the
gentleman from Clovis Eddie and
forterra.
Is the reason for the exemption.
One backed by law enforcement.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that the nine one
one be activated correct.
Mr speaker gentleman currently
any time nor come is of provided
And delay that was my point.
If.
it would it be normal to call
law enforcement to help.
Of in that investigation.
Thank you Mr speaker at thank
administering the services and
we feel that it is unnecessary
for them to be required if they
need further assistance they can
call he believes he must the R.
she must administered are con
they may or may not have any.
This bill is for health care
providers.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
who would two of.
Thank you
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle person there is a
definition in the bill of health
care providers.
There's there's a further
definition there.
I'm not sure what the question
is Mr speaker and gentle person.
as I peruse this is we're going
to the trouble quickly it would
have just
A colleague of mine is on the
board and has experience and so
I'm a look to him and his
answers so thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady there's a debate the
lady so I heard this bill in in
committee and the reason that I
had questions about it is
because.
A lot of times when somebody
and hi I feel like that.
Nine one one should be
dispatched along with police in
especially in the nine one one.
When you show up in an ambulance
a lot of times you titrate the
nor can to where they can breeze
ten they're very violent.
Yes thank you Mr speaker
I agree.
of an overdose thank you Mr
speaker and thank you
the gentle friend from a terror
this does not inhibit medical
are ministering nor can in a
medical facility and they're
going to be observing the
patient for the next two hours
there are a lot of different
reasons why an individual would
lady however you know safety is
paramount for our nurses and
those were just a nine one one
phone call away to come and make
we of the US Senate bill one
eighty one do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate bill one
eighty one the vote is now open.
Does not close.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
The vote is local level to forty
six in the affirmative twenty in
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we got out of order
of Business messages.
House executive message number
nine dear speaker Martinez some
members of the house I have the
state signed House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to sixty eight as amended
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in and goes copy of Senate bill
ninety four as amended has been
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in gross copies of Senate bill
three thirty five Senate bill
three fifty one have been read
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate bill
three ninety seven as amended
has been dreadful and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended with
emergency clause has been read
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in engrossed copies of Senate
bill eighty three Senate bill
two twenty four have been read
in full and signed by the
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in an goes copy of Senate bill
two twenty three as amended has
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session requests the
failed to concur and house
amendments to Senate bill two
fifty as amended and request
that the house received from
their amendments respectfully
submitted sherry data on Senate
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended Senate
bill two ten as amended with
emergency clause Senate finance
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill four fifty two as
amended and requests the
the house of the Senate as
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute substitute
for Senate bill five zero three
and requests the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
failed to concur in house
amendments to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixteen nine as amended and
requests that the house receive
from their amendments
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed house
joint resolution I house joint
resolution six and returned same
here with respectfully submitted
sherry data on Senate chief
committee substitute for house
bill one forty one House Bill
three sixty six House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
passed house bill two forty as
amended by the house House Bill
three sixty as amended by the
house and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine as amended by the
house House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill three
sixty four returned same here
with respectfully submitted
nine as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate
and requests the concurrence of
the house and Senate amendments
Representative sure do them on
amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence of the
house to the Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Sherrie
dean on Senate chief clerk this
is a yes.
Message from the Senate Mr
Senate in requests the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted sherry data on Senate
chief clerk Mr to be entered.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker move we go to that
are the business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee was been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty eight has had it under
Mr speaker move adoption we're
international federal committed
put in Senate Judiciary
Committee supposed to present
for twenty eight all those in
favor of this and I.
Was me.
The eyes of the committee board
of.
Years could hear problems Mr
speaker you're rolling in a
grossing Committee was been
house bill one eighty two house
bill one eighty six as amended
house bill two sixteen as
amended house bill three eighty
them under consideration reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Eleanor Chavez chair.
Mr speaker move to adopt.
House willfully two as amended
waves certificate of correction
that's a new one when
certificate of correction house
bill one eighty house bill one
eighty two thousand one eighty
thirty three all those in favor
say if I was in a.
Was opposing the eyes of a
committee boarded up to.
house bill one eighty six as
amended House Bill to sixteen as
amended house with three eighty
nine as amended how's Education
Committee subs for House before
you one and house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bill five thirty three
The lady from earlier some how
quick review.
Mr speaker I now go to.
The gentleman bothering you Mr
speaker Dillamond on this this
Senate bill four oh two
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to public finance
amending the venture capital
finance authority employees
providing an exception to the
inspection of public records act
making appropriation Senate bill
four oh two.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
technology act authorizing the
lease or sale of broadband
broadband infrastructure and the
provision of cyber security
information technology and
telecommunication network
the broadband access and
expansion act requiring
reporting by some internet
service providers establishing
conditions for lease of the
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty two have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
refer to the House
appropriations and finance
committee.
Gentleman from Dona Ana.
PM in room three zero seven
members sticking out the
gentleman the other gentleman
from the Representative Lara.
Mr speaker I move the order
and of the staff so please help
yourself and take a short recess
for appropriations to do a
little bit of work in a couple
of bills that are coming from
the Senate and then we'll
course you can bring your dinner
into the chamber and enjoy here
so with that gentleman from
Libya.
I move the house and the
resistance of its over the.
On the call with the chair.
Senator is co chair.
