Polls closed. We have a quorum.
Leading from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business messages.
It is ordered clerk to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 175 as
amended. Senate Bill 176 as
amended Senate Bill 201.
And requests. The concurrence of
the House respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 15 as amended
without emergency clause.
Senate Bill 239 and request the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted, Sherry
D. Luhan, said chief clerk
Gentle lady from Burnley. Mr
Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation Objection.
It is so ordered.
Right members. We can take up a
little bit third reading
tonight.
And hopefully
That's still night.
Unless you want to.
The evening is young gentleman
from Otero Kidding?
Don't get any ideas.
From earlier presented.
Thompson. Are you ready on item
number six on the third reading
calendar. Mr. Speaker, Will you
give me to that point that the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
98 on final passage has been
taken. It is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the generator to
explain the bill. Mr Speaker
House Bill 98 amends the
accounts for Persons with
Disabilities Act able
Expanding the eligibility for
achieving a better life
Experience accounts for persons
with disabilities in creating an
exemption to the accounts from
Medicaid recovery. The bill also
increases the defined age for an
eligible disabled person from 26
to 46, and that change goes into
effect on January 1st 26 and the
age has been raised to catch
more veterans to be able to use
these accounts.
And then Section two of the bill
moves to repeal section 6-8 a
all that, um and replace it with
the new section to limit
Medicaid payback, thereby
denying estate recovery from
these accounts. This specific
change in 90 in HB 98 would
become effective on July 1st
2024.
There is a bit gentlemen from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero
represented Townsend. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Uh, General Lady,
will you yield
Mr Speaker. I yield
General lady. I have not heard
this bill. But tell me
I know you introduced a bit.
Tell me exactly what you're
trying to do and how it works,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
able accounts were, um they were
they were made doable by federal
law and our state treasurer's
office took on the
responsibility of doing that,
and they are accounts where
people with disabilities can
save money for things like maybe
buying a house or getting more
education right now, if you get
over $2000 in your account, you
Lose some benefits, so this is a
way for folks to save for.
Disability related. Maybe maybe
a car that has a hand controls
or something like that. So this
is a way for people to be able
to save money for those specific
things and and that that is
already in place. The federal
law has changed to move it from
26 to 46. As I said, to get more
veterans to be able to have
these accounts and then, um
The state has not been going
after these accounts for funeral
expenses and and repayment to
Medicaid. So there is no there
will be. No, um
Impact to the General fund
because the state hasn't been
doing it, but we're putting it
into law so that that you know
if there's a surviving spouse or
someone else who may be a saving
for the house that those funds
can't be swept by the state.
Thank you for that. Mr Speaker
in general Lady. Is there a list
of disabilities that qualify?
Um
A person to participate. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, just one
second.
Oh, and my expert is John.
Craig Camp.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
essentially a disability that
occurs and right now before the
age of 26 frequently, it's
people who qualify for Excuse
me, Social Security and DD
waiver in those kind of things,
but it will go up to age 46.
And what you're doing is
increasing the eligibility from
26 to 46 correct. Correct, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen in that's
that's federal law now, so we're
just getting up getting caught
up with federal law.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady for the debate.
The gentleman from Montero
representative block. Thank you,
Mr Speaker With the kind general
lady from Berna. Leo, please
Yield. Mr Speaker. I yield
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker
in general lady. I only have a
few questions here.
Mainly, I just kind of want to
understand the change of the
provisions regarding the
beneficiary.
Of this potential plan. Mr.
Speaker generally could you tell
me if there's any changes to
that person, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker in general, I'm not
exactly sure what you're asking.
But if you're asking if more
people will be eligible, there
will be the people who develop a
disability between the ages of
26 and 46.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally that that does help
me. I just wanted to know who
would now be covered. And so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I believe
you said 46 is the is that the
maximum age or can they be?
Ah, right now currently be up to
46. Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Right
now it's that the disability has
to occur before age 26, and this
will raise that to the
disability has to occur before
age 46.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, and then I believe
you spoke about the federal law.
That changed was that recent was
that in the last few years? How
How long ago? Was that to be in
compliance? Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that the the law passed the
federal a few years ago, but it
doesn't go into effect until
2026.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady and then with this
legislation go into effect in
2026, or would it just be upon
90 days after the session,
etcetera, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
will follow the federal law
where the age of 46 will cut
will become law in 2026, But the
keeping a Medicaid from, um
Sweeping those funds will start
July 1st.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, that would be of this
year. Is that correct?
Gentlemen? Yes. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. General, eating my
one question regarding that was
all those matching funds.
Be applied to us since I know
this kicks in in 2026. Well, the
state need to backfill that
From from July of this year to
2026, or
Who's going to cover
The benefits Mr Speaker, General
Lady Yester Speaker and
gentlemen, there really aren't
benefits with this. It's just
that you can save money. So the
state as I said before the state
hasn't been collecting the money
after a person dies, so that
won't change. We just want to
put it into law that that's
that's how they will continue to
operate.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady for the
answers, and that helps me
really figure out what the bill
is about. I really appreciate
it. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Did
you lady from
Mm Luna, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr Speaker will the
generator yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
General lady with the lovely
roses.
Thank you. And I love your
flowers to thank you.
Ah, Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
remember discussing this in
committee and and supporting it
as well. But I just I see one
thing here in the
In the F I r or in the analysis
that just I don't remember
talking about, it said these
changes were requested by the
New Mexico Treasury.
Um can you tell me more about
that Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
That's where the program is is
hosted. Essentially the when
this became federal law some
years ago, it was tough to find
an agency that wanted to run it,
essentially in the state
treasurer's office stepped up
and said, Well, we will take
care of this. So that's why
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. So are you're
just saying that they saw they
saw the need to increase the
age.
No, Mr Speaker. That was the
original program. The original
able program. It had been passed
as a federal law that this was
able to be done. But for the
first while we didn't have our
own state program, I think we we
hooked up with Indiana or
someone in allowed them for a
little while to kind of run our
programs because we didn't have
a host here in New Mexico and
then the state treasurer's
office stepped up and said they
would they would be
Oversee the program.
Thank you very much gentility.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There's
no further bit later Close.
Mr Speaker. I move that house
Bill 98 do now pass passage of
house Bill 98. The vote is now
open.
What? What clothes?
Was enclosed by ward of 63 and
the Affirmative zero in the
negative house. Bill 98 has duly
passed this house.
Gentlemen from River River
Sandoval. San Juan represented
length they are you ready on
item 20, would you please commit
to that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
253, as amended on final passage
has been taken. It is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle person
to explain the bill. Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Hospital to 53
creates a concept to make.
The state's capital T program
much more sustainable. Any
question
Is it weird? Is it bad?
I thought we fixed it.
Yeah, it's it's better.
Hold on. Let's wait for the
board.
All right. We've got the board.
You've got the mike. Why don't
we try this again? Game on.
You want me to go to the whole
thing again?
Mr Speaker, would you please get
me to that point?
I just did. We're back on. It's
late. It's late Hospital 253.
Creates a concept to make the
state's capital outlay program
much more sustainable. And with
that I would stand for any
questions. Gentlemen, close move
the House Bill 253 do not pass.
We are on final passage of house
Bill 253 as amended. The vote is
now open.
What? What? What about clothes?
What is not closed by word of 63
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house, Bill 253 as
amended as duly passed this
house.
Gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Sandoval, Santa Fe and Towels.
Are you ready on item 15.
Mr Speaker. Will you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that election necessary
for placing House B 148 with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the generator
to explain the bill 148 is the
annual water project funded
projects authorization bill.
This bill authorizes in New
Mexico Finance Authority to make
grants and loans for water
projects from the Water Project
fund.
There is debate generated from
Chavez representative as L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Well, the lady general lady from
Rio re Percent of all in Santa
Fe Yield. Please. I yelled to
the kind lady from Chavez.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
General lady.
There was 55 water projects
contained in this particular
bill.
And
I would like to review over how
a person does go to apply for
these.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you very much. Um, what they do
is a local water. Uh, local
community, and it could be a
mutual domestic water system or
a city or a county or, um,
different entities, um, could go
to the water trust board.
And they apply in
August of each year, and then
they have a whole series of
steps. We have a water trust
board that that kind of goes
over every single application,
they vet them carefully. They
have seven different
organizations or or when column
working agencies that look over
these projects and they vet them
and they vet them in the order
of importance, and then they
bring it back to us. Uh and then
we ratify what they recommend,
And that's pretty much how it
works.
Mr Speaker, General Lady
appreciate that answer there
because I know that there's lots
of entities that are in great
need for this. Can you tell me
what the makeup of the water
trust board is?
It's a 16, Mr Speaker and Kind
Lady. It's a 16 member board.
And it's made up of
Members from
Mm F AM Assuming and is the
state engineer involved in this?
I Yes, he is the chair of the of
the water transport. Thank you
very much. We have different
state agencies
and water users are on that
board. So it runs across the
state. We have, really, um keep
people who understand water
issues at a very deep level that
served on that board matter. Um,
Mr Speaker and kind Lady.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much
for that response, uh in and I
think this is a very good
program. What we've got going
here. It's made up of. Well,
they can apply for either a
grant or alone and for some of
these small water district, it
is very difficult for them to be
able to go forward without the
help from this particular bill
that you're carrying right here.
And Mr Speaker, general Lady of
if they don't if they are not
successful that first year of
application, they can come to N
m f A or to the water transport
and say, I need help getting all
my paper working. We don't
understand this is there going
to be help available for them?
Um, Mr Speaker and kind Lady.
Yes, there will be helped. They
always have help. They can go to
the water chessboard, and they
have people who will just sit
down with them explain how the
process works helps them we have
a companion Bill House Bill 211,
which we'll hear tomorrow which
will help them even more. So, So
we have kind of put a full court
press on water.
In this state with a lot of
legislation and has gone through
the agriculture Um, a Seki and
Water Resources Committee and
also, health appropriations has
also given 100 million extra
this year, and that is in house
Bill two that will expand the
number of small communities that
we can help.
Mr Speaker. That was going to be
my next question. There is their
presidents given to the smaller
entities that are making
application in regards to the
more uh
Larger municipalities that maybe
making request Mr Speaker and
Kind lady, what we did this year
or we, the royal we what the
enemy faded this year is they
make they make they made a huge
list? Okay, And and with the the
150 million that they normally
had
That would have reached out to
about half of that list with the
extra 100 million that we have
in the House house built to
appropriations that is really
going to pick up a lot of small
community, small cities, small
rural counties and and people
who they just wouldn't have made
the top of the list before, kind
Lady.
Okay. I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. I
thought you were going to read
something else to me. Mr.
Speaker. Kind lady. I can I can
give you the priorities. Urgent
to meet the needs of the
Interstate Stream Commission
Accepted regional water plan.
There's 5% local contribution
was 15% readiness is 10%
regionalization is 10% health
and safety is 25% planning and
design is 10% and other
It's 25%. So that's how they
ranked each of those water
projects.
And Mr Speaker. I appreciate
that. Mr Speaker and General
Lady, can you tell me where the
extra $100 million came from Mr
Speaker and kind lady that came
from the House House, house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. We took it to them.
We asked them to really consider
this. It was work that was done
jointly by
Myself and a lot of members in
this house and the members of
the Appropriations Committee and
and I'm F A M, the state
engineer's office and we all
work together for the fat past
six months because
What we know is that a lot of
federal money is coming in, and
this is the time Now, This is
the time now to get these water
projects started because this
federal money is coming in and
it will. It's it's really going
to help the state.
Catch up with all the work that
needs to be done in water.
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. What? You're telling me
this extra $100 million that
came in is federal funds that
came into the state to help with
these projects, Mr Speaker and
kind Lady, The 100 Million extra
that we got came from our own
state. We just appropriated 100
million more. And that's what
HFC did this year, and we're
very grateful for that. And
And we worked really hard and
that was hard for them to do,
But they decided this was one of
the best things they could do
for the state. So, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady when I'm trying to
find out the extra $100 million
came from House Appropriations
Finance Committee, But where did
that money come from? Was it
taken from some other fund? Or
where did this I mean? It just
didn't appear, so I'm kind of
Pushing to find out where the
extra $100 million came from. Mr
Speaker. Kind lady was the
General fund and so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm assuming that
that money in the General fund
came from the industry that does
support over 50% of the budget
of the state of New Mexico, and
that is the oil and gas
industry. Mr Speaker, So not
only does that industry provide
great jobs.
Helps our communities burns the
state budget, but it's also
ensures that are smaller and
larger. Municipalities do get
funding to help with clean
water, which is at most
importance to the oil and gas
industry. And I think it's about
time that this whole body
recognizes the benefits that do
come from the oil and gas
industry.
And fought all they are able to
do because it did not only fend
said it offends our schools that
funds our emergency personnel
are roads. The list goes on and
on and on.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady.
There.
Work that they do in the
southeastern part of the state
in the northwestern part of the
state.
We're flushed this year. We're
more than flushing. Now we do
have the extra money that we can
get All these projects taken
care of.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
Whenever I hear people say we
want to do away with that
industry for this, the state of
New Mexico going to do whenever
they are gone.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
appreciate the answers she gave
me. I think what this bill does
is excellent because it is
helping our communities be able
to get that clean drinking water
to be able to service their
mutual domestics. Bliss goes on
and on on what these projects
are able to do, but we do have
to give credit. Gentlemen from
its He's distracted me generate
from Chavez. Put him in check,
please.
Mr Speaker. I think it's time
that we give credit where credit
is due.
And it is to the industry that
is funding or state's budget.
Thank you, the oil and gas
people.
That's all Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. There's
further debate The gentleman
from Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady Does the General lady from
real Reba Sandoval Santa Fe and
tells yield
Uh, Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and
steroids. Think. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentle lady.
I'm really not sick, Mr Speaker
as yelling at the referees last
night at the basketball game,
lost my voice.
Uh, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
So when somebody applies for one
of these, uh
Very important grants that
you're talking about. Is there a
cap on the grant?
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman,
It's lived. It's limited to 15%
of the available money each
year.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. So, um, whenever they get
ready to
Go to you for or go to the is it
the New Mexico Finance Authority
to get the loan? Um do they have
to have any kind of matching
funds or anything like that, or
can they just go in there and
get the loan?
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman.
It's really on a sliding scale,
depending on the size of the
project. They're going after
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. And so if if a
community went to the New Mexico
Finance Authority, and they were
able to secure a loan
Could they do it again the
following year and the following
year or how many times are they
able to apply until they are
able to make their water system
whole? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker
and kind, gentlemen, Yes, they
can go again. But they have to
apply again. I mean, they, you
know, And sometimes they do it
in phases to the they'll, Uh
some of these projects are huge.
There are hundreds of millions
of dollars. That's what you need
to know.
And and so they sometimes they
do it in phases, But every year
they have to go back. And if
they're starting a new phase,
they have to show that they have
completed that and then they go
on to the next step. Thank you,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I've
got a I've got a small community
and in my district that I know
would be able to utilize this.
And I appreciate you bringing
the legislation forward. Thank
you.
There's 40 debate. The gentleman
from Catherine Grant me, they'll
go, Representative Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
general lady from Riva.
In the world, Santa Fe and Taos.
Please healed.
Mr Speaker. I certainly you
know, to the kind gentleman
From
Um
Help me capturing granted me
them. Thank you.
I just found out that when the
speaker speaking and I try to
speak, his speaker has his mic
overrides my mike.
And I also apparently I have not
confirmed this, but I have the
ability to meet your microphones
out there. I still haven't found
the button. I still haven't
found it. But the gentleman from
Otero can come in and tell me
where to find it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm glad
we're having a good time
tonight. Real quick question. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Colonials funding. Sometimes
there's matching funds that are
needed. Can this be used to
leverage that through Grant?
Um, Mr Speaker and Kind
gentleman at the colonias. Fun
is a separate fund from the
water chessboard. You have the
water Chessboard fund, and then
you have the Colonials fund and
then you have the tribal
Uh, tribal infrastructure funds,
So there are three separate
fund. I just didn't know Mr
Speaker, General Lady, if they
could use it to, you know,
sometimes that that I think it's
a 10% match. If they can use a
grant, they're not supposed to.
I just wanted to I C Marquita
going down. That's the answer. I
was looking for Mr Speaker.
Generally, the second thing is,
are any of these 55 projects
that I read?
That I read throughout the state
or any of them sat south of that
100 mile mark from the border.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Speaker in Kind gentleman.
Actually there. Several, um,
they're Sunland Park, the lower
Rio Grande public works. Um
Water put a public waterworks
Public Waterworks authority.
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman.
There are many and I can share
the list with you after the
after this debate.
Minister speaker generally,
that's all I wanted to hear.
It's great. Thank you very much.
Thank you for bringing this
legislation for debate. Did you
learn from McKinlay and Juan
Valencia representative Harry
Garcia?
Thank you, Mr Speaker with
General Lady from rural River
from the 1003 Shield Speaker, I
I certainly yield to the kind
gentleman.
Thank you. Um, General Lady and
Mr Speaker. I haven't. I just
have one question How much
smaller associations that have
bad artists or
Or compliance issues. How does
how does that work for them?
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman.
This is subject to the executive
orders so they have to have
their audits in in in in
alignment.
Thank you for that General lady
And the problem that you know
you very well aware of that A
lot of these small associations
are out of compliance, and they
have bad audits, You know, And
as we go along, Mr Speaker in
general Lady
They're having a bigger problem
because they just can't come
into compliance because they're
all volunteer water associations
and
They don't get paid, and they
don't have the
The backing to do all these jobs
and work in the United concerns
me because I just put them out
of the ballpark, correct.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
you are correct. Just so you
know, a lot of the cogs now are
providing, and also, the state
auditor's office is also set up
a system where they can go out
and help small. Um small
governments like our mutual
domestic water associations,
They will help them with their
audits. And I totally get it. So
these are volunteer
organizations. A lot of these
offices are in the back bedroom
of a single wide. I get it and
they change.
Changed constantly, so it's
It's a problem but to help them
we have set up a series of
mechanisms through the cogs or
through the state auditor's
office that actually that
legislation is going through to
really help them with
compliance.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I spoke briefly with state
auditor about a week ago, and he
said he was willing to help some
of these people, you know, and
it is a big issue because a lot
of them in the stadium in Mexico
are struggling.
You know, and these funds are
good, but a lot of people are
going to be left out just simply
because there are no complaints
for their audits about
Mr Speaker and representative.
We're doing everything we can to
help these small communities.
The small community, the small
governments, I should say, and
mutual Domestic Water
association is a form of
government. So we're doing
everything we can to set up
systems throughout the state to
help small rural
Governments. That's really what
all the legislation that I've
worked on this year is is bent
in that direction is set in that
direction.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, you know I respect what
you're doing.
But, you know, we need to do
some to help these smaller
communities getting compliance
and and their audits in order,
because if not, you know, these
funds are going to go somewhere
else and they're not going to
benefit from it. And Mr Speaker
and kind gentlemen, what You
need to tell these
organizations. Here's what I
tell my organization. So first
thing you need to do is go get a
meeting with the mm fa and they
As soon as they call they assign
somebody to this organization
and if they start with the
audit, then they started helping
them with that, and then you
know, so so you have to take all
the things that they need to be
in compliance with and then you
cross that off the list and then
you go to the next one and the
next one. And the next one.
These are these aren't simple
applications, but we have people
set up now to help them and we
have
Grant programs that help them so
that they don't have to pay for
everything. It's not alone
program, So we've done a lot of
work kind Gentleman to really
help the very people I serve in
the people you serve.
Mr Speaker generally, thank you
very much for that. That's the
only question I had and what
more of a concern and question
But we really need to address
it. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Debate generated close Mr
Speaker. I now move that house
Bill 148 as amended. Do now
pass.
We are final passage of House
Bill 148 with an emergency
class.
What's about to close.
What is that closed by the board
of 64 in the affirmative zero in
the negative house Bill 148 with
an emergency clause has to be
passed his house, Your lady from
Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Memorial 56.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Memorial 56 do pass respectfully
submitted the
Three in White Diego's chair, Mr
Speaker, Move a committee
report.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house. I'm sorry. We're in
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on House member
of 56. But if your committee
report and house comers and
economic development substitute
for
Has more of $56 in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
I was supposed to say.
The Ice Habit report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 316 has had it under
consideration reports with
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 316 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 2316 do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move
adoption. We are on an option of
it on favorable committee Report
and House Bill 316, but a
favorable committee report and
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 316.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Supposing a yes report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred. Senate Judiciary
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill five as amended has had it
under consideration reports,
Same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker. Move Adoption. We are
on adoption of a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
presentable five.
As amended All those in favor
say, Aye.
I suppose name?
The I Sabot Committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 70,
as amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption adoption of a Federal
committee report on Senate
You're just you. Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville 70 as amended all
those in favor say if I was
saying I
All supposed to say.
The eyes have it coming,
reported opted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Joint resolution. 16 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate Joint
Resolution 16. All those in
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Joint resolution. 16 has
had it under consideration.
Reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate Joint
Resolution 16. All those
embarrassing if I was in, I
suppose, in a
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Generally from early Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation is ordered
generated from Burnley. Your
percent of Dixon. Are you ready
on item 19 and the third reading
calendar.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will you
get me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing house Bill
232, as amended on final passage
has been taken. It is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. This bill establishes a
new infrastructure division
within DFA and incorporate some
existing functions of the local
government division into the new
division.
I'll stand for questions debate,
Did you lady clothes? Thank you,
As amended. Do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
What is not closed by what if 65
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house, Bill 232, as
amended, has duly passed its
house.
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is
ordered.
Announcements.
Lady from Valencia represented
Mirabel Moya.
Mr Speaker. I just wanted to let
the body know that my husband
and my daughter actually made it
up here and they're sitting in
the gallery watching. Finally,
right, Where are they please
recipe recognize?
Mirabelle. Moya's in the house.
Are they going to take us out to
dinner? No, because you guys
gave us dinner, right?
How do you need so they're
taking me to the bullring?
Alright, let's go.
Announcements.
Gentlelady from Benton Ali. Your
percent of Garrett. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. I want to thank
whoever provided the Chinese
food. Tomorrow is the Lunar New
Year. The year of the Dragon. So
if you got off to a poor start,
you can start again tomorrow
morning. Thank you. Alright, big
props to the to the leadership
Majority leader's office in the
Speaker's office for dinner.
Thank you guys.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Los Alamos towels Real river
representing to gender. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your House
Judiciary Committee will meet
tomorrow at 9 A.m..
In room 309.
It'll be fun. It's going to be
fun.
Jesus Lansky is going to make
sure it's not hot anymore. She's
gonna fix the thermostat.
Members take note generally from
Ben Ali or representative
Corolla. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I just also want to thank you
for dinner, Mr Speaker. And do
you want our leader and our Web?
It was nice. Thank you so much.
Thank you and props to the whip,
Majority and minority Whip who
bought dinner for our cleaning
crew. Thank you guys. Very nice
of you. Thank you. Any other
announcements that generated
from Ben Ali or preserved?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also
want to thank the leadership
office for the dinner tonight.
Uh, Lunar New Year's tradition
within my family.
As I am half Taiwanese, and, uh,
I wanted to inform the members
of the body that if they did not
eat, uh, noodles or any other
long
Stringy kind of beans that they
should do so immediately because
that guarantees your long life.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, and it is tradition
to do so before the Lunar New
Year comes into play tomorrow
when we have our new year so by
your spaghetti, thank you.
The German from Dona Ana
Raymundo will go get his
spaghetti for everybody tonight.
Any other announcement? Alright
members have an announcement in
consultation with the chairman
of the Appropriations Committee
and minority leader.
We have a bill Senate bill that
was referred single referral to
House appropriations. That would
be Senate Bill 129.
It does not contain an
appropriation, but it does have
some statutory changes that
should be reviewed by Judiciary
Committee. So I am going to
discharge the Appropriations
Committee referral.
And instead send that bill to
the House Judiciary Committee if
there's no objection, it is so
ordered one more bill to the
chairwoman committee.
Any other announcements. Okay,
One last announcement that I'll
make is starting tomorrow. We're
going to eat 32nd book clock.
So don't go too far.
Because you will have to run on
the floor.
And if you trip and fall
We will all be in trouble.
So
32nd vote clock starting
tomorrow.
Anything else mints before.
Really, gentlemen from civil
McKinley. Is that what it didn't
second debate, Mr Speaker?
In probably not
Good try, though.
See no objection to disorder.
All right, um
Alright. Get a lady from early.
Oh,
Mr Speaker, Speaker of the house
down in recess until 1030
tomorrow morning Saturday.
Right members have a good night
