Well call is closed. We have a
quorum lady from Eddy and Lea.
Please lead us in today's
implication.
Good morning, Mr Speaker and
members of the house. Please
join me in prayer.
Dear Father God.
Just a simple prayer this
morning, father that you would
give us all wisdom your wisdom,
father.
To do what's right in your sight
into
Just do what's good for the
people of the state of New
Mexico and for those Lord who
are ill.
We are subdued, restore them to
complete health.
For those who are grieving the
loss of a loved one. We ask you
to be their comfort.
We all ask for protection over
our families while we're here in
Santa Fe.
Ask you to provide for them.
And then finally, Lord, we just
ask for your guidance again that
we would do. It's right in your
sight.
And we just ask you to bless us
all as we finish out this
session.
And again. Thank you, Lord for
all that you do for us out of
your great love for us in Jesus'
name, we pray. Amen.
Deleted from Valencia presented
medieval Moya with the Pledge of
Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
That gentlemen from Dona Ana
For all the freshmen in the
room. You better have that
saluted in New Mexico flag
Memorize. You've got seven days.
Generated from Britain. Leo, Mr
Speaker movie go to that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Objection ordered. Good morning.
Good afternoon members.
Gentlemen, from Burnley, you're
presented dela Cruz with an
announcement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have
some some wonderful guests with
us this morning, Mr. Speaker,
Can we have the clerk first Read
the the certificate.
Clerk to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
Miguelito Romero.
Whereas Miguelito Romero is a
renowned Albuquerque, mariachi
singer and accordionist and
whereas immediately toe
discovered his passion for music
around Quetta.
The traditional folk music of
Mexico at the age of six. And
whereas as a child, Miguelito
became a household name with his
performances on the weekly
television variety program, the
Val Della Osho, which was
produced and aired by K. O B. T
V in Albuquerque, and whereas
Miguelito continues to perform
as part of mariachi norteno,
which is entertained audiences
in Albuquerque and throughout
New Mexico and the United States
since 1990
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be given to
Miguelito Romero for his many
years of entertaining audiences
in Albuquerque and throughout
New Mexico, signed and sealed at
the capital in the city of Santa
Fe.
Mr Speaker. It's it's It's my
pleasure this morning to
recognize my friend, my
neighbor, Miguelito Romero. You
know, Mr Speaker when we were
kids, there was a very popular
TV show called Valle del Lago
show. And as you can imagine, we
all watched it and there was our
neighbor.
On that television, playing the
guitar and singing and we were
just so proud of him and and he
was just He was a little kid.
He's a couple of years younger
than I am. And so he is an icon
in the South Valley, and he is a
well known
Musician through our all of New
Mexico. And so it's my pleasure
to honor him. I'm so happy his
family's here, Mr. Speaker, can
I introduce them there on the
rostrum? Please go ahead.
Have Miguel Romero Jr view would
stand, please.
We have Kristen Romero.
And I saved the best for last.
We have Mrs Romero.
Welcome We, Mr Speaker. Uh, if
we got an indulgence a minute
and have a burrito play a song
for us. Looks like he's all set
up with a bajo sexto and a
microphone. So, uh, Romero
Thank you. Very, thank you very
much, Mr Speaker.
Cruz. Thank you very much for
Given me the honor to stand in
point of so many distinguished
people.
I know humble servant like me. I
just I'm just not being able to
be here with you guys today.
And most of all, I want to talk
to you. Thank my family.
They are the backbone of all of
my accomplishments in my
achievements.
But above all other things and
things above all.
I thank God Holy God that he has
given me the opportunity to be
here in your presence.
I made a
In 2001. That was if you all
know in 2001.
There was an attacker.
And the United States of
America.
And as I was sitting down, I
remember I'll never forget.
I was sitting in the in the
living room, seeing the news of
what was going on.
And that's what was going on. I
started writing some lyrics
down.
And this song is called America.
And it was. It was also called
in English. The theme of that
whole deal with America under
attack.
And this is the reason why I
named it as so.
Taco
watching.
One to
Now the inside
losses. Rhodes
CEO.
Some of mental
Escobar. This came
Hermosa stories melas.
Symbol Strip words
saying when
I think when
To me.
On give up.
Daisy.
Let's get
Tambien.
Get
lost.
She has
Gracia.
Oh, my goodness. Um wow.
Miguelito, another round of
applause. That was beautiful.
23 years later. Still hits home,
Gentlemen from Virgilio, Mr
Speaker. My assistant reminded
me that I should always remember
to put on my glasses.
Because I am half blind. Thank
you, Betty.
I forgot. Michelle minnows.
Michelle, I apologize. Welcome.
Thank you to the Romero family.
Thank you for joining us. And
what a what A jewel. What a
treasure from the South Valley
in Albuquerque. Thank you for
joining us again.
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from San Miguel, and
all those beautiful counties
speaker. I also wanna honor Mr
Miguelito him over 30 years ago,
playing gigs in bars when I was
a teenager.
Ah, in Albuquerque.
He actually recorded with the
blue ventures. My family is
banned. He's played the
accordion and some of our
recordings so
He's truly a legend of New
Mexico music and his sons
extremely talented as well. So I
just wanna I'm very happy to see
them here and I want to thank
Mr de La Cruz for honoring him.
He's definitely an amazing Ah,
musician and the
Nice to see you haven't seen him
in a while. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Gentlemen from Curry debacle,
Guadalupe Roosevelt and San
Miguel Representatives, Samora
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, representative the La Cruz.
Thank you big a little.
Thank you very much.
If you have not recorded that
song.
It needs to be recorded.
It speaks to so much.
To what happened in our country
and 911.
And what we went through as a
country.
And it's great for our Hispanic
culture here in New Mexico.
That's what comes out of our
culture. Here in New Mexico is
these beautiful songs in the
history?
And everything we go through and
thank you for that. It was so
beautiful.
It almost brought tears to my
eyes. I just I just had to hold
back on that part of it. But
that was beautiful. Thank you
very much. Thank you represented
with the La Cruz.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and Otero
represented Vincent. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Um, I'm gonna have
the floor for just a little bit
so
You remember? I was telling you,
Did you enjoy your lunch today?
All right.
I just wanted to give a shout
out to, um Melanie guitars and
the
Uh, AG and four h.
She's an extension agent. Melody
gains family consumer science
agent and 48.
And Mike gains, which everybody
knows Mike gains has been around
forever. He's the welding
teacher, Mescalero schools and
he's he was the chief cook today
for your brisket that you had
and then the young folks from
Lincoln County 48.
Were that were serving is Casey
uterus?
Grady Gutierrez, Creon Scott
And Mason Greer. Give them a
hand.
And Mr Speaker behind every good
man is a way better woman.
I hope everybody understands
that.
And if you think that I was able
to pull all this off on my own,
I was not. It was my wife. That
helped me out. Rhonda and
today's her birthday.
Happy birthday, Rhonda.
Rhonda, You're in the gallery
where? There you are. Happy
birthday, and at some point we
can sing. Happy birthday. I've
gotta I've gotta request. I
don't know if I can make it
happen, but I was going to let
representative Embry seemed to
my wife.
But
He didn't perform the other day.
Very good. Not like the other
night when we were debating and
the gentleman that just saying
that song I was wondering if he
could sing a song to my wife in
Spanish for her birthday.
Well, I think I can make that
happen. Miguelito if you're
still in the room little there
has been a request to sing your
version of Happy birthday to
Miss Rhonda Vincent, who is the
wife of representative Vincent,
who is in the gallery. Uh And if
you don't mind, that would be
great if you did.
Even better. Yeah, the two of
you go for it. That's mine,
Unitas.
Leo.
Got it.
Lola.
The other Santo
Says he
s steady.
Santo.
Damn it!
Keep him here.
I've got to save represented,
Vincent, you are scoring major
points.
Making the rest of us look bad.
So please, please stop.
That's what I do. Mr Speaker.
That's what I do.
Thank you so much for for
indulging us in that and, uh,
Happy birthday, Rhonda. I love
you. So, um
The other thing Mr Speaker is I
wanted to introduce you to some
of my friends in the in the
front.
Everybody remembers former
representative Bob Wooley with
healing America's heroes.
And then
I know they remember you.
And then, uh, we've got
Mr Eddy Crane, Good friend of
mine. But but the star of the
show Mr Speaker is is Roxy. I
mean, foxy. Sorry, Foxy Roxy.
So foxy.
Received an award last night.
And, uh, she's the 2020 for
behavioral health.
John Henry Award recipient, Um
Foxy
Are unfailingly shows loyalty
standing by those in need
through challenges and providing
comfort in distress, becoming a
reliable support anchor for all
of our veterans and first
responders that suffer with
PSD PTSD, Mr Speaker, and, uh, I
just wanted everybody to be able
to see Roxy down there, and
she's kind of a local Lincoln
County hero now.
Welcome to the House, Foxy.
And also I would like to
introduce one of my one of my
favorite constituents from two
LaRosa Mr. Coy Circuit Queen.
New Mexico sharing We hunt.
And Shannon, we hunt has been
serving healing America's heroes
for the last year, and, um,
she's she's really doing a good
job, Mr Speaker, and we're
thankful to have you, um Sharon,
So thank you for being here on
the floor with us. Also, Mr
Speaker.
Um, I would like to move that
house Memorial 53 be removed
from the speaker's table and
made the next order of business
Objection is ordered that the
record effect that all action is
set for placing housing, Morial
53 and final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentlemen to
explain the memorial.
They were talking to me, Mr.
Speaker. Would you say that
again?
You're good. You can explain it
now. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. I have some folks
I'd like to introduce on the
rostrum.
And I'm going to have each one
of them stand and
Mr Speaker, You know when we're
up here for 30 days
It's um It's one of those things
where you start to get a little
bit homesick. And I saw my folks
come down from Lincoln County
and asked them if they could go
ahead and stay a week and they
declined said they had to get
back and tend to business and go
back to their respective
municipalities and towns and
And conduct business there so
First I would like to recognize,
um
Commissioner Mark Fisher.
I would also like to recognize
The mayor of read also Lynn
Crawford.
The village manager Ron Sina.
At least chief Lawrence Chavez.
Part department chief Joeckel
Sabarsky.
There was Councilman Darren
Hooker.
And one of the sweetest little
gals that I know she's also a
city Councilwoman Susan
Letterman.
Welcome to the house. And also
Mr Speaker, if you would, uh,
announced my folks in the
gallery that's up here from
Lincoln County. Certainly,
gentlemen we've got and please
rise When I call you up. We've
got the village of Ruidoso,
Michael Martinez, deputy
manager. Every Brophy, chairman
of the larger stacks.
Step, deputy chair of the
airport advisory board in his
wife, Allison, step
Deborah doubts from the Dozo
Valley Chamber of Commerce
Andrea Andrea jury reduce of the
Valley Chamber of Commerce
director of events.
Member services. Rachelle Lynch.
Ski Redo, Redo, Also Valley
Chamber of Commerce Board chair.
Lincoln County, Jeffrey
Honeycutt.
Road superintendent Brandy New
Bill Collections clerk.
Got to get to know Brandon New
Bill is the collections clerk
Tracy Crawford carry Chavez,
Tanya Hauser and others from
Lincoln County. Welcome to the
House of Representatives on
Lincoln date.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I've
always save the best for last.
So my other good friend that's a
city Councilman Joe E B.
Welcome to the House, Joe.
Mr Speaker, could I get the
clerk to read the memorial read?
As memorial 53 memorial
Declaring February 7th 2024
Lincoln County Day in the House
of Representatives.
Whereas Hollywood has made
millions of dollars based on
films set in the beauty,
adventure and drama of the
Historical American West. And
whereas the actual history of
Lincoln County, New Mexico
rivals and outshines the best
script Hollywood has ever
produced
And whereas being central to the
original territory occupied by
the Mescalero bands of the
Apache people and representing
the western edge of the Comanche
territory, the mountains and
canyons of Lincoln County stood
witness as Apaches and Comanches
and succeeding waves of Spanish,
Mexican and Anglo Americans.
American settlers competed often
violently for land and water.
And whereas the post Civil War
era saw a boom in the western
cattle industry, and by the mid
18 seventies to rival rings, had
formed a compete for land, water
and power within Lincoln County.
And whereas on February 18th
1878 the murder of one ring
leader, John Tunstall, by a
posse of deputized by Sheriff
William Brady and the subsequent
revenge killing of Sheriff Brady
on April, 1st 1878 began the
infamous Lincoln County War.
And whereas the Lincoln County
War was conducted by men with
colorful names such as Buckshot
Roberts
Dash. Wait. Big Jim, French and
Billy the kid.
And by the groups known as the
Seven Rivers, Warriors, the
Jessie Evans Gang and the
regulators.
And whereas many of the
individuals in the Lincoln
County war were known,
alternatively to have worn a
sheriff's badge or to have been
cattle rustlers and murderers at
various points in their careers.
And whereas during the captain
Gap fire in the spring of 1950,
a bear cub was rescued by
firefighters and became known as
Smokey Bear.
Lincoln County's most famous
native son.
And whereas Smokey Bear became a
national symbol for forest fire
prevention and the subject of
popular song, Smokey the Bear.
And whereas Smokey Bear lived at
the National Zoo in Washington,
D C for 26 years, was visited by
thousands of school Children and
received so much fan mail that
the United States Postal Service
gave smoky his own zip code.
And he is now buried at Smokey
Bear Historical Park in Capitan,
New Mexico.
And whereas Lincoln County
offers numerous opportunities
for hiking, backpacking and
skiing within dramatic mountain
landscapes, typified by Captain
Peak and Sierra Blanca Mountain
And whereas Ruidoso downs in
Lincoln County offers both
thoroughbred and quarter horse
racing, including the American
future early, the richest race
in American quarter horse
racing.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
Lincoln County be recognized as
having one of the most colorful
and intriguing histories in
America. Epitomizing the legend
of the Wild West and being a
beautiful and exciting place to
live and visit.
And be it further resolved that
February, 7th 2024 will be
declared Lincoln County Day in
the House of Representatives.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the Lincoln
County Board of Committee is
their debate on the memorial.
Gentlemen. Um, I believe that
there's a reader did not say
Smokey the bear, he said Smokey
bear every single time.
I appreciate that Mr Speaker as
well from Chavez, Mr Speaker.
Thank you very much. I don't
need
The gentleman.
Questionable to yield. Uh oh, it
is Smokey Bear. People do
pronounce the other word in
between it sometimes, but you're
correct. It is smoky beer.
Uh huh.
I would like I do have a
question for the sponsor of this
memorial.
How big was original Lincoln
County?
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. That's
a good question. I don't know.
Could you tell me
Would you like to phone a
friend?
Mr Speaker. I know exactly how
big it was it encompassed
Element. Gordo Lincoln Chavez.
Eddie Lee. I think the Baka
Roosevelt quake counties and I
think we ought to take it back
to the original Lincoln County
and we will succeed from the
rest of the state and then we
can make our own laws that are
beneficial for everybody.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much
promotion.
Motion is out of order. I'm not
gonna recognize it.
Debate. Alright, gentlemen to
close Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I move that house Memorial 53 do
now pass and ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
records show that the role has
been called, and all those
present voted in the affirmative
action disordered where on final
passage of House Memorial 53.
The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of seven in the affirmative zero
in the negative house Merlot. 53
has duly passed this house.
Gentlemen. And do you know what
Ruidoso means in Espanol?
Mr Speaker C.
I think it means of the river
the noisy river. I believe if
you just use the word with also
it's just noisy.
Mr Speaker, and I was also going
to tell you if you want a
nickname I can call you Buckshot
Martinez, Buckshot Speaker.
Whatever you want. Big Jim
sounded good to me to my name is
not James. Thank you, gentlemen.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representatives. Opinsky with a
certificate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I'm so excited to
welcome some very special guests
in the house today.
Mr Speaker. You know, New Mexico
is lucky to have a really
wonderful Indian American
community and our community
throws some very wonderful
celebrations that are a lot of
fun throughout the year. This
past summer, we had hundreds of
people gather in Albuquerque for
India Day to celebrate Indian
independence, and I got to meet
a very special person there.
Her name is Aria Atria, and I'm
very excited to honor her. Mr
Speaker. If the clerk could read
the certificate, and then I'd
like to introduce the guests to
read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico
Congratulates Aria, a new area
Whereas Aria, a new Patria is
the 2023, Miss New Mexico
Princess representing New Mexico
for her age group in the
National American Miss Pageant.
And whereas area is the first
Indian, an Indian American to be
named Miss New Mexico, Princess
and whereas Arias, seven years
old and a second grader
attending Laurel Springs School
And we're as are a loves to
dance and excels in traditional
Indian dance.
And whereas are his little
brother is her biggest fan, and
they support each other and
everything they do, including,
including learning to read.
Whereas Aria loves our state of
New Mexico and gets lost in our
beautiful New Mexico skies.
And whereas R E O with her
loving parents.
In a cash nutria and Dr Akash
Khan Wali trea, her brother
Aryan, a new Petria and her
grandparents, Nutria and
Lieutenant Colonel Anoop.
Khan Wali tree, um, where, as
guests of the House of
Representatives on February 7th
2024
Now, therefore be resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico that
congratulations be extended to
aria. A new Patria The 2023 Miss
New Mexico Princess signed and
sealed in the capital in the
city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are so
thrilled to celebrate Celebrate
Aria as a very special member of
our Indian American community,
but also just as a as a proud
new Mexican. She represented our
state at the national pageant,
and she is on her way to achieve
great things. She's already
taught her little brother to
read. She visited the governor
this morning and
Impressed her with all of her
knowledge, and I'm so proud to
introduce her and her parents.
Um I'm going to start with her
parents and then have her stand
last. So her father, Dr Akash
Atria, her mother in a Akash
Atria, her little brother, Ari
in a new Petria and our Miss
Little New Mexico Princess aria,
a new Petralia. Please welcome
our guests to the house. Welcome
to the house.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you so much.
And thank you to the body for
helping me welcome These very
special guests. I just wanted to
add a little fun. Note That aria
can teach us all how to pose to
our best advantage and a
photograph. So if anyone is
interested, I'm gonna continue
to get lessons on that.
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker
Area is iron Senate House
District 47. She just told me
Well on our way.
Thank you. Gentle lady. Welcome.
Welcome again. So good to have
you
Any other another. Oh, wait a
minute. I have an announcement.
I have a guest in the gallery.
And when you hear your name,
please rise to be recognized. A
guest of representative
Johnson. Cindy Nava, who want to
recently was a White House
appointee to the U. S program,
Housing and the former DACA
recipient, and she's back home
Now. Welcome back Cynthia Nava.
Also guests of the gentleman
from Dona Ana representative to
the GATS in high school class of
2025 officers and leaders,
including Alien Raya's
president, Martelly Andreas.
Vice president Michael Mora.
Secretary Caitlin Cuevas
historian as well as leaders
said he'll Quintana, Carla
Landeros, Alexandra Rodriguez
and Alexandria Ramirez. Welcome
to the House.
Generated from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I'm here to let
the body under no today is
behavioral Health Day at the
Legislature. We've been honoring
a number of folks at the front
lines of our public health
crisis, um, in particular with
fentanyl, So I want to thank the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
for honoring some of those
practitioners with me today. Um,
are folks from the harm
reduction program?
Um, Ari Elam behind me. The
other folks are in the Senate
Swatek with the Harm reduction
program and Brianna Henley on
the operations director. There's
some factoids on your desk. Mr.
Speaker for the members of the
House about the what's happening
in our state in regards to
fentanyl.
And in the on your desk as well
is a box of Narcan. We are all
at the front lines currently of
fighting this epidemic of
fentanyl in our communities, and
you could be walking to a coffee
shop to the grocery store and
see someone in crisis. Um,
Narcan is readily available. You
could save a life with this.
And I'll just quickly show you
this tiny little device on your
desk. All you have to do is put
it into the nose of someone who
may be in a crisis and spray.
Peel it open. Place it in the
nose, push the button at the
bottom, and you could save a
life. If someone is in a crisis.
This won't harm them at all, but
merely could help with somebody.
an overdose and last fiscal year
over 3000 overdose reversals
were reported to the harm
reduction program.
Including with law enforcement.
My brother, who is a A state
police has saved three lives
having Narcan on his person. Um
and of course, unfortunately,
last year, 618 of 711 opioid
over overdoses were due to
fentanyl. Um, so this little
device could save a life. Um,
and it's something that we all,
unfortunately have to face every
single day, but when we're
empowered to do
Best, Mr Speaker. I hope we
will. And with that, Um, thank
you. Thank you, gentle lady.
Any other announcements.
I do have an announcement. It's
been ah!
Requested that folks be able to
remove their coats and
permission. Permission granted,
Gentlemen from San Miguel and
towards Mr Speaker. Good
morning.
Sorry there, representative. But
I have a question. How come the
Senate has their journeys
already for Thursday's game, and
we don't Mr Speaker. That's a
good question. Um, somebody's
capital Outlay might get reduced
the here in the next couple
hours if we don't get jerseys
up, that just makes us think
that we're not good enough, Mr
Speaker, and this is gonna be
our year.
But I love your suit Looks good
on you, sir. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Any other announcement.
Gentlemen from
EU McKinley, Sybil, San Juan
Zokora, Valencia representative
Harry Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of
all, I would like to thank
representative Harlem Vickers
for the
Lunch. Good lunch today and also
I would like to thank
representative Joseph Sancho the
chicken today.
Uh, one announcement I have Mr
Speaker. Tomorrow will be potato
Chip day. We represent going
back to the future and I'm going
to teach the credit for it. So
What else is new Gentlemen,
Anyway? Everybody should have a
bag of potato chips in the desk
tomorrow morning. So thank you
for that. And thanks for Mr
Viktors and Mr Sanchez for lunch
today. Thank you. Yes,
certainly. Thank you both for
lunch today. Certainly
appreciate a gentleman from San
Juan and Rio Arriba.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today I
have the pleasure of joining me
on the house floor. Kale Rainer,
who is from Taus problem. He is
a senior and forestry at the New
Mexico Highlands University. He
is also at the university
legislative, fellow student,
Senate president and on his off
time he loves to pow wow, dance
and sing. So if you would help
me to welcome into the house,
Welcome to the house.
From Billy or Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered.
Mr Speaker. Your appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred. House Bill 102,
as amended has had it under
consideration. Report, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
Respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair.
Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reported her husband 102, as
amended all those papers and if
I was saying I was supposed
name, the committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to miss been referred
House Bill 141 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Adoption Committee report on the
hospital 141. All those in favor
signify by saying Aye.
Paul supposed Nate? Yes, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 207 has had
it under consideration reports,
Same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
207. All those in favor signify
would say nine
All those opposed NAY. The Civic
Committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Appropriations
and Finance Committee tomb has
been referred House agricultural
Assay Kias and Water Resources
Committee Substitute for House
Bill 211 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker, Move adoption
adoption of a federal community
porterhouse, agricultural sector
and water.
Resistance Committee substitute
for House Bill 211. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed nay, the
community adopted Mr Speaker,
Your Appropriations and finance
Committee to miss been referred
House Bill 271 has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker moving option. We are
an adoption of our favorable
community report on house Bill
271 all those papers in the
pharmacy nine.
All those opposed nay, the
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 241 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want to Johnson Chair? Mr
Speaker? Move adoption adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house Bill 241 all those
papers in the fire by saying I
I was supposed to say the
committee adopted
Mr Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 302 has had an under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
wanna Johnson chair?
It sounded like moving adoption
Adoption of a favorable company
reporting has built 30 to all
those in favor signify would say
Ni
Suppose name he has had a
committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 123 has had
it under consideration. Reports
seem
Recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Jeon
dress from your chair. Speaker.
I move adoption of the committee
report. We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
hospital. 123 of those are
favorites, and I say nine,
a committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Education
Committee to him has been
referred to Senate Bill 76 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Respectfully
submitted. G Andres Romero,
chair speaker Move adoption of
the committee report. We are an
adoption about Federal Committee
report on Senate Bill 76. All
those in favor say if I was in I
Supposed to say the committee
report adopted Mr Speaker. Your
Education Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Bill 137,
as amended, has had another
consideration reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
respectfully submitted Jeon
Dress from Wheelchair Speaker
Move adoption of the committee
report. We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
Sanibel 137 as amended. All
those in favor signify Busienei.
All supposed name? Yes, having
committed adopted generated from
Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation. Objection. It is
so ordered Memorial 55
introduced by representatives
Jones, Terrazas and Senator
Diamond Brantley.
A memorial requesting the
Legislature to prioritize and
allocate funding for New Mexico
highway 11 improvements and a
truck bypass circumnavigating
circumnavigating Deming.
Has memorial 55 introduced by
representatives Jones to process
and Senator Brandt Diamond
Bradley House Memorial 55 have
been it was by titles order
printed and referred to the
House Transportation Public
Works in Capital Improvements
Committee.
General lady from Burton, Leo.
And before I go to you, are we
at that time in the session when
the Senate is no longer allowed
on the House floor?
Does anybody know?
Maybe not yet.
Just kidding.
Totally kidding, sir.
Just don't vote against our
bills.
Generally from early Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move and go to
that order of business. Third
reading of legislation
Objection. It is so ordered.
Gentlemen from River Rivas
Sandoval and San Juan
representative Lent a Are you
ready on Item number 16 on the
calendar. Mr. Speaker? Yes, sir.
Can you please get me to that
point that the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Taxation Revenue
Committee substitute for house
Bill 252 on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate Amendment or
substitution, the gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. This is
presenting the 2024. How House
Text Omnibus Bill. I want to
first begin by thanking all of
the members of our committee for
all the hard work over the past
three weeks in producing this
bill, I want to also thank those
in the Senate in regards to the
joint meeting that we had last
Friday here in this chamber to
try to bring together some ideas
in regards to how we can present
a tax bill collaboratively
through this process.
I also want to also mentioned
that this is in fact, a revisit
to 2023 in the House bill
version that we passed out of
this very chamber and then came
back after Conference committee
to pass it out a second time.
Ah, this year's bill was draft
intentionally to make it non
veto a ble.
If you call last year, Last
year's bill was vetoed by the
governor, largely in part and
and kept a lot of initiatives
that that we didn't support. But
she did. And so at this point in
time, we are looking to make it
again non veto ball, which means
that there are no rebates in
this bill. There are no moving
funds from the state Treasuries
like earmarks in this in this
bill, which again
It will stand on its own to
again make it non veto a ball.
I would also like to make
mention that working with the
lfc and capacity it is for this
year's text, Omnibus bill, We
have a $200 million cap that we
are looking to utilize, and
we've done our best to stay
within that dollar amount with
allowances for the Senate to
obviously do its own work for
their own initiatives. This bill
is highlighted by House Bill
252, which is
I look at personal income tax
tax brackets that is the most
expensive in the package, but is
the principal in this package to
providing true tax reform and
benefit for all new Mexicans all
across our state, especially
those that are lower to middle
income wage earners? Other parts
of this bill continue to provide
potential benefit for all new
Mexicans focusing on rural
health.
In home services, uh and and is
in no way shape or form specific
industries and or specific to
initiatives that may be popular
this year, so that being said at
this point, please allow me to
expand on some of the items that
are in the bill. This year, Mr
Speaker and folks
In the bill this year. We have
Energy storage tax credits.
House Bill 143, sponsored by
representative Chandler.
The bill would enable energy
storage facilities to be
included in industrial revenue.
bond negotiations, The bill
would treat energy storage
facilities identical to
renewable generation projects.
The bill amends the existing Grt
deduction for sales of wind and
or solar generation equipment to
include sales of energy storage
equipment to a local government.
The bill provides a sunset of 71
of 2034.
The cost of that one.
And I should have prefaced this
that you should all have a a one
pager chart in front of you from
the Legislative Finance
Committee that shows how much
each of these initiatives would
cost. But the cost of this one
in particular would be in the
out years. $2 million
The second one pip brackets.
This is house Bill 252 that I
sponsored. This bill adjusts the
income tax brackets to increase
progressivity and target rate
cuts for working families again.
working families defined as
those in the lower to middle
income wage earning brackets.
These proposed tax brackets do
not impose a tax rate increase
on any income level rather
The personal income tax rate
structure proposed in this
section will in fact decrease
taxes for all taxpayers with the
rate decreases targeted once
again at the lowest income
earners, the as mentioned
before. This is the most
expensive part of this tax
package and in the out years
would cost upwards of about $176
million.
The third Angel Investment
credits House Bill 83, sponsored
by representative Serato and
Diego's. This would extend the
sunset on the Angel investment
tax credit from an end of 2025
to the end of 2030.
The credit is 25% of the
investment up to $62,500 total
credits capped at a at a $2
million cap.
The credit is not refundable,
but may be carried forward for
five years.
The cost of this in out years is
$2 million. Next we have rural
healthcare protection
practitioner credits. This is
House Bill.
163 sponsored by representative
Garcia Miguel Garcia, which adds
over 5000 healthcare
practitioners to be eligible for
the rural healthcare income tax
credit of $3000 more than
doubling
Of the current number of
participants at $2000 at 2000.
Excuse me to recruit more
healthcare providers to rural
New Mexico. The credit is non
refundable, but may be carried
forward for three years. The
credit does not sunset and the
cost in the out years of this
initiative would be a little
over $11.5 million.
Next. We have capital gains
deductions. This is house build
37 rebels supported by our
sponsored by representative
Chandler, it repeals the 40%
capital gains deduction
currently in statute and
provides for a $2500 deduction
for everyone.
It retains 40% of deduction for
the sales of New Mexico
businesses up to $1 million of
income to make sure that those
who have invested in New Mexico
may protect their investments
because we want to ensure that
they that their hard work hard
work is recognized. It's
effective and applicable through
11 of 2025.
This would not have a negative
impact on the on the bottom
line. But rather than having, uh
positive impact of upwards to
$65 million next, we have house
Bill 10 sponsored by Speaker
Martinez and representative or
ego, which is the fire recovery
tax credit.
It creates an income tax credit
to compensate for the
construction of homes destroyed
by the calf Canyon Hermit Hermit
Peaks, fire and for all
wildfires that happened during
calendar year 2021 through 2020
through 2023 3. Excuse me. It is
capped at a court at a total
cost of $5 million.
Per year and carried and a
$50,000 cap per home.
This credit is non refundable,
but may be carried forward for
three years. The impact of the
bottom line of this initiative
would be $5 million in the out
years.
Next. We have corporate income
tax rates.
This is, uh representative
Harper's House. Bill 216.
It replaces the current two
tiered
Corporate income tax rate
structure with a flat rate of
5.9%. Current tax rates are 4.8%
on income less than $500,000 and
5.9% on income more than
$500,000.
The corporate income tax
taxpayer with taxes. Taxpayers
with incomes of more than
$500,000 will pay $5500 more per
year.
Those with incomes less than
$500,000 will pay about $500
more per year. On average, this
would be effective and
applicable on 11 2025, and it
would not have a negative impact
on the bottom line, but rather
have a positive impact of
upwards of $17 million.
Next. We have corporate income
tax single sales apportionment.
This is representative Harper's
house, built to 16 once again,
ah, which at this point, will
repeal using a combination of
sales, employment and physical
presence to calculate the
apportionment of multi state
corporate income tax or income
in favor of using only sales for
corporation and pass through
entities.
This will generally
Increased corporate income taxes
for national and international
corporations with a smaller
physical presence in New Mexico.
but with more sales and will
also provide for various
substantial tax reductions for
businesses that already have
relatively large property and
payroll relative to their sales
within New Mexico.
This provision is intended to
incentivize corporations to
build plants to build facilities
enter headquarter in New Mexico
and also hire New Mexico
workers but export the new
Mexico products, uh produce
products and services out of
state at this point in time
working with the legislative
finance, uh
Committee staffers. The impact
is unknown on on this bill.
Next. We have a second to last
house Bill 93, sponsored by
representative Cates, Medicaid
Renovation, G R T deductions
creates a grt deduction on a
home renovation like ramps and
inch in shower bars. For those
on Medicaid. There is no sunset
to this to this sponsored piece
of legislation.
And the expected outward cost of
this would be about $435,000.
Finally, we've come to house
Bill 166 representative, vice
chairwoman Cadena Childcare
provider G R T deductions.
It creates a G r t deduction for
profit childcare providers on
contract or receiving grant
funds from the E. C. D.
From the G R T.
The deductions will sunset by
July 1st of 2034, and it is
expected to have a negative
impact to the bottom line of
upwards of about four a little
more than $4.5 million. And with
that, Mr Speaker, I would stand
for any questions, sir. There is
debate. Let's go to the
generating from Dona Ana
resented Lara Cadena.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman from
Sandoval, San Juan and Rio Areva
counties yield
I yield to the gentle lady from
Dona Ana County.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Gentlemen. I rise today to share
a bit about the process that we
went through together in
creating this house tax package
that we are now debating as HB
50 to 52, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
like the 60 Day session, I
appreciated chair Lenti for his
transparency.
For his willingness to treat all
of our members with respect and
to consider all the proposals
fairly that were referred to our
committee and brought in front
of us.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um, I was. You've already shared
The House Tax committee was
working with a $200 million
capacity and in many ways we are
working with an outline of
vetted proposals that we had
already sent last year to the
governor's office has HB 47,
which was ultimately line item
vetoed. So many of the proposals
we are seeing here in this
package today.
We're also part of last year's
package. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
what I appreciated is that as we
got into the committee process,
we had a range of bills from
both sides of the aisle. And
ultimately with that $200
million could pass city capped
in mind. Our chair, asked every
member of the committee to rank
their five priorities, doing
their own math to build out to
that $200 million capacity.
Mr Chair. I found that process
to be incredibly collaborative
People had room to ask questions
offer insight bring their ideas
to the table. Mr. Chair, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, another
first for us was just last
Friday. In this chamber. We
hosted a House and Senate Joint
Tax Committee meeting.
So that we could have a better
sense of what the Senate will
likely be moving in their
proposal, and we could share
about the key elements within
hours.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I am
grateful that after those weeks
of collaboration, um and
including some last minute
additions, I feel like the House
Tax committee is put together a
package that is about reform for
new Mexicans, a package that
will hit you Mexicans back at
home in the districts where we
all represent.
And which was fair in its
creation.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I'll wrap
with saying
One of the elements that makes
me feel values aligned in this
proposal.
Is that as it stands, our house
tax package does not include any
refundable tax credits when
you're in the tax world we like
to hold
And create capacity for tax
refundable tax credits when
they're going to the new
Mexicans that have the least
that means that for people that
don't have tax liability, we pay
dollars back out to these
families. While some of those
proposals would come through on
the Senate side, and well, we
promise you to give them a good
a good vetting and attentional
potentially work to tighten
those
For now, We are proud that with
Lichter and E I C and some of
the other tax policies we have
in place. Our tax systems are
becoming more and more
progressive, and we're really
making sure that we passed
policy that goes for the new
Mexicans Need it most. So thank
you, Mr Speaker and Mr Chair for
the debate. The gentleman from
Sandoval, representative Harper.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
generate gentlemen from Rio
Arriba.
Sandoval in San Juan. Yield I
yield to the gentleman from
Sandoval County. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, um
I want to
Talk a little bit about what is
in this bill. Um and about the
process.
And, uh, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I appreciate that
this year.
This bill.
Does not have the ability for a
line item veto.
Mr Peters, gentlemen, but it is
still veto a ball. Is that
correct?
That is Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, That is correct. I
misspoke. I apologize. Miss
Speaker and gentlemen. Yeah, no
worries. I just wanted to make
sure we're clear there, and I
appreciate the thought behind
that because there was a lot of
work last session.
Balancing priorities from
different people, different
chambers, different ideologies,
and we came up with a well
balanced. I thought, really good
tax package last year and I was
really disappointed when
It was
Uh, I think of the 25 items and
there are only four of them were
not line item vetoed.
Um, that was really surprising
to me, so I do appreciate, um,
the sought
Going into this package to make
sure that we're not putting a
similar situation.
Now, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Um
I've I've said that especially
with regards to tax policy a
good bill.
Is one that you like about 70%
of
And you really don't like about
30% of it, and depending on
where you sit in the chamber
here, the part that you like and
the parts that you don't like
will be different.
But that's good tax policy. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there are a
lot of great things in this
bill.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'd
really like that You have tried
to focus on tax reform.
And not a Christmas tree.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I I know
that in the past
We've had, you know whenever we
have capacity for tax reform,
Often you have a line of
lobbyists who are wanting to get
their clients a carve out
Mr Gentlemen. I really
appreciate looking through this
bill.
Um
The vast, vast vast majority of
this, I would characterize as
reform and not carve outs for
one particular thing or another.
Um and I'll just mention a
couple a couple that I think are
really important. The first Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, is your
bill.
In which we are changing our
personal income tax brackets.
And the way that we're doing it
the way that you're proposing to
do it. Mr Speaker and gentlemen
by increasing the distance
between the brackets, making it
more progressive.
That really results in a tax cut
for all new Mexicans.
Gentlemen. This this tax cut is
Roughly $200 per family. If I'm
remembering that right, Mr
gentlemen,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
appreciate
That because you also looked at
You know what this capacity we
have doesn't make sense to
adjust the pitch brackets or
reduce the gross receipts tax.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
analysis Um
Reducing the gross receipts tax
with the same amount of money.
How much would that have saved
the New Mexico and average New
Mexico family?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, based
on the research by LFC they were
looking at closer about $20 per
family misspeaking. Gentlemen,
That's the sad truth is that are
gross receipts tax. Um, uh, it
just is so expensive to reduce
it in a meaningful way.
Right that to make a real impact
on families and businesses. We
would need more than $200
million to make it meaningful.
So, Miss Speaker, Gentlemen, I
appreciate that You looked at
both. And you decided? What can
we get the best bang for the
buck?
And the best bang for the buck
was to get every Mexico family.
$200 by moving the pit rackets.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No, It's
not a question, but let me
expand on that that we had
exhaustive conversations prior
to the beginning of this
legislative session that looked
at and analyzed those to the pit
brackets and the grt reduction
and by far the grt reduction was
one scene that it would in fact,
have a regressive impact on New
Mexico, whereas again going back
to the pit brackets that would
have a much more
Beneficial progressivity type of
effect on the Mexico taxpayers
where you would have again to
your point more bang for the
buck.
Gentlemen, I'm gonna ask you to
use your neighbors microphone.
That one is breaking up. We'll
have the staff. Take a look at
it. Um, apologies for the
interruption.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, for that answer, I
I do think that this is the
right approach.
For the capacity that we have
here.
Um, I I will say that
Some of the things that I wish
were in this bill that we're in
the bill last year were a major
reduction in gross receipts tax.
I think we all agree that is
meaningful and helpful, but we
need more capacity to do that.
Um, putting motor vehicle excise
tax, which is the tax you pay
when you purchase of a car or
vehicle.
Right now, Half of that goes to
roads roughly
And the other half goes to the
General fund.
Um, I think we need to have all
of it going to the General fund.
Especially, we're doing a good
when we're we have as much
revenue coming in as we have
right now.
And also
Liquor excise tax was also the
tax package last year, all of
that going to treatment and
prevention programs that's
missing this year. But Mr your
job in the reason that those are
missing is because of our
limited capacity, not because we
felt like those were bad.
Um, uh, policy decisions.
Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm a little
sad that those aren't in there,
but I understand, but I get it.
So, Mr Gentlemen, I just
mentioned a couple other things
that I think are really good Tax
policy, the healthcare
practitioner tax credit
expanding into more
practitioners, Mrs. A.
Ah!
Representatives Garcia and
represent Jones and also
changing the definition so that
Folks right now the definition
to be able to, um, qualify for
receiving this credit is that
you have to essentially work 40
hour weeks.
And we all know that the health
care industry does not work 40
hour weeks.
Nurses worked 3 12 hour shifts
and doctors work crazy hours and
we want them to be able to take
vacation.
I appreciate that. We've changed
the
Um the definition here to have
more folks would be able to
qualify.
Extending the sunset from the
major task angel Investment tax
credit. We know how important is
to have capital here for the
great ideas that people have.
I think it's great to extend
that.
The fire recovery fund. This is
something new, but I think we
all agree that we need to make
sure we're not
Um, hindering folks who are
trying to replace their homes
that were impacted by the fire.
Um, the child tax care of the
child. Grt deduction for child
care. We had some advocates come
to the committee and explain
Um, how they are actually paying
the grt right now for their
clients because their clients
can't do it.
Um
And I just I think this is so,
uh, we'll have a great impact.
I'm glad that we're doing it.
And then the last one. I'll
mention Miss Speaker and
gentlemen with regards to
corporate income tax going to a
single bracket.
Is is is just what makes sense
all states that have
A
A advanced, you know, Well
thought out Tax code only have
one bracket for corporate income
tax and it matches the top.
Personal tax bracket.
So I appreciate that we're doing
that here.
And we're also going to the
single sales factor for
determining how much taxes they
pay here in New Mexico.
Speaker and gentlemen, I'm not
going to go into the details of
how that works, because I think
I've already made everyone's
eyes in glaze over in the
chamber speaker. Gentlemen, I do
have this beautiful infographics
that I've put together.
If anyone wants to talk to me.
Um, but the bottom line. Um Mr
Speaker and
And chairman or gentlemen, is
that our current tax code?
Rewards.
A business when it expands and
hires outside of New Mexico.
By reducing the taxes that New
Mexico collects.
And the opposite is also true
and even more damaging our
current tax code.
Punishes.
A business.
When it expands and hires in New
Mexico by significantly raising
their new Mexico taxes.
And so
The vast majority of the other
states have gone away from this
approach and are now going to
what we call the single sales
factor.
In fact, there are only four
other states besides us that
used this old, antiquated
approach. So, Mr Gentlemen, I'm
not going to stand here and say
we're gonna have a flood of
businesses coming to New Mexico
now, but I think when we're
talking about good tax policy
It doesn't make sense to punish
a business.
For taking a risk and expanding
and in New Mexico.
And it doesn't make sense to
reward a business when they
decide to expand elsewhere.
Speaker. I'm really glad to see
that in this bill, And finally
I'll just say I miss Speaker and
gentlemen, I really again I'm so
grateful for your leadership. I
really believe this is the best.
The tax means the best committee
in the house. I know I'm biased,
but it is just a pleasure.
The the fairness, the respect
And the fact that you know we
have a bill that represents many
different people, many different
thoughts in this chamber just
really means a lot to me. I just
wanted to say that Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you for the
debate. The gentleman from San
Juan Representative Lane. Thank
you, Mr Speaker as a gentleman
from Rio Arriba, Sandoval and
San Juan Yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield to my friend
Gentlemen from San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen for
rebirth.
Forgive me, which Which county
do you actually reside, so I
don't have to repeat all three
counties all day for the next
six hours. Thank you. Six hours,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
reside in Sandoval County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Sandoval. I mean, you don't
always have to close debate. For
the record. We could keep this.
Keep this party going. But
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
Let me first open our debate
with a note of thinks similar to
the work done in HB two and HB
three. I know there's a
tremendous amount of work that
goes into the tax package that
that you lied that committee and
I know it takes a lot of your
personal time to do that, and I
also want to commend the
committee members as well.
Who I know are dedicated both on
the left and the right to this
tax package, and I know that
that takes a lot of effort and
also want to thank the staff.
These these bills are are
unusual in that they take a lot
of time. A lot of brain power a
lot of effort, and I know that a
large part of that comes through
staff, so I want to be
Be mindful of that as well.
Unlike you know, maybe some
other bills.
Um, where they're more member
heavy, So I appreciate the work
that staff has put in as well.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. Let's take a look at
page 15, starting with Section
four.
You know, Section five. Excuse
me.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval, Can you kind of flush
out a little bit?
Um
What the current income tax
brackets are for personal income
tax.
Particularly once you get past
that
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
for single filers will begin
their so for taxpayers that are
that are making between 16,000
and we're talking currently
16,000 upwards to 210,000. The
rate is at 4.9%.
And for and for those that make
between 27,000. That rate is
4.7%.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan for single filers the
range that
For those making $16,500 to
$33,500 is 4.3%.
And then for those that make
Between $33,500 and $66,500.
They pay 4.7%.
And Mr Speaker general from
Sandoval. And so the changes
that are being proposed in this
bill where I see sort of the
biggest movement.
Is currently
Let's take a for married
individuals filing joint.
They currently and this is
actually true for all three
brackets, or all three.
Um, filers.
Feiler categories.
They currently
Once they make
Essentially a small amount of
income. Let's take the
The
Married filing.
Jointly, which I think is
probably the most common
Once they hit $24,001 in income
currently
They're in the second highest
tax bracket. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is correct. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from Sandoval. Do you
know what the median household
income is in New Mexico for a
family of four?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it is
$48,000 per year. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, from
Sandoval, this this is going to
Touch most
Most filers than and so the way
I understand the bill is it's
going to make a change for sort
of those middle income.
Um filers, especially because
now in order to get to that
second highest tax bracket, you
have to make $100,001. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen. Exactly correct. So,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
appreciate that. I think that's
a good move for our state will
help us to be, um
More competitive with their
neighboring states. It also
provides some relief for our
working class New Mexicans, So I
appreciate that.
Um
I want to ask a question.
On page 25 of the bill.
So now we're I think, rightfully
so expanding sort of what we do
with our rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit.
Um
Mr Speaker General from
Sandoval. Does this also Lupin
folks that do look do say in
home, hospice care, and that
kind of kind of treatment.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, if
they're one of the noted, uh,
professions on page 25, then
yes.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
Um
And this is
This section. Does it apply just
to roll healthcare providers.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
sir, just to rural healthcare
providers.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
I realized that is also defined
in the bill, and I'm curious on
page 30 or expanding this
definition of rural
Um
What are some of the rural
counties because that's one of
the first terms that's used on
Page 30 in line seven.
Can you? Can you give us some
examples of what are the rural
counties?
Mr Speaker? Yes, sir. Just give
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
as we flip through notes to get
you the most accurate
information possible. I'm
looking at rural counties and
I'm going to have to look at
this closer.
If you'd like me to name those I
I'm gonna name Hilda Algo
Catherine County, Socorro
County, Sierra County, Lincoln
County, Guadalupe County, the
Vodka County Quay County,
Harding County, Union County,
Colfax County and more a county.
As as as rural counties defined
Thank you, Mr Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Sandoval.
I'm
Kind of intrigued by that list
and disappointed here. San
Juan's not on it because there's
a huge part of
Send one that I think is rural.
I'm wondering.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen
from San Juan County. So at this
point we're using the dont
identified rural county list and
map.
And so while I while I the ones
that I read off earlier, quote
unquote rural counties. There
are others that are mixed urban
Rural county identified
And the and those ones would
include an additional grant
county Luna County.
Ah Otero County, Eddy County,
Lee County, Chavez County,
Roosevelt County, Curry County,
San Miguel County, McKinley
County, Cibola County.
Rio, Arriba County and Taus
counties.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from Santa
Pola. So did I'm sorry. Did you
or did you not say Sam? Why
didn't hear someone?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
way that San Juan County is
listed on this map pursuant to
the O H factors is that they are
considered a
A small metro county, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from from
Sandoval. So this is not going
to help my constituents is what
I'm hearing is that fair?
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Unless, of course, there are
some
Unincorporated parts of the
counties that could qualify.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. So this is a This is a
genuine requests Is this bill
moves through the Senate? I hope
that you will examine this
because
My county services, a large part
of the Navajo nation who come
too far Mountain for health
services.
Um, much of my district is
rural. And so I would hate to
see what really is a rural
county.
Not be able to take advantage.
What I think is a good a good
part of this bill. And so I just
I would I would make that
request, Gentlemen from
Sandoval, If you would consider
that, as it moves across,
whatever the language tweet,
that means I'm I'm sure the
brain trust back there could
probably figure that out. But
that would be much appreciated.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. So I want to ask a
question about Section eight.
So
I'll just be real Frank with
with you, Mr Speaker General
from Sandoval. I find this
section to be really
frustrating.
Very disappointing.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval, Can you explain sort
of our current law when it comes
to the capital gains deductions.
So when the when there's income
derived from capital gain, there
is a 40% reduction currently.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
When you talk about tax policy,
can you explain to the body? Why
there is oftentimes preferential
Good. So at this point, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, uh there
is an intent to incentivize
activity within this state. And
at this point in time, there are
only nine other states that tax
capital gains less than ordinary
income.
Well, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. It's It may be that
there aren't a lot of states
that do it. But there's also a
lot of states that don't text
income period and then at the
federal level, Obviously,
there's preferential treatment
when it comes to capital gains
taxing and so, Mr Speaker
general from Sandoval, and I
think this is this is an
important point as to why I
think this is one of the
I think the most frustrating
part of this bill.
Is the underlying nature of the
capital gains deduction
Preferential treatment is we
want to incentivize
Investors to make investments in
our communities.
We want them to take their
dollars and improve our
communities. And so, for
example, Mr Speaker gentleman
from Sandoval under current law
If I buy a second home
And I pour money into fixing
that home up and I rent it for a
full year.
And then I sell it. After that
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So if
the business is considered our
packages like the sale of real
estate as a business, then then,
in fact, on page 30 lines 23
that sale would be allocated or
portion Ah, to be able to
appreciate this type of
incentive.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Central. I'm sorry I didn't. I
didn't ask the question more.
Let me ask you more clear I'm
talking about under current law,
not the bill, but under current
law.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
answer would be Yes. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen from San
Juan.
So
That's that's my frustration.
Is we're now gutting.
The cap gains and and I do want
to talk about in a little bit
when we talk about the cell of a
business.
Um, well, actually just do it
right now because we brought it
up. So so the way I understand.
Paragraph.
A two under section eight is now
we're saying you still get the
cap gains.
Preferential treatment, but only
for the cell of a business that
is allocated or portion to New
Mexico. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen? Yes, sir.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Sandoval So with the example
that was given about well, if
Let's say I buy that second
property in an LLC.
And I rent it for a year and
then I sell the property.
When I go to closing and my
selling the LLC or am I selling
the property?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So in
your hypothetical if you sell
the LLC than you would in fact
quality
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
Most real property transactions
if I'm buying a home
And my buying the L. C around my
buying the assets. The property.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
latter of the two
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval and so again, I and I
know this is not your individual
building. You've got to stand up
and defend the whole package. So
I get that
But
This is gonna
Have a huge impact, and it's not
lost on me, Mr Speaker.
General from Sandoval that just
yesterday.
This. This floor passed out and
I voted in favor of it.
A bill to create
A fund to incentivize housing
for lower income New Mexicans.
And now on the very next day,
we're gutting an important part
of our tax law.
That is actually going to make
it harder to incentivize
investors to buy dilapidated
homes to rehabilitate them and
then put them back in the
housing market.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, from
Sandoval. What I see how it's
going to happen if we pass this
part of the tax package out
Is. Let's say I'm still Gaz
investor. I'm still going to buy
a good deal, so I'm still going
to buy that second home. I'm
still going to put money into it
and make it a rental. But what's
not going to happen is in a
year. I'm not going to sell it.
I'm going to hold on to it as a
rental, and so we're in a state
that's desperate for inventory
for new Homebuyers, especially
lower priced homes.
We're now snatching those homes
off the market because we're no
longer incentivizing investors
and that's going to drive up the
price of homes. It's going to
make Reynolds more difficult as
well.
And so I I don't agree that this
is a good change and change in
the right direction. And Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Sandoval
and I recognize that
This does cover the sell the
business and I think we should
kind of drill down on that, too.
So
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. So whether I own a
corporation or LLC if I do a
stock purchase, so if I sell the
actual shares in the
corporation, or I do a
membership purchase, where I
actually sell the ownership in
the L. C.
This cap gains preferential
treatment would apply. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes.
Invited New Mexico business.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
From Sandoval. I can tell you I
have a lot of experience in
drafting.
Ah, these purchase agreements in
my private law practice
represent a lot of businesses
over the years.
I've handled countless of these
transactions.
Um And I can tell you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Sandoval
and my experience out of several
100 of these that I've oversaw.
I could probably count on one
hand. How many actually our
stock purchase or membership
purchase agreements and the
reason why that is.
And why most of these are
structured as an asset purchase
agreement is when you buy the
stock, or you buy the L C.
Membership interests you're
taking on exposure of all the
liabilities that that company
once had. Now the agreements on
paper say that you indemnify me,
but there's a lot of risks that
you take that money and run.
And I'm holding the bag of the
liability. So most buyers
Are not going to do a stock
purchase. Most buyers are not
going to do an LLC purchase.
They're going to do an asset
purchase. And so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen from Sandoval
Does this help me if I'm doing
an asset purchase, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, the answer would
be no.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Sandoval.
I feel like we've established
that it doesn't actually help
for the sale of a business
because it's such a microscopic
number of who's going to be able
to take advantage of that.
It's gonna have a huge negative
impact on the housing market,
which again is an area that we
desperately need Help in.
And I see this.
And I guess I just don't
understand what's driving this.
Um and this, I think was one of
the more frustrating parts.
Of the bill for me.
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Sandoval.
Owner ask a pet question on page
35.
So can you explain what's
happening here in section 10?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So at
this point for flat corporate
income tax, we're moving from
two different
Percentages to just one, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen from
Sandoval. So
The way I understand current
law.
Is the 1st 500,000 your tax at
4.8%. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
sir.
And then Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
from Sandoval.
Once you have $500,001, then you
go up to the 5.9%. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker, you would still pay
4.8% up to the 500,000 then
thereafter will be bumped up.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Sandoval. It's more
precise.
Forming of the question. I
appreciate that. And so the way
that I understand what section
10 does is now we're saying
All of the corporate income
taxes. 5.9% is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
sir.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Sandoval actually really liked
the concept of a flat tax.
Um, I and I know this is not
Well, it's sort of tackles this.
I find it to be fundamentally
unfair.
That we have a system.
Where
You know that you owe
The government money.
We make it incredibly
complicated. Understand?
How much you know the
government.
In fact, you have to pay
professionals often times to
help you figure that out.
If you overpay the government
doesn't tell you that you
overpaid. It keeps your money.
If you under paid the government
punishes you and assesses
penalties.
And
I think a flat tax actually
helps remove all of those
unfairness elements when it
comes to taxation, so I actually
liked the concept of a flat tax.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval.
What? I have a hard time with
those
Why are we increasing taxes at a
time when
We have 3.5 billion in
additional revenue. Why are we
even bothering to increase
corporate income taxes?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Domina
use a phrase from the sponsor of
this piece of legislation.
That's one of your members
represented Harper, where he
just considers this to be good
tax policy to be able to put
everybody at one.
Tax rate.
Well, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Sandoval. I
I agree, I think
I think putting everybody at one
rate is great tax policy, but
we're not doing that with the
personal income tax.
So it seems like we're picking
and choosing.
When we're going to do it.
And so it's not like it's a
uniform policy that we're
adopting.
And again I Why not make it 4.8
across the board. Why 5.9
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I have
a really good response to that.
But I want to out the gentleman
from Sandoval as a part of this,
But what? What tax experts are
telling me that the top pit rate
should match the CIT rate so
that there's no tax avoidance.
Mr Speaker Corporation. At this
point, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from
Ah, Santa didn't mean to cut you
off there.
Um so
Again. I can understand the
rationale for wanting them to
match but there also are some
reasonable
Policies behind one But again, I
think we've operated this like
this for a number of years and
We can talk sort of high level
tax policy.
But the reality is the new
Mexicans are going to look at
this as a tax increase, because
well, it is a tax increase.
And so again, I'm just sort of
dumbfounded that we're sitting
on 3.5 billion of new money.
And we're actually considering
gutting the cap gains
preferential treatment, which is
a tax increase, and we're gonna
actually increase the corporate
income tax rate again when we're
awash.
In money. I just don't
understand why that's the focus
of our efforts.
Um And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Sandoval.
Um, I do want to make one
Comment on on one last section
that I think is is a good
addition Section 15
I like that. We're doing this
deductions of gross receipts.
Grt for childcare assistance and
our pre K programs and, um, I
think the bill is pretty clear.
But just so new Mexicans are
aware this applies to both
private and public or
I guess this applies to private
pre K is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you're
correct.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Sandoval. So
Again. I commend the tremendous
effort that went into this tax
package. Um, I think there's
some good stuff in here. Um,
what I again What I cannot wrap
my mind around is when we have
3.5 billion in in excess
revenues. Why are we even
flirting with increasing taxes?
And in a state that's desperate
for affordable housing. Why are
we disincentivize ng investors
from putting out into the market
that housing market good quality
homes at lower prices because
those are most of the homes that
are flipped?
Um, I'm frustrated by that
provision in particular. So
thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
further debate. The gentleman
from Bernanke, Europe presented
to Garcia.
This is the most speaker.
Come out of representative Will
the gentleman from Sandoval
yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Braulio County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, from Sandoval to, um
I just want to applaud.
The tax committee chairman and
vice chairman.
For incorporating House Bill 163
in to the tax package.
Which is a real healthcare
practitioner tax credit.
At
And we're doing this. The most
speaker
Yes, we're adding 6 million
professions.
To the
Really Healthcare Practitioner
Tax Credit act that was
established in 2007.
Yes, Tomorrow speaker Remember
voting on that bill.
On this floor.
And, uh, the positions that
we're adding our pharmacist,
registered nurses, social
workers.
Health counselor, therapist,
physical therapist.
And licensed midwives.
And these are all really key
positions that the New Mexico
Health care.
Workforce Committee identified
as priority positions to be
placed on the tax credit.
And you can understand that
estimate a speaker.
Gentlemen from Sandoval.
Pharmacists, for example.
A lot of our rural communities.
Estimize speaker general Percent
Owen
The drug store is a pillar.
Of the community.
Once that drug store closes
down, we lose.
That leg.
On the four legged stool.
So there's a big boy in terms of
institution.
Just diminishing overnight.
And we've had some
Fallout, says tomorrow speaker
in 2022. Moriarty lost their
only drug store.
Last year. Buckland Pharmacy in
Berlin closed after 118 years of
service.
Estimate, Speaker
And the registered nurses must
beaker general from Sandoval,
who was at the forefront.
Who was on the trenches.
Regarding
The covid deaths.
It's not the registered nurses
were holding their hands.
Of course, patients dying from
Covid because families were not
allowed into I us the intensive
care units.
And behavioral health counselor
therapist system. Uh, speaker
Jonathan Bernier, Leo
We have to rebuild the safety
nets in our rural communities.
With the devastation of the
behavioral health industry.
That we experienced eight years
ago.
And this legislation.
Of including behavioral health
therapists and counselors.
Is a step
In rebuilding that safety net in
rural communities.
When we lost those programs by
the dozens
Yes, Tomorrow speaker.
Mentally.
Disabled people and people and
substance use disorder.
You know, I had no place to
To kind of get services.
Because of that is the most
speaker.
And, uh and I have to give
credit to representative
Jennifer Jones.
Her bipartisan effort in adding
To this legislation.
Because it was representative
Jones that brought forth
The need to redo the qualifying
hours.
That we had a 2080.
To include registered nurses
ability as speaker, Gentlemen
Sandoval on to get the full
credit.
Is the way we had originally
drafted the bill Estimate
speaker last year we excluded a
full credit to the nurses based
on that.
Formula for total hours, worked
and rested, and Jones saw that
brought that to my attention. We
incorporated into the bill.
It's my speaker.
So also contributed to the
definition of rural
In the legislation.
And I agree with representative
Lane that we might want to re
look at that definition as this
bill goes.
To the Senate.
Because in the sub as in house,
Bill 163.
We have a definition for rural
Has
Means a rural county or an
unincorporated area of a
partially rural county.
As designated by the health
Services, Health Resources and
Services Administration of the
United States Department of
Health and Human Services
System. Uh, speaker
And
The analysts and the experts
were represented a
Learn to smile Speaker
We're basically using data from
the D O H.
And I think
You've got a as the mouse
speaker.
You've got to kind of
Consolidate that definition.
To where it's all inclusive.
My understanding.
For example, given examples in
my speaker County
County is not considered a rural
county.
But you crossed the Rio Grande
and you come into a three school
in the South Valley and we're
unincorporated doesn't doesn't
nated as underserved.
So we're entitled
If we have a clinic in at risk
on South Valley.
Which is just across the Rio
Grande from
Albuquerque, but because we're
unincorporated
Those practitioners that work in
the three school and south
earlier are entitled to the For
the credit.
And I think that's the same
thing for the other counties by
San Juan.
You know, but I want to say is
the most speaker based on my
past experiences with this
definition.
Gentlemen from Bandarban.
There's only one county doesn't
qualify. That's Los Alamos.
All 32 counties qualify.
In one way or another for the
credit.
Speaker.
And lastly is the most speaker.
You know what? This is really
monumental.
This has been a nine year
Ah, struggle, right? Did you get
this rural healthcare
practitioner add ons.
You know, with the pharmacist,
the registered nurses, social
workers being real counselor,
therapist, physical therapist.
And
Licensed midwives.
Ah!
In the act.
And it's finally happening. We
did it last year, but
unfortunately must beaker.
The governor line item this
Specific
Uh, item and in her lang item
veto.
Unless needs to most people
again.
I want to compliment.
From Senator Jennifer Jones for
her contribution to this
initiative.
The tax committee and
The chair and vice chair.
Because he knows the mouse
speaker and my my time up here.
27 years.
Incorporating the rural New
Mexico.
Initiative in our tax package is
monumental.
Equated to reaching the top of
Mount Everest in the Dark
Knight.
And we're doing it.
In this tax back to just the
speaker.
Speaker.
Yes, Senor Santa one.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Eddie Chavez and
Otero, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero
counties.
Thank you, sir. I I too
Um
I want to
Acknowledge.
The work that
That, um
Has gone into into putting up
with this tax package. It's
It's not an easy lift. I get it.
Um
But as I told you prior to us
coming on the floor, um
I still had some issues with it,
and I want to go through some of
those, um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
The tax package today.
What if you look at our total
income on one side?
The $3.5 billion in the money.
And look at the tax package.
How much in percentage
Have we
Um have we brought back to the
citizens of New Mexico of our of
our enormous revenue stream, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, while we
calculate the percentage
It looks like it's about 6%.
And I know that is an issue to
me. We have had
We have had huge revenues, so
The last couple of years, and we
have
A very strong industry.
We have good rock. We have been
blessed with
But looks like
Many years of income if we don't
Mess it up ourselves.
But
When you when you think about
that.
Um
I had a hard time with my
constituents.
Telling them that out of $3.5
billion
We were going to share.
6% of that back with them. Can
you speak to that? A little bit,
sir?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that I
believe I can. I mean, when you
look at the
Capacity that we have in this
task committee this year.
And you look at how it's in
comparison to other initiatives
that
For instance, was passed out in
House Bill two and those types
of initiatives that are equally
just as far reaching as perhaps
what's in this tax package. And
then you look at those that
Maybe in a statewide and
localized level related to the
capital outlay process. The
those types of initiatives are
definitely done with the
greatest of intent to try to
spread as much love and as much
help that we can provide for
constituents all across our
state and definitely in our
respective communities. But at
this point in time as it breaks
down to percentages and where
we're going with this
conversation
This is the capacity that we
talked about. An lfc is one that
was appreciated by the House
Appropriations Finance Committee
in their creation of their
budgets, and so here we are.
And I appreciate that.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
But
When I really dig into it and
start thinking about what we're
doing.
I look at the
Corporate rights and how that
will be impactful, too.
Small business owners and
Large business owners in New
Mexico.
And I've had a lot of feedback.
Um people that thinks we've
missed the boat there.
When I
When I go through
You know, like the capital gain.
I start thinking
We really being fair or we'd be
ingredients legislators. Do we
want all the money so we can
spend for what we think.
We want to spend, but
Really in my opinion, if you
really want to grow into Mexico.
You can. You can just create a
firestorm in the Mexico today.
If you took half
Of this windfall.
And gave it back to our
Constituents.
If we gave that back, so they
went out and created jobs
created G R T created. Don't you
think that has merit that we
should consider Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from all those
counties? I think at this point
we we talk about the surpluses
that we have experienced been
blessed by in this state.
And you consider why don't we do
more?
We have the example that I can
point to of last year where we
had perhaps a billion dollars of
capacity in our tax package, and
we saw more than half of that
swallowed up by by rebates. One
time payments to to to members
of of our state, and then we saw
in crafting that piece of
legislation.
And lessons learned this year
about how in fact
None of our initiatives about
spreading the love and taking
care of our people were even
felt by last year's tax package
By way of what we saw, and and
again. I'm not trying to create
a firestorm here by saying that
most of the appreciation went to
film tax incentives, but the
point is, is that that's the way
it worked right?
And so I am. I would say that
working within our means and
trying to make sure that we can
appreciate everybody's, um, role
in this budgetary process is one
to which I can respect as the
chair of this particular
committee.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that. I, uh
And as as we go through this, I
want you to understand as I've
told you before.
I, uh
I appreciate the way you run
your committee. It's it is a It
is a committee that draws. I
think both sides to the middle.
And you do a good job of that.
So my comments and my house for
substitute that I'll introduce
in a minute is not
Um
In any way.
Shot across your bow as
chairman. It is my, um
Opportunity I believe to
represent
My side of the aisle and to do
what I think the vast majority
of new Mexicans want.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
The vast majority of our
Constituents yours and mine
alike.
All they, although they
Appreciate rebates. It's not the
same as getting a tax cut.
A rebate of something that comes
on a whim of an administration
on the you know.
With all the other things and a
tax cut.
It's something they feel every
two weeks or every week or every
month. They see it. It's
expendable income and it's
things that they can utilize to
grow their companies or their
their livelihood.
So with that, um
Mr Speaker. I'd like to
introduce house
Floor substitute.
For
House tax.
HB 252 reginal men.
And Mr Speaker. I asked for a
real cultural call. It is being
passed out as we speak. Um, the
gentleman has introduced house
floor substitutes to House
Taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 252.
Let's give it a minute As it
All right. Gentlemen, from Eddie
Chavez Montero, It appears the
substitute has been passed out.
What is the 2 to 8 number?
Mr Speaker there, 2 to 8 number
is 0.228103 0.1. That's what we
all have, gentlemen to explain
the substitute. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
This, uh, amendment before you
Does several things number one.
It drops the personal income tax
for all the Mexicans.
The one person
Straight across the board.
Everyone
It reasoned it returns to
massive recurring budget
surpluses back to the taxpayers.
It puts $1.75 billion.
Into the economy and will
transform the Mexico's economy.
Nikon economy's ability to
create jobs and economic
opportunity.
It provides help for small
business It gives New Mexico
taxpayers say
And how massive budget surpluses
Are invested in the Mexico
It does not negatively impact
refundable safety.
Yeah.
Tax credits.
Creates a new fiscal strategy of
forcing spending to match
revenues.
Rather than setting revenues to
match excessive spending Lip
this tax reform proposal.
Grows our economy.
And in the effort just to grow
government.
Mr Speaker.
It leaves
And representative. It leaves
many parts.
Uh huh.
Your bill HB 252 intact. Get
Leaves the energy storage tax
credit deduction.
It leaves the angel investment.
Credit intact.
It leaves the rural healthcare
practitioner credit intact.
The fire recovery tax credit it
to is left intact.
And the Medicaid renovation on
Grt is is intact.
As well as the childcare
provider. Grt deduction.
The big difference between
What you have proposed and what
I have presented to the body to
consider.
Is the elimination.
Of the capital gains deduction.
And
It eliminates the corporate
income tax structuring on top of
that.
Where you
Had
Talked about personal income tax
reductions.
This is a real reduction.
This drops it to 1%, and it will
affect every family in New
Mexico.
Thank you gentlemen. Let's go
back to the bill's sponsor. Is
this a friendly house floor
Substitute Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, with the substitute,
it is not friendly and when
appropriate, I'd like to ask
some questions.
It is appropriate to do so now.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. For one your
involvement in committee in the
processes that we have in
committee and for always showing
up on time and ready to discuss
the matters at hand, each and
every committee hearing
That we do have
Um, you've you've talked about a
couple of highlights of your
committee substitute and
And and then running your
numbers. And now the questioning
that you presented prior to your
Executing of the committee
substitute come into line about
Why can't we do more? Um, with
the surpluses that we have
today?
And so at first glance based on
the numbers
Calculated by staff here to the
right of me, and I apologize. It
done recognize them. We have
Ishmael Izzy Torres from the
Legislative Finance Committee
who is the chief economist as
well as Brendan Gray, who is
also, um
A staffer there the LFC as well.
So when I look, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen at the proposal that
you have, um
And and and we talked about the
capacity that we have today.
Versus what we what we maybe
would like to have.
Today.
Basically basic calculations
right now look like this
proposal would cost
Ah!
This tax package a little over
$2 billion.
So it goes from 200 Million to
$2 billion. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
What we calculated on our side
is $1.75 billion. About half of
what we have.
In new money.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that, so I don't
think at this point we should
argue about
That figure, particularly other
than what I've been told, and
the quick calculations that
again it's going to be upwards
of over $2 billion and
And and then my question, then
goes down to your pit.
Suggestions here in your
committee substitute of a flat
1%.
And so
That sounds attractive, right in
terms of let's all pay 1% of
personal income tax rate, but
what that ultimately means I
think for
Anybody across the state would
be that
The CEO.
I would pay the same amount of
personal income tax.
As the lowest wage earner in the
state. Is that not correct, Mr
Chairman?
Mr Speaker? No, sir. That is not
correct.
1% is a number multiplied times.
Whatever the salary is gross. So
your point I believe you're
making is Would everyone pay 1%?
The answer is absolutely correct
with a person making $100,000
pay more than a person that made
$50,000. The answer is yes.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
looking at this 1% pit tax
proposal then so it looks like
Half percent of taxpayers then
would get about
25% of the benefit.
Or $563 Million of that benefit.
Is that correct, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct that the savings for
those at higher incomes would be
greater than those
But
With that being said.
What you are also doing is your
You are effectively addressing
every income, every young calm
and what you're doing is also Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Is you are growing jobs and
opportunities for every new
Mexican
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate your sentiments. So
at this point in time, then it
seems that my example I gave
earlier in terms of working with
the Legislative Finance
Committee and then more recently
appreciating the work of the
House Appropriation and Finance
Committee and their
deliberations on creating a
budget that appreciates
Everybody across our state is
that should we look at this
proposal in its entirety and
Tuesday move forward in a $2
billion plus committee
substitute for the tax package.
It would, it would may have to
create and cause
Having to cut budgets and having
to recreate, then attacks the
the budget process as it's
presented today, and it sits in
the Senate is that correct?
Speaker and gentlemen, I do not
believe that to be correct.
I believe that if you look at
the recurring spending
Versus what we have.
Income wives and project coming
back in and with the bill still
being over in the Senate side,
we still have the chance to help
New Mexico so
My, um
My point, and I don't mean this
disrespectfully as it's never
too late to do the right thing.
And it's never too late to try
to help the people.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I'll make one last point before
we go to others. That may want
to talk about this. So then
we're talking about in your
proposal. The top half of a
percent of all new Mexicans that
are
Making that wage would
appreciate this the most into
your point. They're the ones
that create the jobs. They're
the ones that do things for for
folks here and I can understand
where you're coming from with
that, But as it reads in our tax
omnibus bill today
Tax incentive tax help.
We are seeking to provide that
to the lowest and middle wage
income earners all across our
state.
That
This text that that our tax
package today is based in
progressivity.
And that this committee
substitute is one to which, why
I would ask you not to support
simply is based in being
regressive and again, rewarding
those with the most means in
this state. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I would deal to others.
For questions or comments, Right
is the debate on the amendment.
I've got the gentleman from San
Juan representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
I'll be happy to the elder, My
friends San Juan.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
can you give me some general
idea of what this would do to
middle income New Mexico. Those
of us, you know those who may be
making less than 50,000 a year.
It would reduce your tax burden
from 4.9% to 1%. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, so that
that I would see that throughout
the entire year, I'd have no I'd
be able to take those funds and
be able to use them with the
store.
My enclosed for my kids that are
growing up too fast, um, buying
tires from my cars that go over
these bad roads We have
Um All of that would be realized
by the middle income. New
Mexico Is that correct, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that's
correct, and that
That is the purpose of my, um,
substitute is
Is to help everyone.
And to help them in a
demonstrably way. Where do you
either are going to provide more
jobs and opportunity?
More disposable income at their
household level, but everywhere
they go
They're going to see the effects
of more cash flow and more
often, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
one last question on this.
Kept gains. Um, how How is that
going to translate down to a mom
and pop business? Um, that is
right out.
Let's say $1.3 million when they
get ready to sell their
business, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Well, I am proposing
would not change.
The capital gains tax.
Process as it's currently today,
What it would do from the
proposal is that would
It would significantly
significantly bring more money
back to the home to that owner
of that business.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and that's my point
Precisely.
Mom and pop shops in our state.
Um make up the bulk of the
businesses, and so, um, they
would appreciate it. I think all
of us would appreciate that when
we get ready to make that cell
and transition into either the
nursing home or cottage on the
lake.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
just a more precisely. Answer
your earlier question on that
$50,000 income level.
It would
It would reduce your tax burden.
From the current 4.9% of
$22,450.
Two proposal of $500 So you
basically would have $2000 more
in your pocket at the end of
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I cannot imagine what
that would do for some of the
people citizens within the state
of New Mexico And I thank you
for that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This for
the bait on the amendment the
generated from Santa Fe
Representative Serato. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Chavez Arian
Otero Yield
Happy to yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
you know, I was appreciate the
debates we have in in committee
and then outside of Committee as
well. I will be honest, I've
have some serious concerns with
changing the brackets. Um, from
our understanding when we're in
committee, and we are debating
changing these brackets, it
appears that what is already on
the table would reduce the the
text.
Liability. The the the cost to
the normal new Mexican in what
is the current bill in this
amendment? You're asking that
everyone get the same amount of
one person applied. Is that
correct?
That is correct. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
And overall since you know,
coming to this body and even
learning from it before we have
really been doing a lot to
adjust our tax brackets and to
ensure that our taxes are felt
in a progressive manner. I don't
have to tell anyone here that
$200 is felt a lot more at the
poverty line that it is at
$54,000, which is the median
income in New Mexico or 100 and
$20,000 or more.
My concern, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and this is many
policy and analysis that we see
or have a concern with a flat
tax because Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, well, it might be the
same rate that that everyone is
being applied equally the amount
and how it is impacting their
daily consumption is different,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so from
this with understanding kind of
the movement that we've been
making to ensure that all of the
burden isn't on the poorest in
New Mexico.
Um
How How do you feel that the 1%
understanding that that
Percent might be felt more when
you have less becomes equal at
that point, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Well, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, That's I think that's a
really good question and
And I think you have to look at
it in
And many perspectives.
Arizona, For example, our
neighbor that came into the
Into the union. It's the same
time
We can look at what has happened
in Arizona versus New Mexico.
That's one issue. They just want
to turn. Think we have to quit
worrying about
Whether one person gets a little
more tax relief than the other
and we have to think about the
whole.
We have to look at the whole
State and say, Can I help
everybody? And if we get so
tunnel vision on the fact that
I'm not going to help?
Mr X, because I'm
I am. I'm worried that Mr Y
Doesn't understand, or I won't
You know, we in this body on two
year election cycles, it gets
really
There's a lot of pulls on us and
you and I both understand that
But I think when we start
thinking about how we are
affecting the status a whole
Putting $1.75 billion back into
our towns, our cities or
counties. It's going to be a
tremendous boost.
And everybody will feel it in
many different ways, but
I concur, I I run a calculator
just like you do. And I
understand that those that make
more would have more benefit.
But
You know?
If you
If you think about what values
are
There's a parable in the Bible.
About
One set.
And how important it was.
Very poor lady gave all she
could.
And I think when we start
thinking about helping everyone
And everyone being put in their
money back in the pot growing
their homes buying
More things for their Children.
I think it just
I think we raised the bar for
all families, and that's what my
my point is, But to your point
you're exactly correct. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I'm I enjoy talking
about these policies with you
for this reason, you know, I
don't think either of us ever
want to be in a position where a
person is deciding to give all
they got for taxes. I think that
I I appreciate you and I can
stick to
My concern about
This, though, is also based on
our General fund because we do
find a number of programs that
you and I, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, find important
businesses in New Mexico have a
lot of concerns. Now they're
great things happening to
businesses. New Mexico. I'm very
proud of the work. All of us
have been doing crime remains a
big concern. And in our budget,
we have money going towards
ensuring that we are reducing
crime and doing prevention where
we can, and I'm sure there is
absolutely more we can and
should do, and that will be a
debate that will continue to
have
I also believe Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that we've invested in
training programs so that when
we are trying to attract new
businesses to our state, we have
the workforce that can can hold
up those jobs that we can
present to businesses to say.
Look how great new Mexico
workers are. We have something
to be proud of. Because they
did. These great programs have a
really big concern when we're
talking about losing billions of
more than a billion dollars in
those revenues to our general
fund.
Because then we're then debating
are are we going to reserve less
for a rainy day? And we've seen
some rainy days or are we gonna
take away vital programs And
then at that point, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen and full credit to
you, you've you've been through
some of these tough times longer
than I am. I have
Are we? Are we cutting ourselves
short, I guess is my question to
you at a moment when we do have
opportunities. Are we cutting
ourselves short by reducing
those programs that can really
elevate New Mexico workers? Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Ms Speaker and and lady. I don't
think we ever cut our short
ourselves short when we give
Back to the people that we
represent. I think when we cut
ourselves short
Is when we burden
Are people with programs.
And I've heard a dozen times on
this house floor and in the last
20 days. 21 days, however long
we've been here.
That all and gas is not going to
last forever.
And quite frankly, I don't know
what forever means, but I think
it's going to outlast everybody
in this room. But I think when
we're all dead and gone
We'll still be burning on gas
and they'll still be producing
it in this state.
But
I will tell you that if you were
really want
To diversify and economy.
You have to empower your people.
With a cash flow that allows
them to go out and create
businesses and opportunity. You
cannot and we cannot.
Continue to hold them at poverty
levels.
Promising them a rebate or
promising them of social
program. What they need is
opportunities to flourish.
For them and their families, and
that's what I'm trying to do is,
say Legislature.
Quit spending all the money the
hard working new Mexicans put
forward. Let's give just half of
it.
Just half of it back to the
people and let's see if they can
perform better than the
Legislature camp.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I do appreciate
that perspective on this as
well. However, we don't want to
overly burden our our folks as
well and what we've seen in
places like Arizona, where they
have a billion dollar shortfall
that there are consequences to
taking too much out of the
General fund and that the
concern would be at that point
the now now we're going from a
1% to everyone to a much higher
rate.
I don't want to go into the
other bill too much, but I do
just want acknowledge that there
is a cut for folks across the
board. But maybe we'll just
disagree on that one. I do want
to look at also the capital
gains deduction, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Um am I to understand
that this floor substitute would
remove that, um, would remove
the capital gains tax for
businesses being sold for more
than a million dollars. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
What it would do was would
alleviate the changes that are
proposed in HB 252 and would
remain as this. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. So So what
We're proposing currently in
this bill right now is to have a
capital gains tax above a
million dollars and remove it
otherwise, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, correct and wrong,
But I believe that that was an
improvement upon what was
presented last year where all
capital gains was taxed before
is that correct?
Mr Speaker General. I should
clarify too, just to be clear
the proposal that came out of
this chamber last year before
the budget agreement did have a
capital gains tax for any
capital gains. Uh, not just
those over million is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Generally, I think
that is correct. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. I think so,
too. I just wanted to confirm so
I While I appreciate the intent
is to ensure that people when
they're selling their nest egg,
which this is for many people,
um, that they're able to afford
that, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
look forward to the day when the
average new Mexican business
owner has a business. It's worth
a million dollars or more.
But for most new Mexicans were
selling their businesses. It is
not that rate and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, I am happy
to pull up some stats and go
through all of that with you,
but it's been interesting having
these conversations about
payroll and the budgets of our
businesses locally, you know
when I say the word a million
people, people's eyes get
bright, and they say, that's a
big number. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um so my my question
is
Actually, just I'll just leave
that part there. Um, and I have
one more question for you that I
do want to ask in the original
bill there was a single sales
factor Is that included in your
floor substitute, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
I'm Richard Speaker. General
Lady. It is not
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
in can I can I ask why? Or, um
your thoughts that just so I
understand Generally, we didn't
put any of that corporate text
back in it. Um
So
It is not in there because we we
don't believe that it is.
Fair to do. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
You know, I appreciate this
conversation. I know that's
that's been a conversation.
We've all had for a bit. Um, I
would miss it. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, with his forest
substitute, and it's because
what's happening right now is
large corporations are able to
take those funds. Um and and the
calculations that they're doing
nationally really would come
back to bite New Mexicans. It
would come back and saying that
even if they're growing in our
state, they're not going to pay
us in a different manner. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, the single
sales factor.
Is normal and common in the
nation. We are
In the There are very few, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen that don't do
this, and most states are moving
towards this. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Um and I know it
makes us compete with other
states in a new way, but I think
that's good because new Mexicans
deserve to be treated like any
other state like a New York like
a like a Montana. We deserve to
be treated in that same manner.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so I hope
that that would be something
that would be considered.
You know, I'm gonna keep
looking, but I will go back to
my very basic concerns that
I hope that one day having a
capital gains tax over a million
dollars is a problem for our
folks. And I just haven't seen
that yet, sir. And I and I hope
one day that we get to a place
where those impoverished don't
feel 1% tax so much so much
greater than our rich brothers
and sisters within the day. You
know the folks that I represent
the ones that do make a lot can
afford a little bit more, even
though they're going to be
paying a little bit less than
the current version.
And the folks that have a little
bit less. Just need a little
bit. So thank you so much, sir.
Debate the gentleman from Lee
representative Scott.
Will the channel men from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero, please
yield
I'd be happy to yield, sir.
Uh,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
The tax package that was before
us did have
Some fundamental p i T reform.
Had beloved in the first year
was
About $80,000 is that accurate?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that is
that's accurate. I believe.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it was
my understanding The million,
sir. Not 80,000. Excuse me. A
million
You know, $1.7 billion is a lot
of money. This is serious
business here, so let's make
sure we get all our decimal
points in the right place.
It was my understanding coming
into this session.
That we had approximately 3.2
billion.
Dollars and no money available.
For
Legislative discretionary
spending is that accurate?
Well, kind of, um, we had 3.5, I
believe was the number. I was
told. Plus, we had grown
reserves up to 2 53% or
something like that. So we had
another 1.7 that we
We were able to draw back to
keep reserves around 30%. So all
in all we had about 5.1, or $2
billion in new and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Can you describe the source of
all of this revenue? I think Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
it came from a lot of different
areas I saw we saw some grt
growth and our big cities. Um, I
don't mean to discount at all.
I think we saw some property
taxes, but the majority of it is
you and I will know was adrift
of of the only gas business and
and its influence in the Mexico.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
they fundamental reforms that
were contained in this package.
Amounted to
If you use the $4.5 billion
number
Less than 2%.
Of the nor money.
That was available in this
session. Is that accurate? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I believe
that is accurate.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
seems tomorrow like
This comes down to a fundamental
question.
Whether the state is better
equipped
To spend these one full monies.
As opposed to the citizens of
the state of New Mexico. Is that
kind of the philosophy that
we're working on here? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, Yes. And
I'd like to kind of expand on
that a little bit.
If you look at the track record
Of this legislature that I'm a
part of, and I'm not throwing
rocks at anybody. I'm just
saying, if you look at the track
record of this legislature
It's not very good.
Helping New Mexico.
We have
We have prescribed a lot of
different things.
Across many different governors
of both parties.
But the fact remains that we are
almost last
Or
Or our last
And too many categories.
And so I think instead of us
Prescribing what should be best.
It's about time that we give
some of the money back to the
people.
And let them do what they do
best and that is race or
families.
Provide for their Children's
education there.
Livelihood.
I just think there's
I think it is our
responsibility when you have
$3.5 billion in new money and
New Mexico. It wasn't very long
ago 10 years ago, the budget
wasn't much over $3.5 billion
And now we're talking about
having $3.5 billion of new
money and the state really not
in any better shape.
And I think we ought to drive it
back Drive, but back to local
control. We ought to send it
back to the homeowner and let
them do it.
Muster, Pecker and gentlemen,
you're
You put a pretty sharp point on
the one that I was just about to
make and that
Over the last few years, we have
gone from a five point
Something more than dollars
billion dollar budget to attend
plus billion dollar budget and I
wonder if the people
And this listening to this
debate.
Have had the same opportunities
that is, most of them doubled
their revenue stream and most of
them feel twice as better off as
they were just a few years ago.
Do you believe that to be the
case?
I do, and in
As you know, and
Several clear Do
I mean, where
Where I was raised.
Um
There was I used to go.
Home.
Eat a sandwich with a friend.
And poverty.
Was rampant.
They didn't know it.
We had We sat down on the
kitchen table on a dirt floor.
And
I didn't think anything about
it, and neither did he.
But I can tell you
That that family
Um
Because of hard work and
opportunity.
They're not like that, and there
Professionals and bankers and
Where their dad was the sheep
share.
But
If you put that money back into
families
It makes a big difference.
Most of those people that are at
that income level.
They never see these
Um
Big projects.
That we put together in our big
cities. They don't ever get to
see that they don't know about
that. What they what they know
about how much money they got.
Did provide for their family.
It's that simple.
And Mr Speaker. I believe I
heard it represented that we
would be hurting.
Those among us
With at the lower end of the
economic ladder.
Assure proposal.
Alter in any form or fashion.
all of the support programs that
are available.
To those folks.
And would they, in fact,
Soon, nothing more.
And a reduction in their taxes
at the lower middle and upper
income levels across the board.
That's exactly correct. And when
you empower those people with
more money
They will have more to go out
and and utilize those services.
Then they've ever done before
because today I mean, just a
couple of days ago, we passed.
Be all on
Fuel cost, and I think everybody
in here knows what I thought
about that.
And and this. I'm just trying to
help them recover from some of
the things that we do.
Japanese, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I believe what we're having here
today is a
Is a debate on a fundamental
philosophical difference.
Between her should be most
qualified to spend taxpayer
dollars.
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I submitted that.
Mhm is
The taxpayer.
And I'll be happy to support
your house floor Substitute.
Thank you, sir. For the debate,
the gentleman from Dona Ana
representatives Small. Thank you
very much. Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker with the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero, you
Happy to yell to the gentleman,
Dona Ana. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you very much. Gentlemen,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I want to
sort of run through some top
line numbers real quick first,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, what
we're talking about at least the
numbers that you shared roughly
1.75 billion recurring annual
Reduction in revenue. Is that
right?
It's one point, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it is $1.75 billion
that would be returned to the
taxpayers in New Mexico. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. And I want to dive
into some of those taxpayers
here in just a sec, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So it's 1.75 billion.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, were the
surplus. The new money
diagnosed, heard and saw the
same numbers as you.
Roughly about $3.5 billion, and
so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, this
is about half of that.
Give or take.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That's
exactly correct. Okay. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Briefly also that we
have the tax Stabilization
reserve, otherwise known as the
rainy day fund. Um, we have over
$2 billion in there sometime
that gets added on to the
surplus, But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, would you agree that
it takes a two thirds majority
and declaration of emergency?
To go into that fund, So it's we
probably shouldn't think about
the money in that Tax
stabilization reserve as as sort
of really, um, funds that can be
used in an easy manner. Would
you agree with that? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think your numbers are correct.
I'd have to say that.
As eloquently as you try to set
the case that we would not have
adequate reserves or the ability
to get to them.
I just don't find that to be
credible in with no with no ill
knowing only meant
Because we have such a cash
string.
Coming in today into New Mexico.
Um and we have been able to do
such great things with early
childhood funds and everything
else.
Um, I think we're going to be
alright for a number of years
and if we'll put some money back
in the
In the pockets of our taxpayers.
We will derive much benefit God.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, I shoot to
share the hope, and I think a
strong sense that we're in a
very durable financial position.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, though I
do think it should be clear for
us in the body that the over $2
billion in the tax Stabilization
reserve.
Those are not funds that this
body can access easily. Mr.
Speaker, Gentlemen, though Yeah,
not that you're saying it's just
real quick on that, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, sort of, um, this
body last year passed a bill
that dedicates all after from FY
26 on
The direct oil and gas revenues
straight to the tax. Um, the
severance tax permanent fund. Is
that correct, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe that is correct. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
gentlemen. I I agree with that
that it's body took decisive and
bipartisan action. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the really important
thing there is that the rapid
budget growth that we've seen.
This is our high watermark.
Would you agree with me there,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, because
we have kept that direct oil and
gas revenue rents and royalties.
Anything above fy 25.
From here on out until this
legislature changes that that
goes straight to severance tax
permanent fund.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe that's correct, but
You have to realize in the body
has to realize
That the stresses that we put on
the Mexico
Within our budget process or
self induced when we
Burdened reoccurring spending.
Under the backs of taxpayers, it
causes those stresses that
you're identifying to be real.
But
What I'm trying to do is to
return the money to the taxpayer
to limit the spending and the
growth of government where the
families of new Mexico can grow.
Just like some want government
to grow, but I think our job is
is to help the families provide
for themselves. They Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. I
appreciate uh, that but Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, my point I
think the question and the point
is that Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
we are at a high water mark
right now.
Uh, our future growth. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen is going to
be our general fund growth or
not is going to be directly
related to broader, um, currents
within the economy are gross
receipts. Taxes going up is
personal Income tax going up or
down, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Is corporate income into
corporate income tax going up or
down the last, Let's say
67 years that have been directly
related to direct revenues from
oil and gas production,
primarily oil production from
here on out.
Every new increment of that the
new excess revenue goes to the
severance tax permanent fund
that that's the law and Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, if you
disagree that that is a lot. We
should spend some time.
Otherwise I want to move on to
what That could mean. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I want
to back up just a little bit
when you talk about a high water
mark.
Are you insinuating that New
Mexico's all it can be today or
that the people of New Mexico or
all they can be Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen know Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I'm saying the high
watermark from direct oil and
gas revenues that's fy 25.
Direct oil and gas revenues,
rents and royalties above FY 25.
Those are still going to come to
the state, but those go to the
severance tax permanent fund, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, they do not
come to the General fund as they
have done, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, you're talking about
the tipping basket effect of
those
Incomes over, uh, the base rate
correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
talking about direct oil and gas
revenues, rents and royalties
above FY 25 when if it comes in,
there's more production as we
forecast next year, the rents
and royalties related to that
production that are above the
amount that came in FY 25.
That goes straight to the
severance tax permanent fund,
not to the General fund.
I think that's correct. OK,
thank thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. The reason
that's important, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is that we now are
We've insulated our general fund
from the volatility within
production. We're saving for the
future with our severance tax
permanent fund. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Would you agree to let me go
through a few places where we
made investments? We've raised
teacher salaries, probably over
30% over the last several years.
Would you agree with that? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
We have increased spending in
those areas.
Absolutely.
But
The
House floor substitute that's
before you
Funds all of that that we have
done.
On the recurring site. It does
not cut any of that off.
What it does is it takes half
Roughly
Of
Our last year's
Revenue.
And gives it back to the people
and seeds them for the future.
Instead of building and talking
about.
Generating
Reserves for US and the
Legislature.
I want to generate reserves for
moms and dads across New Mexico
Famous figure. Thank you,
gentlemen. Let's talk, I guess a
little bit about the source of
this red revenue. Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, would you agree that
sort of at a low level 30% at a
high level 50 plus percent of
the new revenue is directly
related to oil and gas
production.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe that's correct. OK,
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I think glad we
agree there. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the companies that
are doing that work, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if they're the ones
that are generating this very
large surplus, And if we're
sending half of this surplus
back
Ah! Do you think Mr Speaker
gentlemen that it's probably
pretty fair to assume that those
same oil and gas production
companies that are generating so
much of the surplus will be the
beneficiary of of these cuts?
No, I Mr Speaker. No, that's not
Will variant Will employees of
those companies benefit?
Absolutely, but employees of all
companies will benefit.
I'm not trying to make this an
oil and gas bill. I'm trying to
make this in a Mexican bill. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I very much
appreciate that. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if the source of the
surplus is coming from oil and
gas production
And there's half of that being
cut off Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
it seems pretty darn clear to me
that the majority of those
benefits are going to go back to
those folks who are paying that
right now. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, moving on, Um
We have
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if you
wanted to respond, please, I
apologize. Go ahead.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I sure
do.
That is just not correct.
There's only 220,000 employees
in the oil and gas business.
This doesn't do anything to
corporate tax.
Based off what it is this talks
about personal income tax.
This will affect the people in
your community just as well as
it will in my community and to
insinuate that this is an oil
and gas bill is just not
factual.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I
appreciate I think we can move
on here. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the source of that
revenue is coming from
production, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and so that the cut
in that it seems to me
Um, in many cases for the will
will go back to where it's
originating from Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I don't mean that to
be controversial. I simply mean
Mr Speaker, gentlemen to observe
where the source of a lot of our
new revenue is coming from. And
where Mr Speaker, gentlemen, the
cuts might go back to Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
In terms of where I fear that
this could come from
I hope we would agree that we've
raised teacher salaries, 30 plus
percent. I hope we would agree.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen that we've
created new funding mechanisms
like the law enforcement
recruitment and retention fund
things that we've capitalized to
the tune of hundreds of millions
of dollars. In the case of
education, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, we've added well over
1.5 billion recurring dollars.
If we cut out, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, if we if we take
This large of attack of a cut.
Does it not worry you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen that we will
be able to support these
commitments that we've made to
teachers to law enforcement to
healthcare workers. Does that
worry you at all? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, not in
the least.
And I tell you that because
We have
Quite a bit of reserve.
We have
Apportioning less than or about
half of our excess back to the
people.
And we have every reason to
believe.
That the income stream next year
Is going to be as strong as it
was this year.
And so to
Choose to think and to
insinuate.
That giving back to the people.
Is too expensive.
And burdens US.
I have to tell you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
That's all in gas that we talked
about. Most of it comes from
public lands.
That's belongs to all of the
people in New Mexico, where they
live and in Towson or or
Lee County.
It's it's public property.
It's public income.
And what I'm trying to do is to
push
This legislative body.
Into growing. The families of
New Mexico as much
And as strongly as we are intent
on growing our government
budget, famous speaker Thank
you, gentlemen. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. I would point out
that the budget we passed grows
6.5% this year, the lowest over
the last several years. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, Um, let me
ask really quickly with regard
to transportation funding.
Do you think that, uh, we need
to hold the capacity to invest
more in transportation over the
next few years. I would also for
brevity, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
add in. Do you think that we
should continue our
reimbursement rate increases for
health care professionals over
the next few years?
Or should we stop? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen?
Mr Speaker. There's nothing in
my budget.
That would prevent that from
continuing to occur.
Not one thing.
And
And I have to make sure that the
body understands.
That that is. We're not
stripping.
Anything.
Any other power for any of the
spending levels from this body.
All of my proposal does
Is sins. $1.75 billion, about
half
Of the excess that the people of
New Mexico
Have created. I'm sending half
of it back to them so that they
can grow their families.
As they see fear and not have to
look the Santa Fe for a rebate.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It,
uh I fear deeply that we would
not only be if we adopt your
substitute, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, this would
effectively being saying no more
raises for law enforcement, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, it would be
saying no more raises for
Our school teachers, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, it would be capping
our investments in career
technical education that we've
recently set records with.
We would say.
If everything goes well.
That we can maybe hold steady
for a few years, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but it is very clear
to me that we would be capping
the ability to invest in
education in health care.
In roads and infrastructure, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, speaker,
Gentlemen, we just said 100
million new dollars to our water
Trust board for important water
projects all over the state of
New Mexico.
This cut in revenue would mean
we would say no more.
There is no more extra funding
coming your way to repair your
waterline to work on and
wastewater system. I fear, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because we
are we can't go into the Tax
Stabilization reserve without
emergency vote.
And without a two thirds
majority of this body, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
And
Within our the roughly 3 Million
or Excuse me, 3 billion in
reserves. That's there for
roughly about a 30% reserve on
the budget. We passed in a
bipartisan fashion manner this
year.
That reserve has to grow each
and every year to stay at that
robust level. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um I fear that I I
certainly cannot support this,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this puts
a cap No more teacher raises no
more law enforcement raises, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, no more for
roads.
Ah, no more for water. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, um
In the best case scenario.
In a worst case scenario, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, if we have
global price shocks if there's
another oil Price war, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, although
maybe that's less likely because
our production is that such a
remote, robust level
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this
means we're not cutting salaries
were laying teachers off.
When we cut out half of our high
watermark, Mr Speaker.
The sky is not falling.
We still have $1.75 billion
Of excess of new money.
And to insinuate that this
proposal that funds all of those
teacher raises and all of those
law enforcement programs and all
of the highway deals will will
dry up and fall off the vine.
It's just
Not accurate, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm not finished, so
Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen.
Our budget has grown.
From around $4 billion.
Over $10 billion in 10 years.
I have seen
And today we have recurring
revenue streams.
Between 12.6 and $13 billion
And if you subtract this $1.5
billion that I'm purporting to
give back to the people.
You still have
Almost $11 billion of new money.
Which is more than
Our budget this year of 10.2 or
thereabouts, so we still have
plenty of headspace.
And instead of insinuating
That this budget proposal
Is going to cause devastation in
New Mexico.
And teachers won't get any more
raises and firefighters won't
get any more fire hoses or
anything like that is just not
accurate.
The numbers.
Support giving money back to the
people.
For the people.
It does not.
Cause us to cut one program.
Not one program. It doesn't
cause one teacher to be laid
off. It doesn't It doesn't not
do any of that. What it does is
it provides
Parents.
The opportunity to grow.
To buy a new house.
To buy a new car.
To buy new tennis shoes for
their kids. It is a tool that
you can incentivize growth
across into Mexico by letting
the people of New Mexico make
those decisions.
And
Gentlemen, with all due respect.
Telling this body that this
proposal limits
Teachers raises is just not
accurate, and I won't stand for
it. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, thank
you for that. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, let's briefly talk
about Arizona. Did Arizona Mr
Speaker gentlemen, recently an
act of very large tax cut. Uh,
recently, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think they just cut their
personal income tax to 2.5%. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, is that
higher or lower than what we
have here?
It is higher than what we have
here. But Mr Speaker
And gentlemen, if you're
proposing a settlement of 2.5%
go ahead. I'll take you up on
it. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
glad we could get to that as a
as some shared common ground, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, Arizona cut
their personal income tax. It's
still double what you propose,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, What's
the state of Arizona's budget
this year?
Well, I think Mr Speaker, I
don't know what their budget
yes, but let's talk about what
Arizona is done. We both came
into the nation at the same
time.
20 years later, our population
was about the same.
And tell me what the population
and average income is ever an
Arizona
Constituent citizen versus in
the Mexican
And they don't have any oil and
gas.
They did it off a business.
They grew business. They grew
technology. They they put money
back in the pockets of their
small businesses and allowed
them to flourish.
If they had had the oil
production that we had in the
natural gas production. There is
no telling where they'd be
today.
Mr Speaker. Thanks, gentlemen.
Thank you. But, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, uh please correct me
if I'm wrong, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, for this current
year, the budget deficit in
Arizona.
After a less severe tax cut than
you're proposing for New Mexico
is a $1 billion shortfall. Is
that right or wrong, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen,
we needed the rain need to
define what severe Reace.
Giving back to the people in
your opinion is severe.
And those people that I
represent.
I don't think that that money
coming back in their pockets.
It's severe. They think that's a
benefit. So
If you want to talk about it
benefit, we can talk about it.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, as chair
of appropriations. What I'm
talking about is our state
budget. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Please correct me. If I'm wrong,
There's a $1 billion shortfall,
as reported in the Arizona
budget this year after a tax cut
that is less significant than
the one you proposed for New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I am not for sure about Arizona.
Has
And I think what Arizona?
Stresses are
I don't have a thing to do with
the bill that I'm proposing.
I think many times members of
this body want to talk about
things that have not a darn
thing to do with what's before
him today.
And I would tell you that this
bill before us today.
This substitute.
Returns $1.75 billion to the
people in New Mexico.
Yeah. Maintains.
About $1.75 billion of new, many
going forward.
Which is
About 10% plus
And Ms Speaker and gentlemen.
Although
Arizona may have stresses today.
The decisions that Arizona has
had over the years with income
tax levels and property tax
levels and corporate income tax
levels cause us to rethink what
we have done and what we need to
do for the future, what they
did.
Is they put money back in the
pockets of their constituents.
That's what I'm trying to do not
grow government but money back
in homeowners' pockets. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It is,
uh it is 100% accurate to say
that Arizona is facing a $1
billion shortfall.
In their state budget.
Following one year on it didn't
take a long time. One year on
tax cuts that are actually more
severe, Uh, your provoked
proposing much more significant
cuts. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
want the body to know Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Briefly at the University of
Arizona.
They're cutting faculty. They're
looking at cutting faculty. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there. Look
at cutting back. That's one of
this is just one example. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen of when you
cut in half what's coming in
You cap
Teacher raises you Kaplan
enforcement pay. You just have
to Mr Speaker, Gentlemen to
balance the books and Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's what
Arizona is seeing.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker. I'm
I'm not quite finished, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
You can't cut the what's coming
in.
Send it back. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. In this case, I think
there there is disagreement.
Perhaps we should go offline and
learn a little bit more. But
when the surplus is coming from
oil and gas you're sending, you
know almost $2 billion back.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
You're going to have to cap
those salary increases for
teachers for law enforcement,
the investments in roads
To keep our reserves near that
30% and Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
our neighbors to the West just
did this states like Kansas, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen have done
this.
And they face severe
repercussions.
They can't hire more. They can't
increase salaries.
In some cases, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, my strong fear And
while respect and why,
respectfully I cannot support.
this is because I don't think it
can support
The investments are state is
making in education in health
care in public safety and
infrastructure. And I fear Mr
Speaker gentlemen that it could
lead us to have to cut in those
same areas, so appreciate very
much the dialogue. I'm sure
you'll have something to offer.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, but that
is my very strong fear and why I
can't support it. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Mr Speaker.
Before we move on. I just have
to respond.
That if our
Our process of budgeting.
If the first time you're gonna
negative stress in our budget,
whether it's from low oil prices
You know, Covid. Whatever
happens that causes
Yes. If your approach to
balancing the budget is always
to cut Teacherssalaries
As the first thing to do.
We're missing the boat.
That is, I will stand here and
argue with you still.
Tell the cows come home.
Ah, if that's what you believe,
because Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, there's many more
ways for us to balance the
budget, and we don't do that by
Our budget is that high, and I
would also tell you that it
hasn't performed worth of flip
speaker. Gentlemen, I certainly
don't believe that Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I have great faith in
our educators in our education
system and the need to continue
making investments. But, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, we agree
that over 40% of our budget
Is in K 12 Public Education
Department.
Do we agree on that I would
agree that New Mexico currently
Has about $4 billion in their
budget. I would agree that are
higher. Ed is above national
average.
I would agree that what we do
And K through three is is above
national average. I think we
have funded our teachers very
well. And I think we're doing a
good job and we need to
And I'm not proposing anything
that cuts their salaries.
Or proposes that it would be a
requirement that they're cutting
the future as you have
discussed.
What I am proposing is that
those kids that would wind up
going into those classrooms
would be better fed would be
better clothes would be would
have a warmer home with safer
streets around them, and that's
what I want to do is I want to
prepare that child to learn.
You have to. You have to enrich
that family.
So that the product of that
family, those Children can go to
school and be and be ready to
learn.
You can't just throw more money
in the classroom and have
starving Children going in there
and say they're going to be
better.
That's ridiculous.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Let's
talk for just a quick second
there, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
recently passed universal free
meals, school meals. Would you
agree Or disagree with that? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
I think that is, uh, I think
that's absolutely true. But
doesn't it tell you a little bit
about our families?
When we have to provide free
meals.
For our Children because we know
they're coming to school hungry.
What I'm trying to do is get
them fed at the house before
they leave.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we could
go through all of the different
investments. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen,
These new investments. My point
about why you in my opinion, and
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I'm not
saying this is the intent nor
necessarily outcome. It is my
very strong sense that it is a
likely outcome.
Why say, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
that we cap
Teacher salary raises. Why we
can't Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
investment into our colleges and
universities. Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, why we cap and we
won't invest more in the
reimbursements in healthcare.
Because those are the biggest
places of investment, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, it's well over
60% of our entire budget.
And so should something happen
like it did in 2020, or like it
did a few years before Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Those are the only places you
can go to make up $1.75 billion.
I'm not saying it's the intent.
But Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I do
want to share the fact that
those are the places where the
greatest amount of investment in
HB two and our budget is.
And so we have a proposal like
another states, where large
Uh,
Tax cuts, including and perhaps,
especially for the wealthy going
to place the revenue doesn't
come in.
Those are the places that you
have to look to cut to balance
the budget, which were
constitutionally required to do
I simply point out Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that that is where the
majority of our investment as a
state is and if perhaps because
of these tax cuts that are
revenue, Uh
Plus something happens on the
world stage and commodity
markets that we end up having to
cut.
Those are the only big places to
cut. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you.
There's further debate The
general in from San Juan,
representative Lane.
Thank you, Mr Speaker as a
gentleman from Chavez, Arian
Otero Yield. Happy to yield,
sir. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Uh, gentlemen from Chavez.
I would like to
Ask a few questions there, I
think, clear up some
misconceptions that have been, I
think brought out here.
Ah, with some of the questions
I've heard, So let's let's talk
about sort of this theme that I
heard developed that
This floor substitute actually
be a detriment to the poorer of
New Mexico. Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, What's the current?
Proposed rate for the very
lowest income bracket in New
Mexico.
1%
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
sorry. Let me and let me ask
this question. What is the
What is the current lowest
bracket?
In the proposed
HB 252 not in the floor
Substitute.
1.7
Turner and Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Java's What is the proposed
rate?
For all of new Mexicans in the
four substitute
1%
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Chavez under the floor
substitute
Are the poorest of New Mexico
actually getting a tax cut.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is correct.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Chavez. There was some
discussion earlier about how
A dollar.
For the poorest of new Mexican
has the biggest impact and I
agree with that sentiment.
Does our four substitute
actually help address that
issue?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe it does. And so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen from
Travis, Can you explain just
that just briefly about what's
the rationale for lowering the
pit?
Well, it's It's pretty simple, I
think when you lower personal
income tax allowed those
hardworking new Mexicans to keep
more of what they earn, they
have more to spend to provide
for their families.
To build or buy newer, better
homes, and it will generate
revenue across New Mexico and
that is growth. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from Chavez.
Are you aware that it's actually
seven states that have no
personal income tax at all?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I am
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Chavez. I look at and I've heard
the discussion. I do understand
the reality that if they're
there could potentially be lower
income for the state.
In theory, and therefore we may
have to make some some hard
decisions when it comes to
budgeting, But that's not a
necessary truth. So there are
other states, for example, that
have no pit
And there are economies are
flourishing. Their population
base is exploding. Not the
opposite. Which is what you see
with the state like California,
where their pit rates are
extremely high. I think it
states like Tennessee, Florida
and Texas, all of their
economies are flourishing. And
so it is. There are models were
when you remove or great
religious pit.
Actually, the income increases
over time, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, so I assume when
you're talking about
We don't have to cut salaries
for public employees. That's
part of the rationale.
Speaker and gentlemen, That's
exactly right. What
What
The model has shown
Across the Mexico across the
United States.
Is that when you put more money
Back into the society, not at
government at the high level
when you put it back at the at
the kitchen table.
Those families flourish. They
spend more money, more G RTs
created more pity is created
because they have more income
and the whole economy flourishes
and does better Mr Speaker,
gentlemen from Chavez and
The last thing I want to clear
up is there was some discussion
on on the capital gains and what
the floor substitute does. It's
different from the underlying
proposed bill.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Chavez.
There was. I think some theme of
along the lines of I would love
for having a business that's
over a million dollars to become
a regular problem for
Mexicans and and I would love to
see that too.
Um, but the reality is the
underlying bill doesn't even
truly offer
Cap gains preferential treatment
for
Businesses in New Mexico because
most of those businesses are
assets sells the high vast
majority.
And there's no language in this
bill that would capture that.
It's simply for stock purchases
and L C membership transfers.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Chavez, I understand your floors
up to address is that as well,
Is that correct?
I appreciate that. And Mr
Speaker before we go on percent
of the House rules, 74 and 741.
I moved for a call of the house
and the purpose of the college
for the issues related around
has to have a House tax and
revenue Committee substitute for
HB 252.
And I wrote called Boat
Real called Vote on the Color
House.
Yeah, we got the one on the on
the floor Substitute.
Alright, We've gotta call the
house members. Please go to your
seats so that the sergeant's can
Count you
And we will
Proceed as soon as the call is
completed.
Members. Please come into the
chambers. We have a call of the
house.
Please sit at your seats, folks,
so that you can make the work of
our hard working staff little
Members. I have been informed by
our sergeant that the call is
complete. We will go back to the
gentleman from any Chavez and
representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from San Juan, where you
finished with your debate?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you.
Gentlemen from Chavez, and so,
um
I think my question was, Does
the four substitute
Keep the capital gains
preferential treatment hole.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
does, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Chavez and so
Um
The last point about
misconception is again the
language in the proposed house,
Bill 252.
Which is different than our
floor sub.
Doesn't actually provide any
meaningful
Cap gains relief.
For
Essentially 99% of new Mexicans.
It's a very, very Phiri few
people that are ever going to
buy a business with the risk of
taking on the liabilities of the
business.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that's
absolutely correct. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Read further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Chavez, representative Embry
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Guilty of the gentleman from
Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Um
There was some discussion about
Arizona and its recent tax cuts.
Ah,
To your knowledge. What is the
oil and gas production levels in
Arizona?
Nada. They don't have any.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Um
Do you know when
The Arizona's flat tax took
effect.
I believe it was within the last
year. Um
Gentleman, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, I think it is
important.
My memory is right. Arizona has
about 7.2.
Million people in the state, and
they have a budget of about $17
billion.
It's been reported that they
were a billion dollars in
arrears.
What I just looked up, said they
were they had about a $400
million deficit currently.
So it's 400 million of the $17
billion budget.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Um
Are you familiar with
Colorado's, uh, income tax
rates.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I am
not
Ah, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Colorado has had a
flat tax rate of 5% since 1987.
Um how would you compare
Colorado's oil and gas
production to that of New
Mexico's
Well, um
I know up around Ranger. They
have some production I used
Be involved in some of that, Um
And, um
So they have a little bit but
they don't have near what New
Mexico desk. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, would you
say it is significantly less
than New Mexico? Absolutely
significantly less.
And thank you and Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, it is my
understanding that Colorado has
a roughly around $36 billion
budget, which is currently
balanced. Are you familiar with
that?
I am I have seen numbers that
indicate their budget is, you
know 3.5 times, but ours is and
they have they have balanced
There's Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Would you
say that Colorado is a
A little better comparison to
New Mexico.
Then Arizona.
In many ways, um
You know there, Um
Pa. Graffiti is similar. They
got a little oil and gas of they
have a huge tourist business.
Technology is big in the den
Protect Center area. So in many
ways they are somewhere
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Uh, would you say
that based on oil and gas
production that maybe even
though we lag severely behind?
Texas, It might be a better
Comparison on what it does for
their budget and state revenue.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
sir. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. And and are you
familiar with Texas is personal
income tax rate.
Um, Yes, sir. It's uh
It's not as high as what I'm
proposing.
Thank you. Uh, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, I believe it is
0%.
Um
I'd like to talk a little bit
more about the the flat tax. Um
and
And would you say that?
A flax, a flat tax benefits.
The middle to low income people
more by eliminating the
confusion of filing taxes.
Isaac. I think, reducing the tax
burden on people.
Whether you do it on property
tax.
Income tax.
Um, power that family to do
bigger and I have been and I
have said many times on this
house floor.
What? I'm have been
Have been really has been a
heart throb for me.
Is the fact
That
Whether
Whether we realized it or not.
We have put families in a real
bind in the Mexico
And I
Sincerely believe
That if you want to address
crime, and if you want to
address
Education. If you want to
address all those things that
tax our society
We can fix a lot of that when we
fix the family.
And if we will go back
To our roots.
And we will empower the families
to make decisions. Give them
give them
Give them give them a piece of
the action.
Where they where they can be
proud of what they were. Moms
and dads are proud of what they
provide for their
Their families.
You will change the course of
our state. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, Would you
also say that that a flat tax Uh
will, uh,
Eliminate some compliance
issues, especially for those who
Inadvertently mess up their
taxes and and save them.
The costs of dealing with those
compliance issues.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
without a doubt.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and and you. I think
you are.
Um
Saying it and and and I just
want to make sure that when,
when
You. You keep more money in your
pockets.
It increases local spending and
local growth as a benefit to our
communities.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that's
that's absolutely correct. And
as I mentioned earlier
I believe my job and our job as
representatives.
We should be more worried about
the reserves and moms and dads
checking accounts, then we
should be worried about the
reserves in our state budget
when it's
$10 billion.
Very, very few families and in
the Mexico would not notice.
$1000 difference in there.
Income.
Very few families that we
represent would see that as
being if they knew they had
that.
That
Income that steady stream coming
into their families. It will
make a big difference, so that's
my purpose is trying to get
more.
More of life in the families.
Thank you And Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, sort of one final
question on this when when we
look at a flat tax and, uh,
Uh, would you say it will
actually help raise wages
because people will not have as
much fear of moving up into a
higher tax bracket.
Absolutely Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, debt as you will know
that has been
Problematic on many fronts with
with the employees.
At the starting levels moving up
at times. You can promote them
into poverty because of the
taxes that they encourage. They
grow, and we shouldn't be doing
that. We should be. They should
be rewarded for their hard work.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
There is a debate on the
substitute. The gentleman from
San Juan represented Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero yield
I'll be happy to yield to my
friend from San Long.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um
And in an earlier debate, there
was a question asked or a
statement that seemed to be made
that
Um
Severance tax dollars going into
the permanent fund.
That
If, since there is now they're
kind of captain. A certain level
and monies are flowing to other
areas that
It seemed to
Appear in that discussion, as if
Those are the That's the
production.
Or severance dollars.
We're the only dollars that
really go into the
Into the budget. We know that as
a percentage and it's a huge
percentage. I believe Mr Speaker
and gentlemen about about 40% is
comes from severance tax
dollars, but Miss Speaker and
gentlemen
Um the whole oil and gas
industry is not just the
severance of oil.
Or gas, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, but we're talking
about the entire
Economy of oil and gas, which is
Ah!
The folks that go out there and
do the work the equipment, the
Val or, um, attacks that goes
with new equipment that's
purchased the in the income tax
that comes from people who work
in the industry. The
Oh, the G R T tax when something
is bought and sold from one
company to another M, a speaker
and gentlemen, I would believe
in. Maybe you can correct me if
I'm wrong, but the entire oil
and gas industry probably is 50%
or more once you include
All of the service industries
all of the income tax. All of
the G R T when things are bought
the ad valorem taxes. Would you
agree that it's somewhere around
50% of our budget?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think that's right. But I
I think
That we have to think beyond
that. I I think there are other
entities that have great growth
opportunities in New Mexico and
the speaker and gentlemen, that
is exactly where I was going.
Even if we say that it's
50% 50% does not come from that
industry. We're talking
Other people.
Other businesses in our
communities.
And what we have done, and I
think it was. What we've done
with our budget is a couple of
things. In the last several
years we have grown
Our government budget and you
have some experts there.
Um, in the last
Three years. I believe we've had
a
But 10% increase in 9% increase
in speaker and gentlemen, I just
told that
From
Um, just during this
administration.
Our budget has grown about 65%.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
That is exactly the point that I
believe I was hoping to make and
that we're lauding.
A over a 6% budget increase this
year as a tremendous effort on
our part is the lowest
In the last four years. I
believe
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I just have to ask
you
Folks who do not work in
government who
Bakers.
Shop owners.
Folks that are not in the oil
and gas industry and are not
government workers.
Has their income.
At home.
Seen this type of increase, or
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, have
have they seen
Inflation, which is taking a
greater chunk of their
expendable dollars at home.
Well, I think it's been a little
bit of both. I think before
We were burdened with the
inflation measures that you saw
a lot of families, not in oil
and gas, but we're of Associated
Service industries.
Were doing very well.
But a recent the burden of
inflation has has really sat
down on them hard and it's hurt
our families more than it hurts
small businesses.
Even though there to meet Miss
Speaker and gentlemen, I am
What I'm wanting to express here
is I'm glad that we've been able
to increase our teachers wages
To where where we're competitive
with our neighbors. I'm glad
we've been able to have some of
these increases for law
enforcement.
But Miss speaker and gentlemen
At the same time.
The other folks who live in our
communities have not seen pay
raises like that.
They have not seen 4% a year
They have not seen 3% a year.
They have not seen anything.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen since
Covid
Many folks have lost their
family businesses. Many folks
have seen their hours cut.
And there is not, uh
Any increase, and they cannot
write a bill.
To help remedy that situation.
They rely on us and Mr Speaker,
we can't raise their wages.
We've tried to force
Increases in the very, very,
very bottom end.
But for the vast majority of
folks in New Mexico who are in
that middle area, we can't write
legislation to give them a raise
to $20 an hour $25 an hour. We
can't do that.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
all we can do
To affect their bottom line is
to give them a tax break.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Throughout the years we've been
told We don't have the money you
and I came in at the same time.
Mr Speaker. This is our 10th
year.
In the legislature.
And during that time we've seen
lean years and we've seen years
of plenty.
But every year
We've been told we can't
Give back anything to the public
speaker and gentlemen, we've
been able to do a rebate.
At times, but nothing that they
can count on.
Nothing that they can say.
Finally, some relief As a matter
of fact, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, we with
We're seeing proposed in the
current budget, the current tax
bill.
That's that's before us now is
An increase.
And to some, not all but to some
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
It. I don't want to be in a
position where I'm choosing
government workers over all the
rest of the workers.
And it does appear as if that's
our choice. You're over year.
Is we got to increase government
spending because we have people
who work for government who need
to raise and I'm not saying they
don't
What I'm saying is equal
consideration needs to happen to
the taxpayers who are back home.
Who are not fortunate to have a
government job, or who did not
necessarily have a very, very
high income in some industry,
But the average Mr Speaker and
gentlemen,
Is in that.
$55,000 a year range.
And it is a struggle to pay
their bills. As a matter of
fact, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the part of the discussion
earlier. I think you pointed it
out.
Us now providing free
Mills for all Children in the
state.
I think
Is not something we need to lock
ourselves with. I think it's a
tested.
Admission.
That we've harmed families back
home.
Then that now we need to find a
subsidy of sorts for everyone.
Because we have not allowed them
to spend their money. We have
decided, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
That we are better served. We
have a better idea in Santa Fe,
help people back home.
Should be paid.
And and and and and what kind of
money they should be able to
keep. We instead are are better
in our minds somehow as spending
their money.
Is that what your bill is trying
to address? Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
exactly in line with what I'm
Trying to address um
You know, we have
We have given teachers races
over the last several years, and
they deserved it, and I'm glad
we had the capacity to do it. I
supported it and voted for it.
I think at the same time we have
Broader state policeman.
Salaries that we did that over
the last couple of years and
with were really directed that
something I strongly support.
And we'll continue to support
because they
But we haven't done anything for
the families.
You know, we grow big government
and we passed out money and we
give it to this or we give it to
that.
But we haven't done anything to
grow.
The families of New Mexico.
We haven't done anything to put
More.
Um
More food on their tables or
more pride in their step.
We
You know, we have $3.5 billion
of blue money.
And we give less than 5% of our
6% of it back to the people, and
I just think I heard
I think my, uh, the legislators
from railroad by the other day
said that we are we were known
by our values. Our budget was
our values.
And I think there's some truth
to that. But
The people of New Mexico.
They
They looked down on
Legislature.
They don't have They don't hold
us in high regard.
And the reason they don't hold
us in high regard is
There's a lot is because we talk
a lot and we don't do very much
for him.
And they don't feel like they're
represented.
And what I'm trying to do is to
is to do something.
That they can look back and say
the Legislature did something
that was good for us, and we're
just not a bunch of politicians.
So, Mr Speaker, I have one last
question for the gentleman.
In your, uh, substitute that you
had before us today.
Is this going to exempt
teachers?
Or firefighters or policemen or
government workers from a lower
tax break or Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, would this also for
our teachers and firefighters if
we gave this tax break, would it
not benefit benefit them as
well?
Speaker and gentlemen, they
would greatly benefit and they
would feel
That we wouldn't have to have
bills going through here to help
a teacher pay for school
supplies if we drop the text, or
1%.
Not saying that we shouldn't. I
don't think any teacher ought to
have to buy school supplies for
their classrooms. I think that's
crazy.
But
When you drop that tax rate for
all wagers in the Mexico
There is no one exempted.
Everyone will benefit.
And it will be something that I
think will make will generate a
tremendous amount of of growth
in the Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I look
forward.
To something that doesn't
Force us to choose one group of
people over another, but it will
benefit all people in New
Mexico. I look forward to
supporting your committee
substitute or your four
substitute.
Right. Further debate on the
House floor. Substitute the
gentleman from Catrin Hidalgo
and Grant Representative
Terrazas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman please
healed?
Be happy to yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. You know, I
First of all I want to start by
thanking
You know the textbook committee
and everyone that put work into
this bill.
Um, there is a lot of good stuff
in this bill.
Um and and in your substitute,
and so I appreciate that, But Mr
Speaker, one of the things
gentlemen that I have done when
I walked
Um
Even in my district, which
before was in Dona Ana and no
matter where I walked every once
in a while, I would run into the
average person. I just say that
we'd have this conversation
about taxes.
And I'd ask him.
Do you trust?
The state of New Mexico, 22.
Spend your dollars
Or do you trust yourself? In
other words, I'd say.
Do you want the state of New
Mexico attacks you and give you
back goods and services.
Or would you rather keep it for
yourself and spend it where your
family needs it? Most
And I have yet to run into
someone. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
That's that.
Disagrees with spending it
themselves The minute they say,
Well, I can keep it. Would you
rather keep it than giving it to
the government government and
then giving it back and they
agree with you, 100%.
And so that being said, you
know, I think I like your 1%.
Proposal.
And I was interesting, Mr
Speaker that we hear about the
the about Arizona and this is
all with due respect. I'm trying
to navigate through all the
debate.
And so
We listen to what the metrics
you know what Arizona is doing,
but the truth of it is
Has absolutely nothing to do
with New Mexico.
Any more than any of the other
50 states.
Because of metrics in New Mexico
are different than all the other
states.
Our revenues are different. Our
spendings are spending formula
is different.
And although 1% sounds very,
very low
Again. There are many other
states Alabama, Tennessee,
Texas, Wyoming. Washington, New
Hampshire, Florida, Nevada.
They don't have any tax income
tax, state income tax.
And so that being said
I'm gonna ask you a question. Do
you agree?
That we've seen massive
inflation in the last few years.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Speaker in general, That is
correct.
The reason I ask you that Mr
Speaker gentlemen, is because
I'm saying we're seeing for you
know inflation go up, whether
it's a house a car.
Food. It doesn't matter what
you're buying right now. It has
gone up tremendously.
And so you're 1%.
Reduction in tax and personal
income tax. First of all.
Is a gift to new Mexicans.
To be able to keep some of that
money for themselves.
And spend it where they're
losing money through inflation.
Would you agree with that? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I do
and it's a little bigger than
that.
The government has
3.5, or $4 billion of new money.
Legislators typically have never
seen a dime they didn't want to
spend.
And they always have pet
projects. I've had them. I mean,
I'm not throwing rocks. It's
just a fact of the matter.
Legislators have never seen a
dollar they didn't want to
spend.
We don't pay down debt.
Very well.
If at all.
And we don't like to share
I mean, we fight over capital
outlay and who's gonna governor
is going to get so much and
we're going to get I mean, it's
It's always a fight about the
money and I'm just trying to to
take the fight out of that.
And move the all of that excess
back to the people.
The people deserve to keep the
excess.
If we have excess, That means
we're taxing too much. I agree
with that. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I truly do and we're
running out of time and
And I have some other things. I
think you're basically agreeing
with
The premise that we'd rather see
the people keep their money.
Then give it to the to the state
of Mexico.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I You
know, I was thinking about the
You know, I I sat here and
obviously I don't have time to
go through all these texts.
Figures, and I probably
Would get too deep into things
and kind of caused things to get
lose the point that I'm making,
but
Um
You know, I looked at
I looked at the million dollar
exemption.
And it sounds good.
It really does. It sounds better
than it was last year, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
But there are some issues with
the way it's written.
And I think our our leader Lane
expressed that I saw that
express that.
And so
If it's not sold in the exact
proper manner.
Um, we will. They won't They'll
They won't get that exemption.
But I want to think I wanna
actually talk more about small
business.
And I'm gonna tie it into the
inflation that I'm talking
about. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
We see we see the cost of
everything going up.
Tremendously.
We see House housing.
Just in general housing from
what I bought, purchased my
first new built home when I
built my first new bill home.
150 some $1000.
You couldn't touch that. No way
in New Mexico right now.
So when you're Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, when you're actually
you have a business.
And some of these people have
worked their entire life.
Their entire life.
In their business.
And how do they save their
money?
They generally put their money
back into their business. They
generally pay, you know, keep
the maintenance up. They keep
you know their equipment, new
equipment, replacing equipment,
whatever that is.
And these mom and pop
Individuals, Mr Speaker.
Um
Work terrorists tirelessly
trying to create equity into
their business.
And some of these people, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen will work in
that same business in that same
footprint of a business for
2030 40 years.
They don't have a 41 K many
times.
Their money is what they have
been able to create inequity.
For when they decide to sell.
That they can then cash out and
retire themselves. Would you
agree with that? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
I do agree with that, And I
appreciate the comments. Um
Mr Speaker. I know we're
probably close if we're not out
of time, and I don't want to.
Beat this.
Drum any longer than I have to.
I appreciate the bodies.
Questions, I think as, uh New
Mexicans watch us today.
Um and they're they're wondering
whether we're going to do
anything for them. I just asked
the body to consider
Your constituents and what goes
around the kitchen tables and
their homes and that's what this
is. This is not a gotcha deal.
This is about putting more money
back in the families of new
Mexicans speaker Thank you.
I didn't know that they didn't
hadn't finished. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
My time's up.
Jessica.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Generated from earlier Mr
Speaker. I moved to table House
floor substitute number one.
Right. We've got a motion to
table house floor Substitute
number one. There is a roll call
vote.
It was asked for granted.
Yes, and the substitute would
have been tabled a vote of
knowing we're back on the
substitute the vote.
Is now.
Open.
What about clothes?
What is our closed by what of 44
in the affirmative 25 in the
negative.
House floor substitute number
one to House taxation and
revenue committees. Substitute
for house Bill 252 has been
tabled.
Gentlemen yourself the floor.
Mr Speaker. I appreciate the
body's indulgence going through
it. I think the people of New
Mexico
Uh, didn't get a fair shake on
this and
I think we'll probably all hear
from them. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, there is where
the debate the gentle lady from
McKinley representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from McKinley
County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I know there's
been a lot of discussion early
on in the debate this afternoon
about what determines your
limited capacity for tax for the
tax package. Could you please
explain that to the body?
Mr Speaker and gently. I think
we're at exhaustion. We've gone
through that, in regards to have
the budget processes is
calculated for the year in
regards to what is talked about
in Lfc than what's talked about
here in respecting the process
of creating a budget.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
there's more to it, and
actually, we didn't do it. Mr.
Speaker in an exhausted way, I
think I think it's super
important, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that when we look at
capacity and how it's
established, and particularly
when we're looking at capacity
for out years, which is my
point, and you talk about that
when we look at the tax package
And it goes out to fy 28.
How do we set a limited
capacity?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. So
at this point, the way we look
at long term capacities we look
at at long term capacity levels
and revenues for the state.
Mr Speaker. Uh, gentlemen, Can
you tell me what that is based
on specifically
Mr Speaker and gentle lady is
based on the consensus revenue
estimates.
That's correct. And so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, when we're
looking at consensus revenue,
and you're looking at the
capacity to fy 28, and we're
looking at a
Approximately
You're out. Years of 119 can't
see the number of the lights bad
in here. I think it's 623 and we
go out there, but we add those
are those compounded numbers, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gently, they are
not
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, when
we're looking at adding fy, 25,
26, 27 and 28 are those stand
alone numbers.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Yes,
ma'am. They are standalone
numbers. Okay, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Those are basically
the that's the House portion
correct.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
ma'am. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, What are we allowing
for the Senate side? Is it the
same for those out years, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. It's
the remaining balance of that
$200 million capacity that we're
looking to share with the
Senate.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Is there
some sense that there has been
an agreement on what the Senate
will be spending
Mr Speaker and gentle lady of
Hisley as the opposite. How side
to this chamber. We did have a
meeting on Friday to come to a
meeting of minds. But at the end
of the day, who knows what could
happen in the coming days?
And that's my concern. Mr
Speaker. I just hope that the
house does not, um, waiver.
It sounds as though that from
your committee these were
important issues.
And it's also interesting to me
that there would not be an
agreed package, so to speak.
I understand Mr Speaker about
these meetings with the Senate,
and it depends on who happens to
be there at the time, and with
that person says at the time and
and Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
does seem to change.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I would
agree. 100%, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and this may be a
question for one of your
committee members. I'm looking
at, uh, C I t single single
sales factor where I'm concerned
is when it says intermittent it.
Into in Indeterminant.
And I'd like to know why it says
that
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
At this point in time, based on
the figures from our chief
economist at LSC, it could be
positive or it could be negative
at this point.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, um,
where My concern is, is that if
it actually spends if the
spending is higher
Will the Senate in your opinion,
Mr Speaker? Gentlemen agree with
that.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. So
at this point in time, the
reason why it says indeterminate
or whatever the language is,
there is because it could likely
be more likely than not.
A mutual range of
Within 20 million or so and so,
at this point in time,
Absolutely. We have to continue
to work with the Senate at the
same time. We know that in our
house committee, we made a
commitment to those members to
promote their initiatives to a
point where we will respect
whatever the Senate would have
in terms of their own. Uh
Proposals for the tax package,
and that's why we provide that
cushion there. But should it
come back differently than we
have something else to talk
about with them and with his
body?
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, could
you and I I think maybe someone
may have talked about this. Is
there a reason why there was
nothing in here directly with
gross receipts, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. So I made mention
of that earlier in the
discussion that before the
session started, we were
discussing what has more bang
for its buck.
In regards to appreciating
having appreciation amongst all
new Mexicans, and so we looked
at the personal income tax rate
reductions as well as GR T
reduction. And so it was
determined that personal income
tax rate reductions would have
about a 300 to $500 benefit for
for for families.
Whereas G R T reductions of a
half of
A quarter percent.
I would have about two anti
dollars to that same effect, and
so not only just that, but that
G R T reductions were seen as
more regressive were. If you
have more money, you have more
money to spend on different
things that they would
appreciate that much more.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I I
Feel that gross receipts tax, Um
Work was done over the years,
and it wasn't seen that way.
Initially, it was seen as
something that we desperately
need to have Some focus on don't
know exactly how that gets put
into the package, probably too
late for this fiscal year
analyst the Senate does it, But
I still think that because of
compounding and some other
issues with gross receipts, it
needs to be looked at and
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um, the other
Piece that does cause me a
little heartburn is just like
any of these omnibus bills or
something you really like, And
there's other things you you
don't like in. My concern, of
course, is with this corporate
income tax rate.
5.9.
I do see that is an increase in
taxes.
And I am a little bit concerned
about that.
I think the rest of things Mr
Speaker are good. I mean,
there's things that you all had
worked on before.
Um, as you mentioned that had
been vetoed by the governor last
year.
But I thought we had something
in there. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
last year regarding liquor tax
Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
There are still liquor tax
proposals on the table, but
those will be stand alone pieces
of legislation.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, How
do they get put into the
framework?
If they pass Mr Speaker and
gentle lady, that's uh
We're at that point Now we're on
Friday. We're gonna
Look at look at voting on those,
and so if they have the legs in
the next five days after that,
then at that, at that point,
then we could discuss more in
detail. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
would like to see what that
looks like if those bills pass
I would like to see how it does
change what the framework is for
what they're spending level
would be lost. I should say that
the General fund
But it is interesting that I
know that was quite a big deal
last year, a lot of discussion
around it. A lot of
Advocate advocating for it.
What have you, But I would like
to see that Mr Speaker. If those
bills do pass your committee
That would absolutely want to
know.
How that affects what has been
referred to as limited capacity.
With that. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you for
answering my questions,
Gentlemen and lady from early
Oh,
Mr Speaker, this matter, having
been considered for three hours,
I moved to close debate members
are out of motion to close the
bid. All those in favor signify
Mr Speaker, this matter. Having
been considered for three hours,
I moved to close debate members
are out of motion to close the
bid. All those in favor say
privacy and I suppose name
Yeah, it's habit.
The debate is closed. Let's go
back to the gentleman from Rio
Rivas and the walls and one to
close on his bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. At this point in time,
I would ask you do pass on house
Bill 252.
Members. We have to pass motion
on House Taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Well, it's about to close.
What is our close by of 48 in
the affirmative 21 in the
negative House Taxation Revenue
Committee substitute for house
Bill 252.
Has duly passed this house
members. We are going to do a
little bit of housekeeping and
labor and come back to third
reading generated from burning
Leo.
Oh, do you? Would you guys like
to lift the car?
The call is lifted.
The Lady from earlier
Mr Speaker and move to go to
that order Business Committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered Mr Speaker, Your Health
and Human Services Committee has
been referred House Bill 304 has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair, Mr
Speaker. Move adoption adoption
of a favorable committee
reporting house with 304 all
those in favor and if I would
say nine
I suppose me, the report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee tomb
has been referred House Joint
Memorial to has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair
adoption, adoption of Facebook
community and How's your
Memorial to all those in favor?
And if I was saying I need yes,
have a community adopted Mr
Speaker, Your Health and Human
Services Committee to has been
referred. House Memorial three.
Has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair adoption adoption of
committee reporting has Memorial
three all those in favor of a
person I was supposed to. Yes,
I'm a committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your health and
human services committed to whom
has been referred House Memorial
12.
Has had it under consideration.
Reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair option option of a federal
committee report.
Well, how's Memorial 12? All
those in favor? Say if I was in
I
I was supposed to say yes Report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee tomb
has been referred House Memorial
39 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair
adoption adoption of Federal
Committee reporting House Bill
39.
I'm sorry. House Memorial 39 All
those in favor signify by saying
Aye.
I suppose, in a report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred. House Memorial.
51 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair
adoption adoption of Federal
Committee reporting House
Memorial 51. All those in favor
signify was saying I was
supposed to say the committee
adopted
Your lady from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I know if you go to
that order of business messages
disordered message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate Bill 21 as amended Senate
Bill 128 as amended Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 151 as amended.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
and request the concurrence of
the House respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan said
it chief clerk message will be
entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate joint Resolution
16 and requests the concurrence
of the house respectfully
submitted. Sherry Luhan, Senate
chief clerk. We entered
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Joint Memorial two
as amended and request the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House Bill 171 as amended
by the House and return. Same
here with
Respectfully submitted Cherie
Johnson and Chief Clerk message
will be entered.
The Lady from Burnley. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order business introduction of
legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
Senate Bill 21, as amended,
introduced by senators how to
meal and Hemphill and
representative Body Go and act
relating to firefighters
requiring the Department of
Finance and Administration to
establish a program to
distribute funds appropriated to
the department for statewide and
local firefighter recruitment.
Making an appropriation. Senate
Bill 21 is amended.
Senate Bill 21 as amended.
Mm is referred to the House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee, then the
House Appropriations in Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 128 as amended,
introduced by Senator Padilla.
Actually relating to the public
Employees Retirement Act,
creating a state fire member.
Providing a definition for a
state fire member changing the
name of state local state police
member correctional officer or
member and probation and parole
officer. Member coverage plan
one to state public safety
Member coverage Plan one.
Including state fire members
Understate public safety Member
coverage plan one providing for
an election pertaining to the
adoption of state public safety
Member coverage. Plan one making
technical changes. Senate Bill
128 as amended 128 as amended,
is referred to the House labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee. That's the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax, business and
Transportation Transportation
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 151 as amended.
Act relating to taxation,
distributing a portion of the
premium tax from health
insurance business to the
Emergency Medical Services fund
making an appropriation, Senate
tax, Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 151 as amended. Business
Transportation Committee
Substitute percent number 151 as
amended is referred to the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
and act relating to health,
making it appropriation to the
Healthcare Authority Department
to provide subsidies to certain
eligible healthcare facilities
to cover certain revenue losses
providing for a delayed repeal.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
Senate finance companies
substitute for Centerville 161
is referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Senate joint resolution 16.
Introduced by Senators Naville
Cervantes had a meal neighbor.
And representative dela Cruz, a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment article 10 section one
of the Constitution of New
Mexico.
To provide that the salaries of
county officers shall be
established by the Board of
County Commissioners.
Remove references to the first
legislative session and clarify
that any fees collected by a
county
Official shell be paid into the
treasury of the county Senate
joint resolution 16.
Senate joint resolution 16
having been raped twice by title
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial two as
amended, introduced
Um by senators Pinto Lopez
McKenna, Gonzalez and Sergio
Lopez, a joint memorial
requesting the attorney general
to convene a missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives. Task force Senate
Joint Memorial two as amended
Senate joint Memorial tourism
ended is referred to the House
government Elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 56 introduced by
representative Zlata and
Garrett.
A memorial requesting that the
New Mexico Association of
Counties convene a meeting with
counties and municipalities
along the state's border with
Mexico to study the Border
Development Act and to draft
legislation that updates the
Border Development Act to
increase transparency and
oversight. House Memorial 56.
How's it? Mario 56 5 million
towards my titles Order printed
it referred to the house,
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Generally from early Oh,
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation, Objection is
ordered.
Generated from Ben Ali,
representative Herndon or
Barahona, whichever one. Are you
ready on item number six on the
calendar. Already, Mr. Speaker
at the record deflected election
necessary for placing House
Appropriations and finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 33, as amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
generator to explain the bill.
Mr Speaker, Will you get me to
that point in my there were
already there. Mr. Speaker. We
have an amendment.
Would you like to explain the
bill and then? Yes, the
amendment after that.
Mr Speaker, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute as amended
for House Bill 33 creates the
prescription Drug Price
Transparency Act to increase
transparency in the prescription
drug supply chain. The bill
requires manufacturers Health
insurers Pharmacy benefit
managers to annually report
prescription drug prices and
trans to the office of the
superintendent of insurance.
And annually thereafter. The
bill includes confidentiality
provisions throughout the bill
to protect data reported by
entities.
During the During this past
fall, the legislative, health
and Human Services Committee
heard that new Mexicans across
race, ethnicity and party
affiliation rated the cost of
drugs as their top four
priorities and concerns 44% of
those poll said that they had
not filed
Had not field a prescription are
skipped taking medications
because of cost concerns.
Mr.
With that, Mr Speaker. We do
have an amendment that has been
passed out. Okay, Gentle lady.
Hold off one second. We're going
to stand by while the amendment
Okay. We're waiting for that
amendment to be distributed.
I have been informed that the
amendment has been distributed
will generally kindly move the
amendment. Mr Speaker, I moved
House floor member number 12.
To the House appropriations and
Finance Committee. Substitute
for house Bill 33 and the two to
the 202 number is
202 number is 228176.2. That's
what we have generally to
explain Her amendment.
Mr Speaker. The amendment
actually codifies some dates to
make sure that they were all in
alignment. We understood that
there were some that were out of
alignment, and it's simply make
sure that those dates are
codified in that we clarified a
particular item that was in the
bill so that it was clear and
made the be able to read much
better debate on the amendment.
Is your objection to adopting
the amendment seen on you have
an amended bill. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Seeing there is a bit gentle
lady from Burnley or presented
by the hon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Benaglio
yelled, yelled, gentle lady.
Um, thank you for bringing
forward this legislation. I'm
excited to co sponsored as well.
I have some questions related to
the bill. Um, the first is
earlier this year. Um people may
know I was without insurance,
and I remember how worried I was
because I was unsure if I would
be able to pay
For the usual drug prices. The
usual drugs that I acquired from
the pharmacy, you know, really.
Rep. Herndon or gentle lady from
Berna. Leo. What is driving the
high drug costs? Mr Speaker?
While this bill is meant to give
us the data to prove what is
driving the cars, the data from
other states and market reports,
so that cost is larger, largely
being driven by the high cost of
brand named drugs, especially
especially specialty drugs, the
cost of specialty drugs.
Has continued to grow totaling
about 301 million in 2021, an
increase of 43% since 2 2016.
And while the majority are 80%
of the prescriptions that
Americans use that our field are
generic drugs, brand name drugs
account for about 80% of of the
prescription drugs that are
distributed spending in both
retail and non retail settings
with
Little change over time.
Thank you, dental lady from
Benaglio, Mr Speaker.
You know, this sounds like a
really sound proposal and very
excited that we could bring this
forward in order to bring more
transparency. But how will how
will we enforce this? Uh, the
passage of this bill and the
law. How would we actually
ensure that people are paying
are providing that transparency
to us.
Mr Speaker, General Lady the
provisions of this bill or being
placed into the insurance code
so that the office of uh the
superintendent of insurance will
administer penalties for failure
to report according to the
existing penalties schedule in
the insurance code, and the code
allows for, uh, for the
collection of those penalties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dental
lady from Brunel, Leo.
Have. Other states also adopted
similar laws as these will be
the first state in the country
to do so. And what states are
those that have adopted them if
they have
Mr Speaker, gentle lady without
going through the list of the
entire number of states. I will
tell you that 22 states have
passed simulator laws.
Gentle lady and Mr Speaker. I
have a very my very, very good
friend Starting a. She's an
entrepreneur, and she's starting
a company that is going to
produce hopefully will
manufacture drugs, research them
and create them, and I see how
tirelessly she works on her
startup. How much effort she has
put into it. How much resources
all the fundraising that has
gone into it.
And I'm worried with this law
affect her ability to well this
law affect competition in our
state. Will this limit the
amount of people who want to go
into the business of creating
and manufacturing drugs?
Mr Speaker, General lady. I'm
happy to say that no, it will
not hurt competition. There are
no states where manufacturers
have pulled drugs from the
market due to transparency. In
fact, this will help competition
by shedding light on a currently
uncompetitive market. And given
this body the information it
needs to intervene if necessary.
Thank you. Gentle lady from
Benaglio. Mr. Chair, Mr Speaker.
Uh, my final question is many,
many folks who are uninsured or
trying to access drugs from
their local pharmacy user
program called Good Rx. And I've
used this program before. It has
saved me many times when my
insurance hasn't been able to
either cover the price fully of
the drug, or I forgot my
insurance card. And so will how
will this
A law affect
Good Rx as a program. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, What is
good Rx?
Um, it is a coupon service that
essentially discounts the price
of the drug.
Mr Speaker, General lady, it
would not help it at all. This
will actually help the
transparency. The purpose of
which the bill actually exist.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady from Berna. Leo. That
concludes my questions.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Otero wearing the
best looking lapel pin in the
building represented block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
for saying that about my Israel
pin. I really appreciate it. So,
Mr Speaker, General lady, Okay.
I'm sorry. I'm wearing the
speakers pin because he gave it
to me. Of course, Mr Speaker.
Yeah, I dish it out. I got to
take it so good.
Well, thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I don't have too
many questions for you. I just
have a few key concerns that I I
saw in the first bill that was
in the interim committee. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, But first
off I see the F I R and you may
have revised this in the
committee substitute, so I'm not
sure
But in the air, I believe, it
says, according to the
It's a previous office of
Attorney general now is the head
of the Department of Justice.
But it says that OS, I may not
have the statutory authority to
regulate prescription drug
manufacturers. Mr Speaker
General Lady did your substitute
or your amendments and
committees alleviate those
concerns. And how do we give the
OSC the proper authority to
ensure that they can indeed?
Put this forward.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes. That
issue has been resolved. If we
look carefully at the statute
that provides for the authority
of OS I we will see that OS side
shall regulate insurance
companies and others engaged in
risk assumption in such manner
as provided by law. If this bill
passes, it will be the law. They
will have the authority to do
the things that are specified
within the
The legislation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and I really do
appreciate that clarification
because I love passing laws that
we actually can enforce. Right.
So, Mr Speaker Generating. I see
this certain individuals that we
will be adding to increase
transparency and includes I
believe pharmacy benefit
managers, manufacturers, health
insurers, etcetera. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady I saw also
in the F I R. It's talked about
a 2003 law.
That was previously passed. It
says chapter 381. I believe
that's the last page of the of
the far and it said that we
currently already request
We already request data
reporting.
From these individual entities.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I'm just wondering what
additional reporting are we now
requesting with this new
legislation? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Thank you for asking
that question. What this bill is
going to do is to give the
office of the insurance. The
additional boost and authority
and power that it needed to
enforce the actions that were
not
Have not been specifically
carried out, as indicated in
chapter 381. So if anything,
it's going to help the office of
Insurance and increase the
transparency.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally that that does help me
and then regarding non
compliance with this news. If
this becomes law, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. What currently is
the penalty for non compliance?
And then does this increase that
change that? Reduce it? What
does it do in this bill? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, the
current penalty for not
complying with the law is $5000
and that that penalty amount can
be increased to $10,000 for
continuing to fail to comply
with the law. They just So you
know if your next question maybe
what happens with respect to the
penalty? I will tell you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen that he goes
into the General fund.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and then
that that's helpful. Very
helpful. Do we know currently
The percentage of people were
asking for reports or or a range
of how many people are not in
compliance. And how many
penalties did we give out? Mr.
Speaker, General lady. My
concern here is you $2000.
Is reasonable, I would say. But
what? What other mechanisms?
Our employees in this bill to
ensure we do have complaints, I
guess would be my question. So
thank you, Mr Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Within this bill
itself, we are boosting the
authority and the responsibility
of the OS I to make its reports
not only that they also have a
duty and responsibility to make
sure that they are calling
yearly meetings to make sure
that the communities throughout
the state of New Mexico
understand what these price
increases are.
Are occurring and what the
Legislature can do.
To impede those increases and to
help the communities in the
future.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, and that does help
me with some of my concerns, and
I still kind of had has had
concerns regarding that
authority of the OSC and also
the staffing.
Levels that they currently have.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady. Do we
know if house built to we've
increased the OS size budget to
add more personnel to ensure
that we can have compliance. Mr.
Speaker generally.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that will
absolutely help us I and
carrying out the compliance of
this bill. They will have the
personnel to make sure that it's
done and the budget to make sure
that their personnel is paid.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady and you know, I did
have concerns with the original
bill because it was. I believe
it was really targeted toward
pharmacy benefit managers and
other folks, and I'm glad that
it's everybody and that was
actually my suggestion in in the
interim committee, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I just I really
want to make sure that if we're
passing this, we have the
authority to
Do this. And how do we know if
we've spoken with the agency's
office?
Following this F i. R.
Or I'm sorry. The Department of
Justice following the to see if
they have alleviated those
concerns, because Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I just want to
make crystal clear that
Sure this is good. It's very
It's a very good idea to have
more transparency. But I want to
ensure that we can indeed follow
this up and not have lawsuits.
right. I don't want the state to
be sued Mr. Speaker, General
Lady Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
thank you for that concern. We
also have that concern, but the
superintendent is fully
confident and so are we in this
bill, and that
The superintendent and is
prepared to defend that their
ability to have the authority to
carry it out.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, General lady. Those
were all my questions. I really
appreciate the conversation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. For the debate,
the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady from Burnley will
yield I will yield to the
gentleman Mr Baker generated
Could you describe for me the
Objective of this more robust
data collection effort that this
bill would
Would promote
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes. The
purpose of collecting this data
is to help not only the
Legislature, but the community
itself to see what is causing
the increase in the prescription
drugs that we are seeing. And so
what happens is when, over the
years that if as, um where these
prescription drugs transparency
acts have been successful in the
22 states that I indicated in my
earlier conversation that we
have not seen an increased
growing
In the in the cost of those
drugs and when there was an
increase that were ways in which
people like us the Legislature
could intervene to make sure
that we're helping our
communities to be able to afford
the prescription drugs that they
need for their health.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady, Could
you describe the confidentiality
provisions that is embodied hair
with respect to the Office of
State insurance?
Let's just Mr Speaker and
And gentlemen, one of the things
that we wanted to that many that
we wanted to make sure we would
not doing. We were not releasing
any proprietary information or
any trade secrets. And so that
is absolutely embodied within
this piece of legislation so
that manufacturers can feel
confident that their
prescription drugs with any type
of proprietary information would
never be released.
So, Mr Speaker and General lady,
there would be no comparison,
for example, made between two
Name brand drug makers who were
promoting
Similar products is that
accurate?
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
not sure I quite understand your
question. But if there is items
within a product that are being
that makes that product even
better than what we would not be
doing this not releasing. What
is the secret ingredient, for
example, within a product that
might help someone overcome
heart disease overcome weight
loss problems, So those types of
things would be the ones that we
would be protecting those types
of items that are protecting the
prescription.
And drug that is being put on
the market.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
could you describe for the body?
The fundamental difference
between a name brand patent
protected and generic drug,
please?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, when a
name brand product is put out,
that's the product that the
manufacture develops and puts
out itself. It is the first one
to put out this this
prescription drug. It does
generic a bio. They're called
Biosimilar products. Those are
products which are not the first
item of the products to be
produced, but they are a
derivative of an original drug
that was put out by the
manufacturer.
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
there would be no effort as a
consequence of this legislation.
To Pinder.
The pricing of these nor to the
market drugs is that
Correct understanding that is
correct, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
that there would not be any
hindering.
Thank you for that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady as I understand it.
The development of a new drug,
bringing contract to market.
By most estimates requires 12 $3
billion
And I would very much appreciate
these folks continue in their
efforts because these new drugs
are in fact, saving a lot of
lives and the folks developing
them.
Need to be
They need to have expectations
of a reasonable return on their
invested capital. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's
further debate generally from
Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
kind lady from Burleigh Oh
County. Yield, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind
lady. Um
I just have one quick question.
Can you
Explain to me you're replacing
on page two line 25.
The word biological with
biosimilar.
Could you explain to me the
differences and why you're
Replacing biological with
biosimilar.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it was
simply a mistake. A biologic
biosimilar is a generic of a
biological drug that had already
been developed. And we had to
correct that mistake within the
body of the law.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Kind Lady.
There is for the debate that
generated from Liliana Luna,
representative Jones.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady from Benaglio yield
Mr Speaker, General Lady I yield
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. We saw this
bill in Health committee and I
know when, When I left our
committee, there was an
understanding that there would
be meetings with representatives
of insurance companies in the U.
S. I
To to to come to some agreements
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I think one of those was
and, um
You can verify this, that there
was a change in the number of
days required before making a
change in a drug price. Is that
correct, gentle lady.
Gentlemen. Um, I mean, I'm
sorry, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
That is correct We when the bill
was first prepared, it was a 60
day pre notice requirement to be
made to the office of
superintendent But now it's day
of so that there is no advanced
notice that would cause harm to
anybody putting out their
prescription drug.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you for that. I wasn't
sure on the days, but that makes
perfect sense. Um
60 days is far too long, allows
others to get into the picture.
And maybe, um,
Make their own drugs before
those even come out, So I
understand that that's a That
was a good change. I believe Mr
Speaker.
So can you tell me, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, How will this
information be made available to
the public?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. The
Office of the Insurance will be
required to put a report out
once a year of all the
information that they requested
and to hold a community meeting
to answer any questions and to
discuss what they've been able
to find.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. So, with this information
be available online during the
year.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Throughout the year, the Office
of Insurance will be putting
information online at the end of
the year. They will absolutely
be making one concise report on
their findings. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady and I
have one more question.
Um
Mr Speaker, General lady, do you
Do you think this will reduce
the cost of drugs?
Mr Speaker, General Lady based
upon the information that's
provided from the other 22
states that have enacted this
piece of legislation. The answer
is yes.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr
Speaker, I have another question
that was given to me by one of
my colleagues. Do you think this
will reduce the price of over
prescription fentanyl?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
I can tell you based upon the
information that has been
provided for the last 22 states
that have this type of action
this type of acting place that
drug prices have not increased
but have decreased, and I do not
see why fentanyl would not be
applicable.
Thank you, General Lady and Mr
Speaker, and I think under the
right circumstances, seeing that
it is prescribed by a physician,
and it's necessary for pain
Relief. I do agree with you. And
I thank you for bringing this
bill for transparency. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady debate
young lady from Chavez,
representative as L.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
lady from Burnley? Oh, yield, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I yield.
Thank you very much. I've been
reading over your bill. I
haven't had a chance to and
Before now, But question I have
here is the fiscal part of it.
Okay? And it says, is there a
difference between
What is going to be in house
Bill two. The appropriation
there and what the office of the
superintendent
Of, um insurance believes is
going to be the cost of this
because I'm reading here. That
the s. I believe that it will
require additional staffing. Are
you in Agreeance with that, Mr
Chairman, Mr Speaker and General
Lady.
Mr Speaker, General lady, But we
What we do know is based upon
the budget that's out right now,
With respect to the office of
Superintendent, they do have
additional, uh, additional FTE s
that have been funded and with
respect to the funding that's in
there. Now we do believe that
that is enough to get this
program started. We also believe
that the governor will be
putting in additional funding,
if needed to make sure that
this, uh
This act and this program is
very successful.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. I guess my
madam, uh from Burnley, or I
guess my concern is
One of these statements. Is that
the S? I believes that the
agency analysis room will rock
estimated cost will be $550,000,
and that's more.
Them five times appropriated
money.
Do you see that as being a
concern, even though additional
money maybe put in from other
sources. Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker, General Lady in our
conversations with us, I have
agreed to work with less during
the first year because they will
be receiving data as we go into
the second year and we may need
additional funds than those
additional funds will be
requested within the budget.
Well, thank you for that
information First. I was very
concerned that what are we doing
here? You know.
With that big of a difference
with what the S is saying what
was appropriated, and so I did
have a concern there.
Um
Right now. I'm seeing that the
manufacturers report to the
Human Services Department. Is
that correct?
They repeat report to the estate
of the S. I
Mr Speaker General lady are you
talking about in the previous
bill are in the current bill.
Well in the previous bill, and
that was a long time ago, 20
years ago. Uh,
Does H s d right now Still
Received the information from
the companies.
Or was it never really filtered
down to them?
Mr Speaker, Dental lady. That
program never really took off in
the way in which it should have,
and there was no way to enforce
it. This piece of legislation
that's before you today will
actually provide the strength
and the support that needs to
be, uh,
Available to make it work.
Mr Speaker. I guess that brings
me to my next question. Then why
didn't HST follow up on this?
I mean, if if it was enacted by
a prior legislative body, why
didn't they follow? What? What
was passed by this body, and
that's the concern. Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
could not answer that. But what
I can answer is that we have a
very viable piece of legislation
right now that will work and we
will follow up and make sure
that it does. Mr Speaker. That's
very reassuring to hear that
statement from you, General
Lady. Uh,
So H s d is not been involved in
your bill at all.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, That
is correct. We have been working
with the office of the
Superintendent of insurance.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. I guess
whenever there's a department
here in the in our
Realm of overseeing what we're
supposed to be doing to fund
those departments and they did
not follow up. I guess it is in
the best interests of all
concerned with this particular
bill that it is going through
the office of the superintendent
of insurance, Mr Speaker, That's
all I have. Thank you very much
for your responses. Further
debate generated too close.
Mr Speaker.
Now move after get the paper in
front of me. Mr. Speaker. I do
now move that that
And House Appropriations and
Finance Committee. Substitute
for House Bill 33, as amended,
do now pass on final passage of
House appropriations of Finance
Committee. Substitute
But what clothes
What is not closed by one of 67
in the affirmative zero in the
negative House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for hospital. 33 is twice
amended as duly passed this
house.
Is a gentle person from Ray
Rivas and the violence and 100%
of plenty Ready on item number
17. Mr. Speaker, would you
please give me to that point at
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 308 with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I'm back and I'm
powered by green chili stew.
And what house built 308 dozens.
It authorizes the issuance of
general obligation bond capacity
totaling this year,
approximately
$289.6 million, including the
cost of issuance for four bond
issues. And with that I'll stand
for any questions debate general
person to close At this point in
time I moved House Bill 308 with
the executive clause.
Do not pass.
We're on final passage of house
Bill 308 with an emergency
clause. The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is that closed by vote of
67 in the affirmative zero
In the Native House Bill 308
with an emergency clause as duly
passed his house.
Gentle lady from burning. Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order, business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
CN. Objection it is ordered
generated from Los Alamos Santa
Fe in the river, Mr Speaker,
Your House Judiciary Committee
will meet at five o'clock or 15
minutes at at the conclusion of
the floor session, whichever is
sooner.
House members. Take note,
Gentlemen. Gentle lady from
River River Sandoval's rentals,
Representative Barrera, Mr
Speaker. Your Agricultural Seki
and Water Resources Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine o'clock. See you there,
gentlemen, from Sandoval. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Ladies and
gentlemen, before we leave, I
just wanted to
Give a shout out to my shadow
For today, Mr Patrick Autry here
graduate from University of
Michigan in business and public
policy.
2.5 years with private equity
work.
And actually ran for Congress in
Ohio.
Um
But he had moved to New Mexico
and I quote Patrick here because
it's the most beautiful state in
the union.
Yeah, thank you and appreciate
the round of applause for him
sticking around with us through
that. That very fun for session.
So thank you, Mr Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana
representative Small Mr Speaker,
Your House Appropriations and
Finance Committee will meet in
room 307 at 5 P.m.. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Members signal
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero. Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just a
reminder. If you're not doing
anything tonight, Lincoln County
Days is over at the jury, and
it's going to start at 530 in it
will end at 830. Thank you. Do
we have to leave at 830?
You don't have to leave there.
but you can't. Well, you do you
can You gotta leave.
Lady from towers. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your house rule
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee will
not be meeting tomorrow.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
house commerce will be meeting
today at five PM
Members take note generated from
burning, Leo. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your house
transportation public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
will be meeting at 9 A.m.
tomorrow. Thank you. Take note.
Any other announcements. The
That to Resources Committee will
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Is the
game out on tomorrow or not. We
don't have our jerseys. Mr.
Speaker. I'm getting a little
worried Question, gentlemen. We
might have to, uh
Pull out the old ones and show
them who's boss.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Take note
any other announcements before
we leave for the day?
Members. Thank you for a very
productive day. For those of you
with committees. Enjoy your
committee time. Enjoy your
dinners and celebrations. Always
a pleasure.
Thank you.
Your lady from Berkeley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I move the house down
in recess until 10 A.m. tomorrow
morning. Thursday, February
28th.
Members will see you tomorrow at
10 A.m. the House or Senate
