Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cadena
representative Cates here,
representative cases here.
Representative is L
Representative Matthews.
Yes, yes, Representative Zamora
Representatives and water is
here. Mr Vice Chair.
Here. Chair is here, Madam Chair
here.
The chair is here. You have six.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. We do
have an amendment to the House
Memorial 33, which is yes, we
will pass that out right now to
795 like to remind the audience
that we had a long discussion
about the
Agreements and thank you, Madam
Chair. Um
After meeting with the
department and with several
community we we, um we came up
with it with some changes that I
think are more inclusive and are
frankly more direct. Now.
instead of consider acceptance
of above amended this memorial
to to say that we are
developing.
It's just stronger and makes a
lot more sense. So I'm really
grateful for the recommendations
that were made, um from all the
stakeholders to make this
memorial stronger. I think it
has a little bit more teeth and
it um it really directs us to
work together.
Developed to develop a plan that
takes into consideration all of
the issues all across the state.
So that is really Madam chair.
My my expert is online if we
need her as Melanie Kirby, so if
she if we need to, um
Thank you. Okay, And now we'll
turn to the audience. Are there
members who are there? Members
Thank you.
Yes.
Pam Man chair committee members.
Pam Roy, representing and
supporting this bill, Colorado
actually passed their
legislation last year and they
look has one so in the rock and
you know we are expanding food
production.
This is really about me.
Thank you. Candy. Sweet, sir.
Good to have you with Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Committee, Um, on behalf of the
Department of Agriculture on
Candy's sponsor for
Oh, no, she's the expert
witness. Okay? Alright,
Therefore seeing some order
Thank you, madam Chair, members
of the committee and
representative for bringing this
bill forward.
Can we kind of just
Refresh our memories on what we
were looking to change.
Madam Chair representative of
what? We We strengthen the
language starting on the line.
Amendment, I give you my
amendment it give you my
amendment. Thank you very much.
Well, thank you for giving me
yours on page of we have struck
the consider acceptance of
pollinator protection plan that
starts on and we are changing it
to
Develop a pollinator protection
plan. So instead of consider
acceptance, we are asking the
working group that's assembled,
which is now more in to just
develop that plan together to
develop the plan and
representatives that gives them
the authority. Mandating it.
Yeah.
Yes, it's so it's ah
Bringing the working very New
Mexico Environment Department,
the Department of Agriculture
working together with you know,
beekeepers, and any really
And then on page three lines six
and that was to be more
inclusive. You know, folks who
are working
Thank you for those
explanations. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. No,
thank you, Madam. You're asking
the department
I do appreciate this bill first
put me okay. Uh, whatever you're
asking the Department of
Agriculture to convene a working
group to develop a pollinator.
Heavy all visited with
The M D. A Madam Chair
representative is Oh, I believe
we have through, especially
through this.
Latest round of of amendments.
My expert Melanie Kirby, can
weigh in here.
Representatives. Okay, well, the
reason, Okay. I appreciate that,
because my question is going to
be going back to the bill that
Now Senator Mimi Stewart carried
regarding the bees.
Does this tie in at all?
Madam Chair representative. I
actually don't know what that
bill is. I haven't seen it. I
don't believe in time, Madam
Cheer. Uh, I'm the only one on
this committee that remembers
hearing that
That particular bill. She had a
group of young people up here.
The
Anyway, they really lobbied for
this bill that was passed out of
this particular committee, and I
believe her bill did include,
including the department in the
mix.
But, uh
Whenever you're talking about
develop a pollinator protection
plan.
I guess I need a little more
input on what y'all Madam Chair
representatives old. This is
where I
Hello. Good morning. Can you
hear me? Yes. Um, thank you so
much. Yeah, it was potentially
exposed to Covid and I didn't
want to risk passing it along,
So I apologize, pronouncing
person, even though I I really
want to be there in person. Um
Yes, Madam Chair and
representatives. Thank you all
for your questions, Um, and
representative itself just to
clarify.
This particular initiative is
quite different and distinct
from the previous bills that
Senator Stewart put forth. Her
bills were more for more focused
on pesticide regulation, which
is actually not able to be
Regulated through the state
legislature that would actually
have to go through the New
Mexico State University Board of
Regions, So this particular
initiative has actually been in
the works for about six years
through the New Mexico
Beekeepers Association, MSU NMD,
a pesticide applicators and
additional stakeholders. Um and
so this this effort to now get
it through the state Legislature
is
As a former senator, suite
mention is to get it through.
Um, uh, income. We'll get it
through federal compliance so
that that way
It's actually we're catching up.
And actually, I'm sorry. I think
it was Gillian who had mentioned
that from rmf you so this
particular initiative does not
seek to regulate pesticides
because
The Legislature cannot do that.
Um, but what it does seek to do
is to set up a broader working
group, also with an M d, a
continuing to be involved Brad
Lewis and also Camilli along
Who's the new pollinator
Specialists with NMDA have been
helpful in creating this
memorial. I do believe that CA
Miley might be online as well,
if you wanted to actually hear
from NMDA specifically, but yes,
they have been a part of this
and have been very supportive in
helping to expand it.
Thank you very much for that
explanation, Madam chair and
representative, Um, we we are.
We do need the pollinators. I'm
not just getting that one bit.
We do have butterflies that also
pollinate as well.
Oh,
But is this going to be
overreaching as far as anybody
that wants
What are they going to have to
do? Are they going to have to
make application instead of
being able just to go out there
and ensure that these
pollinators or
Driving Madam chair
representatives all I don't
believe that that that this task
force will have anything to be a
beekeeper.
Okay. I appreciate that. That
So they do not met Madam chair
and representative. Anybody
That's new to the to this
industry to the pollinator
industry.
They don't have to be Madam
chair representatives out. I
don't believe so. Yeah, that
doesn't seem in keeping with the
beekeeping.
The biggest, the biggest thing
that's hurting this industry
right now is our drought
conditions change that That is
God's way of saying, Okay, I'm
moving the water for a while,
but I will bring it back. He
always does.
We just have to pray a little
bit harder.
I do appreciate what you're
trying to do here. I do not have
a problem with it. I just needed
to clarify some of the language
that you put in it. Madam chair.
Thank you.
Second
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cadena
Yes. Votes. Yes, Representative
Case. Yes, Representative.
Kate's votes. Representatives.
elbows. Yes, Representative
Matthews representative Matthews
Vote es Representative Zamora.
Yes, representatives and
whatever votes yes.
Mr Vice Chair. Yes. Votes. Yes,
madam Chair.
Yeah. On
At the House.
Yeah. My work. Thank you so
much. And now I have wild
friends in the next committee. I
think that is what I got. I got
them right now. Thank you. Bye
bye.
Welcome.
Welcome, representative. Um um
Thank you, madam Chair and
members, Um
As we know New Mexico is in need
of water.
You know, at all parts once I
came to the Legislature, I said,
I want to find some extra water
and do another San Juan Rio
charmer project.
And basically, if you look at
Texas, New Mexico, Colorado just
draw a line up.
And you go west of that There's
no excess water.
Where is their excess water, and
it's in the Mississippi River
Valley.
And they're its tributaries.
And if we look right now at the
storms that are happening back
east, there is flooding in the
Mississippi River Valley.
So who's paying those flood
claims?
Uh, flood insurance is actually
federal insurance. And so the
federal government is paying it.
There's been a lot of
discussions of moving water from
the Mississippi West.
Ah, the purpose of this
legislation and I've tried to
leave it wide open.
Is to go ahead and create a bank
account.
At the state engineer's office.
That we start putting money in.
We start investing it. It grows
like the permanent fund. So that
one day whatever day that is.
And there is a project to move
water from wherever we can say
yes, we have money to come to
the table.
That's the real purpose of this.
Um
When we look at the
State engineers, huh?
Analysis, he said. Interstate
transfers of water or a
screamingly rare expects
expensive, technically
challenging and controversial.
Currently New Mexico is a party
to two significant interstate
water transfer projects. The San
Juan Real Charm a project
And the animus La Plata Project.
We were working on one down in
the healer, and it was expensive
and there were a lot of
political issues with that that
I think prevented it.
When we look at how can we get
water to New Mexico? One of the
things that I noted, is let me
Right here is the Arkansas River
at the Oklahoma, Arkansas.
Um, uh, State line and there are
two large
Lakes there. If you go over to
conscious, it's about 1500
Miles.
You can store the water there
and then it's 40 miles to the
Pecos.
So I think that one is one of
the most
Promising that they could look
at
Um
If we look at Denver and I
forgot which river Denver is
going to, but it's one of them.
that goes into the Mississippi.
They're trying to set up a
project to go from that river
down to the to Denver City.
If we look at Texas, they're
already in a project with, um
Louisiana taking water in the
west part of Louisiana, you
know, basically in the swamp.
And moving it to East Texas.
Everybody in the West is looking
for water.
This project or this fund and
again, I tried to make it very
wide and we could always amend
it if it if we don't have the
right language.
Is to go ahead and just
Allow us to have money, be at
the table and be a player.
And with that, madam chair.
Thank you. Have you here? Um,
I'm gonna how many people are in
favor of this lady
Yeah, I had a question.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Um, in the analysis of
their only concern is it's light
of rights on decision making for
the budget.
Um, And so it's not really a
questions as statement that I
don't have concern about that,
because, um, if we have the
right to not invest in our water
because of budgetary, we're
going to balance our our budget
on water than there are a whole
but of other issues going on,
and then I would have concern
over before this.
But I do want you to have the
opportunity to our listeners. So
thank you. Thank you, madam. So
if you notice I didn't put in
appropriations on it, and the
reason is because of budgets
already left the house. So you
know we'll create the fund.
And if it's next year is like
this year where we have a
surplus, then the appropriate
committee can decide and we're
gonna put this much money in
there.
And that's why I didn't say
every year we're gonna allocate
1% or anything. I want to leave
it loose enough that we can get
it over there once the fund is
created, and let's say we've got
money in it.
And all of a sudden it doesn't
fit the project that the state
engineers come up with. He can
come back and amend the
legislation so that it fits and
that is kind of my vision as a
loose structure, but a bank
account so that we have a
checkbook to be a player in the
future.
Cheers. Thank you. Very much
Representative is read The bill.
Um
It is. It's very clear that
there is no outside state right
now that wants to sell their
water. They're all they want to
keep their water.
We have an obligation to the
state of Texas right now that we
have has an obligation to send
us water.
Um
So therefore I have a problem
with one of the other things
that I saw on one of the Nellie
And according to the office of
the State engineer, and I will
read it verbatim.
Interstate transfers of water
extremely rare, expensive,
technically challenging and
controversial.
At present, there are no
proposals for interstate water
transfer projects that appear
feasible, according to the
office of the
I also noticed that there is
No oversight.
And for me, that's very
troublesome. The state, the
office of the state and engineer
Would have the ability to
administer this fund is as they
see fit whoever might be
And the director of the OSC.
So actually, they could be
taking this money.
And purchasing water water
rights to be used by the Let's
say the office of the game and I
have a problem with that.
Um, let's see the other thing I
had.
Because it does state in the
analysis, see if I will read it
verbatim to okay.
Projects supported by the
existing Water Trust fund must
be appropriated by the
Legislature after being
recommended by the water
transported group.
With subject matter expertise
established evaluation criteria
and representation of diverse
stakeholder interest. In
contrast, the future water
project van created by House
Bill 301 would be a ministered
by the OSC with broad authority
and no mechanism for legislative
oversight.
And that gives me heartburn. It
really does.
It doesn't. This bill does not
establish a process or criteria
for evaluating and selecting
projects to be supported by the
so I mean,
Right now. We have money just
flowing out of the
Hole that has been punched down
there. My part of the world
And we do have the excess money.
But you know what? One of these
days we're not gonna have it.
Madam chair and representative,
I'm not trying to throw in the
pan water on your bill.
I'm glad to see that Hannah is
here and Mr takers from the
office of the State engineer and
I'd like to hear their comments
on Madam Chair if
If we can adults them to make
some comments. I would
appreciate a rising quite
interstate story commission
director
And we are neutral on this lead.
Um, will solve our as you read
representative itself. The, um
unlike does that mean we
shouldn't be pursuing any lot
more opportunities.
Thank you. Very well, I guess my
question to either one of them
is right now. Are there Is there
an availability of
Potentially their future holds.
Oh, come on, Where's your
And Madam chair. Thank you. For
that response representative
ring.
We do have water problems in our
state Supreme Court has ordered
Officer of the state Engineering
the Interstate Stream
Commission. Whenever
There is a call for that water
down on the paper said. We
cannot go back at him with me.
It has to be a wit delivery, and
that's very troublesome whenever
we have on the Rio Grande son
The
Overreached.
Um, Elephant Butte and say we
want the water and we want it
now.
I have a problem with that. We
also have problems over there in
the healer.
I expressed my so Yeah. I mean,
if the water is available for
somebody that doesn't want to
sell it to state
It's not a bad thing, but then
we have the expense of Colorado
has to follow suit. As far as
you the same. Texas is great. I
see.
Just make just me and in the
past the Interstate stream
commission quite often.
We took viable farmland out of
production.
Farmland fed our citizens
Interstate Stream Commission
ended up buying those water
rights just so we could make
that delivery to Texas doing the
same thing over on the Rio
Grande side. We have all the
problems in the real middle Rio
Grande Valley.
Madam chair. I also see that
this bill does go to
appropriations and finance. Next
I did not see an appropriation
in your bill. It's just just for
what they're calling a gift.
Let's see what was the other
term that they used in just one
minute?
Mean permanent. Vance means the
land grant permanent funds rule.
Uh, damn libraries and demo.
Okay, black.
The fund consists of
distributions, appropriations
gifts, grants donation income
from the investment of the fund.
And you want that to go through
the state investment counsel? Is
that correct? Can you tell me
why that particular entity was
select?
Madam Chair and representative
is l I selected them because the
state investment counsel does
our investments on permanent
fund and this would be similar
to a permanent fund. It would be
a water fund and you know you've
been here long enough.
You know the Legislature if
If they start stepping at the
you know, state engineers start
stepping outside the bounds.
The Legislature giveth and the
Legislature taken.
And we've seen that happen in
the past. And so I think we'll
have a hand. They will be
working with us to make sure
that we're happy with whatever
project they decide.
And I agree those projects are
going to be
Discussed for years. Um, you
know, it's not something we're
going to do tomorrow.
But when we begin to move
whatever project
As it crosses every state or
county. You know somebody's
going to say, Hey, I want to
speak it.
And I just want to make sure
that we can come to the table,
Madam chair. I appreciate your
response on that. I know that
more than 30 years ago. My
father in law who lived in
Kentucky.
He said. What's gonna save New
Mexico as pipeline? I don't
disagree with that.
But it does take dollars. Lots
of dollars lots and lots of
dollars.
Madam tear the concern that I
see from the state engineer's
office.
Is they
Now I've lost it. Oh,
It is going to take
What did you do? Or three full
time employees and oversee this
is that correct, Madam Chair and
representative is l I saw that.
But this fund has $0 so right. I
don't see that they need to
tease today, right? You know, at
some point when we actually have
some money, and they start
moving forward, then I see him
coming to the Legislature and
saying
I need more FTS.
Madam Chair and State Investment
Council is going to entity for
these dollars that are
Going into this fund that you
want to set up.
And it's going to be non
reverting.
It seems to me without any
legislative oversight. It's
going to be at the sole
discretion of the office of the
state. Do you understand where
I'm coming from on that madam
chair and to give your opinion
on that? Yeah, And like I said,
you know, it's going to be a
project over numerous years. And
if we don't we, the Legislature
don't like what's going on.
We could actually go to the fund
in recall the money back, you
know, that's the old we give it
and we can take it.
We've seen that happen before,
madam. Never all that was club
back, stupid place, and that was
very concerning and it was very
harmful, especially to our
schools.
Um
Madam chair.
After it goes to appropriation
that that is its last committee.
Their concerns I have with this.
I understand the intent of it.
Yeah, we do have to protect our
our water.
We need something to be able to
back up.
With no other state that is
willing to sell their water
rights. It's gonna be a problem.
It's going to be appealed that
water just doesn't go up. He'll
it goes down.
But
Madam chair. I'm gonna leave it.
Uh,
You get up to whatever the
committee wants to do on this.
Appreciate your responses. I
have a few for you,
representative Re my
You know, I know that this bill
was just dropped. This is a
pretty big concept. I think that
I think so that we can have a
deep conversation and really
look at numbers Room. I think
that's that's the real problem.
I see with this bill. I I
Just the comments from I didn't
sign on your bill because I
said, Wait, is it I gotta I
gotta check on. You know, I'm
always for you See how much
water and how much money we can
so it's not like I'm against it
further development. I really
do. And, um
And again. I appreciate, you
know, I drove to Montana.
Two years ago, and I said, Well,
all we need to do is piped water
down from Montana to New Mexico,
you know?
So I kinda see where you're
coming from. I think it's uh, we
should do or
We could do that in the interim,
Uh and I think all those
questions need to be answered.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cadena
Yes.
Excellent votes. Yes.
Representative case in Brazil.
Representative Matthews
representatives, some water
Yes. Um, whatever routes
representative Allyson? Yes,
Madam Chair. Never do passport
attitude. Congratulations.
On. Ah, and before we a Joseph,
you have a due passi looking for
my number again. 301. Thank you.
Uh, just a minute. We have a
quick announcement.
Just really grateful to have
several board members. They have
to head south, so I was trying
to wrangle them back to the hall
to say hello. Um, for those of
you that watched water music for
decades, Um, moved along, and
now we have a majority just
ready to work, and I've said
before. I think it's senator
Savant is water rights very much
in a different scale spectrum.
Um, but just appreciate that So
far we've already and I think
others had to run out. But if
you wouldn't mind, just
introducing yourself very
quickly, Rosa, I'm
Randy, Go right back in. I'm
saying my glasses on Okay,
Valley.
I'm Greg Davey. And I'm your
manager building. Thank you all
for running back allowing me to
grab you from the hall. But it's
a big deal to have you all here
and like representative, as all
said, we always have some
running commentary on Texas, but
I like to clarify for the
committee. It's actually e B i d
for running and thank you. It's
more of you up here.
And welcome to the committee.
Hmm.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
I'm sorry. I didn't ask to
explain my vote when I voted,
but I think
That this is a very interesting
bill.
I think we'll see things in the
future that we never imagined
of. And and technology will play
a big part of that.
New Mexico.
Might become a place where
We import water from from
From somewhere else. Montana,
Mississippi Other places
interesting to
To see where this bill goes and
and
How it reacts, even though
It didn't get worked through the
interim.
What it can. It can get some
attention here to
To get some strength in the
interim, so
Thank you for bringing the bill
forward representative and and I
look forward to see what how it
plays out.
Yeah. You like to respond to
that representative, Madam
chair? I really see this.
Uh, legislation if it's enacted
that in the future, it's going
to be modified to fit whatever
project so, um, I if you really
if you go to Louisiana right
now, they say, Take my water.
You know, just get it out of
here. We have too much.
Now you and I both realized once
we say we'll take some of it.
They're going to go. Oh, but
we'll get you to pay for it. You
know? So, um
Ah, I just want us to be ready
When project finally comes
around that we can move forward.
Wherever the water is, or
whatever state engineer comes up
with.
But thank you, Madam Chair. I
thank you. Thank you,
Representative Ray my again. I
tried to clean bills that are
really ready to be enacted. So
that's always my goal would not
against the intent or or and
understand that will probably be
voting the same way in a year or
