Roll calls close we have quote.
Hi madame clirk jail lady from
believe so chasing.
Mister speaker I move we go to
that order of business
announcements I mislead this
business chechen it is so
ordered members of their
announcements.
My gentleman from
see will mckinly represent
welcome.
Thank you mister labor veterans
and military affairs
after we get off the floor for
an organization in your house
will five
dollars of your curious that'll
be
five to fifteen member states
note any other announcements the
gentleman from suntaffe in some
double representative mcqueen
missus speaker the house energy
environment and that's a
resources committee will meet
saturday and nine o'clock we
will hear how spills forty one
forty eight and probably one
thirty three thank you missus
speaker.
Gentlemen from earlier percent
of the middle thank you miss
speaker your house education
committee will meet at eight
thirty on monday morning we're
gonna have an organizational
meeting and then at nine thirty
we're gonna be joined by the
senate education committee for a
joint hearing on the LESC LFC
and executive budget
recommendations so eight thirty
monday morning health education
thank you miss speaker members
stick notes gentilated from
achilles I wind representative
johnson thank you mr speaker
your house government elections
and the indian affairs committee
meeting will not be held
tomorrow we will not meet
tomorrow on friday however we
will meet at eight thirty am on
monday thank you.
Members stick note.
Any announcements lady from los
alamos and santa fe and also
from sound of other
representative children thank
you mr speaker your house
judiciary committee will have
its first substant of meeting on
monday starting at one thirty or
fifteen or twenty minutes after
the end of the floor session as
appropriate it will be in room
three oh nine thank you members
take note.
Right members have got some good
news
um after today's intro
we will not be meeting on the
floor.
Again until monday uh so for
those folks who don't have
committee
over the weekend or even
tomorrow you can make plans to
head home for the weekend.
Any other announcements.
Generated from berliers have
chasee.
Mr speaker I would we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
See an objection it is ordered.
The.
House bill too introduced by
representative of small making
general appropriations and
authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by lot
house build two introduced by
representative small as bill two
have minorities by title
is remain.
Under article four second five b
one.
Order printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House six introduced by
representatives chandler and
serado and senator stewart and
act relating to employment and
acting that paid family and
medical leave act creating the
paid family and medical leave
fund providing for the paid
family and medically program to
pay an eligible employee a
percentage of the employees
wages to allow the employee to
bond with a new child or to care
for a family member limiting the
time allowed for paid family and
medical leave.
Accepting certain employees
providing for administration of
the program by the work for
solutions department.
Preempting similar programs
creating a temporary advisory
committee house bill six
introduced by christian channel
sorry representatives of
representative of channel
stewart and senator stewart.
Has will six hundred twice by
title is deemed remain under
article four section five b two
house executive message fourteen
order printed and referred to
the house health in human
services committee thence the
house commerce and economic
development committee
house bill eleven in introduced
by a representative matthews and
act relating to labor and acting
the paid family and medical
leave insurance act creating the
paid family and medical leave
insurance authority creating the
paid family and medical leave
insurance board creating the
paid family and medical leave
insurance fund providing for
administration of the paid
family and medical leave
insurance program by the board
accepting certain employees
providing for rule making
providing foreign appeals
process pre empting similar
programs prescribing penalties
making an appropriation house
eleven introduced by
representative matthews house
bill eleven have been retired by
title is remain under article
four section five.
B two.
Executive message.
Executive message fourteen order
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee vince the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill twenty three
introduced by representative
queen and act relating to the
state game commission reforming
the state game commission
appointment process setting term
limits for commissioners adding
requirements for appointment and
removal of commissioners house
bill twenty three introduced by
representative of my queen.
House will twenty three hundred
minutes was a way titled is
order not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill forty two introduced
by representatives.
Hartman ville and senator padia.
For the transportation
infrastructure revenue
subcommittee and act relating to
transportation creating the
transportation trust fund
providing for transfers from the
transportation trust fund to the
state road fund for certain
projects prioritised by the
department of transportation.
House bill forty two introduced
by representative environment be
hill and senator michael pidea
house bill forty two have middle
twist by title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill one hundred in
participants introduced by
representative castiano and act
relating to education and acting
the adult online learner
scholarship act creating the
adult online learner sculpture
program in the higher education
department providing powers and
duties focusing the program on
new mexico specific critical
workforce needs providing
eligibility requirements
providing scholarship priorities
creating funds making
appropriations house bill one
hundred introduced by
representative of castiano.
Yeah.
House bill one hundred.
The.
Have been with twice by title.
It seemed remain under article
four section five b one of the
constitution auto printed and
referred to the house education
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Hospital one hundred and fifteen
introduced by representative
chander endorsed by the courts
corrections in justice committee
and act relating to judicial
salaries removing salary
formulas for magistrates
hospital one hundred and fifteen
introduced by representative
chamber.
House bill one fifteen have been
read twise by title
is injury and under article four
section five b one order printed
and referred to the house
judiciary committee then it's a
house appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and sixteen
introduced by representative
thompson and act relating to
crime removing the time
limitation for commencing
prosecution of human trafficking
increasing the age for sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution to eighteen adding
human trafficking to the
definition of racket hearing
amending the elements of human
trafficking providing a
definition of harm prohibiting
certain defences in a
prosecution for human
trafficking adding victims of
human trafficking and sexual
exploitation of children to the
victims of crime act prohibiting
earned.
Material materials deductions
for a human trafficking
sentencehouse will one hundred
and sixteen are introduced by
representative of thompson has
been one hundred and sixteen
haven't been ripped twice by
title is order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
Hospital one hundred and
seventeen introduced by
representative or tests and act
relating to taxation excluding
receipts of a prime contractor
that are derived from operating
a facility in new mexico
designed designated as a
national laboratory by an act of
congress or from operating a
research facility in new mexico
that is owned by the state from
certain gross receipts tax
deductions for manufacturers
house to one hundred and
seventeen introduced by
representative or tests.
The.
Thanks.
Has been seventeen haven't been
rid twice by totals james
remain.
Under article four section five
b one.
Order printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one hundred and
eighteen introduced by
representative or tests and act
relating to taxation removing a
sunset date to allow a taxpayer
employed in certain electricity
generation to appropriate a
proversion business income by
the single sales factor
permanently.
House bill one hundred and
eighteen introduced by a
representative or test.
The.
House bill one eighteen haven't
been retwelted by title is in
german under article four
section five b one ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
The.
House bill one hundred and
nineteen introduced by
representative of hochman view
and act relating to rarod safety
requiring at least two persons
for the operation of a rare
train or local motive that is
used in the movement of free
hospital one hundred and
nineteen introduced by
representative of hochman bill.
House bill one nineteen have
been read twice by title is jim
to me under article four section
february one.
B two apologies house executive
message.
Has executive message nineteen.
Is ordered printed and referred
to the house labor veterans in
military affairs committee then
the house transportation.
Capital improvements in public
works committee
house bill one hundred and
twenty introduced by
representative on the and act
making an appropriation to the
corrections department to
provide mentional products to
incarcerated persons house but
one hundred and twenty
introduced by representative on
unearning.
House bill one hundred and
twenty have a bedroom was by
total is in deemed your main
under article four section five
b one order printed and referred
to the house consumer public
affairs committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and twenty
one introduced by
representatives armstrong read
lord vincent and jones and act
relating to children requiring
the children youth and family's
department to conduct
assessments provide services and
conduct an investigation upon a
failure to comply with the plan
of care.
House one hundred and twenty one
introduced by representatives
arm strong rebord vincent and
jones has will one hundred and
twenty one have a bedroom twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill one hundred and
twenty two introduced by
representative of kates and act
making an appropriation to the
secretary of state to convenient
county register redistricting
task forced as well one twenty
two introduced by representative
kits.
Hospital want twenty two have
been read twice by title is
deemed german under article four
section five be one order
printed and referred to the
house government election in in
the first committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee
house bill when I twenty three
injuries by reps that have cats
and pope and act relating to
libraries prescribing the
banning of library materials
hospital one hundred and twenty
three introduced by
representative and pope.
Senator poke my apologies.
The.
Wait what was that.
I'm just getting.
Did you say representative.
You just upcreated him.
Just getting said a report.
Has we want three having been
retired by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
The.
House per one hundred and twenty
four introduced by
representatives peter grew and
townsend and act relating to
legislative affairs creating the
interim administrative rule
oversight community requiring
legislator review of the
executive agency proposed rules
amending the state rules act
notice of proposed role making
to conclude a fiscal impact
statement if the estimated cost
of implementing a proposed rule
is greater than one million
dollars making inappropriation.
Hospital one hundred and twenty
four introduced by
representatives pedal group and
townsend.
The.
Stand by.
The.
Has been one twenty four have a
minorite wise by title.
Husband one twenty four have
been twice by title is the
intermain under article four
section five b one.
Ordered printed and referred to
the house government election in
the affairs committee then the
house judiciary committee.
Apologies house going to
election and in in a first
committee then the house
appropriations of finance
committee.
Hospital one hundred and twenty
five introduced by
representative of robot cairbiro
and act relating to public
finance in acting the public
banking act creating the public
bank of new mexico establishing
a board of directors and the
structure of the public bank of
new mexico providing duties
permitting certain investments
prohibiting conflicts of
interest creating the state
banking fund requiring the state
treasure to deposit and maintain
a certain amount of public money
in the public bank of new mexico
providing penalties making
appropriations house bill one
hundred and twenty five
introduced by representative
royal mail cover has been one
hundred and twenty five have
been rich wise by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill one hundred and
twenty six introduced by
representative garrett and act
making an appropriation to the
public school facilities
authority for a statewide public
school benelation verification
assessment house bill one
hundred and twenty six
introduced by representative has
been hundred and twenty six
seven minutes wise by title this
deemed remain under article four
sixty five be one order printed
and referred it to the house
education committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and twenty
seven introduced by
representative
and act relating to firearms
establishing a minimum age of
twenty one to purchase or
possess an automatic firm a semi
automatic firemarm or a large
capacity and municion feeding
device providing exceptions
providing a penalty hospital one
hundred and twenty seven
introduced by representatives of
you house bill one hundred and
twenty seven have been written
twice by title it seemed remain
under article four section five
b two house executive message
nine order printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee then the house
judiciary committee.
Hospital one hundred and twenty
eight introduced by
representative romaro and act
relating to canada's changing
canous regulation act
definitions providing powers and
duties increasing the plant
count for candidates produce
your microbusinesses providing
procedures for criminal history
background checks removing their
proper provision against a
person owning both the canvas
license and a license under the
look of control act prohibiting
co location of canvas activities
and alcoholic beverage sales or
service activities so the public
or members of private clubs
providing for investigatory
confidentiality providing for
seizure and destruction of a
legal adulterated or misbranded
canous products allowing for
licensee conversion from
nonprofit to for profit
corporate status changing
packaging requirements replacing
license with legislation
recommends our registration of
canada's training and education
programs including the canvas
regulation act in the racheering
act the delinquency act in the
uniform licensing act including
candidates and a list of
contraband and jails and prisons
creating crimes prescribing
penalties repealing a delayed
appeal amending repealing an
acting sections of the m s a
nineteen seventy eight.
Hospital one hundred and twenty
eight introduced by
representative of romaria did
you read the entire bill.
Hospital one hundred and twenty
eight have been retired by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee
house bill one hundred and
twenty nine introduced by
representative remarrial and act
relating to crime creating the
crime of unlawful sale of a
firearm before the required
waiting period ends requiring a
fourteen day waiting period when
conducting the sale of a firearm
providing an exception
prescribing penalties house for
the one hundred and twenty nine
introduced by representative
roman.
Has been one twenty nine have
been rich was by totally demand
under article four section five
b two house executive message
seven.
Is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer republican
first committee that the house
judiciary committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
introduced by a representative
of chat field and act relating
to the environment creating a
cloud seating weather
modification pilot project in
the new mexico department of
agriculture requiring reporting
making appropriations hospital
one hundred and thirty
introduced by representative
chatfield.
Stem by.
The.
House bill one thirty have been
rich was by title.
He is dim to me and under
article four section five b one
order printed and referred to
the house energy environment and
actual receptions committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee
house bill one hundred and
thirty one introduced by
representative little and act
making an appropriation to the
health care authority department
to fund state food banks.
House bill one hundred and
thirty one introduced by
representative little.
Husband one thirty one have been
read twice by title is or is dim
tremendous article four section
five b one or the printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee then
house appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
two introduced by
representatives torosses towns
and mirabom lawyer embaka and
act relating to public schools
enhancing an expanding
enforcement provisions to reduce
excessive absenteeism making it
a crime for a parent of an
accessibly absent student to
allow that student to continue
being absolute from school
providing penalties.
House one hundred and thirty two
introduced by representative to
use towns and irrelevant lawyer
and bucker.
Yes our husband one thirty two
have minority twice by title
is ordered not princeton
referred to the house rules
committee
I spell one hundred and thirty
three introduced by
representative or tests and act
relating to the environment and
manning the oil and gas act
allowing the oil conservation
division of the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to regulate certain transfers of
oil and gas wells and authorized
the conversion of oil and gas
balls for rumor energy storage
and geothermal development
increasing the amount of fees
and financial assurance
associated with operating oil
and gas increasing civil
penalties allowing fees to be
adjusted to account for
inflation requiring the capture
of ninety eight percent of
natural grass produced beginning
in two thousand twenty seven
providing for certain setbacks
from oil and gas facilities.
House per one hundred and thirty
three introduced by
representative or tests as well
one thirty three have been read
twice by title is deemed remain
under article for section five
two house executive message one
order printed and referred to
the house energy environment and
natural reasons as committee
then the house judiciary
committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
four introduced by
representative lending for the
indian affairs committee and the
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public education creating the
tribal education trust fund
providing reporting requirements
creating the tribal education
trust fund dispersement formula
task force making appropriations
house with one hundred and
thirty four introduced by
representative of the letter
hospital one thirty four have
been read twice by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b one order
princeton referred to the house.
Education committee to them to
house appropriations and finance
committee
house will one hundred and
thirty five introduced by
representative lending for the
indian affairs committee the
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
education changing the
distributions from the indian
education fund.
House for one hundred and thirty
five introduced by
representative of lending.
House bill one hundred and
thirty five have been retired by
title is deemed remain under
article four six and five b one.
Order princeton referred to.
The house education committee
events that house appropriations
on finance committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
six introduced by representative
saraniana and act making an
appropriation for grants to
public post secondary
educational institutions to
develop a pre service teacher
computer science education
program house with one hundred
and thirty six introduced by
representative sergeant has been
one hundred and thirty six seven
minutes was by title is deemed
to mean under article four
section five one order printed
in reference to the house
education committee then house
appropriations of finance
committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
seven introduced by
representative of romero and act
relating to firearms and acting
the gas operated semi automatic
farms exclusionact prohibiting
the importation sale
manufacturer transfer receipt or
possession of gas operated semi
automatic firms for himing large
capacity ammunition feeding
devices prohibiting devices that
materially increase the rate of
fire of a firearm or approximate
action or rate of fire of a
machine and prohibiting machine
guns and machine going
attachments requiring the third
attorney general to list gas
operated semi automatic firearms
subject to the provisions of the
gas operated semi automatic
firearms exclusion act requiring
the certification of some
automatic firms providing
exceptions providing penalties
house but one hundred and thirty
seven introduced by
representative roman.
House but one hundred and thirty
seven have been rid twice by
title is jim to me and under
article four station five b two
house executive message eight
order princeton referred to the
house consumer public office
committee there's a house
judiciary committee
hospital one hundred and thirty
eight introduced by
representative casting and act
relating to off highway mortar
vehicles amending section sixty
six dash three dash one thousand
one point one and m s a nineteen
seventy eight eighteen laws two
thousand five chapter three
twenty five section one as
amended amending definitions.
House but one hundred and thirty
eight introduced by
representative castiona
with something else will one
hundred and thirty eight have
mentioned twice by title is or
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee
house for one hundred and thirty
nine introduced by
representative of cate and act
relating to finance and acting
that professional recruitment
and retention housing loan for
service act providing for
program administration by the
new mexico mortgage finance
authority providing loans for
service to professionals for
expenses related to the purchase
of a home conditioning loans on
practice in new mexico providing
terms for a payment.
Hospital one hundred and thirty
nine introduced by
representative.
Yeah.
The.
Thanks.
Yeah.
House will one thirty nine have
been read twice by title is
order not princeton referred to
the house rules committee.
House will one hundred and forty
introduced by representative
hockman and act relating to
taxation creating the clear car
income tax credit the clean car
charging unit income tax credit
the clean car corporate income
tax credit and the clean car
charging unit corporate income
tax credit providing a delayed
repeal house for one hundred and
forty introduced by
representative hawkman beel.
House bill one hundred and forty
haven't been rich was by titled
is deemed remain under article
four six five two house
executive message three.
Water printed and referred to
the house energy environment and
natural reasons as committee
then the house taxation and
revenue committee
house will one hundred and forty
one introduced by reps and its
harkman behill in lane and act
relating to judicial salaries
providing their justices of the
supreme state supreme court I
receive a salary increase
removing salary formulas for
magistrates making an
appropriation.
House per one hundred and forty
one introduced by
representatives hochman be held
and lane.
House bill one hundred and forty
one have been read twice by
title is it seemed remain under
article four sixteen five b two
house executive message thirteen
ordered principle and referred
to the house judiciary committee
then the house appropriations of
finance committee
house bill one hundred and forty
two introduced by representative
of hockenville and act making an
appropriation to the public
education department to provide
reimbursement for the cost of
preliminary scholastic app to
test for high school juniors who
are one thousand or above on the
test during their junior year
hospital one hundred and forty
two introduced by a
representative of hawkenview
house will one hundred and forty
two have been rich was by
totally dim german under article
four section five one ordered
printed and referred to the
house education committee that
ends the house appropriations
and finance committee.
The.
Hospital one hundred and forty
three introduced by
representative of channel and
act relating to energy storage
facilities amending the industry
or revenue bond act of the
county industrial revenue
bondact to include certain
electric energy storage
facilities as eligible projects
requiring the provision of
payment in lew of taxes payments
to school districts if a
municipality or county requires
energy storage facility projects
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for sales of energy
storage equipment to government
for the purpose of installing an
energy storage facility adding
sunset dates hospital one
hundred and forty three and
shoes by representative of
channel.
Has been one forty three hundred
minutes was by totally generate
under article four section five
b one ordered printed and
referred to the house energy
natural recencies and
environment committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
Hospital one hundred and forty
four introduced by
representative hochman vehicle
and act relating to gun violence
creating the office of gun
violence prevention intervention
creating the director's
selection committee providing
powers and duties requiring
annual reports hospital one
hundred and forty four
introduced by representative
hocken vehicle.
Has were one forty four have
been here towards my title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
The.
Hospital one hundred and forty
five introduced by
representatives charters case
chassis and japan scheme.
For the legislative health and
human services committee and act
relating to health to health
care requiring department of
health to prom- promulgate and a
forced minimum nursing staff the
patient ratios in license
hospitals creating the staff
advisory committee requiring
license hospitals to develop an
implement policies and
procedures providing
administrative families
declaring an emergency house for
one hundred and forty five
injuries bear representatives
java's chassis and zapansky
house will one hundred and forty
five have been read twice by
total is order printed and and
it's ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
Hospital one hundred and forty
six interest by representative
brown and act relating to
transportation creating the
transportation trust fund making
annual transfers to the state
road fund for certain projects
prioritized by the department
transportation.
Transferring certain unexpended
capital outlay balances to the
transportation trust
distributing in a portion of
groceries tax revenue
tributables of the sale
electricity to the
transportation trust fund
and mending distributions the
motor vehicle exised tax making
an appropriation house for the
one hundred and forty six
introduced by representative
brown house will one hundred and
forty six hour minutes was by
title is jimmed remained under
article four section five b one
order printed and referred to be
house transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations in finance
committee
house bill one hundred and forty
seven introduced by
representative mcqueen and act
relating to the state game
commission reforming the state
game commission appointment
process setting term limits for
commissioners adding
requirements for appointment and
removal of commissioners
hospital one hundred and forty
seven introduced by
representative
has been one forty seven have
been rich wise by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House will one hundred and forty
eight introduced by
representatives armstrong
horrera alison cates in
tomorrow.
Endorsed by the new mexico
finance authority oversight
committee and act relating to
finance authorizing the new
mexico finance authority to make
loans or grants from the water
project fund for certain water
projects declaring an emergency.
Hospital one hundred and forty
eight introduced by
representatives armstrong errera
kate's allison and tomorrow.
The.
Has been one forty eight.
Has been one forty eight have
been with twice by title is
gentremen under article four
section fifty one order printed
and referred to the house
agriculture as sake yes and
water researchers committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee
has been one hundred and forty
nine introduced by
representative on an act
relating to health preventing
the restriction of medication
assisted treatment for minors in
in patient and outpatient
substance abuse treatment
facilities and programs that are
operated are funded by the state
creating their evidence based
addiction treatment for minors
fund making an appropriation
hospital one hundred and forty
nine introduced by
representative power on.
The.
Thanks.
Has we want forty nine have been
read twice by title is deemed
remain under article four
section five b one or the
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and fifty
interest by representative block
and act relating to taxation and
acting the renewable energy
production tax act imposing an
excise tax on electricity
generated from reminible
energy's resources distributing
review to revenue from the tax
to the severance to taxpayer in
front.
House but one hundred and fifty
introduced by a representative
block
house but one hundred and fifty
have been right was by title is
deemed your main under article
for section article four section
five with one of the
constitution order principle
referred to the house.
Energy environment the natural
resources committee
then the house taxation and
revenue committee.
Hospital in a hundred and fifty
one introduced by representative
thompson little
under area america.
Gorula and chasing and act
relating to state and private
educational institutions
requiring state funded post
secondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
prevention of sexual salt
domestic violence dating
violence in harassment we're
stalking house with one hundred
and fifty one introduced by
representatives thompson little
under a romaro korula and chase
has been one hundred and fifty
one.
How minorities by title is
ordered not princess referred to
the house rules committee.
House bill one hundred and fifty
two introduced by representative
and act relating to driving
under the influence of
intoxication talks getting
liquor or drugs prohibiting
driving with controlled
substances or medical lights in
the blood providing that the
ignition interlock requirement
only applies to offenders with
alcohol concentration in their
blood or breath as well one
hundred and fifty do introduce
by representative of rem-.
As well one fifty two minutes
was by title is or not
princetory for house rules
committee.
As for one hundred and fifty
three introduced by
representatives as a brown zell
brown scott mason and henry and
act making an appropriation from
the general fund to the
department of transportation for
transportation infrastructure
projects on certain portions of
united states highway three
hundred and eighty house for one
hundred and fifty three
introduced by representatives
zell brown scott mason and
henry.
How's been one fifty three
hundred minutes whereas where
total is deemed remain under
article four security be one
order printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Hospital one hundred and fifty
four injuries by representative
sorry and act relating to public
employees allowing certain
public employees to return to
work for affiliated public
employers under certain
conditions.
House for one hundred and fifty
four inches by representative.
House will one fifty four
hundred minutes was by title is
order not princeton reference to
the house committee.
Hospital one hundred and fifty
five
injuries by representative ream
and act relating to criminal
sentencing providing three
strikes for violent balance for
the purposes of life
imprisonment eliminating the
possibility of parole except
geriatric or medical parallel
for a defendant with three
fellow strikes and sentenced to
life from prison providing that
certain convictions incurred by
the defendant before the age of
eighteen shall constitute
violent values providing
penalties.
Hospital one hundred and fifty
five.
Introduced by observer.
House will one fifty five have
been retired by title is ordered
not printed referred to the
house rules committee
as well one hundred and fifty
six introduced perhaps in
everything.
And act relating to delinquency
providing that children of the
edge of fifteen in juvenile
detention facilities be
segregated from children fifteen
years of age or older house with
one hundred forty six introduced
by representative of ream as
will one fifty six I have been
retired by tettle is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
Hospital one fifty seven
introduced by representatives
and more and act relating to
public education in acting the
school teachers on site
protection act requiring that
the department of public safety
conduct school employee firearms
training establishing procedures
for school employees to be
licensed and appointed to carry
hang on in hang on on school
premises adding school employees
license and appointed to carry a
hand gun to exceptions to
unlawful carrying of a deadly
weapon on school premises house
will one hundred and fifty seven
introduced by representative of
tomorrow has been one fifty
seven have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
The.
House bill one hundred and fifty
eight introduced by
representative of zamora and
representative garcia.
And act relating to missing
persons improving the
implementation of silver alerts
requiring cellular service
companies and paging service
companies to execute a procedure
for notifying their
representatives that text
message are sent to all
customers at no additional
expense hospital one hundred and
fifty eight introduced by
representatives more and harry
garcia.
The.
The.
House with one fifty eight have
minorites where the way tellers
are not princeton referred to
the house rules committee.
House were one hundred and fifty
nine introduced by
representatives of more and act
relating to gaming removing a
allowable gaming expenses from
the net take calculation for
nonprofit gaming operator
licenses rescinding the july
first two thousand twenty seven
repeal and reinactment of
section sixty dash two e dash
forty seven and mse nineteen
seventy eight being large
nineteen seventy ninety seven
chapter one hundred and ninety
section forty nine as amended by
laws two thousand twenty three
chapter one hundred and twenty
two section one and by laws
twenty twenty three chapter one
hundred and fifty four section
two by repealing laws two
thousand twenty three chapter
one hundred and twenty two
sections two and four.
House bill one hundred and fifty
nine introduced by
representatives of.
House will one fifty nine have
been a twice by title is deemed
remain under article for section
five be one ordered printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then the house
accession and revenue committee
hospital one hundred and sixty.
Introduced by representatives
more and act relating to gaming
expanding the employment history
that a candidate for executive
director of the gaming control
board may have increasing the
executive director's potential
annual salary hospital one
hundred and sixty introduced by
representatives of more house
will one hundred and sixty have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
I spoke one hundred and sixty
one introduced by
representatives brown and jones
and act relating to education
requiring certain school
business purchased on or after
july first twenty twenty five to
have air conditioning and
seatbelts providing for the
calculation of school bus
seating capacity requiring
training house but one hundred
and sixty one introduced by
representatives brown and jo.
Has sixty one have a minerate
twice a bit title is order not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
Yeah.
House will one hundred and sixty
two introduced by
representatives arm strong
chatfield mason herrera and
vincent and act relating to food
in acting the meat inspection
act authorizing the new mexico
live stock board to conduct me
inspections to ensure the safety
and quality of meat for human
consumption creating the office
of meat and paltry inspection
providing for inspection stamps
and establishment numbers
providing penalties providing
exemption exceptions for ritual
slaughter.
House were one hundred and sixty
two introduced by
representatives armstrong chat
field mason horrera binson.
The.
House will one sixty two have
been rich was by title is order
not princeton referred to the
house rules coming.
House bill one hundred and sixty
three introduced by
representatives garcia and jones
for the legislative health and
human services committee and act
relating to taxation adding
certain pharmacists registered
nurses social workers behavior
health counselors and therapists
and physical terms to the rural
health care practitioner tax
credit modifying the
requirements for receiving the
rural health care practitioner
tax credit increasing data
collection and reporting
requirements for the taxation of
revenue department house per one
hundred and sixty three
introduced by representatives
garcia and jones house will one
hundred and sixty three have
been ripped was by table is
deemed remain under article four
section five one order printed
and referred to the house health
and human services committee
vents the house taxation and
revenue committee.
Hospital one hundred and sixty
four introduced by
representatives armstrong
taraces jones and hermes and act
making an appropriation to the
board of regions of new mexico
state university for the new
mexican apartment of
agriculture's existing livestock
mexican wolf compensation
program
house will one hundred and sixty
four introduced per
representatives arm strong
paraces jones and hermeo house
will one hundred and sixty four
hundred minutes wise by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five b one ordered
printed and referred to the
house agriculture a sick yes and
water resources committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee
house one hundred and sixty five
introduced by representative
it's arm strong in her meal.
And act relating to
pharmaceutical drugs requiring
medicaid managed care
organizations to reimburse
community based pharmacy
providers for the full cost of
prescription drugs plus the
professional dispensing fee
requiring the healthcare
authority department to conduct
a study to determine and set a
reasonable professional
dispensing fee for pharmacy
providers that provide services
to medicaid recipients making an
appropriation hospital one
hundred and sixty five
introduced by representatives
armstrong and herme.
Husband a hundred and sixty five
hundred minutes was by title is
deemed remain under article four
section five one order princeton
referred to the household in
human services committee then
the house appropriations from
finance committee.
I spent one hundred and sixty
six introduced by
representatives cadena and gay
against an act relating to
taxation creating groceries tax
deductions for the sale of child
care assistance through a
license child care assistance
program and pre kindergarten
services by for profit pre
kindergarten providers hospital
one hundred and sixty six
introduced by representatives
perena and gave us.
House will one hundred and sixty
six hundred minutes wise by
title is deemed remain under
article for section of five b
one order printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee
then the house taxation and
revenue committee
hospital one hundred and sixty
seven introduced by
representatives jones brown and
block and act relating to
childbirth requiring medical
care for all infense who were
born alive defining born live in
infant mandating reporting and
acting penalties and acting
civil remedies creating the task
force to monitor born a live
birth hospital one hundred and
sixty seven introduced by
representatives jones brown and
block.
Has been a hundred and sixty
seven have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
Hospital one hundred and sixty
eight introduced per
representatives jones lord and
reeb.
And act relating to firearms
prohibiting an undocumented
person from receiving
transporting or possessing a
firearm or destructive device
providing a penalty.
House one hundred and sixty
eight introduced by
representative jones lord and.
House will one hundred and sixty
eight have been read twice by
title is ordered not princeton
referred to the house rules
coming.
Hospital one hundred and sixty
nine introduced by
representatives to rose as
dunkin zamora is on and mason as
our apologies and act relating
to food prohibiting misremember
misrepresentation of lab culture
protein as a meet food product
prescribing penalties.
House but one hundred and sixty
nine introduced by
representatives to russia's
dunkins and mora azel and mason
house will one hundred and sixty
nine have been read twice by
title is order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
I was one hundred and seventy.
Introduced by representatives
the pansky and act relating to
medical candidates limiting
employment protections for
certain employees in safety
sensitive positions clarifying
in parameter hospital one
hundred and seventy introduced
by representatives of.
Hells will one hundred and
seventy have minorites wise by
turtle is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House by one hundred and seventy
one introduced by
representatives romaro and lane
for the legislative education
study committee and act relating
to public schools changing
graduation requirements for
students entering ninth grade in
the twenty twenty five twenty
twenty sixth school year
preparing students to graduate
with the diploma of excellence
aligning next step plans to
graduate profiles.
And house bill rep one seventy
one injuries by representatives
romaro and lane.
The.
That's g under as ramar
representative gender is from
he's a g for sure house but once
if anyone have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
sorry.
And referred.
Third reading of legislation.
Has been one seventy one have
been written as my total is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee
I spoke one hundred and seventy
two introduced by representative
and act relating to public
employee pensions providing a
temporary additional non
compounding payment to retired
members under the public
employee retirement act making
an appropriation as well one
hundred and seventy two.
Introduced by representative of
sanchez.
House with one seventy two have
been read twice by title is
deemed mean under article force
section five b one order printed
and referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee then the house of
operations committee.
House hundred and seventy three
introduced by representative and
act making an appropriation for
the new mexico department of
agriculture to administer a
range land past medication
program hospital one hundred and
seventy three introduced by
representative.
Has been one seventy three have
mine which has been totally dim
to mean under article four
section five one ordered
princeton referred to.
The house agriculture are sick
yes in water reasons this
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee
hospital one hundred and seventy
four injuries by representatives
of a queen and on your known and
act making an appropriation to
the cultural affairs department
to conduct a feasibility study
of establishing a national
museum of new deal art house
with one hundred and seventy
four introduced by
representatives of my queen and
on your known.
House bill one seventy four have
minorities by title is deemed
remain under article four
section five b one order printed
and referred to the house rural
development language and
cultural affairs committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
I was well one hundred and
seventy five introduced by
representative matthews harmeo
dixon traves and zapansky.
An act relating to the
children's code specifying to
whom and under what
circumstances information that
is held by the children youth
and family's department that
pertains a child abuse or
neglect maybe shared requiring
that information be provided
about child fatalities or near
fatalities protecting personal
identifier information of
department clients requiring the
court's written order when
excluding media from an abuse or
neglect proceeding which is
appealable requiring reports on
the children youth and family's
department website prescribing a
penalty house bull one hundred
and seventy five introduced by
representatives matthews hermeo
dixon charges and zapansky.
Okay.
Yeah.
Has been one seventy five
hundred twice by title is
ordered not printed referred to
the house rules committee.
Stim by everybody just need a
minute.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hospital one hundred and seventy
seven introduced by
representatives dixon and
armstrong and senators woods and
campus and act relating to
finance creating the new mexico
match fund making an
appropriation declaring an
emergency.
House per one hundred and
seventy seven introduced by
representatives armstrong and
senators would arm strong sorry
introduced by representative
dixon armstrong and senators
woods and campus.
House will one seventy seven
have been read twice by title it
seemed german under article for
section five b one what it
printed and referred to.
The house rural development
language in color to affairs
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee
I was but one hundred and
seventy eight introduced by
representative queen.
And act relieving to the taking
came commission reforming the
state game commission
appointment process setting term
limits for commissioners adding
requirements for appointment and
removal of commissioners I was
put one hundred and seventy
eight introduced by a
representative of macqueen.
House for one hundred and
seventy nine.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
Going to pass for a minute
that about three break
representatively.
This message brought to you by.
The.
The.
The.
If we suspend the rules for
three seconds to say how to wear
good friend zackery cook zackery
cook.
Where's your running away can
you come say high.
The.
Representative cook welcome
back.
Good to see you.
Has been one seventy eight have
been read twice by title.
And after ten minutes of
rereading the bill.
Is the intermediary under
article four section five b
three order printed and referred
to the house energy environment
electoral resistance committee
then the house judiciary
committee.
House bill one hundred and
seventy nine introduced by
representative from.
An act relating to taxation
increasing liquor excise tax
rates on alcoholic beverages for
certain manufacturers and
producers.
Indexing the tax fees for all
manufacturers and producers
changing current districtions
from a percentage of net
receipts of the liquor excise
tax to dollar amounts
distributing the demander of the
revenue from the liquor excise
tax to a new alcohol harm's
alleviation fund creating the
alcohol harm to alleviation fund
house will and hundred seventy
nine represent uh introduce
bureau of senator from house
bill on seventy nine hundred
minutes wise by title is or is
deemed remain.
Under article four section five
b one order printed and referred
to the household in human
services committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
I was well one hundred and
eighty introduced by
representative of jones and act
making an appropriation to the
department of health to develop
a pregnancy and parenting
resource website and hotline to
providing resources to expectant
families and new parents
hospital one hundred and eighty
introduced by representative
jones.
House bill one eighty have been
read to us by title is due to
mean under article four section
five b one order princeton
reference to the house health in
human services committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one hundred and
eighty one introduced by
representative thompson.
And act relating to insurance
amending the life and health
insurance guarantee association
act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance guarantee association
repealing section fifty nine a
dash forty six dash fifteen nmsa
nineteen seventy eight being
laws nineteen ninety three
chapter two hundred and sixty
six section fifteen
husband one eighty one have been
written as by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
How strong memorial number one
introduced by representative of
montoya for the economic and
rural development and policy
committee a joint memorial
raising awareness of the
economic challenges experienced
by the four corner's region and
urging new mexico's
congressional delegation to
support legislation that will
fund the construction of a freak
rail line and transloading
facility on the naval nation in
the four corners region.
How strong memorial number one
introduced by a representative
montoya.
How's your memorial one have
been read twice a bit title is
order printed and referred to
the house rural development
language and cultural affairs
committee.
House memorial number one
introduced by representative
garrett a memorial requesting
legislative finance committee to
conduct a study on equalizing
the pension benefit structures
of the education of retirement
board and the public employees
retirement association in
claboration with the interim
committee that studies
investments and pensions in the
university of new mexico bureau
of business and economic
research has moral number one
introduced by representative
garrett.
I was remoral won't have been
written while by title is
ordered principle and referred
to the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
has memorial number two
introduced by representative
ferrari a memorial declaring
january twenty fifth two
thousand twenty four new mexico
food and farms day in the house
of representatives and
celebration of community food
and farm initiatives towards
ending hunger and straight down
the state white food system has
memorial number two introduced
by representative from.
As more number two have middle
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speaker stable
as memorial number three
introduced by representative
lord a memorial requesting the
secretary of health the
convenient task force to study
the prevalence effects in
lifetime social fiscal impacts
of prenatal substance exposure
and adverse neonator outcomes
requesting that the final
results of the study be pre-
reported to the legislature has
memorial number three introduced
by representative lord.
House memorial number three have
a minute twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house health and human services
committee
house memorial number four
introduced by representative
garrett a memorial requesting
legislative education study
committee to study middle school
education has memorial number
four issues by representative
garrett.
The.
Cars are more for how many twice
by title is ordered.
Printed and reflected the house
education committee
house joint resolution number
one introduced by representative
of macqueen.
A joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section five of the constitution
in mexico to provide that each
regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed
forty five days remove the
restriction on the on bills that
may be considered in even
numbered years and provide for
consideration of governor
governor veto of rights for
bills of certain special or
extraordinary legislative
sessions house joint resolution
number one and choose better
representative macqueen.
Maybe should be fifteen days.
Instead of forty five.
How's your resolution when I
have been rid twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the house government election in
an affairs committee then the
house judiciary committee
I was joint resolution number
two and shoes very
representative of macqueen a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section twenty two of the
constitution in mexico to
provide the all bills passed by
the legislature and not acted on
by the governor will become law
and to require veto messages on
all bills vetoed by the governor
house joint resolution number
two introduced by representative
mcqueen has get your solution
number two haven't been right
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house
government elections in in the
affairs committee then the house
judiciary committee.
I was trying to resolution
number three introduced by
representative.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend article two section
thirteen of the constitution in
new mexico to remove the
requirement requirements that
only courts of record may deny
bill and that only prosecuting
attorneys may request a hearing
to determine whether bails
tonight to allow courts that I
bail for all types of criminal
offences to allow courts did I
bail upon finding by clear and
convincing evidence that release
conditions will not reasonably
ensure their parents of the
person as required or protect
the safety of another person or
the community and to allow for
conditions for denial of bail to
be provided by law house joint
resolution number three
introduced by representative.
How's how's direct resolution
three hundred minutes was by
title.
Is ordered printed and referred
to the house government election
in the affairs committee then
the house judiciary committee
house joint resolution number
four and shoes by representative
from a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
constitution of new mexico by
adding a new section of article
two that provides the people of
the state with environmental
rights including the right to
cleaning healthy air water soil
and environments a stable
climate insult staining
ecosystems and directs the state
counties and municipalities to
serve as trustees of the natural
resources of new mexico for the
benefit of all the people how
strength realization number 4
introduced by joan from.
Has your solution for have mine
twice by title is under
princetory for it to the house
energy environment and natural
resources committee then the
house judiciary committee
astronaut resolution number five
introduced by representative
figure a joint resolution
proposing to amend article four
section five of the constitution
in new mexico by changing the
length of legislative sessions
and even numbered years to sixty
days allowing the consideration
of all subjects during each
regular legislative session
providing for consideration of
governor veto overrides for
bills of certain special or
extraordinary legislative
sessions house joint resolution
five introduced by
representative figure o.
The.
How's your solution five have
been read twice by title is
ordered principle referred to
the house government election
and in the first committee then
the house to be sharing
committee.
How straight resolution number
six introduced by representative
block a joint resolution
proposing to mandate article
twelve of the constitution new
mexico by repealing section six
and adding a new section six
that replaces the public
education commission with the
state word of education that
determines public school policy
and has control management in
direction including financial
directional of distribution of
school funds in financial
accounting for all public
schools pursuant to authority
and powers provided by law.
House direct resolution number
six introduced by representative
block.
How's your solution six.
Have been retrieved by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house education committee
then the house government
elections and indian affairs
committee.
Generally from
santa fe.
The.
Mr speaker I moved to go to that
order of business messages.
Seen the objection of this order
clerk to read.
House executive message number
twenty five.
Speaker martinez the members of
the house pursuant to article
for.
Section five b two of the new
mexican constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
six nine seven one a bill
prioritising water project fund
projects that are urgent to
address public health and
safety.
Allowing the water trustport to
authorize water projects for
what for wastewater convents and
treatment providing that the new
mexico finance authorities set
requirements of financial
capability of qualifying
entities and determined costs of
originating grants and loans.
Removing the requirement that
eligible entities conduct an
audit and the and that water
project plans are reviewed and
recommended by the state
engineer and the department of
the environment before approval.
Removing fiscal agent fees from
items that are eligible for
grounds and loans.
Reducing the amount of water
project funds distributed to the
state engineer allowing the new
mexico finance authority to fund
water projects without receiving
the approval of the legislature
for the next five years.
Providing that money in the
water project fund may be used
to hire contractors to provide
technical assistance and
changing the day that the water
transport is required to report
to the legislature respectfully
yours michelle hungership
governor.
The message will be entered.
Message from the senate mister
speaker i'm directed to inform
the house at the senate has
passed house bill one with the
emergency class and returned
same here with respectfully
submitted sherry delhon said a
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Lady from earlier person of cc.
The.
This was bigger removed we go to
that order of business
committee report see an
objection it is ordered clerk to
read mr speaker you're in
rolling in and growth in
communities has been referred
house bill one with the
emergency class has headed and a
consideration reports that same
has been duly enrolled in and
growth preparatory deciding by
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted eleanor
chavis chair we're an adoption
of favorable committee report.
We will be unadoption or a
federal committee.
No pressure representative
travelers.
Moto dot.
We are an adoption of federal
community report and house bill
one or those in favor seeing if
I see now.
Straight that again.
I guess I guess i'll get predium
although suppose they know the
eyes have it can be reported up
to the the record reflect that
the duly enrolled in a girl's
copies of house but one were
signed by the officers of the
house in open session.
The.
Generally from reliable.
The.
Mr speaker I moved we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
objection it is ordered
alright members we have a couple
of announcements to make any
announcements where
miscellaneous business from the
floor.
The.
The.
Generally from you thank you
mister speaker house although
there's no one in here house
health and human services
committee will be meeting at
eight thirty in room three oh
seven on monday.
Members take note any other
announcements.
The.
The.
All right i've we've got a
couple of clear errors that
we've consulted on with the
leadership already on two bills
and i'll go very slow to make
sure but he knows what we're
doing.
House will one thirty.
Sponsored by a receptive field
who was referred to the house
energy environmental natural
reasons this committee and then
the house appropriations and
finance committee I would like
to correct that record to say
house agriculture are set yes
and water reasons committee the
house appropriations committee.
So how's will one thirty chat
field.
Originally sent two house energy
environment natural resources
then appropriations.
We are correcting that two house
agricultural seconds water
resources and appropriations.
Sina objection is ordered.
House bill one or one.
Sponsored by representative
thompson.
He was originally referred to
the house health and human
services committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee however the bill
includes civil penalties
therefore I will remove house
bill one or one from its
original assignment to the house
health and human services
committee.
And instead of send it to the
house judiciary committee
house appropriations and finance
committee then we repeat that
house will one or one thomson or
regionally referred to the
household and humans are
business committee then house
appropriations and finance
committee we are now sending it
we are removing it from health
and now we are sending it to
house judiciary committee then's
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Some objections ordered.
Or at any other announcements.
Okay last announcement to the
day as they said there will not
be a floor session tomorrow or
saturday or sunday we will be
back on monday
I hope that you will have see if
travels home if you're going to
home I hope you have a great
weekend those of you who are
going to be working over the
weekend
I hope you have good sessions.
Uh with that think you offer
agreed first week of floor
sessions will appreciate all the
good work.
That.
J from bernil.
Mr be growing up the house
standard races until ten thirty
monday morning.
Thank you members the house will
set a reason until ten thirty am
monday morning.
