Opposite direction.
Roll calls close. We have a
quorum.
He's right for today's
invocation, led by
The gentleman.
From Chavez, Eddie and Lieber
said Mason.
Our father in heaven. Thank you
for the for your gift of life.
No complaints. Just thankful to
be alive in here.
I never remember each day our
oath to the state of New Mexico
to abide by
Not only our constitution, but
the Constitution of the USA,
Dear God, let our light shine
before others so that they may
see your good works and give all
the glory.
Our God in Jesus' name. We pray
Amen and generated from earlier
presented little to lead us in
the Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands One nation under God,
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
In the generated from Chavez's
recent Brazil leaders in the
salute to the New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico Z assemble of
perfect friendship among United
cultures.
Play ball.
Generally from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered.
Good morning members happy
Monday.
Their announcements. The
gentleman from Catrin
Grant any Calgary presented.
Terrazas. Mr Speaker? Yes.
You will find on your desk, Mr
Speaker and all the members
What looks like a gold bar, but
It's actually not a gold bar.
It's in the shape of a casket.
As you know, funeral directors.
This is one of the things we can
buy.
And, uh, I just thought I'd
share this with the members and
I hope this makes a, uh you
know, have heavy sweet week.
A sweet day. Better sweeten your
day. But anyway, we're not
soliciting Mr Speaker for the
record.
I had a few members thinking
that we were soliciting. That is
illegal. We don't do that. It's
a nice gesture.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. 50%
discount today, Billy.
Gentlemen from Vanessa
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am
happy to introduce my intern and
shadow that will be here this
week. And so I have output at
person that will be here from
you and him. He's actually
visiting from you and M from the
policy size, So we're
Gonna be taken around and
showing them how we work and how
we get things done. So thank
you, Mr Speaker. Welcome to the
house. You have a great week.
The lady from earlier presented.
Dixon. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Similar to Representative Baca.
I would like to introduce my
intern and shadow for the week.
Also from U. N. M s political
Science department, Miss Abigail
McCoy.
Welcome to the House and have a
great week as well.
Gentlemen from San Juan, Percent
of Lane.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It's my
privilege to introduce some of
my guests that are in the rust
room today. So Mr Speaker, you
could notice by the lovely red
coats to your left. We have some
red coats from the Chamber of
Commerce up in Farmington.
And so, Mr Speaker, whenever you
open up your your shooting
sports facility up in
Farmington, they'd love to come
to a ribbon cutting for you or
Any other business. You might
start up in Farmington. So
I'm gonna introduce them. I'll
ask them to stand and and we can
give them a round of applause.
So Michelle Gonzalez
Welcome to Shell.
Lois Lewis.
Tracy locked in.
Camacho.
Carrie Olson.
Denise Noyce.
Alan Lion.
Also former longtime high school
wrestling referee and used to
referee many of my matches back
in the day.
He got every call, right? Of
course.
Katie Harris.
And Farmington Chamber CEO Jamie
Church. So welcome. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Welcome to the
House. Gentlemen from San Juan
Senator Montoya. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Um
Mr Chair or Mr Speaker.
Today.
We passed House Bill two out of
Appropriations Committee.
And there
What was something that was put
in the bill?
That have concern as to how
That ended up in the bill.
Um, Mr Speaker. That is a
provision for a line item for $6
million.
To go towards legislative Staff.
Year round, Mr Speaker.
Um
This happened in appropriations.
Mr Speaker without any
Discussion whatsoever. We got
here a week early to start doing
the work. Obviously, during a 30
Day session, you have to get
here a little bit early to start
to work on getting the budget
ready.
But Mr Speaker during that whole
time
From a week before the session
up until Friday.
There was no discussion of this
amount being put into the
budget.
There was no discussion as to
how this amount in the budget
would then be administered.
We have
Until
On the day of ketchup cleanup,
where we take the work that has
been done in the subcommittees
and in the work groups.
Um, we had no discussion in
those workgroups or in those
subcommittees about this
appropriation.
Mr Speaker. I believe there are
some
Legal potential legal challenges
or concerns, and I'm going to
briefly go through those
Speaker in Article four, Section
nine.
That off authorized the
Legislature to hire staff and
your round staff. But these
positions are described and are
very specific.
Such as chaplain, chief clerk
sergeant at arms enrolling
clerks, uh, reading clerks. This
provision allows for staff and
I'm gonna in the quoted part
here is for each house.
Not for individual legislators.
And or for district offices.
Um
Mr Speaker, where
We have increased, uh, increased
staffing and made provision
through through for for
legislative agencies such as L S
We have increased, uh increased
staffing and made provision
through through for for
legislative agencies such as LSC
lfc L E S, c, H, C, C and S. C.
C.
These have been created by
statute.
And their duties and
responsibilities are set out in
statutes.
Um, obviously, Mr Speaker, this
is a concern.
The only time that we've even
debated staffing on this floor.
Was last year when a study
Was given. That was added into
the
House Bill one. The feed bill.
And Mr Speaker. Uh, that was a
surprise that that would have
been added into that bill. But
Mr Speaker, that's the only time
we have had discussion of this
at least among the legislators.
Mr Speaker. I
Was. It was mentioned by a
couple of folks in HFC that
there had been a robust
Discussion.
Through the interim, and Mr
Speaker.
Um, as I went and did an
extensive
Search has defined out when that
happened. This robust
discussion. What I found was the
only time it was discussed at
all by legislators was
Through Legislative Legislative
Council meetings and Mr Speaker
that
There. That is not very many
members of the 100.
12 members that we have in the
Legislature. There's just a few
members that serve on
legislative Council. But Mr
Speaker, what came out of that
was
A study that was conducted by
the Bureau of Business and
Economic Research at you and M.
And research and polling. Mr
Speaker did
A survey. That survey was sent
out to all legislators where
they took input and we were was
described
On there. We were able to
describe what potential staffing
needs. We might have.
But Mr Speaker once
That research was taken and the
results of that poll were
distributed.
Once again there was no further
discussion.
As to whether or not this was,
of course of action that we were
going to pursue.
Um, Mr Speaker.
The concern I have is
The answer is on that on that
study on that poll. Mr Speaker
on that survey among
legislators, there was a wide
range all the way from people
who did not believe we needed
any staff.
To people who believe that we
needed to legislators that
believe that we needed every
person every legislator to have
their own individual Staff year
round, So, Mr Speaker
The concern.
That I and many of my colleagues
on
Appropriations have and I would
believe members of this body
have is that there was an amount
put in there.
$6 million.
Amount.
There was no discussion prior to
And there was no discussion that
this was even going to be in
house Bill two.
So, Mr Speaker, I believe I have
a remedy.
For this problem.
And that is I'm going to be
filing a bill today.
That takes the lowest tier that
was in that study. Mr Speaker.
For there to be.
Up to 12.
Regional staff offices where non
partisan staff
Could work there year round and
that that staff would work.
Four.
And report to Legislative
Council service as to make sure
Mr Speaker that
That
This doesn't become partisan
staff.
And potentially prone towards
activities of electioneering.
Mr Speaker.
So I'm going to introduce this
today. I have talked to a
prominent member.
Of your caucus.
Um
To potentially sign onto this
bill.
And, um, Mr Speaker through that
conversation.
There was discussion that, uh
We don't really want the
governor.
To decide whether or not we have
this staff. This is our This is
our
Our legislature.
And Mr Speaker. The concern I
have is
The governor still has a say.
Ms Speaker. The governor can
line item veto that $6 million
appropriation.
In particular, she could point
to the fact that there is no
legislation attached to it.
Mr Speaker. It was then, in part
of our discussion was
Well, the governor could veto
the legislation.
And that is right. That is the
exact same thing that the
governor could do by just line
item vetoing that item.
The difference. Mr Speaker is if
we get a veto proof
Uh, majority to sign onto this
bill, which I think it is likely
we would be able to get that Mr
Speaker. I think we could
Then at the very least, have a
veto override threat.
So, Mr Speaker. What? I'm
presenting what I'm going to be
introducing today.
Is a bill.
That has the defined structure
in place. There's no question
about how pay will be handed
handled because that pay
structure already lines up with
the different classes that
exist. So Miss Speaker I'm
hopeful.
That this would be an answer,
And I believe if I don't believe
there is a question of a German
is here, because this bill
specifically deals with two
things.
Staffing levels.
And an appropriation attached to
it.
Of $6 million. I believe
Virtually everything that we
passed out of appropriations
this year in the budget.
I had to do with an increased
budget for things such as office
offices, staffing.
And Mr Speaker.
I I believe this would stand the
test of German nous and then Mr
Speaker. I believe if the
governor were to veto this, we
at least have some recourse. So
I hope to have, uh
Someone sign onto this with me.
But regardless, Mr Speaker, I
plan on introducing this
legislation today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentlemen
from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I am
so pleased to introduce my
shadow for today.
His name is Abhishek Nara Hari.
And he is a current high school
senior at Albuquerque Academy,
and he will be an incoming
student at Georgetown
University. This fall. Very
proud of him. He will be
studying international relations
with the goal to be a diplomat
after graduation. He is also one
of the New Mexico delegates to
the United States Senate Youth
program, and he is a social
media manager at
A South Asian American advocacy
group, and he's invited involved
in student government and model
U N So if you all would please
help me. Welcome Abhishek to the
house. Welcome to the house. I'm
in shock.
Lady from Berlioz's percent of
chasing
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
Introduction of legislation is
ordered.
House Memorial 31, introduced by
representatives lent and Baca.
A memorial declaring January
29th 2024 NM Day in the House of
Representatives in recognition
of the University of New
Mexico's contribution, House
built House Memorial.
How's Memorial 31 haven't been
rate was my total disorder not
printed in place on the
speaker's table Lady from
earlier presented JC Mr Speaker.
I move to go to that order,
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered. Did
your Lady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan with an
announcement?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I mean, Mr
Speaker didn't committees I
think we're waiting for our
guests to come onto the rostrum.
But what? We're waiting for this
Get to be lit to the rostrum.
You'll notice that I'm wearing a
purple sash today. Mr Speaker,
This is an and celebration and
recognition of Alzheimer's state
or Alzheimer's Association who
put on a wonderful
Event today and having
discussions with all of us and
talking to
Not only our legislators, but
they will be meeting with our
governor shortly as well. So
members of this chat this
chamber may have noticed that
and and others wearing the
purple Stashes to I'm proud to
stand in support of the
Alzheimer's Association and with
their advocates who are with us
today, the Alzheimer's
Association is the leading
health organization.
Advocating on behalf of the
43,000 new Mexicans who have
Alzheimer's disease and over
70,000 family caregivers
Nationally, the organization
speaks on behalf of the more
than 6 million Total Americans
facing this disease.
They are here today Advocating
for the full approval of the
full budget requests of the
aging and Long Term Services
Department, the state agency
they worked very closely with to
tackle this terrible disease.
And as as we know, many of us
here have have worked on many
pieces of legislation to help.
Um
Are folks that have dementia and
Alzheimer's diseases and Mr
Chair, I still waiting for them
to be led onto the roster room.
So the one seed once they get on
the roster, and I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. Further
announcements and Lady from Dona
Ana Representative Diego's Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I
have some special guests here
for last cruises day in the
house. If I could introduce them
I've got Dr Michael Law.
Sean Martin.
Brandy Shelby.
Glory, Findlay.
Javier Perea.
Debbie Moore and one of my very
close friends. Russell
Hernandez, Mr Speaker. I also
wanted to make note on your desk
today. There's a clear bag that
we're giving out as gifts for
legislative gifts. This year.
We're showcasing products from
the kids can Youth entrepreneur
program This program is in
partnership with the last
Kruse's
Chamber of Commerce and
ambassadors. The goal of the
kids can entrepreneur program is
to inspire creativity and
innovation among youth. Across
last cruises, Indonesian a
county So Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady and
welcome to the house back to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our
guests have arrived and thank
you, and they are wearing their
proud purples assets sashes
representing the Alzheimer's
Association in Alzheimer's Day,
celebrated here with us today
and for all those reasons
mentioned before I'd like to
give an introduction to them,
Mr. Mr Speaker.
We have here with us. Tommy
Hernandez, who is the director
Alzheimer's Association. We have
Julie Rodriguez. We have
Dina do Kane.
Nicolette Garcia, Stephanie
Tyus.
Catherine Warner.
Buffy Saavedra. Do you know
Rolls?
Jennifer Rick Nathan Young and
Beth Hamilton's and many many
others that are here with us
today that are
Recognizing and bringing the
awareness that we need to this
disease that is affecting many
of us in touch many of our lives
and our families. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I appreciate the time.
Thank you. And thank you all for
your work. Welcome to your
house. Let's go next to the
gentleman from Sandoval River in
San Juan. Representative length.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Good
morning. Good morning members.
By show of hands. How many of
you in this room? Or maybe a
started room knows somebody that
went to you and M.
Alright or are going there.
Excuse me that being said Mr
Speaker, I am proud to say that
today is, um, day in the
Legislature and I share this
honor with many of my alumni
here that I would ask Unanimous
consent that H m 31 be removed
from the speaker's table and be
made the next order of business
is ordered that the speaker
reflected election necessary for
placing House Memorial 31 on
final passage has been taken.
And it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Thank you. I'm gonna go off
track of the memorial and just
say how many of you caught the
game last night when number 25
nm shellacked Nevada in the pit.
Anybody did anybody catch that I
did, And it was a spectacular
sight to see. And I'm so honored
to be a sponsor for the U. N. M
Lobos Day. You know, you and M
is certainly a flagship
university here in the state of
New Mexico not to take away from
an MSU because they're also
amazing as well. But you and M.
About alumni, and they have
branch campuses all over our
state from Gallup, Los Alamos,
Taus and Valencia.
That do a number of great things
for all of our people here and
around the state, and I'm so
honored to stand in support of
this day, along with my co
sponsor who will overshadow me
because he did something more
spectacular than I did that.
Probably No one else in this
facility has had a chance to do
And I will like to at this point
in time, give it to my co
sponsor Represent Barca
Representative Vodka. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you,
representative Lanta.
Um, I stand in support to this,
Uh,
Memorial.
Um, what I did spectacular was I
was a gymnast for, um, If you
guys can believe that.
Anyone.
Actually, I did have the
privileges of honor of attending
U and M for my undergraduate and
my graduate degrees, uh, having
played football there
And I was a member of the other.
AH organizations.
So I stand in strong support of
this all of its amazing
departments. Universities are
Health sciences department are
med school. There are so many
great things that are going on
on your desk. You will actually
find a
Ah plan with the hot air balloon
at the U. N. M because through
you and M.
You will achieve great heights,
not just with our top ranked
basketball team.
But also with our newly hired
football coach Bronco who will
undoubtedly help us to take our
football program.
To hire to greater heights. So,
um, as a
As a proud logo.
As a proud alumni.
Ah, I wanted to honor our
university and all that is done
for
For all of us and future
generations. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
Do you think we should replace
the annual basketball game
between House and Senate for a
flag football game instead?
Mr Speaker. Actually, I do think
that and I would, at one point
would also recommend that would
sponsor a bill.
That we in the house would get
to be the Lobos every alternate
years. And so we don't instead.
No disrespect to the Aggies, but
I say that in my my own.
Oldest child is at New Mexico
State, So I'm a little
embarrassed about that. But
other than that, sir, I would
recommend a flag football game
and that the house gets to be
the logos. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and thank you.
Representative rented for
allowing me to sponsor this
memorial with you.
House floor amendment number one
to House Memorial 31 great
friendly.
Absolutely.
Is there further debate The
general lady from Berna, Leo
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members. Um, I stand in support
of my colleagues Memorial,
having graduated from U and M a
couple of times. Um and I think
I believe that my colleague was
going to introduce the people on
the rostrum representative Lynn
to have one addition to that.
Introduction, but I also wanted
to recognize in addition to our
men's basketball team who just
won Nevada 55 to 89 and also Mr
Chair are women's basketball
team who also just one air force
66 to 51.
So when my when my colleague
introduces people on the roster
might have one addition to
introduce
Fantastic. Thank you, gentle
lady. And I believe the coach
for the Wolfpack. What was that
guy's name again? I don't
remember. Forgot. Anyway. The
general lady from Catrin
Violence and Representative
Armstrong. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I just wanted to stand
in support of this memorial. I
had a daughter, who was a pole
vaulter for you and M.
She ultimately ended up
graduating from in MSU.
Ah, So you know, I had kids go
to both. I had now grown adults
with degrees from both and stand
in full support of you and M and
the specially athletics. So
thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, Gentle
lady from Bern earlier
percentage of Thompson. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield
Thank you.
Representative Martinez has
comment about being a gymnast
brought back some. I was a
student trainer and I taped what
feels like millions of ankles
and the football players were
easy because they were big and
the gymnasts were little and
they were hard and they were
very picky about their ankle
taping, So I'm a proud alumni of
you and M, as is my son and a
big champion and
I've been a mobile fans since
1968. Thank you, Mr Chair
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, um gentlemen, from
generated from earlier percent
of Casey. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman yield
I yield
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Thank
you very much. And thank you to
your co sponsor, representative
Baca, The gentleman from
Valencia. I, um I just wanted to
tell you
A little anecdote really quickly
when I was first elected and you
and then the main campus is
actually physically in my
district.
But, um when
The rhinoceros elected the
president had a dinner for all
of the new representatives and
senators and
What he said. I've never
forgotten. This is not the
University of Albuquerque.
And he didn't say this, but I'll
say it. The Mexico State is not
the University of Los Grosses.
This is this University of New
Mexico and Mexico State is also
for the entire state. We need to
keep that in mind and celebrate
both of these, but today happens
to be the turn of of u. N N and
thank you so much for the the
memorial. And don't forget it's
the University of New Mexico.
Flagship institution of the
state.
Gentlemen from gentle lady from
earlier present everywhere, bulk
Caballero.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
code gentleman sponsors yield
Reeled. Thank you. So I stand
and
Great support of this memorial.
As many of you heard over and
over and over again. I'm not
only a graduate of the school of
architecture and planning, uh,
also the school of Public
Administration and currently a
proud doctoral student in
Chicana Chicano studies, And I
say that with a lot of pride
A lot of, um, and also a lot of,
um What's the word?
Concern as I always pitch.
During this day.
For our ethnic studies programs.
And I always emphasize the
importance of these ethnic
studies.
And their fight for parody that
continues today, so I urge
everyone that's here
representing our university.
Please continue to support these
programs. They represent the
vast majority of our communities
of color around the state. And
they have been, um, greatly
under represented in all facets
at the university, So we know
you're committed. We know your
president is committed. We know
your departments are committed,
but we need that third eye.
Watching everything that goes on
so that we don't have to fight
so hard. So thank you, Uh, co
sponsors and thank you very
much. I'm a proud Lobo and will
until hopefully I finished this
dissertation, which will
hopefully be one day soon. Thank
you.
Thank you, young lady.
Everyone's a little boo Woof!
Woof! Woof! Gentlemen from
Sandoval represent Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
want to thank the two co
sponsors for you and M Day.
Um
My wife is a proud graduate of,
um, law school. My daughter is a
proud graduate.
Of U. N. M. This past May with
her degree in
Psychology, so
You know, my wife and my
daughter and my money went to
you and M, So I stand full
support.
Thank you gentlemen. Back two
gentlemen from really was in the
walls and want to introduce
guests on the rostrum. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at
the rostrum. I don't see Louis
or Lucy Lobo. But in their
absence, I will introduce James
Holloway, who was the provost
and executive vice president
there at the University of New
Mexico.
We also have Theresa constant.
This who is the executive vice
president for finance and
administration.
We also have Dean Jennifer
Millat, who is the dean of the
U. N. M College of Arts and
Sciences.
And I apologize in advance and
butchering your names, but we
will continue with Douglas
Zenden Dhoni's who is the
executive vice president of the
U. N. M health Sciences and the
CEO of UM health.
We then have Tracy Collins, who
is the dean of the U. N. M.
College of Population Health.
Patricia Finn, who is the dean
of the U. N. M School of
Medicine and finally board chair
in the Union Board of Regions,
Miss Kim Sanchez, real, uh,
And that's all I have. In terms
of of those that are have a list
for so if I missed anybody, I
think somebody's gonna pick me
up from early. Oh, thank you, Mr
Chair and representative lent
and Baca for introducing this
wonderful memorial. I also have
one additional guests from you
and M Doctor Patria de Lancer.
Jones. I think I said that
properly. She is the director of
the U. N. M School of Public
Administration, my alma mater,
And she is also a very good
friend of mine as long as well
as our board chair Regions Board
of regions. I'm sorry, Kim
Royal, Mr. Chair. I currently
chair the school of Public
administrations and M alumni
board.
So I'm very proud to have them
all of these guests.
Thank you. Thank you, Lady. And
welcome to the house to all of
you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So at
this point in time, if I can
respectfully ask the clerk to
please read the memorial to read
Memorial 31, introduced by
representatives Lent and Baca
Memorial, declaring January 29th
2024 NM Day in the House of
Representatives in recognition
of the university research and
Public Service on behalf of the
residents of New Mexico.
Whereas the University of New
Mexico and whereas the
University of New Mexico Fusion
Serving more than 26,000
students and employing tens of
thousands of New Mexico
residents, including employees
of the University of New Mexico
Hospital.
And whereas in 2023
approximately 4500 students
received degrees from the
University of New Mexico's main
branch campuses, including
approximately 2000.
900 bachelor's degrees 1000
master's degrees 100 jurors
doctorates, 91 medical
doctorates and six and whereas
the University of New Mexico and
the awards over $147 million in
scholarships
And whereas there are more than
200,000 active alumni with Lobos
and every state, including
124,000 in New Mexico, and
whereas the University of New
Mexico is celebrating a century
of graduate studies, giving
students access to nationally
recognized faculty cutting edge
research, professional and
academic development, And
whereas the University of
Mexico's graduate and
professional students soc ation
is celebrating 55 years
Identifying, promoting and
supporting the And whereas the
University of Nomex state's
largest integrated healthcare
treatment with nationals
recognition for primary care,
rural medicine, family medicine,
nursing and midwifery.
And is home to the States only
National Cancer Institute
designated comprehensive cancer
Center.
And whereas the University of
New Mexico Hospital is the only
level one trauma center for the
state and emits approximately
3000 trauma patients each year.
And whereas the University of
New Mexico provides a research
driven education, faculty
members engage in investigation
and scholarship that creates new
knowledge, which brings
sustained wealth in New Mexico's
economy. And whereas the
University of New Mexico is a
community of unique perspectives
that embraces people's
differences and celebrates the
culture of contrast, rather than
the contrast of cultures.
And whereas the University of
New Mexico is the university for
New Mexico
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico, January
29th 2024 declared U. N. M Day
in the House of Representatives
in recognition of the University
of New Mexico service and
dedication to the residents of
New Mexico.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
trans.
Okay? Is there any further
debate on the memorial?
Seeing non the gentlemen to
close. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, everybody for
trimming in At this point, I
moved that house memorial 31 do
now pass and I also ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the records show that the
role has been called and that
all members present voted in the
affirmative emotion to show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative. See
no objection. It is ordered.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 31. The vote is now
open.
The board is now
More LAUSD.
My vote of seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house. Morial 31 has to leap has
his house Congratulations. Unit
on your name Day.
And while we're at it, we've got
some folks in the gallery here
here for you and you and M. D,
including the Anderson School of
Management and Centro Della
Rossa and folks from government
relations, including Michael
Plattenburg. Welcome to the
House.
Announcements.
Gentle lady from Sun.
Announcement.
Lady from Berlioz's Sandoval
represented kids. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I just like to bring to
attention the members that there
is a salad in front of you from
meals on wheels. This
organization does nutritionally
based home cooked meals that are
specific to the individual,
whether or not their heart
healthy or glucose.
Um, they serve them fresh. They
serve them frozen sometimes if
you ask for a newspaper, they're
going statewide now, so they
will be in your community
Locally. This particular salad
came from Silver Leaf, which is
a crowd space company know that
there will be sourcing dairy and
meat and vegetables in your
local area as well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. And
thank you for the delicious
salads. Meals on wheels. Um,
also want to recognize
in the gallery who is on the
board of meals on wheels?
Welcome to the house.
Lady from Burnell, your
representative Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered clerk to read.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee has been referred
House Bill 135 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Gee, Andres from your
Chair Speaker. I move adoption
of the committee report Adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house Bill 135. All those in
papers in a proposition. I
opposed me the eyes have it
could be report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 199 has added under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted. Andres
Romero chair Mr Speaker. I move
adoption of the committee report
were an adoption of a favorable
committee report and house Bill
199 all those in favor If I was
in I
Whose name the Civic Committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Joint Resolution
one has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson share move adoption
adoption of a federal coming to
report on House joint resolution
one. All those in favor
proposition I
Oppose Nate. The eyes have it
coming to report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House joint resolution
to has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee. Respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair adoption? We are
on adoption of a favorable
community report on House joint
resolution to all those in
favors. And if I was in I
Hey, the Civic Committee report
adopted Mr Mr Speaker. Your
government elections in Union
Affairs Committee tomb has been
referred. House Joint Resolution
five has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker move, Adoption were
an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Joint
Resolution five. All those in
favors in the Bible say nine
opposed Nay. Yeah, it's habit
Community report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred. House Joint Resolution
seven has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee. Respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson Chair? Mr Speaker? Move
Adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report on
House Joint Resolution seven.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
It was me the eyes have it.
Committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 50
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submit submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair Mr
Speaker. Move adoption adoption
of a favorable committee report
on House Bill 50. All those in
favor signify by saying Aye,
a sizable committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker. Your health and
human services committed to him
has been referred House Bill 93
has had it under consideration
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee.
Respectfully submit. Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption
were on adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
93. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Opposed? Nay, the ayes have it
coming to report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 98
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair move
adoption
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house Bill 98 all those in
papers and I oppose name the
community adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred. House
Bill 81 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass as
amended and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted. Doreen Y
Guy goes chair
Mr Speaker. I move adoption. We
are on adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
81. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye.
Oppose any the Select committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 83 has had it under
consideration and reports, Same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted during
White Guy Goes Chair, Mr.
Speaker Move adoption. We are in
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
83. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Opposing a the Civic Committee
report adopted Mr Speaker, your
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 159 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do not pass, but that
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 159 do pass and
then referred to the Taxation
Revenue Committee. Respectfully
submitted during White Guy goes
chair.
Move adoption
We are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house but 159 but a favorable
community report on House
Commerce Economic Development
Committee substitute for house
Bill 159 all those in favor of
nine
Oppose Nate. The committee
report adopted Mr Speaker. Your
Judiciary Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 101 has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Somebody move. Adoption speaker
move. Adoption adoption of a
favorite committee reporting has
been 101. All those in favor
signify was a nine
Suppose name the committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tumor has been
referred. House Consumer House.
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill 114 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr Speaker with Adoption
Adoption Favorable Committee
report on House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
house but 114 all those in favor
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tumor has been
referred. House Consumer House
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill 114 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair Mr Speaker with Adoption
Adoption Favorable Committee
report on House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
house but 114 all those in
favor say Aye.
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee tomb
has been referred House Bill 94
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
share Move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report on
house Bill 94. All those in
favor say Aye.
Proposing a yes Habit Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee tomb
has been referred House Bill
104 has had it under
consideration and reports, Same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair Move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report on
husband 104. All those in favor,
say nine Disney
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted Mr Speaker Your
Health and Human Services
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 131 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then refer to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson share Move
Adoption Adoption about
favorable community report on
husband 131 all those in favor
say Aye.
All those opposed. Nay Ecevit
Committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your consumer in
Public affairs committee to has
been referred House Bill 116 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari
chair, Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a federal community
report and husband 116 all those
in favor of the problems and I
All those opposed me. The
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, your consumer and
Public affairs committee to has
been referred House Bill 128 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari
chair, move it.
Two bass
Or do pass on third reading now.
I obviously felt, um
Move adoption
Senior moment. We all have those
young lady. We are an adoption
of a favorable commitment report
on house Bill 128. All those in
favor of seeing if I was saying
I
All those opposed and a
Yes, have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your consumer and
Public affairs committee to has
been referred House Bill 191 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari
chair adoption
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report and has been
191 all those papers in by by
saying I
Supposing. Eight. Yes, the eyes
have it. Committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 178 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass as amended.
And then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
Move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house Bill 178. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
I suppose, mate. The eyes have
it committed. Report Adopted Mr
Speaker. Your energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 187 has had
it under consideration, reports
with recommendations that do
pass as amended and then
referred to the Taxation and
Revenue Committee respectfully
submitted. Matthew McQueen share
adoption adoption of a favorable
community report on house Bill
187. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Was supposed Nate.
The eyes have it committed
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your taxation and
revenue Committee tumors been
referred House Bill 253 has had
it under consideration reports
with recommendations that it do
pass and then refer to the
Appropriations and finance
Committee. Respect respectfully
submitted Derek Lengthy chair,
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
253 all those in favors and
probably saying, I suppose Nate
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bills two
and three as amended and has had
them under consideration.
Reports seem
With recommendation that it do
not pass, but that house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for house
bills two and three do past
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker Move
adoption of the committee
report adoption of an
Unfavorable committee report on
House bills two and three as
amended, but a favorable
committee report on house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for house
bills two and three others in
favor signify by saying nine.
Oppose Nate.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tumor has been
referred House Bill 184 has had
it under consideration reports
with recommendations that it do
pass as amended and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
180 for all those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed name.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 242 has had
it under consideration reports
in with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to you wanted Johnson
chair.
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
242. All those in favor signify
by saying nine.
All those opposed name.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Joint resolution.
11 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson Chair? Mr Speaker? Move
adoption. We are on adoption of
a favorable committee report on
House Joint resolution 11. All
those in favor signify by saying
Aye.
All those opposed nay.
The report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred. House Memorial 10 has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson Chair? Mr Speaker Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report and house Moyal
10. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye.
I don't suppose name a committee
report adopted
Generally from Bernard Leong,
representative.
Chase E.
Mr Speaker. I mean, have we got
to that order of business
messages disordered clerk to
read.
House executive message number
44 Speaker Martinez and members
of the House pursuant to Article
four. Section five B two of the
New Mexico Constitution. I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the 56th
Legislature. Second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council service
drafting number 227673 a bill
creating the climate, energy and
water division within the
Economic Development Department.
Providing the powers and duties
of the division, establishing
the Decarbonization technology
program and creating the
climate, energy and water
Project Fund. Respectfully.
Yours. Michelle Hunger from
governor.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
45, Speaker Martinez and members
of the House pursuant to Article
four. Section five B two of the
New Mexico Constitution. I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the 56th
Legislature second session.
Submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council service
drafting number 0.227431 a bill
authorizing a percentage of the
severance tax permanent fund to
be invested in private equity
funds. Investing in climate
technology. Respectfully Yours.
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
message will be entered.
How's executive message number?
46, Speaker Martinez and members
of the House
Pursuant to Article four,
Section five b to the New Mexico
Constitution. I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the 56th Legislature. Second
session submission of a bill
bearing Legislative Council
service drafting number
House Bill 233 a bill for
writing for the determination of
competency.
Providing a process for raising
the issue of competency,
Establishing competence,
Competency restoration programs
requiring additional reports.
Providing definitions and
requiring the state to pay for
mental examinations.
Respectfully yours. Michelle
Congressman governor will be
entered.
Gentle lady from Bradley
represented Casey, Mr Speaker.
We go to that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Objection. It is so ordered.
Real nine an act relating to
economic development, creating
the climate, energy and water
division within the Economic
Development Department.
Providing the powers and duties
of the division, establishing
the Decarbonization technology
program, creating the climate,
energy and water project. Fun
making. Appropriations House
Bill nine introduced
House Bill nine have been
written twice by titlist
Jermaine Pursuant to Article
four, Section five B two House
executive message 44 Order
printed and referred to the
House.
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, thence
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee Bill 265,
introduced by representatives
Lord Army, Oh and Vincent and
Act relating to medical
assistance, requiring the
Healthcare Authority Department
to provide medical assistance to
persons formerly Children in the
state, requiring the Children,
Youth and Families Department to
enroll Children in its custody.
In medical and public assistance
programs requiring the Children
Youth and Families Department to
provide written certification of
the enrollment of Children in
its custody and medical and
public assistance programs
making conforming amendments
House Bill 265 introduced by
representatives Lord Army Oh and
Vincent House Bill 265 have been
read to us by title disorder not
printed and referred to the
Rules Committee.
Hospital 266 introduced by
representatives Lord blocked
Pettigrew and Vincent an act
relating to taxation, creating
the gun storage income tax
credit.
House Bill 266, introduced by
representatives Lord Block and
Peter Pettigrew and Vincent
House Bill 266. I've made it
twice by titles deemed your main
pursuant to Article four.
Section five B one order printed
indifferent to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee.
Hold on scratch that.
Sort of printed and referred to
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 267 introduced by
representatives Armstrong
Townsend Lane and Act relating
to rules amending the State
Rules Act requiring an agency to
respond in writing to public
comments on a proposed rule
before the rule is, Brock
lamented.
Requiring publication in the New
Mexico Register of Agency
responses to public comments.
House Bill 267 introduced by
representatives Armstrong
Townsend.
Has will to 67 have been read to
us by Tyler's or not printed and
referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 268, introduced by
Representative Chandler and Act
relating to taxation, increasing
the child income tax credit for
qualifying Children under the
age of six House Bill 268,
introduced by representative
Chandler.
House. Bill 268 haven't been
there twice by title is Jim
German pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one order printed
only for two.
The House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 269.
Introduced by representative
Chatfield and Senator Woods and
Act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration for Quake County
to construct new
Dr Dancy Trig Memorial Hospital
in Tucumcari.
House Bill 269, Jack Jack Field
and Senator Woods. 269. Having
been read twice by titles.
Ginger Main pursuant to Article
four, Section five B one ordered
printed and referred to the
House Rural Development, Land
Grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee thence the House of
Recreations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 270, introduced by
Representative Sanchez and Act
relating to higher education,
amending provisions governing
and Technology enhancement fund
requiring assessments of
benefits for economic
development, rural and tribal
communities and workforce,
education and training, making
an appropriation House bill 270,
introduced by representative
Sanchez 170 have a minute to us
by title is Jim Jermaine
pursuant to Article four section
531 ordered printed and referred
to the House Rural Development,
Land Grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee.
Thence, the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Hospital 207 new one introduced
by representative Serato and Act
relating to capital
expenditures, enacting the
Public Finance Accountability
Act, creating the Public Finance
Accountability Fund,
establishing funding criteria
and grant management and
oversight requirements,
enumerating duties of the
Department of Finance and
Administration making an
appropriation House Bill 271
introduced House Bill 271 have
been read to us by Thailand's
Jim German pursuant to Article
four. Section five B one.
Printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Hospital 272 introduced by
representative Serato and Act,
making an appropriation to the
higher Education Department for
Central New Mexico Community
College in collaboration with
San Juan College, Santa Fe
Community College and Southeast
New Mexico College to develop
and start entrepreneur and
development programs to foster
and nurture local companies.
House Bill 272, introduced by
representative Serato House Bill
272. 100 minutes was by titled
Is Jim Jermaine Pursuant to
Article four, Section five B one
Order printed and referred to
the House Education Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 273, introduced by
representative Serato and Act
relating to finance amending the
local Economic Development Act
to include childcare facilities
as qualifying entities. House
Bill 273 introduced by
representative Cerrato
House Bill 273 have a minaret
was by title is Jim Jermaine
pursuant to Article four,
Section five b one what are
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House.
Appropriations and Finance
Committee House Bill 274
introduced by representative
Serato and Act relating to
taxation, creating the advanced
energy equipment, income tax
credit and the advanced energy
equipment, corporate tax income
credit.
House Bill 274, introduced by
representative Cerrato.
House Bill 274 having been it to
us by title of Jim German
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one order printed
and referred to the House,
Energy, Environment and Natural
Resources Committee events, The
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 275, introduced by
representative Hernandez, an act
relating to taxation, reducing
the amount of time the taxation
and Revenue Department shall
make a determination on an
application for a high wage
jobs tax credit to be in line
with other tax credits
clarifying willful submission of
a certification for the credit,
amending definitions applicable
to the credit.
House Bill 275, introduced by
representative Hernandez has
built 100 and 75 have been read
twice by title is Dean Jermaine
Pursuant to Article four,
Section five Being one ordered
printed referred to the House
Commerce Economic Development
Committee, then the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
276 introduced by representative
Hernandez.
An act relating to cannabis,
allowing licenses pursuant to
the Cannabis Regulation Act and
the Liquor Control Act to
conduct any lawful activity or
combination of lawful activities
at a licensed establishment,
except for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages. House Bill
276, introduced by
representative
House Bill 206 176.
Have you been? It was by title
is order not printed and
referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 277 introduced by
representative Sanjana Figueroa
Herrera, Corolla and Madrid and
act relating to teacher
licensure, expanding the scope
of the computer science license
endorsement to all licensed
teachers making an
appropriation.
House Bill 277, introduced by
representatives Sanjana Figueroa
Herrera Gorilla and Madrid, 277
have been read twice by title
and Jim Jermaine Pursuant to
Article four. Section five B one
Order printed refers to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 278, introduced by
representative Sarah Indiana,
Gorilla Herrera, Allison and
Madrid and act relating to
public education requiring
computer science to be embedded
in elementary and middle school
subjects and offered as a
standalone class in high school,
providing for professional
development for teachers,
creating a fund making an
appropriation.
Hospital 278 introduced by
Going to the dinner, gentlemen.
Stand by.
House Bill 278 have been there
twice. My title is Ginger main
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 279 introduced by
representatives mural. Moya
Hernandez, Baca, Garrett and
Herrera.
An act making an appropriation
to the board of Regions of New
Mexico State University for the
Stem outreach Center for
expansion of stem Technology
labs statewide.
Has built 279 introduced by
representative Mirrorball Moya,
Hernandez, Baca, Garrett and
Herrera.
House. Bill 279 haven't been
read twice my talents Jim
Jermaine pursuant to Article
four, Section five B one order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 280, introduced by
representatives Townsend
Montoya, Duncan is ill and Alan
T. Martinez and act relating to
taxation, creating a flat
individual income tax rate of
1%.
House Bill 280, introduced by
representative Townsend Montoya.
House Bill 280 have been raped
twice by title is Jermaine
Pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one order printed
and referred to the House,
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence, the House Taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House built
Generally from Bruno Leo.
Mr Speaker it now being 1159 am
I move? We adjourn until 1201 PM
house will come to order.
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended that the journal
showed that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session.
There's no objection. It is so
ordered Mr Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to the revision and
approval of the rules in Order
of Business Committee.
If there's no objection, it is
ordered.
Generally from early Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation objection to
disordered.
Clerk to read.
House joint resolution third.
Joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article 10 section
one of the Constitution of
Mexico to provide that the
salaries of county officers will
be established by the Board of
County Commissioners remove
references to the first
legislative session and clarify
that any fees collected by a
county official shall be paid
into the treasury of the county.
I was joint resolution 13
introduced by representative
Pedigree Solution 13 House joint
resolution 13 have been there
twice by title disorder printed
and referred to the House
government Election Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Memorial 29.
Introduced by representatives
Gorilla Laura G. Andres Romero,
Garrett and Thompson Memorial
requesting the Legislative
Education Study Committee to
study compensation and career
advancement opportunities to
improve recruitment and
retention of New Mexico public
school teachers.
House Memorial 29 introduced by
representatives Gorilla, Laura
G. Andres Romero, Garrett and
Thompson Memorial 29 have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee has
memorial 30.
Introduced by Alan Tin Martinez,
a memorial requesting that an
ignition interlock task force be
established to ensure that
drivers using an initial
interlock device are ensured
levels required by the mandatory
financial Responsibility Act.
How's Memorial 30 introduced by
representative Allen T.
Martinez.
How's Memorial 30 twice by title
disorder printed it referred to
the House Judiciary Committee.
Generally from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker movie go to that sort
of business announcements of
miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered
announcements or miscellaneous.
No miscellaneous.
Generally from towers with
miscellaneous business. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can you
hear me? Little bit here? You,
Mr Speaker 10 years ago today I
gave birth to my second
daughter.
Her name is Vida.
Pearl Ortez E. Jones.
And, uh,
She's had a really rough
weekend, and I would love it if
you would lead
A birthday song for her.
Mr Speaker. I would love to
gentle lady on 30. No, those
stress Happy birthday to you
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday dear breather.
Happy birthday to you. Ferris
Complex. Vida. Thank you so
much, buddy. Thank you, Speaker.
Anything announcements. Lady
from reward. Reba Sandoval Santa
Fe and also from towels,
representative. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your house,
Agriculture, Kias and Water
Resources Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock. Thank you. Note.
Gentle lady from Dona Ana. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, your house
Commerce and economic
development will meet today at
130.
Members take note. Global's
Any other announcements, Members
Your financial disclosure forms
are do with the sector of state
by the end of business.
Wednesday, January 31st 2024
Also the secretary of state will
have staff on site to help
support you with your forms
starting Tuesday in the House
lounge at 10 A.m..
Or in the Senate lounge,
starting around one PM show.
Should you have any questions
regarding your filing?
Also important reminder.
Listen closely, especially new
members.
That nine to introduce
legislation is this Wednesday,
January 31st 2024, don't miss
your chance to introduce your
bill, and by Wednesday, the 31st
And last, but not least, Please
look at your social calendar.
There's a lot of fun stuff
happening this evening,
including the Comcast Cable
Association, legislative dinner,
a restaurant Martinez 615. PM
invitation only, but I believe
everybody got an invitation so
There you have it.
Any other announcements.
General lady from Catrin,
Socorro, Valencia and Sierra
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. The
Republicans will be having a
caucus tomorrow morning at 1030.
am, Were you room 318 members
take note.
Generally from Santa Fe,
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting at 130 today.
Members take note room 309.
Alright members that will
conclude our business for today.
We will not have any evening
floor session today, but we
should be planning for those who
start later this week and we are
office is working closely with
both leadership offices to give
everybody plenty of heads up so
that you can plan accordingly.
As we get into the
Um, dog days of the 30 Day
legislative session.
Gentle lady from Britain, Italy,
Europe's Casey
Mr Speaker. I move the house
stand in recess until 1115 am on
Tuesday. January 30th
Tomorrow.
I see no objection. The house
was sending recess until
Like walk out music or
something.
