housekeeping cleaning a
committee report messages from
the Senate.
and then we're going to continue
through some third reading
Not conclude.
yeah and then we'll see how how
How long we last.
From the New.
Mr speaker I move to the next
order of business committee
reports.
In addition is ordered.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred Senate bill four oh two
as amended has had it under
consideration point I was
Supposedly the as of the
committee board opted.
Mr speaker appropriations and
finance committee to is been
referred Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill four
committee for the Senate hopeful
divers Committee substance
reasonable for fifty two as
amended all those in favor say
if I was in high.
House oppose me in the eyes of a
addition is ordered click to
read message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in those copies of house bill
eight as amended house bill
two zero seven as amended house
bill two fifty three as amended
house bill two sixty nine as
amended house bill four sixty
session return same here with
respectfully submitted sure do
them on Senate chief clerk Mr
winter.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
session in requests the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherrie dean on Senate chief
clerk this will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
as amended respectfully
submitted sherry do them on
Senate chief clerk.
Mr winter.
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
Bill three forty five as amended
by the house House Bill three
ninety five as amended by the
house House Bill for twenty four
the Senate has passed house bill
three sixty three as amended by
the house and further amended by
the Senate and requests the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments respectfully
nine as amended by the house
further amended by the Senate a
request the concurrence of the
houses sentiments respectfully
submitted sherry do them on
Senate chief clerk message will
be entered.
Concurrence calendar number one
on your desk we can start with
item for and the generated from
the sales.
But I do recommend the body
concur Mr speaker stand by help
is on its way.
concurs to the Senate floor
amendments to house taxation.
House transportation.
And public works committee
another license plate that a
member in the Senate wanted.
Honestly.
And I'm a very accommodating
Kayser debate on the motion the
dealer who's on the ones on the
face.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady so now your bill is
to the license plates is that
Mr speaker Julia is anyone
keeping track of how many
license plates or again across
France line this year
Mr speaker I imagine there is
doctor later thank you Mr
speaker seven.
Seven.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker gentle lady I just a
state of all of the crappy
license plate bills that we went
through this year yours was one
of the best so thanks.
again Mr speaker hi I have
spoken to bear with
Representative Smokey bear this
please get it right gentleman
it's Smokey bear.
bill two eighty seven as
amended.
All those in favor of more
stickers NMSA nine.
Supposedly the eyes have it the
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm are you
ready on concurrence calendar
number one item number three.
bill.
And.
Those three words are.
Registered to a person.
to vote.
And Mister speaker I wish the
body to agree with their
amendments and vote yes it will
Supposedly the eyes have it the
house house concurred in Senate
amendments to house for service
to for house bill sixty two as
amended.
on concurrence calendar number
one item number two I am Mr
speaker.
I move that the house concur
with the Senate amendment to
house bill one seventy nine
known and clarifies
the process or what happens if
the
amended all those in favor of
concurring with certain
amendments signify by saying
aye.
All those against nay nay nay.
ready and item number one
concurrence calendar number one
Mr speaker I'm ready.
I move that the house speaker
it.
I remember amendments on page
one money seventeen to strike.
To the call of the semi colon
making appropriations Asian.
line twenty four strike subject
to the legislature appropriation
process for on page ten line six
after the period insert money in
the fund is subject to
appropriation of the end of the
bill Mr speaker.
And how do you urge the body to
act on this motion yes the body
to vote yes on concurrence
The supposedly you guys have it
the house is going could Senate
amendments to house bill three
sixty five is twice amended.
Remembers all triggered tension
to the house Judiciary Committee
sub two percent of bill sixty
us to recede the sponsor of the
bill.
I'm sorry the the the the the
house sponsor of the bill has
decided to receive from the
sponsor to recede the house
amendments from the Senate bill
it is not on the calendar
Give me a thumbs up if you want
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house received the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements Committee
And I urge the body to put yes.
Right.
Is there debate.
You sure to deliver to you.
that was put on an in house
transportation just explaining
the body to the body a little
bit Mr speaker
The original amendment took
get around and who would like to
enjoy track trails the same way
everybody else does
that puts them in kind of a
difficult position Mr speaker so
miles an hour so it's important
to get this legislation or some
sort of regulation in place now
but this is not the last time
this body will see this bill
thank you Mr speaker okay we're
nine all those information of
this and I.
Supposedly the eyes have it we
have receded from the minutes.
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five as amended by the
Senate and requests the
Julie formerly Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker and we go to that
order this is third reading of
Thank you Mr speaker I have
experts coming soon so I will
get started Mr speaker this is
kind of a complicated bill it
drug task force to study the
increasing cost of prescription
drugs during the interim
pharmacy benefits managers
probably spoken about as PBMs
Okay okay is so so basically
this is a consumer patient
protection to keep the costs as
low as we can for the patients
and with that I'll stand for
and tax business transportation
committee substitute for fifty
one as twice amended do now
pass.
Message of Senate tax business
and transportation committee
The clerk to call of those
members of the record of.
Representative Ferrary.
substitute for Senate bill fifty
one is twice amended has only
passes house.
Supplemental salary increase.
Mr speaker can you give me to
that point please that the
record reflect that alleged.
the gentleman to explain the
bill I thank you Mr speaker
Senate bill five twenty one
provides a one percent increase
for state in employees with that
pass we are on final passage of
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty one as amended the vote
is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
It was a close to fifty one in
the affirmative seventeen in the
negative Senate finance
committee subs to present a bill
A difficult election is Sir for
placing Senate bill two zero
five of final passage has been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain the
programs we've done this every
ten years since nineteen ninety
one and we're in need of a re up
to save our hospital.
That is it for questions you
know debate the gentle lady to
vote is now open.
The clerk to call those members
of the recorded vote
Representative Ferrary.
built this house.
Members who is doing Senate bill
three eighty nine tourism
department sports authority
that all action necessary for
places Senate bill three eighty
nine of final passage has been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
that only to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker how US
Senate bill three eighty nine
C. motivated generated close
thank you Mr speaker I move that
Senate bill three eighty nine do
now pass a full passage of
We can we reopen can we reopen
the roll call for.
For the tax guy.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
The vote is one of six in the
affirmative during the negative
sentiment three eighty nine has
Gentleman from Berlin service
center Baca are you ready and I
am seventy.
Thank you Mr speaker house built
in nineteen is a name equipment
and like mint the reason Mexico
but the rest of the country as
far as NC double a as amendment
Spence participate in college
athletics with that Mr speaker
stand for questions early the
gentleman from San Juan to San
Juan has a lot of questions
press his button to ask the
that Senate Bill Clinton as a
minute now pass we're on final
passage of Senate bill two
nineteen as amended the vote is
now open.
The votes about close.
affirmative I in the negative
Senate bill two nineteen as
amended has really business
house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative of the locals are
you ready and item fifty seven.
would get me to that point Mr
speaker the record reflect that
all action necessary for places
Senate bill to forty on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
enforcement board will function
creating Madam chairman I think
he.
This is a tax exempt
organization tax audit bill.
This is a relatively simple bill
right now non profits every time
the are able to raise five
hundred thousand dollars in to
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and we do have support from all
the audit firms that typically
would be involved with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions
there is a gentleman from San
Mr speaker solution of.
See if individual to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
Elizabeth Liz.
The clerk to call those members
of the recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
vote is now closed level to
fifty three in the affirmative I
Item fifty one Senate bill one
seventeen.
Thank you Mr speaker we commit
to that point.
substitute for Senate bill one
seventeen as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentlelady to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker this is a bill about
prescribing psychologist
under the medical board and all
the parties involved are in
favor.
See no debate gentle lady to go.
Legislative close nothing.
substitute for Senate bill one
seventeen as amended do now pass
final passage of Senate health
public affairs committee
September's number one seventeen
as amended the vote is now open.
Was.
Ferrary yes Representative
Ferrary votes yes voters will go
to fifty seven in the formative
zero in the negative Senate
helpful givers Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
reflect that elections Services
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
oh seven as far as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill
placements within CYFD Mr
speaker I'll stand for questions
senior to be donated to close.
Mr speaker I move that Senate
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
with a recorded vote.
far as amended has only passes
house.
Gentlelady from Dona ana said a
support role are you ready on
Thirty two.
Thirty seven.
Senate bill one eighty eight.
It's item thirty two Senate bill
inability to final passage has
been taking it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain how
the bill.
Senate bill one eighty eight
effective date as it really as a
result it will go into effect
June sixteenth this bill is
brought to you by the Senate
Senator souls.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
There's a lot of press about how
we spend our time and that this
bill is a waste of time.
Symbol I I mean we all.
This is something we all relish
both literally and figuratively
Send me a copy of an article in
the guardian which is a British
newspaper about this bill.
That's called earned media
that's good for New Mexico after
He does not plan does not
liabilities hinging on those
samples derivatives and lock.
Thank you Mr speaker the kind
Mr speaker gentle lady we struck
out in the fall those three
words in our last committee so
Mister speaker gentle lady we
can have that delicious smell of
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from done in is here is the core
of yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Travis county.
New Mexico is a fresh cut
alfalfa field.
And that that brings in a pretty
good chunk of change to so I
will probably not vote for this
alfalfa so I am red curry but
I'm still partial to the alfalfa
feels Mr speaker thank you very
eighty eight as amended the vote
is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
What is one of fifty seven in
the formative zero in the native
Senate bill one eighty eight as
Mr speaker you get me to the
point the record reflect that
alleged deserve a place in
Senate finance committee
subscribers in the rules
finance committee for Senate
rules committee is a bill to
create of the cyber security
office it will create the office
it will set the rules the basic
Thank you Mr speaker I move
Senate finance committee at the
Senate rules committee said this
Canadian separatists Senate bill
the vote is now open.
To read the clerk to call those
committee serves to present
rules committee subs to percent
of the two it is twice amended
is really passes house.
Yes I can record for that
alleged eserver places Sierra
zero three as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentlelady to
doing a rate study every two
years if funding is available in
this stand for questions.
Senate majority leader close Mr
speaker I move that Senate bill
two oh three as amended do now
Close.
But those members of the record
reflect.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
What is one of fifty eight in
Chasey.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed house bill one sixty five
as amended by the house house
bill one eighty one House
under.
Members of the director tension
tomb concurrence calendar number
two on your desks.
three concurrence items on
Mr speaker I move that the house
concurred in Senate amendments
amendment simply puts a sunset
date on the on the bill.
urge the body to vote yes.
To convert thank you.
We'll motion to concur with
house house concurred with
Senate amendments to house bill
three seventy nine as far as
amended with an emergency
clause.
Gentleman from San Juan
Speaker I move that house
concurrent Senator amendment to
two three six three as amended.
The gentleman to expand the
And I urge the the body to vote
yes.
Very well we do have debate the
gentleman from Santa as of the.
The intended the in and hearing
we're the the the tier do who
were in the DSS did a
presentation on license plates
in what they can do as they can
print these things on the land
you know so my concern with this
is.
I know it's like to live in New
it further debate on the motion
to concur the deleted from
Bernalillo Torrance Mr speaker I
just want to say Texas US three
hundred sixteen personalized
plates we need to pump our
line.
All those opposing the eyes have
it is the house of the house of
representatives Mr house bill
three sixty three as amended.
Representative set up the.
Generated from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato if you
can hear my voice coming to
chambers.
Thank you.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with an amendments to
house bill two fifty five.
Care Act rules he can we remove
the section that did not affect
the the entirety of the bill
with that.
I I to the body to vote yes on
in favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles the eyes have it the
house has concurred with Senate
amendments to house labor and
veterans of military affairs
committee substitute for House
In objection objection it is so
ordered.
These bills on this settlement
account also on the list that
we've shared with both
leadership offices they're just
on a separate calendar because
Gentleman from Bernalillo
representative of the local news
are you ready on item number one
on the supplement to come under.
Thank you Mr speaker we get to
that point.
substitute for Senate bills
nineteen interpreted to as
amended on final passage has
been taken into business of the
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker last year
enforcement County Board will be
divided into two separate
entities along for the
certification board and the law
enforcement standards and
training council this bill
addresses the statute creating
this bill is supported by the
New Mexico counties.
Municipal league chiefs
association secretary G. symbol
Department secretary Benjamin
extra work can you introduce
your expert witness thank you Mr
speaker my expert witness is a
former representative and now
senator Moul on twenty or more
my assistance welcome back
Torrance Representative Lord
thank you Mr speaker the
tenement please yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do the
Mr speaker general fund
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
the the chief of a the state
police is the one that is
endorsing this and he oversees
the state were furious about
that bill so I want to make sure
before we get to that boat state
police and you said
Secretary Bali is also on board
the two bis pages were removed
and that's why I support.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that's all the
questions I had si no further
debate the gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
nineteen and ten fifty two as
amended the vote is now open.
Close.
But those members of the
recorded vote Representative
Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes it was one of fifteen and
informative zoom in the negative
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker can you to
that point.
Are you ready and item forty
three.
debate amendment or subsection
the gentleman to expand the.
Mr speaker of members of the
body just before six to for the
agritourism promotion act thank
ranches playing into rural
states customs and culture
agritourism business provides a
way for for the for our
producers to diversify their
operations and support the
promotion of our of our cultural
amendment close Mr speaker I now
move.
That.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for hi Senate bill is
for sixty four do not pass we
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes voters will go to fifteen
and affirmative zero in the
negative Senate conservation
committee subs to percent of
four sixty four has duly passed
Mr speaker knocking you out bye
bye said come back to the
previous yes Sir thank you yes
Most people can get me to the
power point.
The director said that elections
are for placing Senate bill four
sixty eighth and final passage
has been taken and it is now
as amended establishes April
tenth of each year to be known
as the lotus economic day in New
Mexico in recognition of the
contributions made by New
no debate amendment close thank
you Mr speaker with that I don't
know movements in the bill for
six eight as amended passed we
are on final passage of Senate
See they put a.
Representative for both yes.
That would have fifty in the
affirmative ten in the negative.
number one item number three.
Really really you are you ready
on that item.
the bill Mr speaker this bill
would have New Mexico joined the
revised interstate compact on
the placement of children as
soon as thirty five states have
bill three fifteen do now pass
we're on final passage of Senate
bill three fifteen the vote is
now open.
Was about to close.
zero in the negative Senate bill
three fifteen because we built
this house.
are you ready and item.
Number sixty five.
Thank you Mr speaker can get to
that point the record reflect
that election is there for
In the building the the three
ninety six related to
transportation increasing fees
for the annual registration of
water cycle increasing
dollars well several questions.
Senior division one of those.
Thank you Mr speaker of
the Senate bill three ninety six
the best.
The clerk to call those members
that are equitable.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
the vote is now closed with a
To.
Madam fifty three Mr speaker
already would you please get me
to that point the director of
the election is there for place
committee substitute for Senate
bill one fifty seven is a twin
bill of Senate bill two ninety
two which recently passes house
unanimously that bill provided
very significant gross receipts
tax revenue losses caused by
destination sourcing I stand for
questions see no debate in later
close.
transportation committees subs
to present a bill one fifty
seven the vote is now open.
We'll table to close.
Because we would have six to six
in the affirmative during the
negatives and a tax business and
transportation committee
substances and percent of the
one fifty seven has duly passed
this house.
Mr speaker I'm just give me a
second here.
It has to do with their travel
hi yes there are many Mr speaker
we take you to the point that
speaker so Senate bill four
thirty three that is one simple
amendment to the air
enhancement fund hi you all I'm
sure the body remembers that Mr
gentle lady to close Mr speaker
I now move that Senate bill four
thirty three do now pass we are
on final passage of Senate bill
four thirty three the vote is
Yes Representative forever yes
the vote is now closed by a vote
of six to six informative during
the negative Senator for thirty
three has duly passed this us.
To the from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Are you ready and item number
Your speaker are was it the
participate in different bill
what.
We have.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
rules be suspended in the record
show that all actions have been
taken for placing Senate bill
the opportunity for a person who
makes a purchase from the
department of game and fish to
make a donation to help support
youth programs.
Speaker that I stand for
ninety two the vote is now open.
Well to close.
But those members of the
recordable.
Representative Ferrary.
gentle lady from earlier percent
of hopping hill are you ready
and item forty five.
Thank you Mr speaker point
record reflect that election is
there for placing Senate bill
and companies also known as TNCs
become non emergency medical
transportation providers using
existing public regulation
commission certification rules
under the teensy administration.
bill excuse me of Senate health
public affairs committee
substrate presentable for eighty
five the vote is now open.
Yes Representative for both yes.
Sixty five in front of their
innovative Senate health public
affairs committee since two
percent of the forty five has
duly passed this house.
subject to debate amendment or
substitution and we need to
explain that Mr speaker Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty seven as parents of
children performing arts
requires the presence of a
physical and and will being of a
child performer and with that I
stand for questions see no
debate gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I now move the do pass
for Senate health of public
The votes about close.
But those members of the
recorded vote Representative
Ferrary yes Representative
Is agility from doing Ana ready
on item number seventy three I
generated explained the bill
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
three twenty seven extend the
sunset date by which the New
Mexico finance authority may
approve standard projects under
questions Senator mail gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker I just SB three
twenty seven do now pass.
Passage of Senate bill three
twenty seven the vote is now
open.
Close.
books Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
voters because a lot of six but
I'm informative zero in the
negative Senate bill three
twenty seven as we built this
house.
Item sixty four for those
watching at home Senator three
eighty eight.
Because the record for the
record reflect that election is
replacing Senator three eighty
eight on final passage has been
initiative score strategies
regarding the detention of youth
with minimal impact.
Senator questions see in later
close.
Those members of the recorded
vote Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
Deleted from earlier
Representative Chasey.
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in and goes copies of House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
bill one eighty six as amended
house bill two sixteen as
amended house bill three eighty
nine as amended how's Education
session and return same here
with respectfully submitted
Sherrie dean on Senate chief
clerk.
This is really a.
Message from the Senate Mr
Distributed.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
amended by the house house bill
four sixty two as amended by the
house House Joint Memorial seven
returned same here with
No running chambers.
The current rule number two
percent McQueen can you run that
bill.
Leo Representative Chavis are
you ready.
On.
You madam seventy Senators
allusion fourteen.
I am Mr speaker we given to that
explain the bill the bill joint
resolution I should say.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate
joint resolution.
Fourteen
seeks to approve the six the
property would be between the
General Services Department and
the city.
In the city and the metropolitan
redevelopment agency and with
that I set for questions senior
division lady to close.
solution for tentatively
peasants house.
Deleted from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato you're
ready on Senate joint resolution
The record reflect that all
action is server places Senator
resolution twelve final passage
has been taken and it is a
subject to debate amendment or
substitution ability to explain
the bill thank you Mr speaker
decade we need the approval from
our body and with that I stand
for questions see no debate
related to close thank you Mr
speaker I move that Senate joint
resolution twelve now to pass
But those members of the
recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
solution twelve is only passes
house.
The record reflect that all
actualizar for places at about
three ninety eight on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the donated or
which that Ortiz created with
that Mr speaker stand for
questions Senate majority leader
looks thank you Mr I do know
announcements just be three
ninety eight do now pass.
Is this.
Close.
But those members of the
recorded both.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary both
yes.
What is includes a vote of six
From Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa are you ready on
supplemental calendar number two
has a right okay the director of
like the election a surfer
please and Senate health public
Affairs Committee served
presented before fifty two as
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
requirements it also requires
mapping data to be collected
collected twice a year and
prohibits the department of
information technology from
Representative.
Health and public.
Senate how the public affairs
amended the vote is now open.
No pictures in the chamber
please totally getting to look
at.
Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
To me from Santa Fe reserves a
pesky are you ready.
On.
that all actions necessary for
placing Senate bill one forty
four as amended a final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution ability to explain
the bill thank you Mr speaker
public regulation commission.
And what that is you for
questions related to this thank
you Mr speaker I move that
Senate bill one forty four as
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business divisions
Prime members that's going to
consider business for the
evening good job.
Yeah.
Point of personal privilege
stager point Mr speaker I would
like to take this time to thank
all the staff the historian
janitor's job everybody worked
much appreciated thank you.
Mr speaker point of personal
privilege stage four.
Thank you Mr speaker.
We still have a bit of a day
tomorrow not too much but a bit
been a more realistic productive
and humane session and I want to
thank you on behalf of everyone
Mr speaker thank you thank you
gentlemen.
This gentleman.
On the one percent of them this
Mr speaker it for.
day yes finally they fifty nine
thank you I had to do it right
before we left so why do to
leprechauns recycle live
gentleman because they want to
leprechaun go outside
legislative.
Wanted to go see his patio.
That's a good like it
when we announce until what time
we raise.
Eminem's on the face.
Mr speaker I move that the house
From the neighboring state.
Is there any consider.
