Armchair. This bill is going to
be a livestock sanitary board,
uh, to do meat inspection in
state.
What this bill will do will be
Juicer.
By having in state meat
inspection, will hoping to
attract more processing plants
in the state so that you will be
able to go in a restaurant and
see
New Mexico beef on the plate.
New Mexico beat in the grocery
store.
It's It's a very important bill
for agriculture to create that
value added part of the of the
deal. And with that, I would
turn it to, uh, Belinda's to see
if she would
Oh,
Thank you. Senator Wood's good
morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee. Thank you again
for giving us an opportunity to
bring this bill in front of you.
Um, it has been amended. Um, we
believe that this will be okay
to reference. I s, of course, we
will never get the final say
until we submit that packet to
them, but we are excited for
this opportunity for beef
producers, Sheep producers, pork
producers.
Um um
I didn't have an opportunity to
keep New Mexico beef in state.
There is an opportunity for a
lot of economic growth with this
bill from from the producers all
the way up through retail, and
we were hoping that our
constituents and all of our
people out there take um,
advantage of this great
opportunity.
But thank you.
One last thing, Madam Chair.
There is a provision in this
bill so that there won't be any
chance for horses to be put into
the food and Madam chair. I
would just add, Let's get new
Mexicans feeding new Mexicans.
And with that we stand for
World Wall Room was
In supporting this bill and want
Anyone who issues just speak,
seeing none will turn to the
committee.
Hmm. Hmm.
Representative yourself.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Mm. Long time coming, huh?
I appreciate this bill right
here.
And I know that there was
A lot of time and effort that
was put into this. It's kinda
gone changes. We've
Had to follow all the protocols
from the national. I appreciate
the head of our livestock board
being here she is in right along
stride by stride with you to
getting this done, and I do
appreciate that.
One of the questions I do have
will several not necessarily
questions, but items I'd like to
point out
Ah!
Right now. It states here in one
of my analysis that there are
only right now. Currently seven
livestock slaughter Suffield
facilities that have a federal
grant of inspections, which
allows for public sale Newman
and accustom example operation
can only slaughter and processed
livestock for the exclusive use
of the livestock owners.
This product cannot be sold to
the public and his for immediate
consumption.
And Madam chair and
representative and Senator.
Mhm and I'm going to point the
finger at the livestock.
Head board ahead.
Are there any facilities right
now that are doing
Whenever it's saying that a
custom example operation can
only slaughter and process
livestock for the exclusive use
of the livestock owners. This
product cannot be sold to the
public in his for immediate
consumption.
Do you know of any facilities?
That is my might be in violation
of what I just read.
So, Madam chair, a
representative results There are
operations out there that are
what we refer to as custom
plants They do not have
inspector standing in those
plants. Uh, full time from the
time the animal walks into the
facility until the time it goes
out and packages that is
required for retail sale of any
meat. So if myself if I take a
steer Ian to a processing plant
that doesn't have an inspector
standing in there, that meat can
only be used.
But those plans are inspected
for cleanliness. And so if
somebody is actually, um,
butchering livestock of some
sort in their garage, and it's
not for a household use their
their own household use. They
are in violation of inspections.
Yes, okay.
I just wanted
Some clarification there, Madam
Chair representative and Senator
Was there a conflict with
another bill on the Senate? Yes,
there was in that bill was
pulled on the Senate floor.
And the sponsor of that other
bill is now and
Madam Chair and Senator would
can you tell me what the
conflict was between Senate Bill
51 and the one that is currently
before US Senate Bill the other
Senate bill one of the
inspection done by the
Department of Agriculture?
Issue of the last stop board.
Okay. In my argument on that was
the livestock board was already
there on the premises.
And why not just have it just
keep
Going right straight through the
process. The last shot board
would have to be there.
For two reasons. It was
originally called the Sanitary
Board. It was to watch for
diseases and cattle, especially
the ones that transferred to
humans, and the other reason was
it defines ownership because it
were a brand state that each one
of these states have to.
Each animal has to be inspected
for ownership.
Thank you for that explanation.
I hope that clarifies it for the
audience on why this is the good
bill, okay?
Ah, the other bill was I know
that there was some
Continuing contention over that
particular bill in the one
before US today.
I'm looking at the F I R And it
says for
Fiscal year. 25. There's
$522,800 that is going to be
And it's going across the board
and it's all recurring. Can you
tell me
What All that money will be
directed at
So, Madam Chair representative
Brazil actually in house Bill
21 close to 1.5 million is
coming to the New Mexico
Livestock Board to stand this
program of strictly for the meat
inspection program.
So that that money will be used.
We're going to have to figure
out some office space will have
to purchase vehicles. We're
gonna have to get our it up and
running. Um um
Start employing people. It'll be
used just strictly for the meat
inspection program. Um, just as
a note that once we get this
program up and we are in
compliance and into a
cooperative agreement with the
Food Safety Inspection Service
under the USDA, the state does
become eligible for up to 50% of
reimbursement of the cost of
operating
The program, okay?
And Madam chair representative
and senator and
Miss Garland.
Whenever whenever everything is
up and running. Well, there have
to be an inspectorate each plant
every day whenever the process
is going on.
So, Madam Chair representatives
is l represent an inspector must
be there if the meat will be
used.
And that's very important for
everybody that's listening and
out in the audience that there
does have to be
Inspector on premises whenever
they are not have also noticed
that
There's an analysis from Jeff.
Witty doctor witty from the New
Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
And
He is also re reiterating that
this
Right now. These products cannot
be sold to the public in his for
immediate consumption.
And it's a shame that we've gone
all these years whenever our
meat does have to be
transported out of state before
it can be consumed by New Mexico
citizens And that's just
appalling to me and then
We are faced with it all the
time.
Ah, Madam Chair. I think that is
all the questions I have. I want
to applaud.
What has happened here if we
pass this out, and if it gets
off the house floor, and I
certainly hope that it does, um
It's a step forward for being
able to feed New Mexico.
And to make sure that our
industry is still viable. So
Quote, bracketing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters. Just a couple of
questions. The bill that we
looked at number but it had a
great deal deal. This inspection
program would work and so forth,
And I'm just curious,
And I'm I'm assuming that, uh,
that HB bill has kind of been
subsumed by this SB bill. Uh and
What? Why was the detail I'll
answer that Madam chair and
thank you for that question. Um,
House Bill 162 has committee
substitute to match this bill.
It's gone through judiciary with
no
The descending votes.
And I did a committee substitute
over there to match this madam
chair, um in this on the Senate
side, and it's specifically
Senator Campo. Um Cervantes took
it and thought that it needed
mess. Garland took the
Guidelines for what they needed
to him. And this is the product
of that.
And so we're very thankful that
we have a we have their support.
Thank you very much for that.
Agnes representative. My other
question was looking through all
this. We're still even with this
bill passing
End of process being set up.
We're still not going to be any
rules correctly because we have
to have some permission from the
department, the US Department of
Agriculture. My question, Madam
Chair Senator is
Are we
I'm not suggesting that we're
having in inappropriate
conversations. But are we in the
process of working with the U. S
department when in Texas they
So manager representing
Matthews, um standing. This
program up is like a process and
when they first start talking to
FSC as they kind of give you a
timeline of 2 to 4 years, so you
start at the bottom and you
start with the custom plants
retails and interest aid. And
then once you build your
training up
And your inspectors are at a
level that they feel that they
can do in interstate sales. Then
you can move into that type of
agreement. It is a little
different. Um, the cooperative
agreement in the beginning is at
least equal to
But if you moved to interstate
sales, you have to be 100%
match.
So it is a little different and
you have to build into that. But
we are going to work towards
that. I will. I would like to
make a statement that there is
some
Talking in Washington, D C to
take away that requirement that
if if the inspection is good
enough for interstate sales that
they feel it should be good
enough for interstate sales, so
there may be a change coming.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Uh, Senator,
Representative Ms Garland. Um
and
As I said, I think initially on
this bill, I'm um eventually.
Now we have
Thank you, madam Chair.
About a week ago.
I received a call from
One of my constituents in my
district, and he said the meat
inspection under the state
And as I read this, uh
On Page one. It says that the
Mexico's livestock Board shall
adopt rules necessary to
Establish anyway, it says to
meet and exceed the standards of
the Federal Meat Inspection Act.
Maybe that's what caught his
eye. Am I think everything. What
this bill does is make the
inspections even better, So I
appreciate that.
And the only question that I
have is on Page two.
Line five and six. It's a theme
horse meat slaughtered for human
consumption as
Adulterated. What exactly does
that mean?
Madam Chair representative. That
means no meat. Horse meat can be
used.
To be processed in this plant
mixed in
Okay. I'm glad to see that as
well. That is not mixed in with
anything in the neighborhood
culture. Horse meat is
considered sacred.
At the outbreak of Covid.
There was a
In adjacent, um, district where
Covid was really taking a lot of
people affected affecting a lot
of people and relatives of mine
went out and
Uh,
Process some horse meat and it
stopped the covid right and its
tracks. Believe it or not, it
did so horsemeat is very sacred.
So I'm glad that you put it in
the bill. Where is
Not adulterated.
So thank you for that.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative now
represent recognize Madam chair
I move to do pass.
We have a do pass by
representing similar to
Representative Armstrong.
Heck, yeah, Presented
I was like, Yeah, Representative
Cadena.
Yes.
Representative Dana Votes Yes,
Representative case. Yes,
Representative Cates. But yes,
representatives. L
representatives l But yes,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews votes
Yes.
Representatives and water.
Yes, representatives and mortar
votes. Yes.
Mr Vice Chair.
Also a heck Yeah. Vice chair
also votes. Heck, yeah.
Madam chair.
Yes And um, Senator, Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for SB 37.
Madam chair. Thank you.
The agricultural awful to you.
Thank you. Grateful to you,
Senator. Thank you.
Oh,
And, uh, yeah, yeah, we have no
more business on the calendar so
everybody can get back to work
and meeting adjourned. Thank
you.
Not yet.
Not yet. We'll see. But we
