Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Led by the young lady from
Bernalillo, your representative
Borrego.
Third anniversary of his death,
So I am very honored to be doing
this.
Oh, great Spirit or creator you
have given us an opportunity to
help New Mexico and our new
Mexican Mexicans. Give us the
vision as we are doing our work
to help Only Mexicans thrive and
to strive as we make our
decisions to create a healthy
new Mexico for the future,
especially for our Children.
Each of us the fortitude to work
through the chaos.
And insight to see how are
decisions impact the lives of
new Mexicans and make it better.
Ensure the integrity of each of
vulnerability as we move to our
debates in our votes.
And help us to respect each
other's decisions. As we all
come from different parts of the
state and represent our
constituents desires, although
we come from different
environments, backgrounds,
traditions and cultures help us
to see that we have more
similarities than differences
and that we are
All the king.
For the good of our communities.
Our great state of New Mexico.
Land of enchantment united as
one nation under God. Amen.
Gilman from earlier
representative room with the
Pledge of Allegiance
Legion.
And the gentle lady from really
was and well center of Intel's
representative Barrera with the
salute to the New Mexico flag.
Play ball.
The Lady from Bernie Leo,
representative Casey
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is so ordered
school first and generally from
Katherine Sierra Valencia,
Socorro Armstrong. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I just wanted to
mention today that it is four H
day and the roundhouse. We have
a lot of green jackets, a sea of
green.
Ah, across the roundhouse today
in the Rotunda, Senate side
House side and throughout the
whole capital. I just want to
welcome them. Um, I do have a
certificate for them if the
clerk could read the
certificate, Mr Speaker to read
The House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico declares
January 30th 2024 for each day.
Whereas four H has been a
Premier Youth Leadership
organization in New Mexico for
over 100 years.
And whereas for each sponsors
clubs in rural and urban areas
throughout the state.
And whereas more than 30,000
youths between the ages of five
and 18 participate in four H
youth development programs
statewide.
And whereas for eight youth
development programs are diverse
and help participants acquire
life important life skills,
including leadership,
responsible citizenship,
critical thinking problem
solving decision making,
conflict resolution and
communication skills that
directly contribute to the
successful transition of young
people to productive adults. And
whereas forage participants
report having greater confidence
And a more positive self
identity, stating that they have
greater control over events in
their lives and a better ability
to make decisions on their own,
that they set goals and take
responsibility for their actions
that they could take pride in
many things, and that their
lives are purpose and meaning.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that in
recognition of the contributions
of forage to the state, January
30th 2024 be declared for each
day in the House of
Representatives signed and
sealed at the capital in the
city of Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. For that and other
words, life skills for each
teaches life skills.
And boy, could we all use some
of that nowadays? So we
appreciate four h Mr Speaker, I
would like to introduce from the
four H advisory leadership team.
If you could please stand as I
say, your name Holly North,
swirly worthy.
Casey Montoya.
And John Casio.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. They come
from all walks of life, All 33
counties and we just really
appreciate them. I have a couple
of other guests to introduce
young man by the name of Julian
Cur from Tumbleweed four h, If
you could please stand
And the one the only
Oldest grandson of Gail
Armstrong.
JD Tucker Kersey.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
really appreciate for age for
each taught me a lot of things a
lot of life skills in life, and,
uh, would really, really
appreciate everyone's support
for four H across the state of
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And in honor of for
each day I am wearing my green
suit today.
Go for a church. Uh,
Was that for my green suit, or
for for each other way? Thank
you.
Let's go to generated from Rio
Ribas on the wild Santa Fenton,
House representative Aurora
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and it is
my pleasure to introduce some as
distinguished guests on the
restroom. Today of my May do so
Please go for go ahead, OK if
they would stand when I read
their names, And if my
colleagues would please wait and
will applaud them all when I've
introduced them, and I'd like to
start off with Rubini splice and
he's a producer and CEO,
director and CEO of Granddaddy.
We have essay Morales an actor,
Maybe many of you may remember
him and his role in La Bamba.
We have who? Liam Macias. He is
also an actor in many network.
Uh, Netflix films, including on
the block we have Jolene
Rodriguez, She's the CEO of
Broken English productions. We
have Jenny Carry on. She's also
with Granddad. And of course we
have our own Hector Balderas. He
is the president of Northern New
Mexico College. And would you
all please give them was
And and Miss Mr Speaker. I want
you to know that they are
bringing the film interest you
to northern New Mexico and
they're working with northern on
on, maybe using their their
local side at the El Rito
campus. This is really
important. The more film we have
in the North, the better it is
for our constituents. And if it
would please the speaker, I
would like to have the
Ah, the clerk read the
certificate to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
Reuben is less whereas Reuben is
less is an emerging visionary in
the entertainment industry
recognized for his novel and
initiatives in the film world.
And whereas Reuben is list is
the chief executive officer of
Grand Dave Capital, which
through its subsidiaries,
Esperanza Films LLC has
committed to producing films in
New Mexico.
And whereas Esperanza Films LLC
has committed to working with
northern New Mexico College to
develop educational and career
opportunities in the film
industry for its students, and
whereas Esperanza Films LLC has
committed to working with
northern New Mexico College to
revitalize the El Rito campus by
making it a destination for film
production in Rio County.
And whereas through this
partnership, Esperanza Films LLC
and Northern Mexico College have
committed to advancing social
justice in the film industry,
emphasizing and creating
opportunities for New Mexico
residents in rural underserved
communities.
And whereas this partnership
reflects a deep rooted
commitment to fostering
education and creating a
thriving environment for new
Mexicans who aspired to
professional careers in the film
industry.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to Ruben
is less for the invaluable
service he is providing to New
Mexico by expanding equity and
social justice in the film
industry signed and sealed and
at the capital in the city of
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, dear lady, Um we have the
gentleman from Colfax Mora River
San Miguel in Towers
representative.
Sanchez. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
I just wanted to add to her
representative mentioned. I want
to talk about northern colleges,
film initiatives and partners.
In partnership with Esperanza
films Northern has committed to
developing economic and career
opportunities in the film
industry for its students.
Esperanza films has committed to
working with Northern New Mexico
College to revitalize Northern
New Mexico's
Colleges and Reto campus to make
it a destination for film
production and rural Real Reba
County through this partnership,
Esperanza Films
And northern New Mexico College
have committed to advancing
social justice in the film
industry.
Emphasizing opportunities for
Hispanic and Native American
students in rural underserved
communities. Northern is
currently offering and
associates and film and digital
media arts and then the
technical trades. New initiative
seeks to work with film industry
to bring meaningful
opportunities to northern
students in these programs.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The gentleman
from San Miguel and Torres
representative Castellano
And Mr Speaker.
Mm.
Welcome. Welcome. I didn't do it
as good as you but I tried,
gentlemen. Well, folks, thank
you. Thank you for participating
today and president But let us
thank you for your leadership at
northern. I'll take a bit of
chairs, prerogative and tell you
all how excited I am that you
all are making investments and
helping develop a part of our
community that can a really use
the support but also that is
looking forward toward where our
economy is moving here in New
Mexico. So thank you for being
here and I know you'll have a
Flight to catch
Welcome to the house and thank
you for investing in New Mexico.
An announcement gentlelady from
Dona Ana representative Diego's
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'd like
to make a point of personal
privilege.
State Your point. Mr Speaker
Since becoming a chair of
commerce, I've tried to
establish positive relationships
with all of my members.
And yesterday. I think I fell
short. And so I wanted to
apologize to, um representative
Hernandez, representative
Duncan, representative.
Martinez and representative
Mason and, um, wanted to
continue having positive
relationships in our committee
because I think that's how we
move forward, so I hope that
they will be gracious and accept
my apology and hope we can do
better.
Q. Mr Speaker. Thank you. Gentle
lady. On announcements. Men from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero,
Representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um
Two things first.
I think the test
Just
But trade is commendable, I
think
When we mess up
We own it, And she did. Thank
you. Thank you, gentlemen. The
general men from
Oh, I'm sorry. Apologies. I
thought you thought that was
like three points.
You know me, Mr Speaker. Fourth
point when I When I have the
mic, you know how it is. Um, Mr
Speaker. Thank you on the
rostrum. Um
There's a bunch of green, um,
here on the front row and
I think I was late getting in,
but I believe representative
Armstrong Red or had the
Memorial read. Is that correct?
That's correct, gentlemen. Thank
you. Well, let me introduce some
people that I and tickled to
death to introduce to you, Um
Hailing from
Down south where all things
grow.
Um, we have Wayne Shockey, who
is the Eddy County four H in
county program Director, Would
you please stand
Welcome to the house. Also, we
have the state for H president.
Aubrey Putman.
And also the state for H Leader,
Ambassador Danica Rose.
This week will have, um
I believe
In conjunction with 48. We're
going to have FF eight days.
And there's
No.
Organizations, in my opinion
that do more
To foster leadership potential
from young new Mexicans, whether
They're in agriculture or
They're just a four h member
that lives inside the city
that's interested in public
speaking or many other avenues
that they had before him,
including Mr Speaker. Firearms
sports. That's really good.
So
Mr Speaker. Um, I know, um
Representative Bazell has a few
that she would like to
introduce, but again.
Thank you all very much for
coming to your house for
Participating.
And government and, uh
I look forward to each and every
one of you taking one of these
chairs some days, So thank you
very much. Thank you, gentlemen.
Generated from Chavez
representative as ill.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
I love to brag about four H. It
is my favorite thing to do,
especially with these young
people that are sitting in front
of us today.
Mr Speaker. I do want to point
out to the whole body.
That four H is the largest youth
development program in the
world. 95% of these
Members.
Think about how their choices
will affect others and 95% of
the youth are comfortable with
being a leader. So there's not a
doubt in my mind that these
young people
Will be up here someday to lead
our state in the right
direction.
And and
Mr Speaker and members of the
House.
This curb the four H Cup that's
loaded up with candy pens and
pencils is from our esteemed
Uh, caucus leader Gail
Armstrong. We do appreciate
that.
And I have three guests that I'd
like to introduce.
And if they would stand up, I
would appreciate it. Mr Colton
Nick Case.
Miss Lily case.
And their mother, Brittany, and
the case who I have met known
since she was a little bitty
girl.
Mr Speaker at this time, I know
that there's gifts up in the
Uh, gallery.
Better hear from quite county.
if you could recognize them as
well.
Can all the good folks from
Quake County please rise to be
recognized. There you are.
Welcome to the House of
Representatives.
And Mr Speaker at this time, I
would like to have for all the
four H members up front and
anybody that who is a past four
H member or a later still stand
up and let's say the four h
pledge in unison, Okay?
Please rise for the four H
pledge.
I pledge my head to clear
thinking my heart grant in my
world.
Mr Speaker. These are awesome,
Young people. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, young lady.
The gentleman from
Chavez representative Henry
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
want to add my appreciation and
support to these young people
from various four H clubs around
the state.
My daughter participated in the
Diamond H Club and Roswell in a
number of different things,
including shooting, sports and
archery, and I can't say enough
about the development.
That that that she gained
through that experience, So it
is just great to have all these
young people here, Uh, learning
about their government and and
showing off their green jackets.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
The general lady from Dona Ana.
I'll go and Luna Representative
Jones
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to point out to you fellow
members that on your desk,
you'll find a small bag of
pecans and an invitation to the
Deming Luna County Silver Spikes
Reception tonight at the La
Fonda ballroom from 530 to 730.
Um, in addition, especially
selected bottle of wine from the
fabulous Irv A wine bar will be
delivered to your office today.
If it hasn't already. I hope to
see you there tonight. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Bring your
dancing shoes tonight to the
silver spikes reception members.
Gentlemen from San Juan
Representative Lane. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I want to keep the
forage theme going. I am a
former member of four H and
learned a lot of valuable life
lessons. I remember learning how
to bakery.
Learn how to braid, which turns
out when you have long hair is
really helpful. Um
Although back then didn't have
long hair.
I remember.
Going to dances as an eight and
nine year old boy and trying to
muster up the curves to ask 13
and 14 year old girls to dance.
Who knew that would come in
handy. That kind of
Courage and and getting shot
down time and time again.
Um, some things never change.
Maybe, but
I just appreciate sort of that
formative part of my youth and
what four H taught me. Um and
you know, growing up in a rural
area. It was a big part of
Our experience, and I'm glad
that we have members of the four
h here. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Sandoval,
representative Martinez.
Mr Speaker. I rise as a point of
personal privilege.
What is the purpose of your
point, sir?
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I wanted
to stand and thank the chair of
Um
And I have I have a couple of
other things to say. There's a
line from my favorite movie
Gladiator, Marcus Aurelius
suspect and he's talking about
the fragility of Rome.
And he says there once was a
dream that was wrong.
You can only whisper it.
Because anything more than a
whisper and it would vanish.
And then he says, I fear
That it will not with that same
reverence that I stand before
the body today and say there is
a dream that is New Mexico.
You can only whisper it anything
more than a whisper my kids when
I was raising them that life is
made up of choices.
Good choices will produce good
things in life.
Bad choices. Well, those will
affect us the rest of our life.
We learn from those choices,
whether good or bad.
And I try to live by that.
And learn from every choice,
whether good or bad.
We come up here?
And we make choices every day.
But I rise today and ask, Are we
making the right choices or the
expedient one decimating the oil
and gas industry where we line
up to spend their money?
I think it's an experience. I
think we need to look
At a balanced approach.
I think we need to invest in
renewable energy.
But it can't be an all or
nothing road.
I respect everybody in this
house, and some I count is very
close friends and others I hope
to develop. Um, but let's think
about the path we're choosing
for this state.
And to think about the choices
we make everyday choices.
Whether we follow
The right path the wrong path.
That's up to personal
interpretation.
I do believe that everybody that
comes here has the same goal in
mind.
We love this state. That's why
we're think getting to that end
point.
That's a personal choice.
And I would ask this body
That we
Really think about it. I left
this building last night.
Full of emotion. Fusion anger,
disappointment.
I spent the night tossing and
turning, and I kept asking
myself and my overreacting to
this.
But I will say this this morning
I woke up.
I think our constituents
I am not a man, but sometimes I
feel it's my risk.
Disagreement and debate or why
we're here.
But if we choose not to debate
not to discuss not to exchange
ideas to Mexico.
So what I would I would
encourage this body.
Not only to think about the path
that we're taking
To get this state moving. Think
about decorum and respect.
And how we exchange.
Let's build friendships. Let's
build a path forward that all of
us as new Mexicans.
Can look with chose different
roads.
But we're all headed.
I would ask that we all think
about that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
I'm gonna go to intro real
quickly to introduce today's
memorial and then I'll come back
to announcements. Young lady
from Burleigh. Oh, Mr Speaker
movie go to that order of
business introduction of
legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
House Memorial 35 introduced by
representatives Moya, Barca,
Armstrong and Senator Memorial
declaring January 30th 2024 as
Valencia County date in the
House of Representatives.
Whereas Valencia County as part
of the Rio Abajo
I'm sorry. How's moral 3500
twice by title disorder not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table generated from
bring Leo
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business
Ordered back to announcements.
The gentleman from
Carried the backup Guadalupe
Roosevelt in San Miguel,
representative Samora
Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you
look on your desk today, you'll
find a block of cheese.
I think everybody
Always appreciates the cheese
here in this on this floor, it
comes from Southwest cheese,
which is a world class cheese
producer. And curry County, Mr
Speaker.
It opened in 2005 with a 400.
1000 square foot facility.
And today it is right at half a
million square feet.
Produces £588 million of cheese
annually and processes over £5.1
billion of fresh milk.
Which comes from within the
radius of 30 Miles.
And 25%. Of that comes within a
radius of 15 miles of the cheese
plant.
12% of the American cheese
Consumed in America is produced
at Southwest Cheese.
9% is exported around the world.
Southwest Cheese has a success
has been a success and has been
a huge economic
Benefit to New Mexico, Mr
Speaker.
It employs approximately 300
people and is an economic
driver.
To the Clovis.
Area and local farmers, dairies
and local businesses bringing
real money new money.
Into the state of New Mexico.
Thank you Southwest cheese for
everything you do for the state
of New Mexico. Thank you, Mr
Speaker of Cheese. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Generally from towels
representative of this. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um
Last session, along with leader
Chase E and Rip on your own. Oh,
I was proud to sponsor a bill.
Um
Ending life without parole for
Children.
And creating opportunities for
parole for those serving long
adult sentences for crimes
committed as Children.
I chose to sponsor this
legislation after learning about
the story of one woman.
Darcy Morse. Darcy was 17 years
old when her older, abusive
boyfriend
Kidnapped and killed an innocent
boy.
Because she was present for the
crime. She was. She was
convicted and sentenced to life
in despite her circumstances,
Darcy worked hard.
To better herself while she was
in prison. She got two associate
degrees.
She got a bachelor's degree.
She became a tutor.
And a mentor.
In the fall. Darcy was among the
first to be considered for
parole under the reforms that we
were proud to pass in the last
legislative session.
After considerable time, careful
consideration.
The parole board found her fit
for parole and she was released
from prison in October.
I'm happy to welcome Darcy
Morrison to the floor today.
I'd like to introduce her.
Would you please stand
Darcy is committed to serving
her community.
She works in a small family
business in the East Mountains.
She's applying to graduate
school so that she can become a
social worker. She is serving
her community.
Darcy and others who have been
given a second chance under
these recent reforms are here
today to show us that we made
the right choice and thank you
for welcoming Darcy.
Thank you. Thank you, Dear lady
and welcome, Darcy.
General lady from Eddy and Lea,
Representative Brown. Thank you
so much, Mr. Speaker in, uh good
morning members. Well, good
afternoon, actually before for
each guests leave the chamber. I
just wanted to recognize Wayne
Shockey. When more time. If you
please stand
Wayne is in charge of the Eddy
County Four H Club and Mr
Speaker. He is a coach who knows
how to create champions. He's
taken teams to state and
national competition and won and
brought brought back those
amazing trophies. So, um, the
club also has a tradition of
inviting elected officials like
me to come to the
Send off dinner for the teams.
And I just have to say, I think
it's such a lovely thing to do.
It is a pleasure to meet with
not only the students, but the
parents of the students and
enjoy giving them a send off and
then one of the nice things
about that, too. Is Mr Speaker.
Um, we get to learn from the
students that kind of do a dry
run for us, and I will never
forget the presentation on meat
inspection.
That was so fascinating. And so
I appreciate everything you do
to include us in in all that you
do. So Thank you, Mr Shockey.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. And welcome
once again, Mr Chalky.
Gentlemen from better NALEO
representative Ream.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members of the house today you
have a balloon fiesta calendar
on your desk and I want to talk
about the balloon fiesta when
the balloon fiesta is going on.
It's a city within a city.
It's tens of thousands of
Spectators who come out.
It is a huge economic driver,
not only for Albuquerque. But
for the state. Many of the
people that come to balloon
fiesta, go outside the county
and visit our state.
And I would like to also
encourage you to go ahead and
look on your capital outlay.
They're asking for some money if
you could help them, even a
small amount would go a long
ways again. Thank you to the
bloom Fiesta and what it brings
to New Mexico.
Thank you Balloon fiesta and
thank you for recognizing them.
Gentlemen from Burnley. Oh, big
economic driver.
Here in the state.
We can do better than that. Come
on, Balloon Fiesta, everybody.
How dare balloon rides for
everybody, courtesy of
representative Ream.
Just kidding.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Point of
privilege, please. State your
point.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I would
like to thank Chairwoman Diego's
for that apology. It is
heartfelt, and I appreciate
that.
Second would be a confession.
Um, as I was in four H and F a
many, many years ago.
Um and I raised pigs and
Stairs.
He told my steers. If they
didn't make the sale, I was
going to slaughter him.
Wow, didn't tell him what was
going to happen if they did make
the cell but just wanted to
confess that today.
Okay, It's archived and on the
record forever. So there you go.
The Lady from Valencia
representative Mirabel Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr
Speaker.
I asked by unanimous consent
that House Memorial 35 be
removed from the speaker's table
and made the next order of
business.
Only if they're chicharrones
upstairs.
See an objection. It is ordered
that the record reflect that
election necessary for placing
House Memorial 35 has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So many
of you. I'm hoping that you have
already your lunch on in many of
you would, uh, dived in, so we
definitely have some Matanza.
There's a month answer going on
in the patio. If you guys didn't
get a chance to go out there,
and say hi, then it's a
tradition that us in Valencia
County definitely loved to bring
to the roundhouse and so thank
you for Valencia County. Um and
mostly a lot of law soonest, but
everybody who took part in
See county in order to get get
it done today. Um, I did ask
them that why there wasn't
chicharrones in here. But they
said they're just getting done
so they will be here and they
got us so
That they're coming, so enjoy
your food. You also on your
desk. You have a bag from with a
bunch of goodies from all the
different cities in Valencia
County. We have five amazing
cities and villages that live
within Valencia County. We have
blend Lawson's real communities,
which is our newest city and
Peralta and basket farms.
So I wanted to say a few things
about each of the communities
blend.
Is a growing city with 350 new
homes. That is where I claim to
be from that is my hometown and
been there most of my life they
are have a growing airport, the
largest rail hub with BNSF, west
of the Mississippi, and we
received 3 to 4000 visitors each
year to our Veterans Memorial
and our visitor centers.
Ah, you have lost Souness, which
is the second fastest growing
community in the state. We are
only second to think real
Rancho.
So that's that's huge and they
pride themselves on being
business friendly with Meta, who
is currently expanding and
Amazon, which is, um, will be
opening soon. Real communities
Our newest city is, uh, is home
to our Cosa, which is a wind
tower manufacturer, which will
be opening their still in
construction. I believe
Or they're already open already.
They're already going. Um, and
they're also home to Valencia
County Business Incubator, which
is the only rule business
incubator in the state.
Um which that I've had the
privilege to be a part of what
they do. And I really love what
the what the business incubator
is doing because it helps small
businesses and entrepreneurs.
Preneurs, um, realize their
dreams.
They also are all the newest
police department in the state.
Um
Valencia County. Um as you'll
see here in a minute in the
memorial is home to the world's
largest Matanza, which just
happened this weekend, and we
actually had the most in
attendance. I think I believe
that there was 12,000 in
attendance this year. So our
little our little, uh, county
had a bunch of people coming in
there and a lot of full bellies
because I believe there was 12
teams.
That we're that we're cooking
that day, and basically you get
in there if you have not been
able to make it to the world's
largest Matanza, it's always at
the end of January. I highly
recommend that you go. You will.
If you leave hungry, it's your
own fault. Um, but we do. I did
want to say to that in the
chambers. We had a couple of
senators that won some awards.
So, um, so Senator Gregg Baca
was grand champion. This year he
took his team took first place
in the liver competition, the
Cardinal Levada competition and
third in the Iron Pig and
chicharrones and then Senator
Joshua Sanchez took third in the
grand champion third in Carnal
Awada and second in the
specialty pork dish.
So, um
I have some guests here on the
rostrum and next to me that I
would like to announce. Um
First we have our mayors of some
of our our wonderful cities. We
have Robert Novel in who is the
mayor of city of Berlin, please
rights.
We have Joshua Ramsdell, who is
the mayor of the real city of
real communities.
And we have our mayor pro TEM of
the village of LA soonest Gino
Romero.
And we have a bunch of other
wonderful elected officials. We
have Tracy Armijo, who is a
counselor, First city of Berlin.
Rudy Espinosa, counselor for
city of Berlin.
Frank Ortega, who is mayor pro
TEM for city of Berlin. We have
Matthew Marcus, who was a
counselor for city of real
communities. Thomas Nelson,
counselor for city of real
communities, and then we have
let's see Cruz Munoz, who was a
counselor for a village of
laziness and our county
commissioners. We have Gerald
Sykes, who is the chair for
Valencia County.
And Joseph, Brazil, who is the
commissioner for Valencia
County.
Welcome to the house. Everybody
Thank you. Can I get the clerk
to read our memorial? Please
read Memorial 35 Memorial
declaring January 30th 2024 as
Valencia County Day in the House
of Representatives.
Whereas Valencia County is part
of the Rio Abajo and whereas
Valencia County is the home of
the largest matanza in the
world, and the Matanza is a
symbol of the rich Spanish
heritage of the Rio Grande
Valley.
And whereas the Matanza is a
family fun event to raise funds
to provide scholarships to
students while preserving
Valencia County traditions by
promoting civic, social,
cultural and employment training
programs.
And whereas Valencia County is
the home of the famous Tommy Lee
and Grant
Which the king of Spain granted
to the 30 families in 1739. And
whereas the village of Los Lunas
was founded by Spaniards in the
17th century, and whereas the
village of Los Lunas has
identified as New Mexico's
second fastest growing community
with expensive, expensive
population growth.
And whereas the population of
the village of Los Lunas holds a
significant role in New Mexico
is expanding and competitive
economic landscape and as a
catalyst for major industrial
manufacturing, technological and
economic development in Valencia
County.
And, whereas blend is officially
known as no waste of seniority,
Berlin or our Lady of Glen
And, whereas blend means
Bethlehem and Spanish
And whereas blend was a
strategic point along the Camino
Real, also known as the Royal
Road, which carbon trade routes
south into Mexico.
And, whereas blend has gained
the nickname Hub City because of
the Berlin cut off of the
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe
Railway.
Now no known as the BNSF railway
company.
And whereas the original pre
1937 United States route 66 runs
through the heart of Valencia
County
And whereas Bosque Farms was the
destination for and whereas
Bosque Farms serves to be a
sparsely populated agricultural
community,
And whereas Peralta was the site
of a minor engagement during the
American Civil War
And whereas Rio communities is
home to Valencia's Valencia
counties, only golf course Terra
del sole
And whereas Valencia County is
home to the Decalogue Stone,
which contains an inscription
that is interpreted to be an
abridged version of the 10
commandments in the form of the
Paleo Hebrew alphabet.
And whereas Valencia County
houses to museums that blend
Harvey House Museum and the Los
Lunas Museum of Heritage and
Arts
And whereas Valencia County is
home to parts of the civil and
National Forest and the Montana
wilderness
And whereas Valencia County is
renowned for its agriculture
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives
State of New Mexico that January
30th 2024 be declared Valencia
County Day in the House of
Representatives.
And be it further resolved that
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the mayors of
Dylan Luna's Bosque Farms,
Peralta and Rio communities and
the chair of the Board of County
Commissioners of Valencia
County.
Alright. There is debate on the
memorial. A gentleman from
Valencia Representative Buck.
Oh, thank you. Mr Speaker. Will
the General lady in my friend
from Valencia County, please
Yield? Yes, I will.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. I also rises
1/5 generation resident of
Valencia County.
It's not only been an honor but
a privilege to actually grow up
in that community.
And I do say that that it's
still a community, although we
are one of the fastest growing
counties in the state.
Although we are a hub of
economic development, I think
that our community is still kept
that sense of identity that we
actually are all kind of related
in work together.
So I
You know, I'm honored to be a
part of this as we move forward
to the to meet the challenges
and to meet the opportunities of
the next decade or so.
I'm thankful Mr Speaker in
General Lady as far as to have
to represent the communities of
blend.
Law soonest slaughter Basket
farms and Peralta.
I'm also important to have
Amazon and Facebook within my
within my areas, and so as we
look at the economic development
of Valencia County
We also have to remember the
pivotal role that that's going
to play in the economic
development in the state of New
Mexico.
So one of the things Mr Speaker
and those that elected officials
and my friends and family that
are here. We want to thank you
for what you've done.
We want to make sure that we
continue to work together so
that we meet the next 10 years
and that we, you know, kind of
advance our interests of our
citizens. Our communities. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General Lady.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
further debate on the memorial
to generated from Katherine
Sierra Zokora en Valencia.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. All the kind
lady yield. Yes, I will. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Kind
Lady. I to rise to Valencia
County as a whole.
Ah, Together we can do many,
many things, and there's a lot
of area in Valencia that I
represent. Most of it is rule.
My did lose blend in the
redistricting, but I gained real
communities, so I'm proud of
that. And they're trying to do
big and great things over there
in conjunction with the county
as a whole, Um
We have the Hispanic chamber. We
have the greater Valencia County
Chamber. We are growing.
We are making our mark on the
state of New Mexico in a good
way, and it's more reason we
need the Los Lunas corridor, so
I just wanted to put in a plug
for that. We are the second
fastest growing community and we
need that for our communities,
So we appreciate all of you
being here. We appreciate of
course, uh, Hrones and red chili
and all the good food that we
got delivered to our desks and
all the hard work that goes into
planning that.
And I personally would like to
think representative Maribel
Moya because she did that in
conjunction with something hard
in her life that she had to go
through and she was a real
champion. Still to pull that off
and get that done. We all have.
We all wear many hats and she
wears them. Well. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Gentle lady.
Further debate on the memorial.
The gentleman from
Oh, sorry. The gentleman from
Curry.
No, Catherine Grant any they'll
go represented Terrazas. Thank
you. Mr Speaker with the General
lady, please Yield. Yes, I will.
Will the mortician on the on the
rostrum stand up.
Mr Speaker.
This gentleman loves to harass
me as a fellow mortician.
I wasn't sitting in my seat and
he sends me a picture Mr.
Speaker with me not sitting
here.
And so I said, Well, I just
we'll go ahead and call on my
good friend, Uh, form from
Berlin who runs a wonderful
place there. And so I just had
to tease him back. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
I see no further debate. The
gentle lady too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Before I
close Can you introduce my
guests in the early General
lady? We've got, um, a number of
members out in the gallery and I
ask you to rise and then we'll
clap at the end. We've got Tracy
Armijo, Steve Holdman. Rudy
Espinosa, all of them counselors
at the city of Berlin.
We have Lawrence Gordon, Matthew
Marquez, Thomas Nelson, all of
Munoz counselors at the village
of Los Lunas.
We've got business owners, City
officials and other
representatives from all over
valleys, a county, including the
good folks cooking the food
outside, so let's give them a
big round of applause.
And welcome to the house
generally too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that house Memorial 35 do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the house that the records
show that the role has been
called in all members president
voted in the affirmative motion
charm members of the House
president voting in the
affirmative. See no objection.
It is ordered. We are on final
passage of House Memorial 35.
The vote is now open.
The board is not closed by a
vote of 70 in the affirmative
zero in the negative House
Memorial. 35 has duly passed
this house. Congratulations.
In the next year, I expect are
three members of the Valencia
County delegation to win some
awards at the world's largest
matanza very well.
Let's before I continue. I
wanna, um, welcome some guests
of the gentle lady from, um
McKinley and San Juan
Representative Johnson. We've
got the Gallup Chamber of
Commerce up in the gallery.
Welcome to the house from Ben
Ali, your representative Moon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I wanted
to recognize today in the
gallery advocates who are
participating in the end Mass
incarceration day of action.
They are advocates who have
traveled from around the state
to visit these chambers, as we
consider numerous pieces of
legislation aimed at creating
safer communities. We know that
we need better and more creative
solutions to crime and violence.
And today our halls are filled
with people who have
Experience these things who have
spent years in state jails in
prisons and those who have been
on both sides of the justice
system as both victims of harm
and crime and also accused of
it.
The people closest to the pain
are those who are closest to the
solutions and those who are
eager to imagine our responses
to harm and create public safety
infrastructure that supports
healing from harm rather than
punishment. New Mexicans need
and deserve more more holistic
and more effective approaches to
public safety, and we are
excited to welcome those here
today who are helping us.
Imagine better solutions. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you. And
welcome to the house folks up in
the gallery. Thank you for being
here.
Gentlemen from Lee,
representative Pettigrew with
announcement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I to rise
to
Speak in favor of four H.
As a
As a kid. I remember half
standing on the opposite side.
I'll side all the guys all the
girls on the other side.
Getting the gumption to go Ask
ask the girl to dance.
Mr Speaker. I spent many years
As a 48 shooting sports coach.
And teaching our youth how to
The nuances always had to
reload.
Your shelves.
To be able to use those in
competition.
Mr Speaker Since I've been in
here in the in the house
Have used a substantial amount
of the junior money appropriated
to us to support our 48 shooting
sports and our local four H area
in Lee County.
And I would be remiss if I don't
talk a little bit about all the
things that
Coming up.
Not all of them just a few march
22nd through the 24th at the
Weddington Center.
Shooting sports has their
leadership conference up there.
And I would propose with that
and any other event that happens
within four H.
That are members go and get
involved.
In July.
The 10th through the 14th in Las
Cruces is the one hundred's.
State Convention for Our Youth
are four H.
And I would plead with our
members to please go support
your schools goes through
support your four H.
Students there.
They would love to see you
there.
Have you recognize but also have
you recognize them in their
efforts?
With that, Mr Speaker. I do
appreciate the opportunity to
get up and speak and in, uh
Support of our four age and
there are at least 14 statewide
events that they're still coming
up on the calendar this year.
Please take advantage of that.
Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you for the announcement
generated from earlier presented
Che Si. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
am very, very happy today to
formally introduced the members
of the house to our majority
legislative analyst's Veronica
crop, Nick, She seated right
here and you see her in our
office.
Veronica has been named as the
2024 recipient of the Casey
Family Programs. Excellence for
Children Alumni Award Casey
Family programs is the largest
operating foundation in the US
dedicated to safely reducing the
need for foster care. Veronica
had her picture on the front
page of Art Noah's Page three.
Sorry, the a section a win for
her community. Mexico Child
Welfare Advocate wins a national
award.
And she was recognized for her
work with Indian Child Welfare
Act and her role as a role model
for young indigenous youth.
Veronica also was recognized in
the Mexico
As the 2024, recipient of the
Children's Life Institute.
But child welfare and juvenile
Justice Hope in Action
Excellence Award and in 2025.
Veronica will be one of two
United States delegates
participating in the
international foster Care
Alliance summit in Japan.
So Please help me Congratulate
Veronica and come. Say hello to
her in my office anytime.
Congratulations, Veronica
Gentlemen from Chavez, Arian
Lee, representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr
Speaker to rising point of
personal privilege to twofold
one. I also like to recognize
the four H program and then in
the Mexico, too, as a child was
They were. They were operating
that long ago. It was a member
of the four H and N. Eddy
County.
Um, they
I think it's a great
organization. They do great work
with the youth of our
Our state.
Secondly,
I rise to take
Representative Diego's the chair
of our House committee for her
comments this morning and
And just hope that week. You
We all
Continue to work together to
make new Mexico a better state.
Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Gentlemen from Otero,
representative Block.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I also
would be remiss if I did not
talk about the great folks in
Otero counties for H Club. They
were here earlier today, but I
think they went to go meet with
the Valencia folks and get some
delicious food which I totally
agree with. So, Mr Speaker, I
just wanted to say thank you to
them, and I also wanted to say
thank you to Valencia County for
bringing the delicious food
I actually went up myself to get
the freshest, delicious Coronas
and there were so delicious,
delicious. I devoured them
immediately, Mr Speaker.
Furthermore, I also want to say
A formal welcome to my friend,
representative Pata Han. So now
we have to Jen's ears in the
house now, and we're going to
kick some butt. So thank you, Mr
Speaker. Appreciate it. Alright,
well, part of kicking butt would
be to bring your speaker. Some
of those fresh hrones. So let's
get on it, gentlemen.
Gentlemen from Otero and
Lincoln. Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
also rise for the four H
Children.
And I am glad for that
organization. I do go to the
Weddington Center and watch them
at the state shoot and they are
very good. And since they're all
gone, I wanted to give accolades
to their leader, Wayne Shockey,
a good friend of mine. I've
known him a long time. And, uh,
when I just want to tell you,
thank you for always guiding our
kids.
And keeping them keeping them in
the right direction. And I hope
you continue to do that for a
long time. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. Gentlemen
from Colfax, Curry, Harding
Quay, San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I rise to
appoint a friendly state your
point.
Mr Speaker, Believe it or not, I
too, was in four h. I think it's
a great organization learned a
lot and learned how to braid and
learned how to raise animals.
My worst part was keeping
records. It was It was not my
forte. But I've worked on that a
little bit and I'm a little bit
better now, but I think that's
an organization. That really
points.
Young people in the right
direction, and it teaches them a
lot of skills and teaches them
how to keep records.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I expect all of
you for four h next year to wear
your green.
Suits, Gentlemen. From what the,
UM
Gentlemen from
Idiot Otero and Chavez. I know
well where his green suit next
year.
Alright, let's go to the gentle
lady from Santa. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I move we
go to that order of business
Committee reports Objection and
is ordered to read.
Mr Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred. House Bill
149 has headed under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
share Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on how they won
49 all those in favor, say Aye.
Supposedly the eyes have it
report adopted. Mr Speaker. Your
Health and Human Services
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 151 has had
it under consideration reports
with recommendations that it do
pass the submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair of adoption
adoption of a favorable
community report on house Bill
151. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Oppose me. The eyes have it.
Committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
163 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass as
amended and then referred the
Taxation of Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
163. All those in favors in the
public saying I
All those opposed nay, the ice
The S have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
165 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
sheriff move adoption
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
165. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye. Suppose. Nay,
the committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee tomb
has been referred House Bill
179 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson share move
adoption
We are an adoption of a federal
committee reporting house Bill
179. All those in favor signify
by saying I was supposed to
have a committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 71 has had
it under consideration and
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee
Respectfully submitted G Andres
Romero chair. Mr Speaker. I move
adoption of the committee
report Adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
71 all those in favors and if I
was saying nine
What was supposed to say the
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 171 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that do pass as
amended. Respectfully submitted
John dressed. Remember Chair
Speaker I move adoption of the
committee report on adoption of
a favorable committee report on
house Bill 171. All those in
favor of obviously no
I was supposed to be a civic
committee adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee tomb has been
referred. House Memorial four
has had it under consideration
Reports recommendation that it
do pass. Respectfully submitted
John Dress from your chair
Speaker I move adoption of the
committee report were an
adoption of a favorite committee
report and House Memorial for
all those in favor signify by
saying nine
I was supposed to have a
committee report adopted there.
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 48 has had it under
consideration, reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted the
Doreen Diego's chair.
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
48. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye.
Proposed me
ISAF have it. Committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
252 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the Taxation
Revenue Committee. Respectfully
submitted. Doreen Yj Legos
chair.
Move. Adoption were on adoption
of a federal committee report on
house Bill 250 to all those in
favor, say nine
Supposedly the report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your role
Development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill
209 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
commerce that economic
development Committee
respectfully submitted.
Christina Ortez chair Mr
Speaker, Move Adoption
Adoption of a federal committee
report on house Bill 209 all
those in favors and if I would
say no.
Post name.
The committee reported on today.
Mr Speaker, your rule
Development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 218
has had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation and Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted.
Christina Ortez chair, Mr
Speaker. Adoption Adoption of
Federal Committee Report on
hospital 218 all those in favor
of the same night.
Oppose me. The committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred. House Bill eight has
had it under consideration,
reports CMA's recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill Eight
Do pass. Respectfully submitted.
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker, Move adoption. We are
an adoption when I'm favorable
committee reported in House Bill
eight, but a favorable committee
report on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill eight. All those in favors
and if I by saying, I
Suppose Nick yes. Abbott
Committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Consumer and Public
Affairs Committee. Substitute
for House Bill 27.
Has had it under consideration.
Reports with recommendations at
it do not pass, but that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Consumer and Public
affairs Committee substitute for
house Bill 27 do pass Mr Speaker
moving actually submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr Speaker Move, Adoption were
on adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee Substitute for House
Bill 27. But a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Committee Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
house Bill 27. All those in
favor signify was saying I
Opposed nay.
The eyes of a committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 129 has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 129 do pass respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair, Mr Speaker, move,
Adoption, Adoption and
Unfavorable Committee Report on
House Bill 129, but a favorable
committee report and House
Judiciary Committee substitute
has We want to remind all those
in favor signify by saying, Aye.
It was Nate.
P I sabot coming report adopted.
Generated from earlier percent
of Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move and go to
that order of business messages.
Objection of disordered.
House executive message number
47 Speaker Martinez and members
of the House pursuant to Article
four. Section five B two of the
New Mexico Constitution. I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the 56th
Legislature. Second session
submission of House Bill 183 a
bill increasing the penalty for
negligent use of a deadly weapon
to a misdemeanor.
For a first offense and 1/4
degree felony for a second or
subsequent offense. Respectfully
yours. Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor message will be
entered.
House executive message number
48 Speaker Martinez and members
of the House pursuant to Article
four. Section five B to the New
Mexico Constitution. I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the 56th
Legislature second session.
Submission of House Bill 123. A
bill prescribing the banning of
library materials. Respectfully
yours. Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor.
The Lady from Burnley or
representative Chase E.
Mr Speaker, I will We go to that
or a business introduction of
legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
House Bill 10 introduced by
Representatives Morago and
Javier Martinez, an act relating
to taxation, creating the home
fire Recovery income tax. Credit
House Bill 10 introduced by
representatives Baringo and
Javier Martinez has been read to
us by title is Jim Jermaine
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one ordered
principle referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 281, introduced by
Representative Townsend and Act
relating to higher education,
expanding eligibility for the
lottery tuition scholarship
program. House Bill 281,
introduced by representative 100
to us by title is order not
printed referred to the Rules
Committee.
Hospital 282 introduced by
representative Dixon and
Matthews, an act relating to sex
offender registration, amending
and enacting sections of the sex
offender Registration and
Notification Act to comply with
federal law.
House Bill 282, introduced by
representative
House Bill 280 to have a million
dollars by title is Jim Beam.
German pursuant to Article four,
Section five B two House
executive message 40.
Printed referred to the House
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 203 introduced by
representatives Montoya,
Townsend and Pettigrew and Act
relating to the Legislature,
providing for nonpartisan
administrative assistance and
regional offices. Making an
appropriation has built 283 then
and Pedigree House Bill 283 have
been retired by title is deemed
German pursuant to Article four.
Section five B one order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 284 introduced by
representatives Dixon Army, Oh,
Matthews, Armstrong and Jones
and Act relating to the state
government, amending the
Children, Youth and Families
Department Act requiring the use
of state issued electronic
devices when performing
departmental duties, requiring
the backup and retention of
electronic records Hospital 284.
Introduced by representative
Dixon Army, Oh, Matthews,
Armstrong and Jones has built
284 have been read twice by
title, is ordered not printed
and referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 285, introduced by
representatives Opinsky, an act
relating to public safety,
creating the public safety
recruitment Bureau of the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy,
providing powers and duties
writing for the development of a
centralized public safety
recruitment website that
provides a one stop portal for
state and local enforcement and
safety agencies to advertise
employment opportunities.
Providing for the development of
a media campaign to recruit law
enforcement and tell a
communicator career candidates.
Creating an advisory committee
requiring law enforcement
agencies to have plans to
recruit more women into law
enforcement and to provide
mentorship and peer assistance
programs for newly trained and
other law enforcement officers,
including Tele communicators in
the Law Enforcement retention
fund providing funding for the
New Mexico law enforcement
Standards and training Council
to develop a new curricula for
telecommunication tell
communicators.
Making Appropriations Hospital
205 introduced by representative
Polanski House Bill 285 haven't
been read twice by title
disorder not printed and
referred to the House Rules
Committee.
Hospital. 286 introduced by
representatives Armstrong
Mirrorball, Moya, Baca and
Senators Baca and Sanchez and
Act making an appropriation to
the Department of Transportation
for East West Corridor
Transportation Infrastructure
Project on Los Lunas Boulevard
in Valencia County.
Hospital. 286 introduced by
representatives Armstrong, Moya,
Baca and Senators Baca and
Sanchez has built 100 and 86.
I've been there twice by title
is dim German pursuant to
Article four, Section five B one
Order printed and referred to
the House reputation,
Transportation Public Works in
Capital Improvements Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Hospital 287 introduced by
representatives Dixon, Romeo
Matthews and Armstrong and Act
relating to risk management,
requiring the Republican the
publication of terms of legal
settlement agreements providing
for loss prevention preview
teams requiring reports.
House Bill 287 introduced by
representatives Dixon Harm Eo
Matthews and Armstrong's House
Bill 287 have been read twice by
title, is ordered not printed
and referred to the House Rules
Committee.
Hospital 288 and introduced by
representative Thompson, an act
relating to health professional
loan repayment, expanding the
definition of health
professional in the health
Professional Loan Repayment Act,
making an appropriation.
Hospital 288 introduced by
representative Tom
House Bill 288 haven't been made
to us by title is deemed
Jermaine Pursuant to Article
four section for FP. One order
printed went through to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Hospital. 289
introduced by representative
Paragon and Act, making an
appropriation to the Department
of Health to contract with
community based lesbian, Gay,
bisexual, transgender and queer
organizations.
To train health care providers
on lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and queer healthcare
laws, provider and patient
rights and best practices for
inclusivity and the
implementation of an education
campaign on a hospital. 289
introduced by representative for
a home
House Bill 289 have been read to
us by title is Jim German
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee.
There's a House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Hospital 290 introduced by
Representative Serato and Act
relating to economic
development, allowing for the
forgiveness of loans made to
certain borrowers pursuant to
the Childcare Facility Loan Act.
Providing conditions expanding
uses of the loans, making an
appropriation.
Hospital. 290
House Bill 290.
Have been raped twice by title
of German pursuant to Article
four, Section five B one order
printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Hospital 291 introduced by
representatives Corolla, Cates
and Herrera.
An act relating to water,
allowing counties and
municipalities to require water
harvesting, recycling and rest
reuse, creating the water
harvesting income tax credit,
creating standards for the
design, construction
installation and inspection of
rainwater and storm water
catchment systems requiring
permitting, providing matching
funds for rainwater and strings
and facilities.
Hospital 291 introduced by
representatives Corolla, Cates
and her are 291 have been read
to us by tireless Jim German
pursuant to Article four.
Section five B one order printed
or referred to the house
agricultural sake, yes and Water
Researches Committee. There's a
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 292, introduced by
representative Serato and Act
relating to property, enacting a
new section of the NMC 1978 to
limit county and municipal
restrictions on certain battery
charged fences with alarm
systems located outside of areas
owned exclusively exclusively
for residential use. Amending a
section of the NMC 1978
Regarding county and municipal
zoning, providing definitions
House Bill 292 introduced by
representative Cerrato
House Bill 292 have been made to
us by title is
Order not printed and referred
to the House Rules Committee
Hospital 293, introduced by
representative Onion are new and
act relating to housing,
amending and enacting sections
of the Affordable Housing Act,
creating the creditworthiness
assistance program providing for
creditworthiness assistance
grants, creating the created
Creditworthiness Assistance Fund
making an appropriation.
Stand by.
House Bill 293 have been hit
twice by toddlers. Jim German
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one printed or
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 294 and act and I'm
sorry, introduced by
representative Lane an act
relating to taxation, creating
the education enrichment income
tax credit.
House Bill 294, introduced by
representative Lane
House Bill 294 have been read
twice by title is Jim German
pursuant to Article four,
Section five B one hold on
principle referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 295, introduced by
Representatives Block, Allen, T.
Martinez and Vincent and Act
relating to deceptive trade
practices, enacting the
protection of minors from
distribution of harmful material
act defining terms authorizing
liability, creating a private
right of action.
House Bill 295, introduced by
representatives Block Martinez
and Vincent.
House Bill 295 have been twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 296 introduced by
Six introduced by
representatives Duncan Montoya,
Townsend, Valentin Martinez and
Armstrong House Bill 296 I've
been with towards my title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the House Rules Committee
297 introduced by Representative
Zamora and Act relating to
schools and acting the seizure
Safe Schools Act to provide for
seizure disorder management.
And care by school personnel
providing for rulemaking limited
liability.
House Bill 297 introduced by
representatives Mara
House Bill 297, having been read
twice by title is ordered not
House joint resolution 14
introduced by representative
Townsend.
The joint resolution proposing
to amend articles four and nine
of the Constitution of New
Mexico to provide by law program
to provide state funding to
parents or legal guardians of
school aged Children for home
school or private school.
House joint resolution 14
introduced by representative
Townsend House joint Resolution
14 have been read twice by
Charles Order president referred
to the House government election
in the Indian Affairs Committee,
House Memorial 32 introduced by
representatives Garrett G.
Andres Romero, Herrera, Baca and
Tomoya.
A memorial progressing. The
Legislative Finance Committee to
conduct a study on higher
education compensation for both
temporary and non temporary
instructional staff and
collaboration with the
Legislative Education Study
Committee has memorial 32
introduced by representatives
Garrett Gee, Andres Romero,
Herrera, Baca and Moya.
How's Memorial 32 have been read
to us by titles order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee.
How's Memorial 33, introduced by
representative Ortez, a memorial
requesting the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture to
convene a working group to
consider acceptance of a
pollinator protection plan, as
proposed by the New Mexico
Beekeepers Association, and
assess ways to protect
pollinators through community
education, outreach and data
collection. Hospital Morial 33.
Introduced by representative or
test
How's Memorial 33 haven't been
ran twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Agriculture and Water
Resources Committee.
Has memorial 34 introduced
representative Ortez.
A memorial requesting the
establishment of a working group
to explore the expanded use of
citizen science by state
agencies has memorial 34.
How's Memorial 34 haven't been
met twice by title is ordered
printed.
And referred
Two.
House Energy, Environment and
Natural Resources Committee.
How's Memorial 36, introduced by
representatives of pants key
Romero, Luhan, McQueen and
Serato Memorial proclaiming
February 1st 2024 City of Santa
Fe Day in the House of
Representatives.
Has been memorial 36 introduced
by representatives of Penske
Romero, Luhan McQueen and Serato
House. Morial 36 haven't been
rid twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
or placed rather in on the
speaker's table.
Ask Memorial 37 introduced by
representative Lane, a memorial
honoring the National Conference
of State Legislatures for its
creation in Albuquerque and on
the 15th anniversary of its
founding on January. 1st has
memorial 37, introduced by 37
have been request by title is
order not printed and placed on
the speaker's table.
Has memorial 38 introduced by
representative Sanchez Memorial
supporting the transfer of the L
via schoolhouse, where the
Penasco Independent School
District 23 Saiki Associations
and Alveda
How's Memorial 38 introduced by
representatives
How's Memorial 38 haven't been
read twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee.
House Memorial 39 introduced by
representative Armstrong
Memorial, recognizing the blue
butterfly is a symbol to bring
awareness to Huntington's
disease. Hospital House Memorial
39 introduced by representative
Armstrong Memorial 39, having
been read twice by title.
Is ordered printed and referred
Hospital 298 introduced by
representatives Alkon and Harry
Garcia, an act relating to
veterans, enacting the service
members and Veterans Suicide
Prevention Act within the
Veterans Services Department
Act.
Providing department
responsibilities to raise
awareness regarding suicide
within the populations of
service members, veterans and
military and veteran family
members and to increase access
to suicide prevention resources,
providing definitions making an
appropriation.
Hospital 298 introduced by
representatives Al Cohn and
Harry Garcia House Bill 298
haven't been there twice by
title is deemed German pursuant
to Article four, Section five B
one order printed and referred
to the House Labor Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee. Then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 299 introduced by
representatives Jones, Brown,
Chavez and Thompson, an act
relating to pharmacies, amending
the pharmacy act to provide for
custodial facilities requiring
and possessing controlled
substances for withdrawal
management.
Hospital 299 introduced by
representatives Jones, Brown,
Chavez and Thompson House Bill
299 have been read to us by
title disorder not printed and
referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 300, introduced by
representative Terrazas and
Jones.
An act.
Making an appropriation from the
general fund to the Department
of Transportation for the second
phase of the road infrastructure
project on certain portions of
United States Highway 180.
House Bill 300 introduced by
representatives Terrazas and
Jones.
House Bill 300 haven't been read
twice by title is deemed German
pursuant to Article four.
Section five B one order prints
that are referred.
To the House transportation
Public works in Capital
House Bill 12, introduced by
representatives Ortez and
Lending and Act.
Relating to attorney regulation,
directing proceeds of legal
actions under the federal
Hermits Peak. Calf Canyon Fire
Assistance Act to attorney
interests on lawyers trust
accounts.
Declaring that funds from the
settlement of legal actions
under the Federal Hermits Pete
Calf Canyon Fire Assistance Act
and attorneys interests or non
lawyers. Trust accounts are not
assignments.
Hospital 12 introduced by
representatives or tests and
lent 12 have been read twice by
title disorder not printed and
Refer to the House Rules
Committee. Your lady from early
Oh, Mr Speaker. I move you go to
that order of Business Committee
reports. Objection, disordered.
Mr Speaker, your agriculture of
psyche As and Water Resources
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 162 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Susan K. At at a chair
Person
committee report on House Bill
160 to all those in favor
signify by saying nine
Proposed Nate the I Select
committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your Agriculture Ekeus
and Water Resources Committee
tomb has been referred House
Bill 211 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do not
pass, but that house agriculture
Cycles and Water Resources
Committee substitute for house
Bill 211 do pass.
And then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Respectfully submitted
Susan K. At a chair. Mr.
Speaker, Move adoption adoption
of a federal committee. Excuse
me. We're on adoption when
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 211, but a favorable
committee report on house
Agriculture and Water Resources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 211. All those in favor,
say nine Pasni.
The Yeah, it's have a committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your transportation
public works in Capital
Improvements Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
186 has added under
consideration, reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Dan Hawkman, Vol
chair.
Mr Speaker. Moved. Option Option
about favorable committee report
on House Bill 186. All those in
favor signify by saying aye
opposed made the community
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your transportation
public works in Capital
improvements. Committee tumor
has been referred House Bill
190 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations do not pass, but
that house transportation public
works in Capital improvements
Committee substitute for House
Bill 190 do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Dan Hoffman
Wheelchair Mr Speaker Movement
option adoption of an
Unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 190. But a favorable
committee report on House
transportation public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
substitute for House Bill 190.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Opposed. Nay could be reported
opted Mr Speaker, your
transportation public works in
capital improvements. Committee
tumors been referred House Bill
231 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Dan Hoffman,
wheelchair Mr Speaker Movement
option.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
231. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
All those opposed nay, the
community adopted
Mr Speaker. Your transportation
public works in Capital
Improvements Committee to him
has been referred house built to
38 has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Dan Hoffman, Field
chair, Mr Speaker Movement
option.
We are on adoption. They will
come to report in the house,
Bill 238 told those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed nay.
The eyes have it. Community
court adopted Mr Speaker, your
transportation public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 245 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Respectfully
submitted. Den Haag movie
Wheelchair, Mr Speaker Move
Adoption option of a favorable
community report on House Bill
245. All those in favor signify
by saying nine. I
You have the mic. All those
opposed nay.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
We have a perfect record, folks.
Good job.
Gentle lady from early or
present, Casey.
Mr Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation
I object.
Mr Speaker.
Objection noted movie Go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
Objection. See? No objection. It
is so ordered.
All right. We've got some bills
coming out of rules that I want
to make the body aware of House
Bill 123, introduced by
representative Cates.
Jermaine Pursuant to Article
four, Section five B two House
executive Message 48. It is
discharged from the House Rules
Committee order printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House.
Education Committee.
House Bill 183 introduced by
representatives Little Angola.
Jermaine pursuant to
Article four, Section five B two
House executive message 47.
It is discharged from the House
Rules Committee order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then is the House
Judiciary Committee.
Folks, we have a committee
report from
January. 24th and we have
consulted with
Um, both leadership on this
issue.
Um, we ask the body to expunge
the House Judiciary Committee
report that was adopted on
January 25th regarding House
Bill 41.
The report contained a clerical
error.
In the vote count. The vote
count does not change. But the
name of one of the votes
changes. That's where the
mistake the clerical error was
made.
Um
In the in the original report.
The votes were swapped.
Uh, for literally in in
representative McQueen's, so
we've got
Amended committee report that
reflects the vote that took
place again. The vote count does
not change just the names of the
folks who voted on the bill.
So
With that.
Um, I'd like to ask the body to
expunge the January 25th House
Judiciary Committee report for
House Bill 41 and adopt the
corrected report.
I see no objection.
It is.
It is ordered.
Okay, we've got
Four bills.
Where we are going to drop a
committee referral we've
consulted with
Um, both leaderships on this as
well.
I know go slowly and I'll read
the bills Bill numbers so you
can follow along.
House Bill 101, sponsored by
representative Thompson, Um
We have consulted with
leadership as well as the
leadership of the House
Appropriations Committee, and we
will be dropping.
The House Appropriations
Committee Referral. This is for
House Bill 101.
Objection. It is ordered.
Also, we've got house Bill 216,
sponsored by representative
Harper.
Um, we are asking the body and
we in consultation with
Leadership as well as the
leadership of the House Commerce
Committee.
We are dropping the house
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee referral.
And only keeping the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee
referral. This is for house Bill
216 Objection. It is ordered
House Bill 219. Also,
representative Harper
In consultation with minority
majority leadership, as well as
House Commerce and Economic
development Committee
leadership. We are dropping the
House Committee and Economic
Development Committee referral
and only keeping the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee
referral see no objection. It is
so ordered and last, but not
least, House Bill 10 sponsored
represented Borrego.
We are dropping the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee referral and only
keeping the House Taxation and
Revenue Community Referral House
Bill 10.
You know? Objection. It is
ordered.
Any other announcements. The
gentleman from Bernal, EU
representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your House
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow at 830 in room 309.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Members
Stick note. Gentlemen from Sybil
and McKinley Representative
Alcorn.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee will meet 15
minutes after the caucus
meeting. I think I understand
they're supposed to be a caucus
meeting. So we will be 15
minutes after we have two bills
who we should be out of there
before midnight.
That sounds like a great
evening. Thank you, gentlemen.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Dona Ana to see if in fact,
there is a caucus meeting. I've
heard rumors as well.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. The House
Democratic Caucus will be
meeting immediately after the
fourth session in room 307
members take note. Mystery
Solved. General Lady from Santa
Fe Loss Alamosa Sandoval,
Representative Chandler. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, your House
Judiciary Committee Dinner is
tonight at the bullring. If
people could arrive a little bit
earlier than originally thought,
like 545, or so that would be
great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Member stick note tells you
usually committee member to the
House Judiciary Committee dinner
tonight at 545.
Generated from earlier percent
of Thompson. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. You get a two for one,
so consumer and public affairs
will be meeting immediately
after the Democratic Caucus and
House Health and Human Services
Committee will be meeting at 830
in in room 315. So if you want
to sit down, you better come
early, because that's a tiny
room. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Member signaled gentlelady from
Santa Fe, Representative Serato.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at 130 or after
floor session in room 317,
However, at the request of the
sponsor, HB six, the only bill
that was on the agenda will be
rolled till Friday. Uh and
please keep an eye on the Golden
Road for updates to the agenda
for tomorrow. Thank you.
Remember steak. Note Any other
announcements?
Committee dinners. House
Judiciary Committee dinner
tonight 545 bullring.
Generated from burning here
beside Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, the house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee is also having its
committee dinner this but maybe
double check that.
Members take note crash both
committee dinners even if you're
not in those committees.
Alright.
See no further announcements.
The gentlelady from Bern Ali,
your JC
Mr Speaker. I move the house
stand in recess until 1030
tomorrow morning. January 31st
2024
Wednesday. Thank you, dear lady
Before I take that motion, I
want to remind the body that
financial disclosure forms are
due by the end of two morrow
Business Day to the secretary of
State's office.
Be there or be
Sponge Bob Square pants and also
find the House Senate recess
until 1030 tomorrow morning.
