The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Roll calls close we have a
quote.
Please rise for today's
implication.
Led by
the gentle lady from catherine
said a score below several
percent of armstrong.
Thank you mister speaker
dear lord please wrap you your
arms around america rapir arms
around the veterans the children
the elderly.
Please help us and guide us.
We know we can disagree but we
can do it with compassion.
And with friendliness
and not hold graduates
dear lord left us all up and
help us to make good decisions
for the state in mexico and use
this name I pray amen.
With the gentleman for billion
recent delicates leaders in the
pledge of.
And the generation from valencia
said i've made about more year
leaders in the pledge to the new
mexico flake.
The.
Generally did for brilliant.
Yeah.
This your speaker I move we go
to that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business in objection it is so
ordered good morning members
good morning everybody.
Good morning madame clirk their
announcements from the floor.
Generated from earlier present
sir
speaker mr speaker I have the
honor of introducing our newest
national board certified
teachers they're up in the
restroom um
as you know mister speaker to
become a national board
certified teacher you go through
this rigorous process of
videotaping yourself analyzing
the data and then um
documented it and then being
tested on it and these women
have all been achieved the great
honor of being a national board
certified teacher so as as I say
your name would you stand up.
Thank you first when is jennifer
duff from our teacher public
schools who achieved an art
thank you
next to it making leave
next is making leave for most
almost public schools
she achieved in elementary
literacy thank you amanda craft
from albequirky public schools
also achieved in literacy law
brown from silver city
consolidate school district
thank you as the latest sylvia
miranda from texaco municipal
school district
elementary literacy and lower
brand from ascruces public
schools
thank you minister speaker they
could elite and congratulations
and thank you for your service
other announcements.
Did you from.
Call facts more than your
reverse and begin and towers
representative census thank you
mister speaker I just want to
thank modern county they're the
ones that provided that
chicharonia's
uh the biscuit those are the
turties
and ours are western more soil
and water that the teacher on is
i'm sorry motor county did the
panel it does the best
constitution the turtiers uhm
are so just when I acknowledge
my former cost me to terminally
settle here my dad she's going
to be performing here here soon
she's an amazing person in the I
know you're going to acknowledge
what our schools you shortly but
I just wanted to acknowledge
them as well thank you mister
speaker thank you gentlemen and
thank you for the teacher on is
my office is right back here if
you like to drop some off a
little leader
and their room one hundred at
the clerks office thank you very
much welcome
I think we're ready are you guys
ready for the performance ready
to go but right folks we have a
mariachi australia consisting of
eight and ninth creators from
santa fe.
Members include sa- asasha
smoker ella tammerlin brand and
record never charges is a bill
monus emma rose martinez long
gets yet a better cruise gay
goes carlos network risk
goodman.
Anna gathers
and alia.
But I don't have a last night.
So early a year the artists you
alia.
The.
Mister speaker thank you should
I wait till after the
performance to
uh mention the sponsors of the
majority thank you thank you
mister finger and modies
yesterday yeah take it away.
The.
The.
You give on the interview as one
said then
to
some said then
I get
i'm
in lost the iran
and
there's
us that you see
mama
who
wanted my set out of us email
got allowed
by
this year and that's
the receipt.
Give on the the
standard
as those then how many
moments
pressures that were
stuck to see that I
mean I got a lot of
us who got saw there when they
must say that god love us email
this
day.
Beautiful general from earlier
percent of the license thank you
mister spoke this wonderful
performance by these talented
young musicians is brought to
you by way of the three school
companies the atricular
companies are an offshoot of the
score landground which i'm very
proud as a portion of my house
district which was the original
village of our three school the
entities under their wing among
other things is mariachi
spectacular that's held in
albuquerque for the last thirty
two years their goal mister
speaker in the next few years is
to get your help to build the
international money achieve
music hall of fame of which will
I will be participating with in
albuquerque I would like to
change to speaker members.
The single peter sanchez to my
left.
Peter sanchez and rondo such as
their nod brothers run designers
while the way mister speaker
randy is the c o corner also
because need anything corner
will see that man
also will have a good friend who
modes and good friend
challenging their board members
thank you mister speaker thank
you and welcome to the three
school companies great to see
you are and we have some guests
in the gallery is would it
gormly elementary school up in
the gallery very you are
second grade teacher zoey german
and and chairman have their
students who have been studying
the three branches of government
they've learned about their
sanity representatives
leadership qualities and the
process of creating a lot
they're visiting today to
celebrate early childhood day
and to contextualize what
they've learned in school we've
got forty four students.
In twelve to thirteen adults
welcome to the house
representatives
we have a guest of
representative alan martinez up
in the gallery from the send of
all academy for bilingual
studies we have thirty seventh
and eighth grade students
welcome to the house
we have guest of representative
ladder hive education still in
council from center there is a
bumper be day care fourteen
children ages eight to twelve
with teacher
and parents welcome to the house
we have a guess we have guess
the representative sanchious for
more high school eric is senior
mickey allowed I go and soft a
war is a bill martinez senior
city council treasure in normal
capacity super intent and
welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from lincoln and a
piddle representative vincent
thank you mister speaker good
morning and good morning to all
of the representatives if you'll
notice on your desk this morning
we have some more o terrible
connect cookies and we'd like to
welcome you tonight
at the her vay wine bar we're
going to have a reception and
that's going to be at six pm and
then we would like to invite you
to come by any breakfast with us
at seven am at the elderly hotel
thank you mister speaker you
gentlemen member state note the
german from donator represented
latter thank you mr speaker
today is border in dussel
association day on your desk and
provide find a bag with the cool
little woven basket there as
mexican candies and it courtesy
the border border industrial
association also mister speaker
i'd like to mention
that two billion dollars was
added to suit economy according
to the study by the enemis you
three point two billion and
exports to mexico which is a new
record for new mexico ninety of
ninety percent of which came
from something that has a thirty
four three hundred forty five
million dollars a new private
investment uh has been announced
sixty three percent of all the
mexican exports come from
something that esser five
hundred and fifty five jobs will
be created by protect by
projects announced the progress
were announced to twenty twenty
three and one point five million
square feet of new industrial
space has been under
construction we're doing some
great things that sought that
the and and that said I would
also like to invite everyone to
the b I
reception at laugh on the
starting at five o'clock from
five to nine at the
hotel thank you mister speaker.
The q gentleman member state
note and gentleman do you have a
special guest with the u n the
certificate.
Mister speaker I do I have
mister david avalos mister david
is part of the SB b c network
and he was recognized nationally
just recently as forty under
forty and in the united states
you represent he probably
represented in mexico and mister
speaker we do have a
certificate.
Thank you german and mister
welcome to the house thank you
for joining us.
Correct read.
Okay.
The house of representatives of
the state of new mexico
congratulates david overlooks.
Whereas david has been
acknowledged and honored is one
of the prestigious group of
individuals receiving the
american small business
development centers forty under
forty award in recognition of
his exceptional contributions
and dedication to the new mexico
small business development
center networking.
During his remarkable two year
ten year and.
Whereas david avalos they level
outstanding achievements
underscore the resilience
creativity and vital role of
young professionals in shaping
the future of america's business
landscape.
As highlighted during the
america's small business
development center's conference
and whereas david avalo's
section selection as one of the
forty remarkable winners of this
tinguish panel of judges and
america's small business
development centers millennial
interest group examplifies as
exceptional business acumen
innovative thinking and
unwavering commitment to faster
and growth and success within
the small business fear.
And whereas his celebration at a
reception during the forty
fourth annual america's small
business development centers
conference at the galored opera
land resort in national
tennessee served as a testament
to his outstanding contributions
to the small business
development center is community
and the wider entrepreneurial
landscape.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives
that state of new mexico that
congratulations be expense
extended to david evaluates in
recognition of his receipt of
the american small business
development centers forty under
forty award.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Welcome mister thank you for all
of your work and your service to
the great states you know from
the thank you mister speaker one
one more announcement daisy
leader and the group out of the
uh bumble be are early
challenged education
group are gonna be in room three
eighteen I invite my colleagues
to go visit with them we have
some students who are very very
interested in the legislative
process we have several students
who want to be legislators or
mayors or other elected
officials so any opportunity
that you have to speak with them
it would be greatly appreciated
they could join a serious
serious question who's got the
better to terrorist down
southern north
mister speaker ours are a lot
bigger
now now order in the house.
Generally from earlier
presentative thompson morning mr
speaker I have a point of
personal privilege your point
that teacher honest are
wonderful and amazing and I
think I speak for many of my
colleagues that they would be
welcome on our desk any time of
the day or night throughout the
session thank you mister speaker
members take note and members of
the public specially take looked
and the other announcements.
Okay.
Folks there will be.
A legislative breakfast in tours
of the supreme court on tuesday
twenty fourth beginning at seven
thirty in the morning for all
you early birds others also
bunch of different social stuff
on the social calendar check it
out
here is the plan for the rest
the day there is an amigos lunch
and now eleven thirty we're
going to break
uh we're going to reserve a
subject to call the chair for
people to go and uh take part in
the lench and if they so wish uh
the plan will be to and I
haven't heard
afternoon committees meeting to
day other than see obviously but
the play will be to reconvene at
about two o'clock to do some
more bill intro this afternoon.
That alright so good with
everyone thumbs up from the whip
thumbs up from the leader.
Alright generally from berlin or
please chase you.
Mister speaker I move the house
standing room at the subject of
the corner of the chair
everyone is put a time on it
well we'll just keep the the two
o'clock time members take note
the house will send a reserve
subject to the call of the
chair.
