Rep matter.
Representative hockman vehicle
representative little here
representative.
Representative of the morning.
Vice chair figure here.
Madame chair johnson.
Experts from.
And.
Nineteen addresses a l.
And the crime of disrupting
election results the bill is
intended to protect the valid
result.
And which are actually.
And I forgot to introduce
corresponds here.
I haven't had coffee either I
almost forgot I was here.
Madame chairman and thank you
madame florida leader and
representative you know and good
folks from the department of
justice actually I kinda like
the name department of justice
these days managed here
representative so I think think
it's grown on me appreciate it
so the bill I I i've read it I
find it interesting
madame to represent I guess i'm
just wondering what is the the
impetus for bringing this
forward now in this legislative
session madame chairman
represent.
We we realized.
Other.
Thank you madame chairman and
think you made employer leader
for the answer
you know I I agree with you I I
think that.
The integrity of our elections
should definitely be a top
priority for all of us i've been
a big advocate for election
integrity and ensuring that
every legal vote counts.
And so madame chairman
representative i'm just
wondering so like I know in the
state's history we've had close
elections such as in two
thousand and four two thousand
with bush carrie
and the bus gore and some adams
hair representative i'm
wondering in an event where
there is a very close election
where they're we don't we
haven't done a recount yet rate
and were required to send
forward these
delegates or these these
electors
how do we square with a very
tight election that could indeed
change from one candidate to the
other winning the state madame
chairman representative.
I am going to see.
Madame chair members of the
committee i'm representative
thank you for the question I
always like to be able to answer
a process question for the
public
the first meeting of a state
campusing board after an
election occurs in late november
so at that first meeting of the
state campusing board after it's
received certified results from
the county on an election the
canvassing board meets and they
review the closeness of races
and they issue orders pursuant
to the automatic recount
statutes and those automatic
recounts are performed timely so
that they can accommodate the
time lane as as outlined an
article fifteen which is the
electoral coll.
Alright thank you madame
chairman think he representative
so and thank you.
Secretary states offers I forget
your last name and i'm to
representative windsy bachman
bachman that's it I was going to
see grace and her.
That's this gentleman here thank
you manager
now I appreciate i'm just trying
to get there at their names
right thank you madame flor
leader thank you miss bartman so
I know an at the county level
they send their certified
results and they must do that I
believe it's ten days after an
election
manager representative is that
correct
madame chair representative
there is an an extended timeline
if there's a higher number of
vot.
The.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative and
it's it's my understanding that
currently.
If there's if there's an issue
with the the election results in
a county.
And they see that there may be
some discrepancies.
Regardless they must still
certify the election.
In that time frame is that my
underst.
The.
The.
Madam chair representatives the
way the county can vast process
works is that they go before the
board the clerk presents on the
alcohol of the election and
gives information as required by
statute and then there's a
second day.
Okay thanks madame chairman
thank you representative so if
it if a candidates fail suit.
In a county or less you say the
statewide election results of
presidential candidate this is
what this is entailing madame
chairman representative if they
file suit and then they request
a hand count of the ballots
that's not the automatic.
Recount that's done with the
secretary states office how
would that square with this new
legislation madam chair
representative cause it could
take a longer time then it it
could take up to january fourth
or whenever they they certify.
Where madam chair representative
so to be clear even after the
certification of the county l.
They're currently not is not in
statute and the abilit.
That would be up to the fact
finder in that scenario.
Thank you madame chairman think
you represent it so miss
representative miss back minutes
i'm wondering.
The.
If if the judge the fact finders
they do indeed allow this
recount in a county list just a
bernalio county and there are
tens of thousands of voters who
voted in that election madame to
representative.
Unless you say this takes longer
less you say that they want it
ensure that there's a forensic
audit of the ballots and it is
granted by the courts madame
chairman representative if we
don't have.
The results by the time that
congress certifies the
presidential election because it
takes a pretty long time to do a
forensic audit then will anyone
be allowed to bring forward
electors or will this statute
say nobody can bring forward
electors until the audit is
completed madame chairman
representative that miss barbie
madame chair representative I
can't speak to what would be f.
The committee thank you
representative that's that's my
big concern with this piece of
legislation because if we don't
have a provision to allow
someone to request an audit and
and try to get the correct.
Results if it's a very tight
election then madame chairman
representative I find this would
be criminalizing those electors
who may truly have believed that
there are candidate did indeed
when the state this could put
them in in jeopardy of of
litigation and so madam chair
representative I I won't go any
further than that but I I just
have big concerns with that
thank you manager that's all.
Thank you.
Madame chair representative yes
madam chair I guess.
The.
When what is the date new mexic.
Madam chair representative I
believe it's the choose the last
tuesday in november so the three
tuesdays is technically th.
The state campusing board and I
can confirm whether or not it's
monday or two.
And
managed her.
Madame chair representative yes
and manager and.
The.
There was a cont.
Who who won th.
There was.
When we look at the al gore.
It is mid december.
The.
And if we go.
For never w.
Now criminals under th.
I think we all have a.
Now if if there is an aslate of.
And then the outcome of the o.
But those again.
And if I may add madam chair
representative
to be clearer even though
even though there was a group
that met here at the capital
there was outside of the elected
presidential.
They were not permitted entry by
the s.
We did not send that certificate
or docume.
Of of the proce.
The process for twenty twenty
followed state statute as
outlined and.
The electors met they cast
their.
Followed also and federal.
And make an alternate motion to
table.
The.
I i.
Thank you
for bringing this bill I I just
needed a couple of I guess
clarification on timelines which
we've already received which I
appreciate but given what
happened in terms of the
timelines for new mexico.
And.
And why ended up happening in
other states meaning the false
electors were.
Prosecuted.
What was that what was that
process or anything like that
process followed in.
Madam chair representative in
terms of.
The process that was followed in
other states of.
There was one of seven states in
which the result.
Submitted.
The rationale for not charging
in new mexico has less to do
about the timeline of how it was
followed and how it was.
Itself as well as.
So that was more the rationale
for the charging decision as
opposed to any distinction in
timing they can.
For that answer so to me the
language that sticks out.
Knowingly or recklessly.
And so the crucks of this crime
or this would be crime would be
that anybody that presented as a
false electoral with a false
certificate would have to
knowingly and recklessly do so
is that corr.
Madam chair representative that
is correct that is the mental
state.
It's of course different from
some other scenarios which
they're strict liability
offenses that's not what this is
where requiring a knowing or a
reckless mental state prior to
any potential prosecution thank
you very much manager and that's
exactly what.
This would not punish anybody
who who showed up unknowingly
unwillingly with the men's rare
that they did at that point time
think that they were the
certified electors that the
point of this.
Experts is to create and punish
someone for a scenario in which
they knew.
That they were not the certified
elector and that they knew that
they were presenting themselves
under fast pretences is that
correct madam chair
representative that is correct
or they they act it was some
conscious disregard of
substantial.
Thank you madame chairman.
So what.
What happened.
The.
To deter.
Yeah.
So then our problem at the state
lev.
For the rules.
The.
Handbook page twenty one motions
are not required to be.
The.
Representative on your new note
to table
representative block yes the
table represent.
The.
Representative on your nor knew
yes representative block now
represent madam florida leader.
Representative hockey help yes.
The.
Madam.
Madam chair johnson.
Thank you madame chair good
morning
and committee members.
This morning I present to you
house memorial five and
basically it is a very simple
memorial that is requesting the
new mexico congressional
delegation to support
legislation to expand
compensation under the federal
radiation exposure compensation
egg for individuals exposed to
radiation.
And basically what this bill is
asking for is the.
In the final two paragraphs of
the bill where it says now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of new mexico and that new
mexico delicational delegation
be requested to continue to
support proposed federal
legislation to expand and
improve compensation under the
federal radiation exposure
compensation act and be it for
the resolve that copies of this
moral be transmitted to members
of the congressional delegation
madame chair my expert witness
this morning is mister field
harrison and the jerry banali
and of your bedoning.
Yeah.
There is a national.
Yeah.
Have.
Okay sorry about that my name is
emily the case I am a member of
youth united for climate crisis
action and I am here to urge you
to support house memorial five
for decades the people of new
mexico have been exposed to many
talks ins and radiation from
uranium mining and the year
weapons testing.
Radiation exposure causes life
changing how the issues and
drawings people's lives the way
in which are any and was mind
and nuclear weapons were
produced amounts to nuclear
colonialism the federal
government has not provided
compensation for those effected
in roughly the past four or five
decades.
The cut off date to receive
compensation needs to be
extended and the criteria for
who can receive compensation
needs to be expanded please
support a small amount of
justice for those exposed to
radiation who have had their
lives families and community
exchanged forever think you.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee my name
Memorial file but we all know of
a large role in the next the
played and it's consumers new
career history whether it
weapons testing your iranian
mind and you know people are not
warned or informed about the
devastating and long lasting
effects of eighty eightieth and
many families in new mexico have
had to live with the health and
economic and tax without the
compensation I know some
families have been i've had this
intensity diagnosed his pass
down over generations and entire
communities have been left
behind with the current criteria
I don't know the initial beach
and rica was created both when
the distribution and the
timeline of radiation was just
barely being understood and then
also primarily only looked at
the spread of radio new claims
from specific atmosphere testing
sites and so I mean I feel it's
crucial that we do everything
that we can to support our
impact the communities and offer
were just as we can and the
extension in criteria that
there's memorial suggests so
rightly please support more by
thinking.
Chair thank you and thank you.
The.
In my understanding correctly
now that just arizona.
But referred to my expert
witness of.
Better chair members of the
committee yeah the bill the
redious exposure c.
As far as we know that down when
w.
Eleven st.
Expert witness but but currently
what we're trying to we're
trying to expand that bill and
currently it just covers
arizona.
What they've compensated.
Only covers about.
The.
Several counties.
Thank you thank you for that
answer.
The.
Do you know what in this bill at
the federal live.
Who gave me him chair
representatives
as far as I know I have a lot of
exp.
You have to identify case each
case is different if the
individual.
You have to identify who the
benefi.
Thank you madame ch.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you so much representative
for bringing this memory forward
I absolutely agree with the
intention of this.
Represent almond cordo and we
are in the till rosa basin and
we have many folks in our
community who have been directly
affected by the radiation at the
trendy site so madam.
Such an important thing to bring
awareness to but i'm so glad to
see at the state level as coming
together and say we want
compensation.
Allow to to just let not let
people become hole again madame
chairman representative and not
and I know in your area of the
state as well there are so many
things that the government has
done without arc.
Affected the people of our
state.
Madame representative thank you
for this and I was I was excited
to see the federal legislation
has so many bipartisan
codashsponsors as well we have
representative holly.
Could sponsor in this this bill
at the federal level so it made
him tear representative I stand
in strong support I don't know
if that my comments today were a
minute or so I was going to just
explain my vote but I just
wanted to make sure to to give
you guys a very thank you to you
representative else into
mrperiod harrison binally get
done I believe I said that
correctly and thank you offer
for your advocacy for the
downwinders I know in radiators
or in the reading rate of active
and hazardous materials
committee in the interim we sent
a letter to congress to support
the downwinders and I hope are
joined efforts here at this
legislature as a house and
senate and then of course in our
interim helps to push forward
this federal legislation to
ensure that we are indeed making
these families hole again
nothing we could possibly do not
no amount of money can bring
back the folks who have died but
this can at least alleviate some
of the suffering of those family
so madame chairman
representative I just want to
thank you for bringing this
forward.
Thank you madame chairman
representative.
The.
Yes representative this
will affect everybody that's
affected by the down win and
everything else the main point
of this per legislation recently
you have heard in the media that
amendments.
So this is another effort to
maintain that the discussions
continue on the coverage of.
This is coming from.
Madam chair before a year.
You bang the gavel
um I would like I would like to
share
with a committee that these
individuals here the three
german here have made numerous
strips to washington dc to plead
To raise funds so that they
could make their trip there have
been some individuals that are
comes fine to wheel cheers and
cretches that made that trip.
These are
individuals loving individuals
they love their community so.
Listening to us this morning
would appreciate your support
thank you madame chair.
Thank you members of the
committee.
The.
Or anything.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee
I am here to.
So also.
Adopt the principles of.
Association of social workers.
The.
The national coun.
For a crediting schools of show
social work around the country
and in fact all four of.
The.
As we all know and as you heard
in the previous.
Been hit hard by.
Environmental environmental
impacts you heard about the do.
Suffering from the impact of
nuclear testing.
New mexico is also b.
And the wire fires last year
impacted the physical and mental
health.
Following the principles of
environmental justice will be.
I have with me and expert
witness.
He is also a board member.
Board of a credition.
Speaker.
Good morning madame chair good
morning a members of the
committee mentioned many session
about can I do the professor of
the school social work at new
mexico highlands as well the
commissioner with a.
I'm here to speak in support of
which i'm seventeen due to what
we just hear in the previous
memorial the legacy of the
negative impact of the
environmental injustices in new
mexico you'll be thinking about
you and your minors and then
other nation the development of
nuclear weapons and now will be
looking at into mexico's world
is looking at the wise isolation
pale plan that is some plans to
store nuclear west here new
mexico so we have a legacy of
rest was organizing the new
mexico that goes back
with the channel movement in
other movements here in the
mexico to protect communities
from impacts someone might work
I lost have been since you to
look at that the negative impact
of the contamination of water
air and food so we have a legacy
here in your mexico people
fighting back to protect
communities like hours people
that look like me from the
negative impacts of industry
another problem or air the
council of such a work
inducation has included
environmental justice as part of
the curriculum since two
thousand and fifteen all
programs have to be complained
with that in their esplicit and
implicit credit that is in their
cylinder by in the courses and
readings as well as some of the
activities as students are
response outside the classroom
and definitely one of the major
issues that we face in new
mexico is the negative impact
like mention by representative
charges and social work is one
of those professions that we
interact with communities and
individuals families in groups
from all different you know
esporters to contaminate so we
cannot ignore you know social
work practice the impact of an
environment in our bodies in our
minds in our community so it's
important for us to really keep
in mind that social workers are
embedded in a lot of the work in
public health in hospitals and
medical services and clinics in
this or job to educate those
workers to understand why the
negative impacts such as social
terminals of health or impact
that impact communities are
supposed to some of the.
Support of that and i'm.
Thank you madame chairman with
that.
I actually.
They at the point which the
sponsor actually did make.
Memorial.
The.
The ne.
The work.
As an attorney.
In one of the counties.
I know highlands has.
Mention about the role of the
military in some of these
negative impacts to communities.
The.
No thank you.
And thank you representative for
the memorial and you know that's
one of the questions I had
Currently in the maybe since
it's
highlands could you just tell me
a little bit about what the
curriculum says regarding.
Opposition to exploitation of
land people cultures and life
forms in the current curriculum
how would that fall like if I
want to teach a social worker
about that what kind of class
would they be taking to.
My them chair representative
well the some of these topics
and environmental justice are
included we don't have a
specific lesson if I we are
contemplating the class
environmental justice
at the moment but it's not in
the curriculum yet so some of
these I might be included in.
You might be here in the social
environment you know thinking
about what some of the negative
impacts of you know
contamination by
some of the practices in some of
their communities are impacted
near a military community some
of this information sometimes
because of national security not
disclosed to communities that
would be one way in which we
talk about you know negative
investor health to individuals
new borns are you could also be
in the areas of practice when we
think it about diversity in
practice and diverse population
house on communities have been
negative impact offerings is one
of the communities that are we
you should often discuss is the
month of your committee now
because which is a corridor of a
latter industrial heavy stories
of materials a lot of traffic
and in kind of by encounter of
that i'll buy the local national
refuse so that will be something
that happens in a class like
service difference and diversity
and talking about how some
communities are.
Impacted differently and they
have different you know wasting
was there protected.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and think you represent it and
so I pretty much see this
legislation is like a wishly
sort of speaker a
goal list I guess of the
curriculums in these
universities because I see we
mention madame chairman
representative we mentioned like
eastern mexico university that's
my almost we mention highlands
you and
madame chair representative what
i'm just wondering what why
didn't we mention like local
community colleges like like
masolands or santa fe community
college or animals you almost
order or other places like that
cause I I mean it's a pretty
lengthy memorial i'm just
wondering why did we focus on
the the largest institutions in
this.
Representative I think of the.
Focus of the memorial was to
include those universities are
part of the credition process
which I required to include
embeddemental justice in the
curriculum unfortunately we
didn't reach out to
community college and find out
to be member to justice is part
of the creating or their
interest in including that that
was what we only included those
who are under that your
restriction of the council of
social work education who are
required to include in their
critical.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative I know
that our community colleges are
they do some heavy lifting in
this state of their
representative I know I
graduated from one and I was
blessed to do that so madame to
a representative i'm gonna just
go back to the first page your
memorial and I see the big.
So since it's a memorial it's
not the weight of law we're not
saying you m.
Online twenty to twenty one we
say advancement of racial
environmental social and
economic justice for equitable
outcomes so madame chairman
representative equitable
outcomes.
Are we talking about ecro comes
in life.
In a vague sense or what kind of
outcomes are we looking for is
it just relating to people being
served with these the social
workers or whose that.
Intending to help madame
chairman representative expert
madam cherry bristol very
understand correctly this is
applicable to community school
by in this proportion to impact
it where some remedy needs to
have been similar to what we're
talking about record the
previous memorial with
compensation is needed to really
kind of.
Signify that at you know some
negative being back occurred and
then trying to remedy and and
what I think of these social
determines of hell which include
elemental health even though I
don't support the chamber of
commerce at the end they talk
about what is the negative
impact of environment on
our individuals when they have
to be moved I mean as because
the mexico couple just back we
had a wild fire where people got
impacted and the environment
impact individuals were the loss
property
lost you know love once and then
what is the remedy that we have
for.
You know training or social
guests to be able to
help in heal some of these
communities are being packed by
the environment so that's why
you understand with these
outcomes for all okay thank you
madame chair think you represent
it because yeah that that we're
all kinda took me about because
we're we're talking about making
sure folks that are in these
underserved communities or
communities that have been
impacted by these forms of
aggression I would say about the
g.
Your testing sites and things
like that I agree with making
those folks haul but equitable
outcomes madam chair represent I
don't know how we.
Founding documents it says we
have the pursuit of happiness
life liberty and it's not the
pursuit of a equitable outcome
or the guarantee of such and so
madame to represent it i'm
seeing in the bill here fact the
memori.
Peach five it says the rectic
quality health care.
And manager representative it's
my understanding that.
You know health care is it's a
service right manager
representative it's a service as
provided by folks so.
If we see someone has a right to
this quality health care in this
memorial then essentially what
i'm reading that as.
Is saying that you have a right
to someone else's services and
the labor of their services
which I don't agree with
you know I want everyone to have
good health care but I don't
think manager represented thi.
The.
So to speak right everyone
should have it but the
constitution and are founding
documents don't allow for a
write to such a thing so can you
just
tell me a little more about that
manager representative expert my
damn cherry president yes I
think some of these.
Violence included in the
memorial art projected from the
council of social education
which is the horizon that we
want to try to be we know that
we don't have currently
universal health system in the
united states which is
challenging for some of us with
the practicing communities where
access to healthcare isn't is
very minimal especially we think
about at least for highlands
will be serving the north
eastern part of new mexico in
rural and remote a lot of access
to medical services are not
there I mean we we talking about
mental health services one of
the ways will be try to address
that is to the new mexico social
world war force that's forced so
why we understand you some of
these values are portraying the
memorial are aspirations of
where we went hopefully or
communist to be able to be sir
with high quality healthcare
thank you minimiser
representative and I I
appreciate that answer and you
know III want to strive to
attain quality health care in
the state but you know the
prices of health insurance these
days is crazy but I i'll
continue on the same page here.
On p which is online eighteen
through twenty one we're talking
about the need for urban and
rural ecological policies to
clean up and rebuild cities and
rural areas and balance with
nature so madame chair
representative what is that mean
because in balance with nature
we have cities like albuquerque
in los crucism in a city like
mine and almogordo how are we
going to restore this balance
with nature because you know and
as fault it sidewalk is not
exactly nature manager I just
want to know what we're trying
to get with that matter.
But i'm actually president yes I
think I think I have referred to
ready to
some of the disparity does some
communities face so I think part
of the job of the memorial these
two at least with the location
of social work to be mindful
about natural resources and how
I think we'll be trying to get
here in the memorial is trying
to figure it out a way in which
we can keep in our social
workers mindful of natural
restrictions how do you rely on
and even having a through a peak
of their appealing spaces and
natural spaces a lot of
communities don't have access to
parts they don't have access to
open spaces and I brought the
example of the law is one of the
only
why leverages where people can
actually have recreation have
access in a very close by
geographical area to this basis
so I think are we referring to
sometimes the mindful is the
social words need to have to
really understand how those
natural resources will have an
impact how they you know what
with families and communities
and groups okay think you madame
chairman thinking representative
I I appreciate the answers and I
if if those are the actual
concerns that we're going toward
I I agree with that you know
access to open spaces and things
but that I just don't see that
as what's written in the
memorial it seems very vague of
these these things that we add
so madam chair representative
that's all I had and I
appreciate the.
Eventually representative I
think the.
Policies approach to the social
work curriculum one of the
tenants of it is social workers
are learners and i've been able
to practice culture humidity
when they come to communities as
one of the things that they
learn whether in their courses
are related to policy or
practice
one of the major challenges that
we have sometimes is the social
work is assumed coming from a
deficit model that communities
are have the capacity to solve
the unproblems and they need
somebody to save them so one of
the things that woofers address
some over classes is the whole
idea of control community and
that you're going to communities
not to tell them where to do
which really listen and learn
what are some of the needs that
you can help with so I think one
of the major challenges for
people who have already
assumptions about on communities
is to really understand the
challenges that they are facing
and no necessary having to.
You know guide for community so
soon as also learn from
communities in a lot of a
community members are pretty
good teachers as far as letting
them know that they need to
really take a moment to step
back when when they come with
that you know assumption of you
know there they are expert.
Is in in the documentary
community practice as part of
their requirement for the new
mexico license or as well so
it's normally a concept the
actual.
The.
I'm sure president unfortunately
university of mexico doesn't
have an ukrainian social world
program at the moment as one of
the reasons that they were not
included.
Thank you
sponsor and dean for her
bringing this forward the.
And could make.
And frankly I find fascinating
curriculum and.
Would enjoy studying this.
But this peace of legislat.
As it's written
so can you clarify for me the
it's hand.
To change.
Or established curriculum in the
preparation of.
Thank you madame chair
representative that I understand
that or intend with these
memorial is to oblige
environmental justice in the
history new mexico as well as
already kind of a building up
the competences is already
required as part of the
accreditation process for social
work programs or intent is to
also provide support to the
senate of excellent and social
work through certificates and
continued location juniors to
include environmental justice as
one of the many many things and
issues that we cover not only
for students were also for
practitioners in the state so
the idea is to uply I don't
think the intention is to create
new curriculum or require new
curriculum in the state we are
not in that function
correlate but this already in in
in their requirements for our
creditation and we want to be
able to create a model so other
schools in the state can follow
as well as other states followed
the same soot as far as I
believe in environmental justice
in their communities.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you dean I think that helps a
little bit so the curriculum is
already.
In existence and part of the air
credit.
The.
Thank you for clarifying that is
it.
Already or are we adding.
One of the analysis we have says
regulation and licensing
department reads this bill.
To gather to.
Is that the intent to change the
examination and l.
The.
My venture no does not intend of
it like I mention we don't have
any capacity to change relations
related to last insurer i'm
assured that some of our
students when they do it their
exam integrate environmental
justice in their exams as they
are assessing and dignosies and
you know providing some on in a
route for treatment but they are
necessary part of the
requirements for license so I
think our education provides the
baseline for environmental
justice understanding in the
students will make it applicable
whether it's to last insurer but
a binal means we are proposing
any changes.
Thank you madame chair and and
thank you again that clarifies
the issue and I think
brings me to the language at the
bottom of page
also workers in new mexico be
requested to.
That's why the word is requested
as a.
Madame chair representative that
the that's my understanding is
that we are kind of encouraging
programs
and a students to engage in
learning more about
environmental justice and del.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you expert I think that's where
the confusion lies with the
regulation and licensing
department and their
interpretation of this.
In examination
and and perhaps that needs to be
clarified with them and maybe
there needs to be a language
change here just to make sure we
are following the intent but we
don't want to sta.
The.
That is not intended and would
cause obstacles to license for
social workers in the state
because we all agree.
The.
Thank you that's that's one of
the main questions.
The other way.
And about.
Presenting this on an existing
established work for.
Passionate and dedicated and
extremely o.
And.
I wonder if you have any sense
of manimature sponsor or.
Is there clear understanding in
our workforce that this would
not be seen as an additional
burden laid upon them
to increase their level of
frustration in their field I
don't want to damage our current
work force.
Madame chair president I my
understanding that is that
some of these social workers are
currently practicing in the
mexico they already engage it in
some level with environmental
justice and dealing with the
communities so that wouldn't be
necessary a burn we as part of
the center of excellent social
would be providing continued
education
units for those professional
workers which include some of
the portraits of their
environmental justice and those
are free so I don't think this
burn either perceive a real
related to this memorial other
than just making sure that the
social work because they already
practice in really remember
because some of them especially
those who graduate since two
thousand fifteen I already been
disposed to the curriculum and
they will continue but those who
start it before that they will
be you know putin is for them to
more about wasting music and
engage and understand their
practice in the context of
environmental justice so we are
you know making sure that we
will provide a portrait for
people who already in the field
to learn more about how they can
in hands of practice using some
of these principles or
environmental justice.
So madam chair indeed this is.
Voluntarily.
I still madam chair and expert
have some concerns about that
being.
The.
On a work force that prior to
two thousand fifteen didn't have
the training and might not be
currently incorporating this as
much but I at least and clear
clear on the intern.
I would draw the sponsor's
attention to the committee
analysis that says our health
care authority is asking for
worse than definitions of terms
that are not defini.
And would request that you look
at that before this comes to the
floor.
And those were all.
Representative on your new yes
representative block no man.
Matte.
R.
Representatives of more.
Figure out.
Thank you.
What we find is with our current
bale system is that we are
releasing individuals who
shouldn't be released and by
that I mean because they
recommend cribes
when we look at pull numbers
when we listen to our district
attorneys they are saying we
need to change the bale system
solved that weekend hold the
most dangerous people.
And that is why this is being
proposed I I think that all of
us in our.
Have the.
So what the first two documents.
And kind of the data of those
who were using guns.
And when we look at it and in
particular this one with the
descri.
The.
This it it is a small group who
can.
And as an example of how this.
I really want to go to the first
one here and it's a breap so
synopsis so he's out he ends up
murdering someone.
The defendant took the gun and
buyingly opened fire that
offended then drove to dallas
and zooning and gave the gun to
some people the cell
and that's how they get their
firearms they don't go to waffle
guns stores they're on the
street and now you have a gun
it was used in a murder being
given or sold to someone else
for whatever
but the real data.
In these slides what we're
seeing is these are individuals
that were released.
And committed another crime was
talk about felony number one
first degree felonies are like
murder and kidnapping the the
most hanging out types of rape
that I agree it's a small number
but when you're talking about
murder.
And you're going to a family
member and see and i'm sorry
this person was released and
committed another murder it's it
becomes serious
one of the comments over here at
the at the meeting where as well
feloni forced agree that's more
like out of theft but what is
all of theft auto theft not
everyone has full coverage.
And it affects or poorest
individuals the most because
they don't have full coverage
and when you take the vehicle
away.
They're not getting an insurance
check to buy another one.
Also on auto theft what we find
is if i'm a real career criminal
I am going to steal a car.
To commit
to committee drive by to commit
some other crime to try to help
not identify myself.
So I think we need to offer to
the voters another opportunity
to have a bail question which
would hold these dangerous
people and still allow the court
to release those who are not as
dangerous and that's what this
legislation does.
And madame chair without.
Oh and manager this is supported
by d by.
Alright let's go to the audience
those and supported the bill
please.
The.
And the problem.
Years ago.
The.
Our voters voted with the
understanding but money would.
But.
That is.
Every day.
Every day violent criminals in
our state awaiting trial.
This is new victims daily and
allow.
Yeah.
With the best.
With the.
But the robberies.
The president the sports.
Yeah.
Last year and we stood up.
Thank you
there.
I.
The.
Good morning madam chair it's
actually larry santac here on
behalf of the new mexico
business coalition we support ht
are three because it would allow
voters to correct language from
a misunderstood constitutional
amendment that passed in years
ago
we've seen the terrible harm
that violent offenders released
on their own recognition
spending trial has created.
And from a business perspective
new mexico's crime rate has
become nationally notable and an
embarrassment to our state as a
result some businesses are
choosing to leave new mexico as
they can open businesses where
they are not at risk of the
crimes that we have here
please consider the safety and
well being of all new mexicans
and allow voters to fix our bail
system we urge you to vote yes
on here three thank you.
Thank you mister sandhai.
And that is all of the support
online it was there are
opposition in the room
are a hate.
Thank you manager.
Yeah.
I think.
Yeah.
Thank you sir for their
opposition in the room or is
there opposition online
all right daniel.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
daniel williams of a policy
advocate at the american civil
liberties union of new mexico
there is so you have new mexico
stands and strong opposition to
this proposed constitutional
amendment.
Madame chairman of the committee
I live in all the kirking and I
am deeply sensitive to the
concerns about public safety
that might be giving rice
proposals like this one to
change our pre trial attention
system however as the chief
public defender just mentioned a
wealth of data shows that bail
reform is not making us less
safe it's not driving crime nor
will the changes to pretrial
attention make our communities
safer in fact in many cases pre
trial attention can have a
criminalic effect that in fact
makes us less safe the proposed
constitutional amendment would
result in the detention of far
more presumptively innocent
people without offering a sound
evidence based benefit for the
safety of our communities for
these reasons and for their
reasons that mister power
mentioned the a thirty of new
mexico opposes house string
resolution three think you're.
And.
Thank you thank you
representative of ream I have a
lot of questions about this bill
but I do see the m
representative month ways with
us so I will i've looking myself
to like my top five or six and
so we can time to get to that as
though my first question is is
that your intention that people
charged with non violent
misdemeators can automatically
be denied bill.
And.
Prior to the bill amendment that
was not.
Manager representative and.
And by providing that anyone not
just you know alleged felons
excuse me can be detained as
provided by law.
Without the prosecutor i'm
having to.
What we're also doing news were
shifting the bird.
Yeah.
Prove that there are no.
Federal s.
Thank you very much madame chair
representative how much does it
cost a day to.
I don't know the exact.
Thank you and this burning of
can attention center of their
still to my understanding and
please correct me if i'm wrong
they're about forty percent
under staffed it.
Representative at presents
the constitution does not
prohibit a judge from detaining
anyone charged with a felony
without bail if there are flight
whisk or a.
Oh sorry yeah having trouble
writing reading my
quickly types notes so at
present the constitution does
not prohibit a judge from
detaining anyone charge with a
felony without bail if they are
a flight risk or a danger does
it at present but then I think.
Send a bit.
The squares are in the bottom.
Or them or that they should it
that the score was this person
should be detained yet the judge
released them.
Thank you madame chair
representative
so i'm i'm looking at th.
Allow people to profit off of
bail again like for pr.
And when you.
We had and s.
The.
And that was.
Okay thank you i'm just looking
at page two line twenty one we
cut out a money or property by.
Sufficient sure it is.
That was the ex.
You're p.
All right well thank you very
much I have I have more and we
can talk about mine but I do
want to
allow for others room for others
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Very much mountain and think you
representative I I wonder.
Rather scientific.
Presentation.
Courts.
Wish I had.
Not.
What the court said.
I have too many papers this
morning because I had.
These scores yes.
At the university.
Yeah.
A bit better.
Yeah.
If you don't know.
Do you know when it at what
point is.
Is.
I heard in las vegas it.
And do you know that this.
Recognizing.
The other side had.
For at least the last decade
really.
And it may have helped.
When you have somebody who.
And is.
Yeah.
I.
Yeah.
We're spending more.
Community save so.
The.
Overtur.
The.
One
one thing that.
One of our here.
Some notorious and I just don't
remember these names I probably
may be I can get somebody.
But of a very very famous.
Now can.
The difference between our.
Is that now the judge could keep
o.
That's really.
What we're looking at here but
it is incumbent upon.
So i.
Honestly think that.
Other things and and one of the
th.
I was persuaded by th.
The.
Much b.
Supported what are.
Then I think that.
To the table and of course.
Yes.
When we look at that of that
group of in.
The.
Now you're over thirty percent
of that group that was released.
Part of the.
Who are.
Committee another crime so
what we need to do is give the
judge a little more.
Latter two.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you representative for
bringing this forward and you
know in my community is as you
you already know an officer was
killed this last year by a
violent fellow who was released
because he branded a firearm
against a peace officer
previously he was released on
those charges because there was
not a requirement to hold him
pending trial and then after
that he murdered officer anthony
ferguson in july
and that was a direct chain of
events so madame chair
representative my question my
key question is if if this goes
into effect with this help to
alleviate those kinds of
horrendous horrifying things and
communities like mine.
Where we do have violent fellow
felony.
Folks who have already gotten a
felony sting behind bars pending
trial and ensuring that they
don't get out pending those
charges madame ch.
Discussion.
The.
But when we look at an example
such as.
When another person is killed
what is the cost.
That person will never be in.
Put a dollar amount on.
Because.
Or should have.
Then they go back in commit
other fello.
And that's what we need to start
addressing.
Thank you madame chairman and
and representative and I I
appreciate that answer because I
think it really hits home at
least for me and I want to my
constituents got murdered
because there's this huge huge
hole in the system in my opinion
madame to representative and I
do want to make sure that.
The I I just know in the case
that i'm talking about not only
was this guy released pending
trial.
But when he was released he got
access to a sat off shot gun
which is illegal he was already
having feeling charges that we
shouldn't have even had that
weapon and then met him to
represent it he went and he was
at a party doing drugs.
Allegedly right we have to say
allegedly doing drugs and then
at that party that's that's
where they he fled and then
that's when they started tracing
him because of his tail light
being out so I mean I don't know
how many infractions this guy's
had in the past it's been a
laundry list but madame to
represent it i'm just i'm just
really startled at a person like
that would be allowed back on
the street if they have pending
felony charges for branching a
firearm and I just see this as a
very just a key piece of
legislation to ensure the safety
of our communities across the
board this is not just happening
in albuquerque this is happening
in in small thirty thousand
people areas like mine and al
magordo and i'm sure it's
happening all across the states
manager representative I don't
know if you have any comment on
that that's where i'll leave it
but madame to represent i'll
give that you.
Including me when I was actually
here when we passed the ball
amendment and for those that
were here at the remember might
comment on the floor I said
while this was better than the
brown decisi.
This doesn't go far enough and
we will be back to fix it.
And that's exactly where we.
Or if they wanted.
So.
And representative
we heard some testimony earlier
in this committee about what it
cost to encarcerate somebody and
then we heard about what it
costs.
To encarse rates what it cost
the individual more personal.
I think.
With all.
The problem.
Madame chairman representative
that we ought to be looking at
the cost.
That it would take to protect
our citizens.
The citizens are the state of
new mexico.
Are tired.
I've seen on the few.
Tv stations that we have about
people being released and going
to back out into the public.
And commit in another.
We hear from our constituencies.
Constituents.
All the time.
Not wanted twice i'm sure every
representative in this room has
heard it.
This is a chance for them.
In a house joint resolution.
To have a say.
The.
We have done.
And in justice to our people in
the state.
We have.
A state police been in here for
god's sake.
Asking.
For us to support this bill.
We're not trying.
To take innocent people and
thrown in jail.
We do the best we can.
But we've been doing the wrong
thing long enough.
Madam chair and representative.
Can you go over one more time.
The steps.
They're gonna be taken.
Prevent people.
From being locked up in jail.
The.
It's pretty simple but then it
gets the intricacies of.
And and i'd like to to have some
kind of assurance.
That we're not go.
In their lives and let him.
Lose their jobs or costume a
days pa.
Kind of go over that again.
Will just assume whatever.
He has to complete what's called
a criminal.
Well it's filed with the cor.
Works.
The attorney may.
This criminal complaint is
lacking what we.
Or lacking enough of
dangerousness that this person.
So the.
He now in the end of.
Guaranteed.
So the da now decides
we don't want to pursue.
Or we just don't like this.
Or they make the decision we're
going to proceed to detain the
individual and then the.
The.
The.
The.
The.
If we look at our.
To the new bill
it was incumbent on the
defendant to prove to.
That
there are condit.
So we flip that burden.
The.
Then it is up to the judge.
It's not the da that says you
will be detained it is the judge
who listens to all the facts and
and of course the de.
And now the judge decides i'm
going to detain you or i'm going
to give you can.
You know whatever.
And that's how the process goes
open let me give you one other
so the.
They the defendant doesn't like
what the judge rules he can
appeal that.
The.
So so madam chair.
And representative in what the
issue is today is that the
judge.
Has to release some.
Without going through those.
Checks and balances of the of
the system he has to release and
by law.
Am I correct with with.
With.
The rules in the laws that he
has to
fall
madam chair.
So they have to go through th.
The shift a burden so the state
doesn't.
Yeah.
That is really where the shift
comes in this likewise we also
give the judge more latitude if
he wants to s.
Bond or something else we give
here mor.
Thank you for that in and i'd
like to bring up the point
about.
If it costs ninety dollars a
day.
To hold somebody that creates a
risk that has a risk of.
Committed a crime.
If we flip that coin over.
It cost not even not even
pennies at.
And I think I think what I look
more at the safety of our
citizens.
We.
The facts already prove th.
Everybody always points out
about kirky but we have
problems.
We have.
Problems.
Inguadal of the county in in san
rosa I was talking to the
sheriff one day and he said if
if I could take twelve
individuals.
The.
Out of this county.
I wouldn't have the issues that
I have today and it's always
those same twelve.
That commit those crimes.
And.
Your bill addresses this.
I like it I like that it
addresses it and I believe we
are to be listening to the
people that are supporting this
bill.
And move it forward and let the
citizens.
If they want to change and if
they want something different in
in the system and the way it is
handled today thank you for
bringing this bill forward and
thank you management.
I commend you for persistently
working on this problem because
public.
My constituents are very
concerned and I really thought
we were going to have a
discussion today focused on
madam chair that she.
Madame.
Goes beyond that particularly on
page two lines nine to eleven
and that expansion into me.
Changes the shape of this
conversation and that madame
chair and sponsor is
connects for me to the lfc study
in two thousand and eighteen
that showed that the likelihood
of new felonies being
or new crimes.
Arose with the length of that
initial jail stay so by
expanding the misdemeanors.
In potentially holding people
longer than twenty four hours
not initial jail jail stay.
My concern with this piece as
it's written is that we're gonna
end up.
Increasing crime decreasing
public safety which I know madam
chair and I know sponsor is not
at all the intent
so madam chair i'd like to
continue perhaps offline with
the sponsor that discussion of
the.
Where this.
There are minimum chairs.
Criminal sexual c.
Madame chair I move a due pass
manager I make an ultimate mov.
Representative on your nor knew
yesterday more representative
block noted table
madam.
Representative hochman be.
Representative little.
The.
Yeah.
