Yeah.
The.
Present.
Yeah.
Present.
Here
right.
You.
Thank you madame sharon members
I am stay right and you get my
expert witness today is the ceo
of the new mexico finance
authority marketer russell
house filled twenty nine is the
new mexico finance authorities
public project revolving fun
appropriations bill i'm curious
legislation i'd be half of the
mate legislative oversight
committee which has met during
the interim.
We voted unanimously to endorse
the bill the bill appropriates a
total of thirteen million
dollars run the public project
revolving for that's the prf to
three identified funds it's six
million dollars to the drinking
water state we're bobbing a long
phone.
State match were two epa
capitalization grants provided
under the safe drinking water.
Yeah.
She's administered by animatory
for the purpose of funding local
government and other qualified
planning documents for structure
water waste water public
projects and economic
development plans and then
thirdly there is five million
dollars to the cultural affairs
facilities infrastructure fun
held at the department of
cultural affairs this
appropriation will be used for
capital improvements to various
state facilities owned by the
department those are throughout
the state alama gordon
at leaking alcohol day
all through the state with that
I i'm going to close with
remarks for my first witness
good morning madam chair members
of the committee I would just um
add that this is an annual bill
that's carried on behalf of the
new m.
Yeah.
With that we still.
Yeah.
We rely
on this funding.
Last four years.
Thank you manager members of the
committees it's nice to get
started this session
at the same time I wished I was
home
but
one question manager is why to
the cultural.
Manager there are seven
identified
funds in the law that.
This one was added.
I would just note th.
That's not enough for.
And rather than try to
rearrange.
This was a method of making
certain that they had funding
for their leads with out
redistributing.
And might you give us.
Manager I understand that they
have a capital improvements plan
that's multi years they provided
that.
Legislative
i'm however not able to tell you
specific.
Basic capital outlet from based
on the presentations th.
Appreciate it i'm still waking
up so I apologize i'm a little
entire here
yeah I might just have wonder a
hundred in that.
So first of all i'm just really
cur.
Madam.
Do we know if these are dollars
for dollars matched at the
federal.
Manager the annual
capitalization grants that we
get from.
Requires a twenty percent
statement.
Larger than in years past.
Appropriations it matched but
because of the.
The amount in down to the
status.
Rather than matching eleven
million dollars.
Thank you madame chair and think
you for that.
Might my concern with this large
amount of funding through.
So many.
Manager the this is the federal
capitalization grand amounts
that we've been given the.
We can then flow into the next
year but we've been receiving
these capitalization grants
since nineteen ninety seven but
knew this year and last year is
the infrastructure money coming
down from the bipartisan
infrastructure law so that's a
larger amount but we will we
anticipate um continuing to get
these capitalization grants.
Thank you madame terminate thank
you for that name I sure ho.
Another question I had regarding
those funds was.
Madame chair the capitalization.
Get fully.
The finance authority are non
reverting funds all of our.
Very very small fund are held at
the end of a f.
Yeah.
You know I just want to make
sure that these funds do they
mostly go to community water
systems.
He's happening and please.
But I just want to make sure.
And they can fix this crumbling
infrastructure so do we have
specific guideline.
The annual funding that comes
in.
And prior ties by the enviro.
Been required by law
t.
Safe drinking water conditions
whether or not.
I with these projects against
we're given those projects in p.
So I just want to be clear.
Are they still for the funding
through th.
Share if the project brings them
back into compliance they a.
As you've mentioned a number of
projects needed across the state
this is not the only place
where.
A really valuable.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for th.
Two other concerns I have rega.
Young people going to texas
california arizona and not.
So were any of the fund.
Exactly to your point but I can
tell you that the from the
capitalization grant dollars
that.
That the federal government
provi.
And they allow for those.
To use those dollars to provide
capacity development at these
local systems so it's very.
I.
Thank you madame chairman and
then my last.
Is this regarding the the
tribal.
And other sovereign government
and we need to work hand in hand
with.
Also how do we make sure that.
The other things that going to.
So many share i.
I can tell you that the.
Fund we're able to fund projects
loans in and tribal areas were
women.
I also know that some tribal
entities get a s.
And then lastly relative to how
they're being helped that is.
Financial.
But they.
Think you managed here and think
you both for your hard work
during the.
I just think you both thank you
so much manager.
Yeah.
We have to.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair thank you
committee and thank you for your
questions.
Representatives.
Let's go ahead and was a long
time.
This.
Yeah.
Good morning welcome to our
hearing
thank you madame chair members
of the committee this morning I
am present you house bill.
Before I go any further i'm
anthony allison I represent
this.
Okay house bill sixty seven is
basically asking for an
appropriation to the.
County and tribal health council
and my expert witnesses this
morning is.
Jerly antonio.
A local.
We are asking for an
appropriation
where these go health councils
and.
Basically do an introduction of
sales as well we'll send your
questions.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity my name
is my lady allerging and on
behalf of my team I represent
county and tribal health
councils across their state I
want to begin by saying health
councils are literally the
lifeline of our community
members and to the critical
resources that they need new
mexico at this time this
particular legislative session
has demonumental opportunity to
leverage communities across the
state by investing in its local
county and tribal health
councils they have been serving
new mexico for over thirty years
originally under the county
maternal in childhair plan act
you got amended in twenty
nineteen currently known as
county and tribal health
councils HB one three seven and
the fact of the matters the
health councils have been
defunded for over thirteen years
as you can imagine this has been
a very demoralizing experience
for health councils however the
reason why they still stand
today is because of their
dedication to their community
members they are deeply invested
in the well being of their
community members in order for
any entity program
enterprise to function operate
have the capacity to deliver on
services perform a collected
data analyst the data report
back of in on impacts it has
made it needs operating dollars
and this is what's been missing
this leveraging opportunity has
been missing for health councils
however thanks to cdc w k kellog
right during a very challenging
christies time world wide known
as covered in nineteen it was
the first time the health
councils were leveraged at fifty
thousand dollars right to
provide direct emergency
response services a couple of
highlights the.
Support and coordinative over
four hundred and seventy three
vaccine events hosted over
twenty four thousand eight
hundred and eighty six pandemic
related information distribution
we're talking about education
prevention in they reached over
three hundred and forty five
thousand and that is I think a
very conservative number with
regards to over nineteen risk
and rest resources now if you
think of new mexico and I know
you're all deeply intimally
aware of your communities sixty
percent of new mexico is rural
frontier towns order towns
tribal communities they do not
share in the conveniences that
some of us you're little
albuquerque santa fe bernalio
can drive down the street and go
to an urgent care center or go
to the pharmacy and get a
covered test kit and so on and
so forth this is where it when I
stay health councils are the
lifeline over community members
this is literally what they do
they connect their communities
to the critical resources they
need nothing of coving they were
the ones checking on the elderly
delivering water delivering food
making sure people know how to
quarter a corneding and
registering people for their
vaccination working with the
local gas stations to get gas
cards so that people had the
gasoline to get to the
vaccination site meeting the
people at the vaccination save
with water to make sure that
there were well high treated
calm any kind of anxieties that
people naturally have with
vaccinations and make sure they
got home safe when I say they
are the lifeline I mean that
literally and it's not hyperbole
so here we have on the second
slide you're one year two year
three these are the outcomes of
the work that's been attained
achieve delivered upon things to
cdc funding currently health
councils are getting two streams
of finding one at fifteen
thousand three one five they may
be clear one five fifteen
thousand three hundred and
thirty three dollars from the
state via deoage.
The other stream is cdcs fifty
five zero fifty thousand that
fifty thousand funding from c c
is ending may thirty first.
Sorry manager but.
Yes we submitted our slides on
friday and was told that there
would be printed and distributed
apologies
but
it is important
for another t v screen
thank you for pointing that out.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you so in the future.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee so
we're looking at page two three.
Including the cover she
but here you'll found a very
high level overview of your one
year two year three of what's
been made possible with cdc
funding that funding was awarded
to an empty age during covered
in the distributor the fifty k
across health councils who they
were able to serve reach some of
them mean almost vulnerable
community members across the
street emergency response so I
just want it let you all know
that that cdc finding ants may
thirty first twenty twenty four
and we're looking in about fifty
percent of our county and tribal
health councils who are
receiving chest those two
streams of finding the state in
the cdc funding
being like incredibly
sygnificantly impacted by the
lack of that funding from the
fifty k being lost so we're
talking about the the very real
potential of loosing capacity
and later on you'll learn about
the ninety six positions that
are essentially at stake here
loosing the capacity to notches
fulfilled their mandate but
really do the work that's been
advanced during the last three
years as a result of the c b c
funding and my colleague jarling
will speak to that here in the
many so we're talking about six
point six million dollars
minimum of a funding in the
context of a ten billion dollars
operating budget for the stated
in mexico I think this is a very
worthwhile investment for
communities for their well their
health in well being something
that I just want it also note is
that often we're talking about
metrics I understand folks want
to know indicate success
indicators outcomes impact so do
we and I just want to be very
clear that our health council
submit monthly rigorous
reporting to nmdoh and they have
the capacity in they have the
data to analyze quantify in
report on those metrics just as
reason as last wednesday january
seventeenth I met with secretary
allen of the oe.
Just outside this door actually
in we spoke at length of the
impact the health councils are
having at the local level in
steered wide and I provided just
resent you know impact data
just for the month of january
add to which he said how helpful
this would be for a referencing
during his presentations to
house appropriations in finance
and unfortunately that
that didn't happen generally
here my colleague will now share
with you about the function of
health councils particularly in
partnership with an empty h in
the health promotion
regional teams across the state
think you madam ch.
The.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee
I am journaling and tonio and I
am the tribal eson for the new
mexico and of health councils.
And so i'm gonna go over a few
slides here and i'm going to
talk directly about our
partnership with the new mexico
department of health health
promotion regional teams and
specifically I want to touch on
some of our work with e the
statewide community health
assessments and statewide
community health improvement
plants and so this light here on
this year health council's
instrumental role in public
health as of march this year a
thirty nine tribal sorry last
year we just entered this year
so entering this year thirty
nine county and tribal health
councils have submitted a
community health improvement
plan and so this means that the
assessments the data collection
the prioritization the
strategizing has all happened at
a local level and this has
happened with the support of and
the technical assistance with
the new mexican lights of health
councils and also the new mexico
department of health and so just
want to emphasise the
partnership that the alliance
and you have been regards to
supporting health council
statewide
and in addition to that I do
want to know that
although the data in in and the
prioritization has happened we
are now finalizing our community
health improvement plans and so
with that noted we are going to
be going into the implementation
fee state wide meaning county
and travel health councils will
begin to employment implement
the strategies around their chip
priorities and so you'll see on
the right side of the slide deck
here what those priorities look
like and as we all know we have
a prior we all have a priority
and emphasis around behavioral
mental health and that's what
health cances are also seeing
state wide so community health
improvement plans are showing
the number one priority right
now
is behavioral health immense or
health and this also is in
combination what substance
misuse and homelessness and so
health cancels right now are
going to implement.
Their chip plans but I also want
to have note the highlights here
as of january twenty twenty four
some of the impacts that have
been meet statewide so over
ninety seven thousand foods
pounds of food have been
distributed statewide.
Over forty thousand community
members have been reached with
education and prevention
measures related to the chip
priorities listed above.
Over one thousand nine hundred
drug disposal backs have been
distributed over one thousand
eight hundred narcan kits have
been distributed and over eight
hundred gun lock boxes have been
distributed and so these are
just some of the highlights
noted some of the interventions
and some of the work that's been
happening at a local level to
dress address some of the health
issues and some in the
communities and so
I think that this lie directly
shows the impact that health
councils are having and that
also want to note the community
health assessments and community
health improvement plans are not
just a one time thing this
happens on a annual basis
depending on local and travel
leadership preference and so
this work doesn't stop that
we're not going to just have a
one time committed health
improvement plan in the work
ends and so
we just want to emphasize the
ongoing efforts in communities
with the conversation the data
collection and ongoing
priorities.
I'm and to the next slide and
get a top just a bit about the
tribal health councils very
excited
to announce we do have nine
tribal active partnerships right
now eight of them being pablo's
one of them from the naval honey
and we are currently working on
expanding our partnerships to
the naval honoration also in
addition to that you are patchy
bands as well and so we know at
this point a representation is
not
inclusive of all of our tribes
publishing nations in new mexico
but we are actively engaging and
having those conversations with
tribal leaderships statewide and
so i'm in addition to that
tribal health cancels have also
completed a community health
improvement plan also doing
community health assessments
data collection all of this
happening and in collaboration
with their own local travel
leadership so I just want to
emphasize that travel leaders
are in full support of tribal
health councils in their
communities we've just been
fully endorsed by all pebal
council the governors where this
work and they are also
incouraging other public
established tribal health
counsels as well and so with
that noted some of the data
collection and and some of the
prioritization has noted also
number one are travel health
chances focusing on preventative
care one of them being focused
on diabetes prevention number
two behavioral and mental health
number three access to quality
health care services number four
substance abuse and alcohol
misuse and so
you'll see her in the
infographic you know what those
priorities look like but all of
these community help improvement
plans done by tribal communities
have been reviewed and approved
or well be approved by their
local tribal leadership.
And so I just want to emphasise
that tribal councils also are
fully aware of some of the
initiatives and efforts going on
in tribal health councils.
I also want to note to at that
we have been working on our
partnership with the indian
health services and so that is
happening at a local level as
well each individual tribe
will either have a
representative from interest to
sit on their tribal health
cancel or actively engaging with
them and already ongoing efforts
related to covered maybe
accidental education and
prevention and other direct
services
and and so with that noted
travel health cancels plan
instrumental role and I think
that under the state travel
collaboration act or travel
health cancels i'm should be
honoured in recognized and
acknowledged for all the work
that the
moving some of our travel health
outcomes in our state
on the next line it's a very
brief overview of large regional
health priorities and so.
You'll see in each region
behavioral health again is one
of the number one priorities
statewide and so this just gives
you a little breakdown of what
each of the regions in our state
are focusing on and obviously in
encompasses a lot of priorities
related to transportation health
insurance elder and ageing care
healthy foods health education
and so there's a multitude of
priorities happening state wide
and sell a mini initiatives
focused on on these health
priorities listed here.
And the next year i'm just gonna
understand slide sorry i'm here
i'm just going to focus on what
the government structures of
health councils look like
statewide and so you'll see here
twenty one percent of our tribal
health councils are under tribal
government twenty one percent
our non profit fibre one c three
twenty nine are under county or
city government and twenty nine
are fiscally sponsored and so
this just to show you an
important of the different
structures that exist statewide
and
you know the different types of
leadership that exist under
these government structures in
the leadership committees and so
there's a lot of work happening
you know to advise the work
that's happening at a local
level as well and so as of
june first twenty twenty four
and so looking at this year
actually this year june twenty
twenty four as value noted the
cdc funds will ends and so she
noted ninety six positions will
disout and so with the cdc funds
we were able to hire at least
ninety six this month it looks
much difference from a month ago
we actually hired ten staff
under the health council so that
probably puts us at at least a
hundred and six positions that
will disable as of me
and obviously this will impact
operations capacity staffy and
what do we tell these parents
these family members these
grandparents who support these
health councils how are they
going to make a living and how
are we going to support them you
know and in all the work that
they've been doing to advance
health equity in their local
communities and so that's at
least a hundred and six
positions that will disav
in addition to that I also just
want to know what that
leadership roll will look like
as a health council quarter
needed that's listed here on the
rate side I know that there's an
assumption that health council
is just meet once a month
increase agendas and meetings
and so by no means that is not
correct.
Health councils are doing much
more under their functions to
carry that out obviously you see
it listed here but there is so
much work happening to
collaborate to partner to carry
out their functions to you know
advise on health policies to
continue to communicate with you
know community members and so to
also have the ongoing
partnership with local
leadership as well and so with
that noted I just want it and my
slide decked with.
Since twenty twenty one now
there was the house memorial to
which was the public health
infrastructure study task force
and we just also want to honor
an acknowledge that since twenty
twenty one health councils were
one of the top five
recommendations under this task
force and so still want to bring
that back up here it's a light
to all of you and to the members
of the committee you know just
to recognize that this work has
been ongoing and that this
public task forces well has also
seen the instrumental benefit of
health councils steep wide.
Thank you jerlyn madam chair
members of the committee and at
the next slide you'll your see
sort of a high level of our
health council's critical in
instrumental role at the local
and state wide level they are
the trusted local health habs
i'm in addition to what
journaling had noticed with the
charge have I want to emphasize
the fact that this critical work
that's happening these last
couple years in forms the state
wide health improvement plan
that DO age presents to
legislation to executive branch
and the health councils also
collaborate with health partners
care management organizations to
address those local needs those
priorities embridge those gaps
around barriers rate think about
rural communities they laughed
access to significant resources
health councils also work on
government to government
relations as generally not it
now at the systems level we work
in concert with an mdu help
promote health promotion
regional teams and regional
managers are health councils in
foreign public health policies
to advance health equity they
play a key role in the state why
close loop referral system
that's under way between DO each
and HSD to meet the needs of
medicaid recipients and they
also informed the state white
resource directory call share
share new mexico and many many
other directories at the local
level in the also the work that
they do with our communities in
engaging communicating education
prevention health equity in
forms the fabric reducation for
the state of new mexico in in
partnership with an empty oh
i'll pass it over to jerry to
speak to the next.
The humanitarian members of the
committee are next light
actually is a comparative
analysis of health councils at a
national level and so this is
some of more recent research
that we've been doing and so
you'll see her on the left side
new mexico on the right side
some other national health
cancels that we've been looking
at tennessee texas in florida
and so what I will know very
early on is that in a lot of our
conversations with these other
health councils nationally
they've all also have received
covered nineteen fines which
will also be ending in twenty
twenty four so we are much like
these other states are
experiencing this cliff funding
cliff as well and so just to
highlight some points here new
mexico's funding are what what
new mexico health cances are
funded at is fifteen thousand
three hundred and thirty three
dollars per health council and
what we're finding is that out
an average with our national
health councils they are funded
at a hundred thousand per health
council much big difference and
i'm gonna also go to speak to
the fact you as well that
much similar to our other
national health councils they
work in partnership with the
department of health and they
also work on their state health
improvement plans as well
national health councils but the
difference in new mexico which
all highlight is the five one c
three that supporting health
councils which is the mexical
alliance of health cancels.
There is just additional
technical and assistant support
coming from our nonprofit i'm
compared to other states.
I'm in addition to that new
mexico is also leading the way
with our house councils
informing the public the fab
creditation and so that's just
the credition that deal which
receives.
I must excite it's announced to
that travel house councils are
leading the way new mexico as
i'm finding research and doing
outreach tennessee texas and
florida there are no other
tribal health councils so new
mexico is leading the way in
that and I hope that we can i'll
be appreciative of of some of
the efforts around the
government's government
relations.
And with that noted in the time
i'll pass it back to well thank
you gerald and think you madame
chair in members of the
committee the next slide is the
link to one of our key partners
so one thing is to unshare with
all of you the impact of health
councils another thing is also
for you to hear directly from
our key partners at the local
level as to the ripple effect it
will cost if our health councils
are hindered as a result of lack
of funding from the state comma
this you know made twenty twenty
four so once against his
emphasising the fact that
an education prevention
intervention direct services is
critical partnerships to serve
community members particularly
of the most vulnerable and under
resource will most likely be
jeopardized as jerry noted we're
talking about over a hundred
positions that will most likely
be jeopardized so we ask you
knowing your dedication in your
steadfast leadership in
commitment with regards to the
health it will be enough new
mexicans we ask for your support
in endorsing in in funding this
critical bill for our county and
tribal health councils think you
so much for your time today and
we do have one of our county
health councils tyna here who
can provide a very brief one
minute test testimonial
ban chair in the committee thank
you very much my name is tonna
before we can buda earn I want
to speak to you today about the
personnel effect that the thirty
year day back community health
council has had and currently
the coordinator I have been a
member of the health council for
seventeen years.
And i'm asking for you to
support
funding over each bill house
spell sixty seven um
if house bill sixty seven does
not pass our health council will
simply not be able to sustain
our current work partnering with
a hundred percent community a
hundred percent to ensure
equitable access to vital
services for all residents of
our beautiful county and our
residence will suffer
as one example take our health
council's food action to him
which helps to coordinate food
distribution organizations like
the send martin supporters super
kitchen the food depot depot
mobile van because he did their
commuter and many others to be
sure that they are not all
providing the same food on the
same days at the same location
signed my team to port us alone
provides eighty to a hundred and
twenty hot meals on sites every
day.
Other food is given in boxes
through a mobile van
you promptly are aware of the
food distribution services but
we need to be sure that those
services are promoted and
coordinated and the health
council helps to do that our
food action team connects with
our chance protection action
team to make sure that food and
the people who need it actually
collide in the right place on
the right day while our equity
task force through the health
council uses evidence based
tools to assure these services
are facilitated fairly across
populations we coordinate very
closely with the department of
health health promotion teams
and we use the united states
forum to do closed loop
referrals.
In closing I want to say that
fifteen thousand dollars is
simply important not enough for
us to carry out the true spirit
of the mandate of the twenty
nineteen county and tribal
health councils act there is so
much we can do as community
members if house bill sixty
seven is supported by you local
communities must be able to
advance health equity and
coordinate their public health
needs from the ground up you're
support of each b sixty seven
assures that this will happen.
There i'd like to remind you of
the owner loo hungry
twenty twenty three state of the
state address i'm just gonna be
used to sentences out of.
And that's exactly what we
intend to do building a
healthier longer live in more
process new mexico where we can
live for our dreams and decrease
the fear and hard chip out
untreated chronic conditions.
Using every two at our disposal
including the billions of
dollars that come from the
federal government to provide
better benefits in care for
every single new mexicans let's
declare right now today
that that that is where we are
headed and that we will get
there together
madam chairs we are now open for
questions.
Yeah.
Quickly please.
Manager members of the community
name is after the equipment
representative.
So.
Talking about.
But.
The services.
Question.
It's it's a community base
voice.
I have to say.
The.
Yeah.
So i.
What he asked this way who is.
Madam chair members of the
committee image see the new
mexico alliance of health
councils was formulated several
years ago to provide insulary
services to county and tribal
health councils that includes
professional development
specialized training technical
assistance particularly in
relation to the function of the
community health based
assessment community health
improvement a charge that
informs the state white health
improvement plan we also work in
close collaboration with nmm
deon a variety of systems are
public health systems in order
to improve services at the local
level in also our functionality
internally at at the systems
level and I think china or
geraldine or anthony can speak
more so their s.
If you want more context.
Madam chair in the committee I
think it's a really good
question and I have a tendency
to simplify maybe overly
simplify things but I see the
health councils as street level
department of health rate above
that and then it goes up from
there there is nothing like the
street level for really knowing
what is happening to residents
of the county residence of the
tribe and it's absolutely
essential
and it's essential that we
coordinate with the department
of health at that next level up
okay manager
experts let me ask this how many
native american health counsels
in new mexico.
Manager members of the committee
we currently have nine tribal
health councils right now eight
of them are pablos one of them
from the nab honest and so
also we do work with tribal
leadership from all of these
tribal health councils if awful
ben fully endorsed and supported
by their tribal local leadership
as well.
There are madame chair members
in the committee there are
thirty three county tribal i'm
sorry county health councils so
thirty three county and nine
tribal.
Experts where do you.
So the funding stream for county
and tribal health council's
limited specified currently were
engaged with nine tribal health
councils there's twenty
published in in foreign nations
in new mexico it's my
understanding so there's a lot
of work to be done to expand
that reach but in terms of
funding madame chair members of
the committee health councils
are receiving fifteen one five
thousand three hundred and
thirty three from the state this
year in fifty thousand from the
city's funding the latter is
what's going to and come may
thirty first two thousand and
twenty four now in terms of
funding structure per health
councils if you can imagine
areas like burner leo are less
crucial
areas that a little bit more
resource they've been able to
become five or one threes and
findraise and allocate other
funding resources but that is
not the keys for the majority of
our county and tribal health
councils so the operational at
the finding for operations for
our health councils is so
critical particularly at this
juncture giving their cdc
funding is ending and it will
jeopardize the staffing the
capacity the operations of more
than fifty percent of our health
counsels in those fifty percent
combined county and tribal are
predominantly in rural areas so
i'm thinking about what time is
shared this is going to have a
major ripple effect in the lives
of our community members there
are facing barriers every single
day they are the lifeline
between those community members
in the resources that they need
the food in security but lack of
transportation access to a rural
healthcare and example would be
weatherlook a county cornated
with their with the empty board
to create a new license so that
in our and a registered nurse
can practice out of any inner
aid and ambulance at a higher
level for their county now if
that is things solution drive an
innovation I don't know what
else is to connect be bought to
primary care in that community.
And that is what health councils
are doing in partnership through
innovation solutions through
other collaborations with he
partners in public health this
is a critical lifeline to our
community.
Uh when we.
Thirty three counting non tribal
members included in this.
You move you to each two of your
bill.
That's going to.
One.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee that is
a non profit that would be
contracted with n m DO age to
continue to provide and celery
support to health councils that
includes technical assistance
professional development
training and so much more.
Is.
Yes currently madam chair
members of the committee
currently that nonprofit is the
new mexical alliance of health.
And.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That out thank you manager.
I was kind of piggy back along
side those.
Um the budget
is just trying.
Yeah.
State.
So.
Think you madam chair members of
committee the funding arm
timeline that you see they are
starting with fy twenty two that
nine thousand dollars came from
state finding my understanding
this was the first time that
states began to find health
councils twenty twenty three in
increase to twelve thousand and
change twenty twenty four were
fifteen during those three years
because a covered cdc funded our
state like many other states at
fifty four new mexico by the
time the funds were allocated to
health councils it was fifty
five zero fifty thousand dollars
for health councils so it's too
streams of funding the health
councils are currently receiving
wine is the state funding the
the latter is the c DC funding
and that cdc finding is what's
ending may thirty first twenty
twenty four and this is why this
session is a maker break for
health councils once again and
we're going on to fourteen year.
Madam chairs so
is this required this budget
request currently.
And talking with the leadership
of it if see
not yet.
I want.
With regard to the uh
involvement of the kill odd
foundation are they.
Great question chair members of
the committee
though it because of the unique
circumstances that we all find
ourselves in world white pen
damage are foundation stepped in
and provided emergency response
funds myself in my team have
been meeting with various
financial partners and because
he was the unique.
By those resources now that we
are in this endemic fees they're
not going to prove continue to
provide those resources and
particularly for this day statue
being that it is a stay statue
are they see this as a
responsibility of the government
and in my thirteen years of
racing funds for nonprofits year
in in california and in
massachusetts that's that's a
huge barrier in in in m- an
ability to raise other types of
fines for health councils
because it's stipulated by state
statue it is the government's
responsibility and it's been
thirteen years of lack of
funding thank you madame chair
and members of the committee
thank you for that great
thorough answer.
So i'm for the the the total
ask.
And that funding I mean it
would.
The.
Presentative.
And thank you for being here.
So madam chair i.
You know i've been looking at
some.
Throughout the years and of this
thing it's been going on.
Okay
so I see in one.
It talked about the return
investment it was it looks like
it w.
And it's for every every four
dot every dollar that was spent
four dollars was provided to the
communities do you guys.
You have that in your
presentation.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee great question
in just the clarifying point
that there's been two studies
that being conducting on the
return or an investment of
health councils in there's like
five specific success indicators
that both studies point out
it was conducted by victoria
sanchez in many others in that
assessment team out of UNM and
it's been published you know at
various junctions and are
federal library of medical
studies or something but I will
leave you with this that has the
current code to the actual study
where you can read more about it
uplink think you madam chair
members of the thank you madame
turn thank you for that door the
member.
I like to make data driven
things and I I see that you're.
Experts so this is from t.
Oh this matter chair members of
the committee the most recent
study was done in twenty fifteen
that's the current code that you
will have access to
and we're currently in the
process of re engaging with the
unam to
partner with them and explore
the opportunity for another
study that's more thank you
madame chair members of the
thank you madame chairman thank
you for that so with this six
million six hundred thousand
with this include funding for
another.
Madam chair members of the
committee this six point six
million will be funding to
stabilize our county and tribal
health councils
it would be great if additional
funding could be allocated for a
very comprehensive study at this
moment we're exploring
conversations with unm to engage
them in in a study.
Okay thank you medicare but just
to clarify there's no money in
the current ask for a study
sounds good thank you madame
chairman thank you for that
answer so next I want to know
about my county in a terrible
county I was googling all last
night up until the week is
trying to find information on my
counties board and I couldn't
really find much of anything
except an address that went to
the councilling center in town
so madam chair and experts i'm
wondering do they give an annual
report from each county and
where.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee great question
we have fact sheets we as in the
new mexico alliance of health
councils in you'll find the l to
our website on our hand outs
there's there's health councils
that are because of the how
deeply under resource they might
not have the capacity to have a
website or things of that nature
so we collect all of their fact
fax sheets with their priorities
obviously their chip priorities
are current and so we're happy
to share that information
you representative block in
other members of the committee
as well but if the website where
you'll find that information is
wwwn and for new mexico health
councils dot or think you madam
chair members of the community.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you for that miss a
lot of con that I get it right
thank you madame chairman so I
will I will look for that I
couldn't find it last night but
you know maybe I was a little
tired i'm a little tired this
morning as well so whatever but
I will continue so madame
chairman representatives so I I
believe in the l.
There was a budgetary add on for
about four hundred thousand
dollars according to.
According to a hand out that ag.
So what did you get.
What is currently in the budget.
Manager members of the committee
again speak a little bit to that
so the reason.
So for the state funding what
health councils were receiving
last year was twelve about
twelve thousand dollars and so
with the four hundred thousand
dollars added health councils
are now at fifteen thousand
dollars per health council and
so that's the four hundred
thousand dollars you're
referring to
and so that went directly to
health councils through the new
mexico department of hell
thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that
miss antonio so I just want to
make sure so with that four
hundred thousand dollars
was that a recurring for the
budget this year as well or is
that just one time twenty twenty
three f.
That was just one time thing.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that so I would
love to know with the extra
funding madame chairman and
experts what what did that
accomplish in this fiscal year
and did that help you all
sustain just for one year or
what what did that go to cause I
mean four hundred thousand for
forty two some councils is not
much manager madame chair
members of the committee in
alternative you generally china
given that your health telstra
coordinator but with that
minimal funding made possible
was the presentation that gerald
and spoke to earlier that shot
in the chair the community base
health assessment community
health base improvement planning
that they're currently in the
implementation in all of that
work in the last couple years
it's been accomplished with an
mdu age and other coming
is going to be jeopardized if
there's no additional funding uh
at the minimum of six point six
and in all torture time at two
because she'll have more context
madam chair in the committee I
would I I would only add that
health councils are mountained
by the department of health to
deliver on deliverables and we
have to do those things and if
it was only twelve thousand
dollars it would just be even
more insulting frankly right we
would really really.
There are many people who
volunteer many hours.
That we could do more work.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for those answers so
you know I I know that it's a
huge increase rate that we're
putting forward from four
hundred thous.
Over thousand percent increase
so madam chairman i'm wondering
when we get these.
The funds are used which
positions must be filled how
many meetings must be required
and things of that nature that
may may not.
Madame chair members of the
committee and the functions that
we have a provided in this
presentation is what that six
point six minimum funding will
make sure it continues and the
context around direct services
education prevention that china
spoke to the germany noted with
regards to our chip priorities
that's the work that will
continue the funds are utilized
obviously for staffing hours so
being able to maintain those
over one hundred and six
positions currently that are at
stake will be you know will
stabilize health councils moving
forward funding going to add the
coordination of meetings
educational material event
coordinating for prevention and
distribution of services as I
note in in some of the
highlights
sometimes providing a
transportation because if you
think of some of the rural
communities people need help
with getting to went from
supplies some of our health
councils have been able to
attain an office i'm meeting
space much like this one so
those are overhead costs and so
all of that by the way all of
that financial
reporting outcomes reporting is
submitted to an m DOH on a
monthly basis generally not and
if you have anything to act
madame chair members of the
committee so currently just to
give some context the fifteen
thousand through state funds
right now the deliverables that
are outlined for that funding is
deliberable based one of them
being that they have to meet on
a monthly basis submit agendas
and minutes another being that
they have to get formal
recognition or acknowledgement
or a letter of support from
their county leadership or
tribal leadership
the third being that they have
to
develop a fact sheet which is
that report that you're
referring to onward
each county or travel house
council does on an annual basis
priorities.
Initiatives funding
opportunities opportunities and
some other mission statements
and some of that good stuff
another one other deliverables
is to also do
some type of community based and
evidence base
kind of like a project or
initiative and so this can focus
on whatever the community
decides to focus on this year in
claboration with the alliance
and health councils for that
deliverable date and focusing on
doing community health
assessments and developing a
community health improvement
plan
so what the fifteen thousand
currently goes to those are some
of the deliverables that health
councils have been submitting
and doing on an ongoing and
annual basis and so that's what
it was referring to was
deliverable base and um
reporting to deal which under
those deliverables.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you.
Each of them having an
initiative do we know it's
initiative terrible count.
Madame chair members of the
committee so currently called
lentured is the health count
coordinator from a terror county
community health council and so
some of the initiatives they've
been focusing on through some
other action teams they actually
have an act equity action team
one of them being that their
focusing on getting used teams
and community members to get out
and vote focusing on community
health assessment planning and
so a lot of that being what is
data collection
doing data collection going out
to community doing surveys i'm
bringing that back to me in a
room with community members but
also local leadership to start
to plan that planning has been
happening for the last two um
two to three years now the first
year of the cdc grant was
focused on capacity building to
be able to carry out this work
years two and three a lot of it
focusing on data collection
primary and secondary having
conversations focus interviews
surveys and other source of of
different forms of data
collection and so this year has
been finalizing their community
health improvement plan
thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that answer so you
said getting out and vote to
hear that correctly and this is
a non profit.
So madam chair members of the
committee some health councils
are five or one c three's not
all I believe you had a slide
deck on that but a terrain
county a terrible health council
is under county and so
technically they are not they
are not five or one c three
okay thank you madame chairman
thank you for that so terrible
county just real quickly how
many members are on our county
how are they selected I didn't
really get any information about
that when that was happening I
know we were under copi.
How are they selected and who's
on the committee what
requirements are there madam
chair manager members of the
committee and sell I will
personally do not have that on
write off you know however my
head right now but I would be so
happy to connect you with killer
blencher cheese the health
cancelled they do have a
leadership committee they also
do have subcommittees as well
and sell to me that means that
they have a quite lengthy and
long ruster of committee members
yes be happy to connect you to
them great thank you madame
chairman and thank you for that
so on the bill representative
ream talks about it line seven
talking about nonprofit
organization
six hundred thousand dollars I
know when I was doing my capital
out
my junior money I had some money
that I specifically sent to a
nonprofit and somehow we got
taken out by.
So madam chairman how do we I
want to make sure that this gets
to you guys and doesn't get
stuck in an RFP process so how
are we going to deal with that
madame chairman.
Madame chair members of
committee representative block I
would love to circle back with
you individually.
Whatever that internal process
through legislation is that
that's the course of events and
then whatever information you
might need from us to make sure
it's allocated to the
appropriate party and then we
will prove provide that
information accordingly okay
thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that apparently
what I got from last year's
funds that I I put forward they
said you have to be super
specific and I thought I was but
then apparently it wasn't
specific enough so I would just
maybe suggest super specificity
with his
to make sure that you guys do
indeed.
And then i'm just gonna quickly
go through your slide deck here
madame term.
And experts so i'll go to page.
As new mexico tribal help
councils that's where it starts
and there's a little page hard
here that says the albertricky
area southwest.
This data and it's his diabetes
preventions number one with
thirty seven percent and then
behavioral health and then I
just flip quickly to the next
wide where it talks about in
northwest and metro regions and
it looks like there's a huge
change from that assessment to
what is on your northwest and
regional
metro section so madame chairman
and representatives how does
that square with focusing on
diabetes versus focusing on
behavior of.
Madame chair members of the
committee i'm so the first lay
that you're referring to for
travel health councils that is
just data specifically
aggregated to our tribes
publishing nations that are
treatable health counsels.
The slight and slide is actually
regional sell these are in
combination from the health
cancels of the different regions
that exist and this is a more of
a state wide both combination of
county and tribal so that's why
there is a difference in in the
two pages and I will not with as
check here albuquerque area
selfless travel at the center.
Um
want to note that for to
complete a community health
assessment and community health
improvement plan some tribal
health councils received just
about thirty five thousand
dollars to do this assessment.
And so that's thirty five
thousand dollars to do
what health cancels typically do
under a mandate as opposed to
receiving fifteen thousand
dollars from the state so
obviously you see the
differences in the way that
astract a tribal at the center
is funding tribes publishing
nations to do this work as
supposed to work.
Tribal health councils are
receiving from state funds
okay think you made a.
Cleared it up for me so that
first slide is just the nine
trib.
And then madame chairman and.
So with regard to the missing
tribes nations.
Currently involved have we done.
Tribal entities to make.
Are we making those rights.
Madame cheer members of the
committee yes the answer is that
i'll start with nabo honey shan
we we you met with drunigrant
very early of twenty twenty
three actually in indoor star
bill last year so we knew that
there was interests around now
the whole health councils we
only have one novel community
that were partnered with however
we know that there's a very
large land mass between three
states chapter houses what that
would look like now and the
infrastructure to support that
on aba honest is a conversation
that were in very early now
in addition to that what health
companies are currently funded
at fifteen thousand what would
that infrastructure look like to
find the nab honest in
partnership with their
leadership is a very big
conversation to have especially
if we're considering government
to government relationships and
supporting our tribes so we've
aren't very early conversations
about what that would look like
we have done outreached to
individual satellite now behold
communities as well
and addition to that we have
reached out to the patchy bands
both escalate and a patchy at
the time they were interested
we've done introductions and
there was just a little bit of a
hold due to the funding amount
and they are very interested
however they fill that fifteen
thousand dollars is not enough
to support a tribal community
they are very interested they
want to do this but they just
don't understand how under this
mandate that it's possible to
carry out the functions under
fifteen thousand dollars
in addition to that we are fully
endorsed by our public nations
and our leadership from all
people council governors that is
all twenty percent governors we
just met with them at the end of
last year
and so we've got eight pebble is
with them and so they're
encouraging their other pablo
communities to consider having a
tribal health cancel so we do
have a some interest for.
A few more pevels it's we are
seeing that it is a little bit
more peblo led and so that's
fine so we hope to get some of
our other tribal nations on
board
okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you for that detailed
answer so just regarding about
nation it's it's.
So is
the only current nab ownation
tribal council of health manager
yep madam chair members of many
yes okay all right thank you
madame termina.
That says a regional health
priorities in my region the
largest one's behavioral hope
that's not a surprise
unfortunately but I see that
there's a little yellow bar at
the top next to health education
it doesn't really have anything
doesn't say what that is and
then there is one on the bottom
that's also a little yellow
chunk do we know what those are
I just curious for mike just to
get back to my.
Madame chair members of the
committee this is probably just
a little bit of a canava
little canvas typo so if you can
as you man it take some of the
data out what will do is will
zoom out and will provide you
and update it slide it'll
provide all of the priorities
with percentage.
Then just the next light here it
says as a six one twenty twenty
four.
Are you guys time travelers or
is that supposed to be last year
madam chair.
Madame chair members of the
committee
with that's referring to is this
year cdc funds are ending me of
june first twenty twenty four
and it's not because we're time
traveling we just know for sure
that the grants ending they were
not extend replacement finds and
so as of that date all fifty
percent of our health councils
will be reverting just back to
the traditional funds of fifteen
thousand dollars so for the past
three years county and tribal
health councils have been
receiving cdc funds at an
additional fifty thousand
dollars
that will end june first
this year so once that ends were
just back to the fifteen
thousand dollars from the deal
each uh statements
thank you madame chairman thank
you for that okay I thought you
were time travelers done it I
was going to ask for your
candidate you know madame chair
i'm just going to go quickly
next to the national health
council comparative analysis let
talks about what's currently
funded and then what.
What other states that is
tennessee texas others are
getting they said you says you
average a hundred thousand on
those some madame chairman and
the experts what would new
mexico set once we pass this
legislation because I know you
probably have your main non
profit and then you also have
your other councils so how much
per council would would they get
from this money manager members
of the committee so if the
legislation pass will set out a
hundred and forty three thousand
dollars per health council in
our state and so yeah you can
see on the right side here that
each help aren't nationally
other health counsels on average
are getting a hundred thousand
dollars to carry out very
similar functions as they do
here in new mexico.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you for that and do we
know what texas is getting
currently because I mean I guess
they're technically the closest
to us do we know if they're
lower than that where they fall
manager members of the committee
when we last spoke they did not
want to be too specific so as we
know it's an average rate and so
i'm that's basically the average
each of these states gave us.
They are all affiliated with the
department of health as well so
that's I think that's why there
was a little bit of the
big specifics
okay well thank you madame
chairman and thank you for that
and I are they public entities
because of not I mean I guess in
new mexico we have the approach.
Do they not have that and texas
and other states is that why
they're kind of seedy about what
number they give you guys
manager man chair members of the
committee so they'll just kind
of give us a a little round like
a little estimation
they'll say between
some are receiving fifty
thousand some have a hundred
thousand so the most sent common
answer we've got and is fifty
two hundred thousand.
Some even receiving a hundred
and fifty thous.
Okay so we'd pretty much be on
the upper end of that spectrum
if we pass the legislation but I
am worried let's just say we add
ten more counsels for the rest
of the tribal nations or
thirteen fourteen more counsels
then that would
make it a smaller apart for the
rest of us so I will just keep
that in mind in the future and
then madame chair I would just
also reiterate I do.
For these if they do get this
money because I think every year
we want to know which councils
need to help which councils may
be struggling which ones are
doing great because i'm sure
that there is some that are just
killing it right now so madam to
I really proceed that the people
throw answers.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee
the permanent of health has
regional officers um health
councils fulfilled that role at
the local level in partnership
with an empty age I believe new
mexico's one of eight cent
centralised a public public
health systems across the the
country so there's that close
partnership in addition to
health councils have been
employees per estate mandate
so it is stipulated by state law
what the role responsibilities
and function of the health
councils are also in relation to
the department of health and
it's a it's a pretty
close partnership between the
two and.
Yeah.
Questions
I I come from the field of
acronym.
Chip used to be children's
health.
Is that what your chip is
madame chair members of the
committee
chip is community health
improvement plan
in ship is state health
improvement plan okay
i'm sure representative also
I think I said I I think I heard
you say that you were thirteen
years without funding.
Very man chair members of the
committee yes two thousand and
ten health councils before
twenty ten health councils where
functioning at a hundred and
twenty five thousand per health
council
in twenty ten what happened was
they were completely defunded to
zero dollars so since then it's
been a a pill battle of getting
state plans to where it is now.
And is the funding through the
cdc coming from american rescue
recovery act.
And chair members of the
committee yes okay and so it's
due to.
Or anything.
I think that's all.
Former.
Yeah.
We.
Remember because
I can.
Would also place.
What are you more so it plays.
If you recall the.
Yeah.
And as a result of hospital now.
It's a very.
Within our.
With the corner of our gerald
and valley they have been.
Or.
Eleven children.
Sorry I have a little nervous
but thank you for your time
consideration.
Okay.
Thank you they can matter thank
you members of the committee.
We have house sixty eight.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Okay thank you madame chair
again I am anthony allison i'm
present in the spill I am also
my only expert witness
in favor else feel sixty eight
is making an appropriation to
the department of transportation
the clear cattle guards on new
mexico native american nation
i'm in weblands
where this is coming from is
especially in my district there
are capital guards that have
filled up with san and
and the animals are watching
across the cattle guards and
heading into the traffic we
believe that this creates a big
safety hazard for the
communities and
I have asked the department of
dot to help us but they said
that in their statutes they are
not allowed to
help us with it but
at the same time there is
nothing in the statute that says
that they can not so we're
asking them to see if they can
help us they're saying that the
cattle guard is a responsibility
of the land owner whose road the
cattle gardens on
but I need to
alert to the committee that not
everybody that owns a cattle
guard owns a backhaul and it
would be tedious work and it is
dangerous work as well there are
some cattle guards at are made
out of railroad rails and they
are tipped and that is extra
hard metal that they're using in
some of the cattle guards and
because when they chip they
produce sharp edges and they can
puncture tires very very easily
I don't think the
regular never hold farmer
has a catalog on their road with
be able to fix that or even
replaced it so my ask is to ask
the dot to assist us in lifting
out the cattle guard cleaning
out the debris.
And put them back on because in
a sense it is within the right
away of the highways and it is a
safety concern thank you madame
chair.
Medicare and representative this
is going to ask the dot to
furnish the equipment to lift
the cattle guard out of the
cavity that is set on to get it
cleaned up and then replace the
cattle guard afterwards there
are cattle goods that are filled
up to the brim with san after a
recent sandstorms and the
animals are a walking straight
across the to get into the
roadways.
I'm worried about.
Yeah.
Start these activity.
Madame chair in my travels from
farmington into sarafi I have
seen there and the mexico dot
left out the cattle guards
especially in the checkerboard
areas all there is a mixture of
indian lan
b l m in private land and I have
seen them lift out the cattle
arts to clean him out that's why
my bill is a dressing the same
maintenance on the late of
american decent tribes and web
low lands
it is currently the mexico dot
currently does clean uh the
cattle guards but it seems like
they're being selective on great
so this appropriation is asking
for specifically the indian
glance.
Thank you madame chaired in
members of the committee and
representative is this a one
time ask for one time cleaning.
Manager of
it takes a few years to fill up
a cattle guard with sand yes so
this is a one time ask and then
we will be working on
legislation to amend the
statutes of new mexico the ot
that would be the permanent fix
madame chair and and madame
chaired in representative.
I I had arranged myself.
On highway fifty four south of
mountain air and I understand
how these ca.
Yeah.
And it's it's not
it sometimes it's we would clean
him.
Because the window blown and
there's different parts of the
countr.
Different issues but my problem
with this bill is that
I don't believe that the state
of new mexico are to be
microman.
I understand your problem I
understand the safety.
I help as a bill on the house
floor that pertain defenses.
Control of keeping up the
fences.
Retaining that the stage should
take care of the offences and if
they're on the state highway
maybe maybe we're to look at
look at a permanent fix on the
cattle guide guards being
maintained by the state if
they're on the state highway but
like you're saying it's it's not
it seems like they're clean in
some but maybe some night maybe.
Will on a maintain those cattle
guards
seems like we have some anti
donation problems.
The issues with federal stuff
I just I just can't see the
state microman.
To me if if we start
micromanaging a bunch stuff like
that we're going to we're going
to have so many issues that I
think it ought to be down to it
out of be left up to DO t and.
But micromanaging cattle guards
at at this level i.
I appreciate you bringing it
forward to hope the problem
doesn't cause any harm to
anybody.
On our ranch we always had to
clean.
Their cattle garage time and
time again and.
But are you madam charity are
you looking forward to changing
the some kind of statute with
deal.
Madam chair and representative
that is our next step if we need
you my perception of the right
away since
is that the only the state owns
all defensing longer right aways
in my opinion the cattle guard
is a part of a right away.
If the right away friends wasn't
there
the cattle guard wouldn't be
there
so the cattle girds should be
assigned in agreement with the
land owner
that should be part of the right
of way in my mind I believe that
the cattle guards are part of
the right of way and if the
right away friends think is
going to be maintained by the
state they should therefore
maintain the capital cards as
well
and madame chairman and
representative are there some
people cleaning their mouth
themselves or not at all
very very few have a bag home to
lift the catalog out that
categories heavy when they first
come out they were made of rails
railroad rails and those things
are like
twenty five pounds per foot and
we're talking about twenty foot
span sixteen foot spans I think
an average equipment operator
maintaining a backhaul with find
a problem lifting up catalgar so
it would take a professional
people that work with that kind
of equipment to do proper
installations after the cleaning
is complete so we need the
people that work with it and to
be maintaining them
cheer
thank you for that in madame
churn and have you ever looked
into the issue of whom.
I have not looked into the
action on that representative of
manager but uh it is not
something that the average
farmer is going to go out and
buy because they would not know
what
uh
statistics or what parameters
would be needed to meet
a cattle gards at them safe
thank thank you madam chairman
thank you representative for
your.
Think amount here and I don't
think I ever knew before that
the the actual the state
actually owns department trans.
I think while there may be
issues.
The.
You're on the right track I I
don't think this is
micromanaging at all when we're
trying to make the highways
save.
These things.
I wonder if
with regard to the tribal issue
of perhaps there needs to be an
more between the various tribes
and the dot but you're right now
just trying to get the money to
do it and it seems to be this is
a progress and
one that affects our safety so
I I don't see.
What.
Add to this.
Really worth discussing and I
don't think the call in the
highways is a a minor de.
I i'm inclined to support this.
Perhaps maybe th.
Given the numbers and your
department.
If it would be good to.
Thank you
thank you minimum chair
in my area there is a road
that's being upgraded and one of
their up is expanding the lease
and the right of away
and the state is furnishing
all of the fencing and all of
the cattle guards there are
effective in that general area
where the road is being
expanded.
So
that they're just says that
right away fence and the cattle
guards are paid part of state
property because
as they expand the rose they
were in the extra fencing and
the extra cattle guards so that
is where i'm coming from there
should be a state property
thanks madame chair.
Managed here just real quickly
regarding the bill it says.
On page one when twenty to clear
cattle guards on the mexic.
I mean these are trib.
Do we have intergovernmental
agreements for right of way
privileg.
Even entering.
I.
They're there maybe huge
lawsuits here so i'm just
wondering madam chairman is that
concern that you have and have
we spoke into the folks at.
Intergovernmental.
Medicare and representative i'm
not so much I don't know of any
interest or middle agreement but
I know that some chapters they
pass resolution directly to the
department of transportation and
they work directly the chapters
work directly with the dot some
district engineers work with the
chapters in that way based on
the on the resolution that's
passed by the chapter to perform
the duties that the chapter is
asking for
thank you madame.
Would suggest maybe some.
On privilege lands comma if
the tribal chapter has.
You know minimum chair so that's
all I had thank you.
Yeah.
So madam chair and
representative
you know listening to the
testimony around the in this
committee
and thinking about this bill a
little deeper.
I believe that the problem that
you're addressing
on the nation doesn't only exist
in the nation no it exists
throughout the state of new
mexico
and that being said madam chart
and representative I believe
that I might be more supportive
of your bill
if it included the state of new
mexico inst.
When when we
do bills like this we always
vote across the state pretty
much most of the time on on
bills and issues and I think
this is an issue that
that concerns the whole state of
new mexico
and if we could amend your bill
to state that for the whole
state in your mexico is just
another whole nation or
I I believe i've i'd feel little
better about or lock.
Right now I don't really support
the bill like it is it's up to.
Pass.
No.
And i'd like to explain.
I'm voting years and we had
moved here.
Thank you madame chair I will be
quick
say no words will explaining
okay makes sense thank manager
so really quickly I just that
one concern I had I don't want
to be infringing on tribal
nations sovereignty so I do want
to have the caveat so if this
bill does have that on the floor
I will super support it so thank
you manager.
Um i'm voting yes and I know.
Prior to that time we strongly
recommend that all of the state
holders.
And then
meet together so that you have
the answers to the question.
About the answer I don't nation
clause and about.
This might understanding.
So hopefully that can happen.
This.
If madame chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Okay.
The.
Morning madame chair and members
of the committee it's great to
see you all again this morning
I feel like this is sort of like
round hot day cause we were here
last year.
So the bill that is before you
today is a house bill eighty
eight.
And this is a bill
related to firefighters.
And department of finance and
administration to establish a
program to distribute funds
appropriate the department for
state wide and local firefighter
recruitment making an
appropriation and if you
remember last year man i'm chair
when we came before you we had a
similar bill only my bad as the
new rap I forgot to put in the
appropriation.
So what this bill does is it
does include the appropriation.
And it does outline how the f.
The department of finance and
administration the appropriation
in this bill is thirty five
million dollars
and i'm sorry madam chair before
I get into the spec.
My guests and
felt my peers who are also
responsible in this bill
senator leo.
And this is a first.
Umm I want to introduce
representative.
And also the other.
Representative.
Ryan lane yes and I don't know
him very well either because I
have not worked with him yet so
this is a huge op.
Um also the people who will be
speaking to you today are people
from the state fire marshal's
office and from the city of our.
Fire union and they are randy
verelove.
And without an adam chair
I am excited to
to be sponsoring this built
because my father was a fire
fighter for thirty years retired
from last almost fire department
and honestly didn't know what he
did when I was a kid so this is
a.
Good morning madame chairwoman
and members of the committee
thank you for hearing us today
as we know firefighters play a
major role in our communities
and in most cases that northern
new mexico which where I cover
their the lifeline to our
communities and when we think
about the need of recruitment
into small towns like especially
all and belong and you think of
all of those small towns that
rely on firefighters for safety
gallop as a matter of fact
definitely benefit from this as
all of your communities would
getting thirty five million
dollars to recruit firefighters
is the vital for new mexico in a
time when we stay fired danger
ravaging our state climate
change in making everything dry
around us firefighters are
needed and we need to support
this bill to recruit the next
generation of firefighters will
help us fight these blazes thank
you madame chairman
madame chairman and turn it over
to turlu hung
good morning i'm sure members
mentioned before by response we
have brought.
And just says for reason stated
very.
We re.
That does matter
we do h.
A good morning i'm randy very
listen far marshall and
madam chairman members of the
committee thank you for hearing
us today I think it's very
important that we do focus on
this bill as we look at on the
state which is involved here's
russell volt.
And that it is very important to
particular communities what I
see also there is the things
that we're going to identify the
capping coverage are some times
volunteers available sometimes
they're not the working big
family something that I spend
time with their families and
this a reason that we do need to
get eight percent left there
along with the volunteers and we
like to create combination
departments
to get moving and move forward
with this the hope is to get
people for his in the area of
supplement the volunteer
response and cover gaps again in
coverage to ensure the response
those communities somewhere
response is for some of while I
tears were look at twenty thirty
to forty five minutes but time
to go from their work from their
home to pick up the truck the
equipment from the fire station
it takes time if we do happy
firefighters at the station this
will cut down on the time so you
look.
The.
So we currently in the state
wide or less number from last
year we're looking at about four
thousand volunteer firefighters
in the state three or four years
ago we have seventy four hundred
volunteers currently as are
groups from the first or in our
office goes on does aspections
of the departments were seen a
declare looking somewhere around
three thousand now at this point
of volunteers and the state we
do have twenty eight hundred and
twenty seven p firefighters at
this point
and there is a lot of younger
individuals in the rule areas of
the state to see employment in
larger committees or due to lack
of jobs in those communities so
I think this would be a good
opportunity to be able.
Thank you chair will move on to
math.
Good morning madame chair
members of the committee be uh
cognisant of your time I know
everybody's in the roast
the only thing I wanted to add
to
fire marshall the statement is.
This is a unique problem that
we're facing that other agencies
are not we've been asked a few
times how this relates to like
the law enforcement recruitment
fund.
The difference is that seventy
percent of not more of the fire
departments in new mexico are
volunteer that means those
agencies have never had the
budget for those positions since
their inception.
And starting to ask to bring
paid positions into an agency is
a tough cell when we say you've
never budget it for this and now
suddenly you need to do this as
a whole amount the intent of
this mill is to give agencies
that opportunity to bring
positions in right away start
making a need in the community
and being able to work that
budget over a series of years to
make sure that they can then
incorporate the budget again I
think.
You know the the decline in in
service that we're seeing state
wide this is this is the facts
to you to getting that back on
board thank you.
The.
Thank you manager and you have
two other people who have given
very brief or one of the person
mcgell
thank you manager
you stand up okay thank you
manager and steam committee
members my name is
the president local two forty
four which represents about
courty fires you berlio county
fire rescue i'm also the vice
president for the next
professional firefires
association and cd one which
represents not only those two
agencies but also bernaldio
santa bar county rearantic and
torrents county
this bill is very very part
important to the entire
conversation behind staffing
staffing of firefighters in new
mexico and it's not just fire
just not just the state while
far that we're talking about
we're talking about emergency
response and emergency response
has been we've been adding to
what that is over the past
hundred plus years of the point
where we do everything that
would you as much materials and
we do wildly we do ems of course
we do structure fires
and we continue to add every
single year that it the our
agencies in our counties are
stay asked to do something we
step up when we do it but we are
we're hurting for numbers and
staffing we have staff in
conversations in every single
agency that you represent across
new mexico whether you have two
people on an engine whether you
have three people utter whether
you have two paramedics on a
rescue how are we a power
delivering this emergency
response to to your constitution
as to the citizens in the mexico
and this bill is going to help
not only pay firefires but
really help the
conversation a volunteer
firefires this this money is
going to go a long way and
supporting staffing firefires
but in written generalities and
emergency response in the
mascots a huge huge topic and we
urge all of your support thank
you
thank you madame chair and
members without we will c.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Members of the committee it was.
And the governor's office wanted
to.
State for.
Met with.
Yeah.
Manager members of the committee
right now with the fire from the
weight words the monies that we
receive on the fireforeigner
three percent tax on your
insurance whatever you have
insured at three percent was my
scum to the fire fund this year
we distributed seventy five
million dollars to the thirty
point
and that's seven hundred and
thirty forty four minutes in the
state.
So right now what we do is we
get the money's from a tax and
riv and the office of the
superintendent so the ninety
eight percent of the monies are
collected by tax and riff the
other two percent are by office
of the superintendent so we get
a lot mentioned that orderly so
we your operat.
Madame members of the committee
I believe that we currently have
an fund balance we have twenty
two million and twenty two
million are committed to the
grandfan that we distribute on a
yearly basis.
Manager members of the committee
of firefonds are very limited
and there aren't like I see we
distribute and the way trade it
with I sold and the far
department zero reader from a
class one to a class ten one
being the best department ten
being the worst so that so we
found the departments on a
formula basis so if we were to
take thirty five million out of
our fun they would take thirty
five million dollars that we
distribute to our fa.
Representative I you know
there's a couple return to work.
Yeah.
To recru.
If you'll look at your.
You will be.
That's.
The.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes
representative locked yes.
That's.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
