Call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
Lord, help us to live this day
quietly easily.
To lean upon your great
strength, Trustful E rest Feli.
To wait for the unfolding of
your will.
Patiently serenely to meet
others peacefully joyously.
Interface tomorrow, confidently
and courageously. Amen.
The gentleman from San Juan,
And the gentleman from the other
gentleman from San Juan,
representative Allyson leaders
in the salute to the New Mexico
flag.
Play ball.
Generally from Bergen, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Good morning members.
Great to see all of you and your
friendly faces this morning.
With an announcement. I'm going
to go to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Today, Mr
Speaker, we are honoring our
city of Santa Fair and I get to
honor you'll see if you've been
signed with our
With our staff members that you
received a wolf complimentary
ticket, so all of our members
received these in both chambers,
But not only are members but our
staff as well. And I wanted to
give a great thank you to my
wife, which resides in my
district house district 48 here
in our beautiful, beautiful city
of Santa Fair.
And I have a guest here with us,
Mr. Speaker. I would like to
thank my wolf providing us with
the tickets as their way to
express their gratitude and
appreciation for the hard work
that everyone does in this
legislature, and they also want
to educate all of us on now.
Wolves impact on the state and
the great company that they are.
We have
The general manager of Santa Fe
exhibition Susan Garbett and
vice president of planning and
Policy at Maya Wolf. ELISA
Montoya as our guest today. Here
on the bench, ELISA
There she is. Thank you for
coming here today.
Is a B Corp entertainment
company that uses immersive art
and interactive storytelling to
expand minds in fuel imagination
They are committed to using
creativity to make a positive
difference in the world and
advocating for equal access to
art and creativity, believing
that supporting our is a must
have Mexico is and will always
be their creative heart and
center and prioritize working
with local artists, vendors and
community organizations and
employ over four
400 people in the state.
They not only offer their
experience here in Santa Fair
but also in Las Vegas, Denver,
Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas,
and we're opening another one in
Houston this year, Mr Speaker.
Some some Kia compliments.
Excuse me. Accomplishments from
2023 are they offer $18 an hour
minimum wage company wide over
20 local collaborating artists
are engaged over 335,000
travelers visited their ex
exhibit in Santa Fair.
And over 230 community partners,
And there's more. Mr Speaker.
This is this is an example of
when we have economic
development that grows beyond
what we do here in Santa Fair
and keeps on giving back to our
communities. And that is why I'm
so proud and honored to sponsor
with me on Wolf your
complimentary tickets today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker for the
time. Thank you. And welcome to
the House, Ruth.
The gentleman from San Juan,
representative Allyson
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
To my colleagues and Mr Speaker
on your desk this morning, you
will find
Blue corn cookie. That's the
original Navajo delicacy. It
goes very well with coffee and
in the case of my brother Duncan
from San Juan. It'll go good
with water as well. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The Lady from Katherine Sierra
Valencia represented Armstrong.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to talk a little bit about Mr
Speaker FF a Mr Speaker. We are
excited to proclaim today F f a
day here on the roundhouse. We
have several students from
across the state here today and
we'd like to welcome them as you
see, Mr Speaker it is. I see a
blue and gold yesterday. I see
of green today a suit a sea of
blue and gold.
Future leaders of the state of
New Mexico sitting in these
seats all around this
roundhouse, Uh, Mr Speaker, I'd
like to see the gentleman could
read this certificate.
Uh, before I read the
certificate, that's why I'm
wearing my blue and gold suit
today, General Lady
Good job.
Clerk to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
the National FFR organization.
Whereas the national FA
organization was founded in
Virginia in 1925 by 33 Farm Boys
and was first known as future
farmers of Virginia, and in
1928, it became a national
organization known as Future
Farmers of America.
And whereas today, the National
F F A organization has more than
945,000 members with members in
all 50 straight states, Puerto
Rico and the Virgin the Virgin
Islands
And whereas the National FFR
organization mission Centers on
three goals, premier leadership,
personal growth and career
success and whereas
The National FFR organization is
an inter curricular,
accomplishing its mission by
focusing on its three circle
models of F F a classroom study
and supervised agricultural
experiences. And whereas the New
Mexico Effa association has more
than 5000 members in 90 chapters
across the state
And whereas students enrolled in
agricultural education today
learned many valuable career
ready skills, including
agricultural business and
mechanics, ecology and the
environment, animal science and
floral design.
And whereas February 17th
through 24th is 2024 is national
F F a week and members across
New Mexico will celebrate and
highlight their accomplishments
in the FFT.
Whereas the young men and women
have ever pay are examples of
hard work. Dedication
Scholarship now, therefore be it
resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
extended to the national
organization in observance with
nationals We four signed and
sealed in the cab, general lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Those are
a lot of words to describe.
Many that are among us Today. I
have a few special guests on the
rostrum. If you please stand as
I introduce you Jordan's Hamill
Jordan's is serving as New
Mexico FF FE State president
Jordan's is originally from
Artemisia and a graduate of
Artesia High School. She is
currently a freshman at New
Mexico State University studying
animal science.
The next one is Carly era Must
be Carly is a state but the
state vice president
representing District three.
Carly is a senior at Corona High
School. She is looking forward
to college in the future where
she is going to study landscape,
Agriculture, architecture.
Sorry, architecture.
Here's Cole.
Kercher.
Call is a state vice president
representing District Four. Coal
is a senior at Dora High School.
Cole can't wait to graduate and
move on to college. She hopes to
attend. He hopes to attend.
Um and participate in a judging
team.
There's also
Christian Fernandez Christian is
also a state vice president
representing district to
Christian as a senior at De
Moines High School. He's looking
forward to graduating and moving
on to the next chapter in life.
Please welcome all of our guests
here today, and these young
people have spent a year
traveling the state visiting all
chapters in their districts.
They have also hosted leadership
camps.
Ah, fair shows and conferences
to help better prepare their
members to take on the future.
Let's all give everyone a hand
that participates in FF fe.
Thank you for being here.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from San Miguel and
Torrance, representative
Castellano.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to welcome some people from my
part of the country FF a Las
Vegas, Mr. Speaker, Um
I'd like to welcome here and we
support this program. It's a
good for agriculture and for
helping us in the rural
community. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. And welcome
to the house of a A
Gentlemen from Chavez and Eddie
Representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um, as I said
yesterday,
When we were celebrating the
four H students here.
There's no greater
organizations. I believe that
Builds leaders of tomorrow,
better than
Four h and F F A. And I'm proud
this morning.
Mr Speaker to have three here.
That I'd like to introduce.
I'll start with elegant Hagos.
Kinsley Ray.
Madison, Monta
And they're brought here today
by the artist to welding and
agriculture educator FF Fe
advisor Brandon Babson.
Once again, Mr Speaker.
All of these represent
Uh, I believe the future of New
Mexico.
And as we have, as legislators,
the opportunity to support
Um, organizations like this that
involved family.
In the process of educating
leaders of tomorrow. We should
all stand and give them a round
of applause. Thank you very
much. Welcome to the house.
Let's go to the gentleman from
several McKinley representative
Kana
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I stand
here to basically
Welcome these members of future
farmers of America to our house.
One of the things that I am very
proud of is that I wore that
blue jacket for four years, but
I went through high school.
As a greenhorn. I was, uh I was
the vice president myself more
in junior years. I was the
tempter treasure and my senior
year I was the vice president.
But I always tell everybody
We were a group Your grandma say
we could almost say you we were
again but we didn't fight
anybody.
We were such a group that we
would make sure that all our
members were together, working
together and one of our members
was having problems with their
classwork. Somebody would help
that member out if they were
having problems with their
farmer project.
We would get together and help
them out.
And we raised lots of money so
we could make our trips. One of
the things that we did is we got
to go to, uh, Eastern to the
Contest there and then we'd go
to Las Cruces to an MSU so as a
awesome life because we got to
travel a lot going to the state
convention in Albuquerque for a
guy from Maura was awesome
because we got to buy McDonald's
for 15 cents, and there's no
McDonald's and motor
And
So we got to travel. I even made
it to Kansas City one year, so
it's a great time and I will
never forget my life as a future
Farmers of America and I really
welcome these members to our
house. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
And then I believe we also have
some guests of yours, Um,
joining us today, right from the
Zuni Public school district.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let's see
you back and finding
I have it here. If you want me
to
Added. I got him Mr Speaker, the
first one that I have. Mr
Speaker is Clayton, Dwayne
Patella.
Ah, playing here.
Welcome to the House.
Then I have Mr Speaker.
Open Rabel without boycotting,
also a member of the Sunni tribe
and a member of the Sudanese
school board. Welcome to the
House.
And I also have with me Valerie
Belton. Uh, she is also a member
of the Zuni School board speaker
welcoming him, and I hope they
enjoy their time here. They've
already come to my office. We
spend some time read time
together. And the one question
that I have for you, Mr Speaker.
Do you know why Zuni is the
greatest problem? Understanding
New Mexico. Tell us why
gentlemen.
Because representative
representative Oh well, uh,
Once we get those red chili
chips will talk more. Okay.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Colfax create hard inquiries
Salmonella and union
Representative Chatfield Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I also want to,
uh, tell you how honored I am to
look around and see all the blue
in this building the F F. A
organization teaches you how to
dress appropriately show up on
time and work hard. It's one of
the best organizations and
That I've known of, and, uh
He taught me a lot of the
Think taught me a lot of the
good things I learned in school
taught me how to well taught me
parliamentary procedure and I
have some guests here in the
building also have have the F F
A chapter from Logan.
And I'd like to introduce them
if you all will stand when I
read your name. Uh Grayson
Bollinger.
Kate.
Kelly Phillips.
And helical tester.
Charmaine Hall.
Brandon Lightfoot and their
advisor, Clay Lightfoot. Let's
give them all a good welcome.
Thank you all for coming today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Welcome
to the house. Thank you for
being here. This gentleman from
San Juan representative Allyson.
Mr Speaker. Thank you for the
second chance.
I forgot to introduce my wife,
Evelyn, Alison Shane.
Mr Speaker.
She has given me many second
chances, so I appreciate the
second chance that you gave me.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. I think that's like
the fourth chance she gave you
this morning, and it's not even
noon yet. So
Better take you out to dinner.
Welcome to the house. Everyone
good to see you.
Um, let's go next to the
gentleman from
Chavez.
Henry.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
It is very good to see all these
young people from FF a around
the building, participating and
learning about their government.
I had the opportunity early that
earlier this morning to meet
with 18 students from Roswell
and Goddard High schools and in
Roswell and the FAA programs
there.
Uh and I
Had the opportunity to answer
their questions, and I think I
would rather be testifying in
front of a committee then, uh,
answering the questions they
were asking they were thoughtful
insightful and, uh, very well
prepared questions. Uh, they are
here with us in the gallery, and
I would appreciate it, Mr
Speaker, if you could recognize
them.
We've got guests up in the
gallery from Roswell High School
and guarded high school Future
Farmers of America program.
Please rise to be recognized.
Welcome to the House.
You know I before we continue, I
do have to know a lot of these
young men and women come from
very, very far. Places. Um,
probably driving all morning if
not since yesterday. I just want
to appreciate all of you for
making the trek all the way up
to Santa Fe to visit us. It
really is a treat.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Good
morning. I have a couple of
things. First of all I would
like to
To welcome all the FAA students
here. I had a very good
conversation and a very good
conversation with ever face
students from gas and high
school last night and
I am proud to say that I hope to
see many of these young people
here in these seats in the
future because FF Fe develops
leaders and I believe that these
these these students that are in
front of us are the future of
New Mexico and that's really
important to me.
Mr Speaker, if you could
recognize the students from
against in high school, please,
gentlemen, Gatson High School FF
fe. We've got
Rise. When I call your name
we've got Martin Ayala,
secretary.
Dominic Novella, the Treasurer
Arthur the president. He meant
that he Menez Sentinel, Brian,
Bottom member.
And their chaperones. Mrs
Melissa here in Mr Pedro Reach
all the way from gats and
welcome to the house.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you. Mr
Speaker, And I also have another
announcement. Uh, Mr Rudy Zamora
from north squatters Consulting
and chef.
Jesse Appell, aka are providing
lunch for us today. We're going
to have carnal Levada's other
beans and flour. 30 isn't a bowl
perfect world. I wore my white
shirt for the occasion. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Folks have got a
couple of very special guest of
of of mine. Um, up here on the
rostrum that I would like to
introduce.
Um, they are both with save the
Children, which is an
international organization
working on behalf of Children
across the world, and they also
have a very strong presence here
in New Mexico, and we are
thrilled to welcome them to the
House of Representatives. I want
to start with Mr Mark Shriver,
who has many of you know, grew
up in a family deeply committed
to public service.
Ah Mark has been a dedicated
social advocate Author,
nonprofit leader known for his
work in child welfare and
education.
Mark joined save the Children's
US programs in 2003 and
developed the agency's domestic
early childhood education
programs, which today reached
Children and more than 300 rural
communities nationwide.
Mark was instrumental in
establishing the National
Commission on Children's
Children and Disasters in
Congress so that Children are
protected before, during and
after major disasters.
In 2013 Mark created Save the
Children's sister organization,
Save the Children Action
Network, which seeks to build
bipartisan solutions and
generate voter support for
policies that ensure every child
has an equal opportunity to
succeed.
Mark has served in executive
leadership until 2021 when he
returned to save the Children US
in his current role as special
adviser to the president and
CEO.
It is in this role that Mark is
visiting New Mexico today,
highlighting save the Children's
work in early childhood home
visitation.
Elementary literacy and math
programs and nutrition support
that's reached over 33,000
Children and students across the
state in every county in New
Mexico, Mark Shriver, welcome to
the House of Representatives.
And next to mark somebody who
probably needs no introduction,
but I'm going to do it anyway.
Ah renowned actress Jennifer
Garner, who has enjoyed a
successful career at the top of
her field in both film and
television, and has also taken
on the roles of philanthropist
and entrepreneur.
It's Gardner has been a champion
for save the Children for nearly
15 years and has served on the
board of trustees since 2014
Jennifer is a true advocate for
Children experiencing poverty in
rural America and promotes the
importance of literacy,
nutrition and early childhood
education efforts as platforms
for Children to thrive as
learners and in life.
Jennifer is here today in New
Mexico in her role as his Save
the Children Board member having
visited Save the Children's
early learning home, visiting as
well as elementary literacy and
math programs in Bloomfield and
farming 10 yesterday Welcome to
the House of Representatives,
Miss Jennifer Garner.
Now together, Mark and Jennifer
have collectively dedicated over
35 years of service to save the
Children, and they've
collaborated with Changemakers
many of you here in this room in
the public and also private
sectors to draw equitable
attention to resources and
resources to rural America.
Welcome to the House, Marc and
Jennifer and save the Children.
And I hope you stick around for
some Cardinal Levada. It is the
best
Gentlemen from
Looking at some water back there
Debacle Roosevelt in San McGinn,
representative Samora
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And I too
welcome.
The future Farmers of America
here today.
Very good kids is a very good
organization.
Mr Speaker.
I have guests with me here today
on the floor. Uh, Mr Christopher
Pacheco.
And Kasie area and Ryan Tenorio.
Their with government class.
Out of Santa Rosa. Mr. Speaker.
Welcome to the house all the way
from Santa Rosa.
And Mr Speaker, if you if you
will. I have some people up in
the gallery. If you
I would like to introduce them
for me. You sure do. We've got
rights to be recognized as we
get Sharon West. Joe Lagarde
them Frank Madrid.
Students. Solomon Ross
Evangeline Aragon.
Damian Guana.
Joaquin and stupid. None.
Cassidy, Chavez Velasquez,
Elizabeth Higgins.
Edgar Garcia, Jacqueline Gomez,
Sean Story.
Jacob gauge.
A J normal Instruments, Chico
Marine and said Vero Lucero,
guests of representative Samora,
Welcome to the House.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady from
Achillion, San Juan
Representative Johnson. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. I am going to
defer to minority floor leader
Lane. He has part a
General lady you've got you've
got guest Do
You've got something. The
rostrum in the gallery, right?
I do, Mr Speaker.
And the link representative Lane
has part a We have a We have a
Got it. Apologies, gentlemen
from San Juan. So I get
distracted from someone. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you,
General Lady.
So, Mr Speaker. We do have some
special guests here this morning
from Bloomfield FF fe students
first Let me recognize Dr Kim
Meisel, Superintendent
Bloomfield schools. She was just
here. I think she just walked
off Trend. Spencer Creek
Teacher. Thank you, Trent. Mr
Spencer, Sabrina sloth.
Thank you.
And Dave Torres. Don't see Dave.
And then as far as the FAA
students go, Mr Speaker, we have
Ali wing
Sally here.
Justin Goodman.
Jordan met her.
Cameron will. It's
Jonathan Harem, Yo.
Kathryn Brewer, Gavin grueling.
Anthony Stein.
When the slaw
Simmons.
Cadence Burke. How
And Robyn Burns.
And Mr Speaker before I
surrender the mike I I love this
part of the F F tomato. And this
is something that
Actually, the judge that I
clerked for was a national vice
president and he instilled this
in me, and I think it's
fantastic and sums up the sort
of the beauty of this
organization. The motto is
Learning to do.
Doing to learn.
Learning to live.
Living to serve. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen,
Walled away from Bloomfield.
Welcome generally from
Achillion San Juan. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I also would like to
welcome and thank and appreciate
the Bloomfield to students and
my good friends, Trent and Linda
Spencer by way of Pruitt, New
Mexico Gallop and Bloomfield and
that that is why
I co sponsored and co hosted
with representative Lane. I'm
not trying to take over
Bloomfield.
So with that, Mr Speaker, we
have a sample certificate that
we'd like to clerk to read. We
have certificates for all of our
f F a members And then Mr
Speaker. I do have guests in the
gallery if you could so kindly
introduced after the
certificates. Thank you.
Certainly. Thank you, dear lady
clerk to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico
Congratulates Ali wing
Whereas Ali Wing is a student at
Bloomfield High School and a
member of the Bloomfield High
School chapter of the Future
Farmers America.
And whereas on February 1st 2024
Ali and the Bloomfield High
School chapter of the Future
Farmers of America attended the
legislative session at the Cap
state capital.
And whereas the future farmers
of America are the leaders of
tomorrow who connect with and
give back to their communities
while forging self reliance,
academic achievement and
meaningful career opportunities
now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
congratulations be extended to
Ali Wing for her demonstrated
leadership in the future Farmers
of America.
Enter attendance at the
legislative session at the
capital on February 1st 2024
signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the state of Santa Fe, New
Mexico City Lady You have a
guest, um, in the gallery where
you've got and I hope I'm
pronouncing the name, right? Um,
Stephen Jeff Link.
Stephen Jeff Link, a guest a
representative Johnson up in the
gallery, VP of quality and
compliance. Welcome to the
House, Jeff
And you also have two gray
hills. You've got
Kirby Johnson chapter president
as well as doctor.
J. Kaibab Begay, Shiprock
Associated Schools Incorporated
Superintendent and Shiprock
chapter secretary treasurer.
As well as Deborah A. Yossi,
both board members with the
Shiprock chapter.
Welcome to the House.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe representative
Landscape.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
that house Memorial 36 be
removed from the speaker's table
and made the next order of
business.
I see no objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr Speaker, Would you get me to
that point let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
Memorial 36 son. Final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is
city of Santa Fe Day and I am so
excited to have a chance to
recognize our city of Santa Fe
administrative leaders and our
city councilors and our mayor.
Um, as you know, Mr Speaker and
members, we are in the nation's
oldest state capital.
With a history that spans
centuries.
Um, and today embodies and
champions are new Mexican
history and culture as well. Um
Santa Fe is also a pretty
gracious host to our
legislators, our staff, all of
the members of our community
that travel here each and every
day during the session to
provide public participation and
all of our processes, and I'd
like to thank the leaders of
Santa Fe for that most,
especially today.
And I also want to thank you for
all the day to day out work that
you do to make Santa Fe a very
supportive home for our
neighbors, My neighbors and I
hope you'll join me in
expressing gratitude to, um not
only our delegation who is with
me today, but also every city
worker, every small business
owner.
Every resident who makes Santa
Fe such a special host for the
Legislature, all of our staff,
all of our visitors each and
every year and makes the city of
Santa Fe such a wonderful place
to live.
Um
If you would all please, Mr.
Speaker. I have some guests I'd
like to recognize, Um
Please help me. Welcome our
Mayor Alain Weber.
Welcome to the House.
Our city councilor in District
one Seglin del.
Welcome to the House.
We've got to city councilors
from the district where I live.
We have city Councilor Michael
Garcia.
City Councilor Carole Romero
worth
We have City Council early,
Garcia
City Councilor Pilar Faulkner.
City Councilor Jamie Kasit.
And I don't see City Councilor
Amanda Chavez. But if she's
here, I'm recognize her. Our
city manager John Blair is here.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It's a
wonderful day. And with that
I assume for questions
Is the debate on the memorial.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Serato. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from Santa Fe Yield. I
yield to my good friend, The
General 80 from Santa Fe. Thank
you, madam. Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I want to thank
the city and everyone here for
coming out today and joining us.
You know, it's always wonderful
to have you all in the building.
I appreciate all of your
partnership on getting a lot of
the solutions done that we've
been working on.
And I know so much of what we do
is a work in progress, but I
know that we're going to keep
progressing together. So thank
you. And thank you for welcoming
all of my colleagues to the
city. Thank you. Welcome to the
house.
Thank you, General Lady. Further
major lady from Bernalillo
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
want to welcome all of the
guests of Santa Fair.
Fellow city councilors and the
mayor, Um City, which I
partially grew up in.
Ah took piano lessons. Ballet
lessons, city of arts and
culture and a city that is
esteemed throughout the world
And thank you for being here
this morning.
There is free to debate. The
gentle lady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too,
will I generator gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Yield. I yield to
my good friend, The General Lady
from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I to to
stand in great support, of
course of our beautiful city
Different and our city
councilors and our mayor and all
those that are here that are
making our city our capital
city just a wonderful and
beautiful place for all of us to
visit for all of us to grow for
all of us to
To invest in and it is a great
honor as well as my father
further fallow. Excuse me.
delegates here for from Santa Fe
to acknowledge all the things
that we do here in our city
different and to continue to
Participate in the innovation
and the support that we need to
grow our this beautiful city
Capital city, and I want to say
thank you for all your work.
We will grow together. We will
do incredible things, and I just
wanted to mention along with the
are gentle lady from Santa Fe
about the creative industries
and mentioning and having that
wolf represented today and just
how that innovation from our
side is helping our local
governments grow as well. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate
the time
For the debate. The general lady
from Ben Ali or presented
Hochman be healed. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Well, my friend from
Santa Fe Yield. Excuse me. I
yield to my good friend from
Berna. Leo, The lady from
Burnley.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, um
I was born and raised in Santa
Fe. I am a city different kid
will always be the kid from the
city different representing the
North Valley and Albuquerque.
There will always be a part of
my heart and Santa Fe and I love
being able to come back here
every year to my home and see my
good friends like
Our city Councilor Jamie Kasit,
who I grew up, maybe two blocks
away from and every year we see
each other and we can't believe
that we're both in these
positions, and it's just a
really cool thing for both of
us. And thank you for all the
work that all of you have done
for this beautiful, wonderful
city, and I continue to look
forward to seeing what more work
you'll do in the future. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentle ladies are
further debate on the memorial.
Seeing no further debate. The
gentle lady too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
want to just take a moment again
to thank our hardworking city
officials for all the incredible
work that you do, Um, all of
your gracious hosting of the
Legislature, but also, um all
that you do to nurture our
residents and our businesses
each and every day. It's really
makes a difference.
And with that I moved it. House
Memorial 36 do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
house that the records show that
all those members present that
the role has been called, and
all those members president have
voted in the affirmative
emotions. There's an emotion to
show members of the House
president and voting in the
affirmative scene. Objection is
ordered.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 36. The vote is now
open.
The vote is enclosed by vote of
70 in the affirmative. Zero in
the negative house memorial. 36
has duly passed this house.
Congratulations city of Santa
Fe.
And before we move on, I would
like to also extend my gratitude
to you and your city and your
staff for welcoming us every
single year with open arms. We
truly truly appreciate your
hospitality. Thank you. City of
Santa Fe.
Back to the Giulini from Santa
Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had one
additional announcement. Um,
members today is also uh, a day
that we can celebrate a very
special individual, Um and New
Mexico and that is Governor
Everette Chavez day. Um, that
day was declared by the
governor several years ago.
And I think it's important to
recognize Governor Everette
Chavez's contributions. He was
the governor of Santa Domingo
Pueblo. Um, he, uh, worked
extensively on the Native
American voting task force and
has been a champion for, um
Free and fair elections as well
as voting rights in our state,
His daughter may be known to
many of our members in the
house. His daughter is at such
Chavez. Um, who has also, uh
Taken up her father's tradition
of being a leader in voting
rights and working to support
democracy. So, Mr Speaker, if we
could just take a minute to
recognize, um Governor Everette
Chavez day in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
The lady from Chavez,
representative as L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
I was going to talk about the
great FF a kids that most of
them have driven over three
hours to get up here this
morning, but I'm afraid that
they've already left. But I want
to point out to the body that
this is not just for rural kids.
This involves
Those that live in towns and
more metropolitan areas.
It includes everybody in all
aspects, and it's just another
organization that teachers are
young people responsibility.
In what they do and how they
treat other people. Mr Speaker.
This morning We were honored in
our house Egg and Water
Committee to have three separate
chapters come in and listen to
what the bills that were being
heard and everything. So, Mr
Speaker, if they are still here,
right up above me if you don't
mind introducing that I would
appreciate it. Certainly,
General lady we've got we've got
more young people from F a up in
the gallery.
Um, I do want to thank you for
making that long drive all of
you from far away. Guest of
representatives. L we've got
Alan Parker.
Hagerman, five students. We've
got Skylar Point, Dexter, six
students.
Goddard two advisers Justin Lam
Rain Armstrong 10 students.
Roswell. Two Advisers Justin
Armstrong, Holly's Boardman and
eight students. Thank you for
making the trek. All those blue
jackets up there. Welcome to the
House of Representatives.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Your lady from Bern. Ali, your
representative on your own, Are
you
Thank you very much. Mr Speaker.
I'm very happy to have as my
guest today. City Councilor
Nicole Rogers from Albuquerque.
Nicole represents District six.
That's Albuquerque, Southeast
Heights, which encompasses the
University of New Mexico, Nob
Hill and the International
District. Um Councilor Nicole
Rogers is the first African
American woman ever elected to
Albuquerque City Council.
And it's focused on sharing
power with community through
participatory budgeting and
aggressively working on
homelessness and updating
district six parks and green
spaces. So please join me in
welcoming her today. Welcome,
City Councilor Nicole Rogers to
the House.
Also the city councilor for my
parents. They've got some
questions about some zoning
issues. Just kidding.
But they are your constituents
will be calling you soon.
Jim Lady Gentlemen from San
Juan, Representative Duncan.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to introduce a couple of young
people that I have met about a
year ago and come to know And
these are great kids. Haley
Thomas is a junior Healy would
like to be on the Supreme Court
someday.
So she is working hard to get
there.
Anthony Cruz.
Anthony Cruz general also and he
wants to be a cardiac surgeon. I
hope that I can use him. I don't
want to be in front of Haley,
though. So, um, their cultural
ambassadors for Navajo, perhaps
school and they are doing a
great job for their school and
for their family and their last
name, So thank you. Welcome to
the house, Mr Speaker.
We also have some. We have some
guests in the gallery and
wondered if you had introduced
those
I would be happy to gentlemen.
Gentlemen, I don't have the
names up here. But why don't we?
Why don't you go ahead and do
that? We'll We'll flex the rules
for you just for you, sir.
Mr Mr Speaker. I'd love to say
that I have the names, but
they're two board members for
Navajo Prep if you'd stand
Stand and be recognized. Now the
whole prep
Mr Speaker. I'd like to thank
rep. Allyson, my friend for the
bag, and I'd just like to point
out a few things during this in
this in this bag.
These are products that nappy,
um, grows and produces. These
are some of the products pinto
beans, corn, um, cornmeal
potatoes, popcorn. All of these
things can be taken from
railhead and gone down to I 40
distributed throughout the
nation. So
I would like to thank rep.
Allyson for this, And these are
some of the products that the
nation can make and ship out and
create great jobs in San Juan
County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
And lady from Ben Ali or
representative Herndon. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I
would like to introduce my
shadow for the day. Her name is
Iris Eisenman. She is a senior
at Eldorado High School.
She is the president of the
Community Outreach club at the
school, and she was a model you
in delegate and Mr Speaker at
Eldorado High School, which is
in my district.
They have a program called the
Minty for Mentorship program.
Um, also happy to let you know
that Iris Eisenman is my mentee
from El Dorado High School.
Please welcome her today.
Welcome to the house. Mr
Speaker, if I may just ask one
other item and asked you
Two.
Recognize the fact that we have
these group of students here who
are
Filming what it's like to have
mental health issues are how do
you address mental health for
our youth? And they're putting
that in a documentary that will
be released in April of this
year, and they're all from the
media. New Mexico Academy for
the Media arts, Would you
recognize them? Mr Speaker from
the gallery as a group, welcome
to the House and Mexico Media
Institute for the Arts. Thank
you for your work on behavioral
health.
Generally from Britain, a Leo
and torrents, representative
Lord Thank you, Mr Speaker.
First of all I want to say thank
you to Navajo Prep. I have been
there for some meetings. You
guys have a great school with
great staff. Wonderful. I
enjoyed my time there and thank
you so much. You guys have a
great program. I very much
appreciate you. Secondly, I
wanted to address I don't think
any might f affairs still here,
but I so appreciate them. I just
want them to know if they're
watching home. I'm so proud of
you guys for what you do.
And a special thank you to the
ones in my district and burn
Leone, especially in Torrance
County. There's such great
people, and I know what farming
is like, because my husband
actually started out as in the
farming industry in Idaho and
erased potatoes. I know that's a
giant shock for everybody here.
Um, but it's It's a lot of hard
work. I'm very proud of all of
you guys. Secondly, I want to
congratulate Madison McFarland,
a fellow redhead. She is 14
years old lives in Edgewood. She
is a national national caliber
and recently earned her way to
the 2024 USA Sporting Clays sub
junior team.
I am incredibly proud of her,
and I haven't met her yet, but I
look forward to and I just hope
that everyone there stands how
deeply rooted
Firearms in the New Mexico
culture all the way around, and
I hope that these bills that you
guys are trying to pass aged
limits Bans on firearms don't
crush
And ruin the dreams of young
women who are very interested in
our firearms and protecting of
their second Amendment rights.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Cibola. McKinley back to
you. We got ahead of ourselves
on that introduction earlier.
Ah, but we're going to get
caught up now.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. It is
asked him that I get to do this
twice. Anyway, Mr Speaker on the
roster, my have some special
guests from the Great School
Board and the Pueblo Zuni with
us today is a Clayton, Dwayne
Matola.
See is a game in as a write in
candidate for the school, the
Sunni school board president and
is serving proudly also with US,
Mr Speaker members is Carlton
Rabaul. What? Carty
Remember of the student crime
and he is also a U. S. Army
combat veteran.
Mr Speaker. We also have our
librarian from the school's. Her
name is Valerie Belson. And she
is here with us today. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, and, uh,
I already told you why Zuri is
the greatest below in the state.
Thank you. Welcome to the house.
But I don't think they were here
when you said that, so maybe you
should repeat it. So they hear
you, Mr Speaker. I will ask the
question again. Do you know why
Zuni is the greatest pueblo in
the standard New Mexico? I heard
earlier, but I forgot because
representative any CEO are gone
is their representative. Welcome
to the house.
Gentlemen from Cibola. McKinley,
Yoko San Juan Socorro, Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
wanted to say a few words on
behalf of school boards. School
boards are like the new Mexico
highways. You know they're the
backbone of our state school
board members of the backbone of
our kids.
You know, and we need to applaud
him and support him and all the
Issues they have to face and
representatives gone was wrong.
I am the best representative
student of Mexico.
So this correct that make it of
record anyway. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank the school board
for being here and thank all the
school board in the stadium.
Mexico. Thank you. School boards
for all your work.
Gentlemen, we could settle this
score right here in the front.
Put boxing ring in there. What
do you think?
Okay, That sounds like a Yes,
we'll get that set up for
Saturday.
Gentlemen from Chavez, Eddy and
Lea, representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I to
understand up. Most of their
members are gone now, but
I just want to
My support for all of them. I
have
Parts of lots of several
different programs in mind. God
had
In Roswell, Roswell. High
artistic across bad
Loving
Tight, um, in Lovington, all
parts of parts of my district.
And, uh, I'm a strong supporter
of that program. All my kids
went through the program. They
are truly
The next leaders of this state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Gentlemen, from better knowledge
or representative Garcia
Gracia's Tomorrow speaker.
The model Speaker Thomas
Camera representantes.
I just want to state that, um,
that if you do not avail
yourself of the food items.
That we accumulate during the
session.
You are welcome to donate them
to our food pantry at the Holy
Family, Catholic Church and at
the school. Ah, in my district s
tomorrow speaker are Knights of
Columbus voluntarily run the
pantry.
And we have two distributions
weekly.
We have a Tuesday distribution
of nonperishable food items, and
then we have a Thursday
distribution of perishable food
items meets etcetera.
Speaker.
You can leave the food items on
my table here on the floor.
Hmm. Lastly, demand Speaker. Our
pantry averages 400 food bikes,
food baskets.
The week.
Some of the more needy families
in the 87105 and 87121 zip
codes.
And in the 18 years, they must
beaker of the existence of our
food country. We've delivered
346,000 food baskets,
Speaker
Rosella Camera representative is
generated from McKinley, Percent
of Lundstrom. Thank you. Mr
Speaker, had a couple of
announcements and appreciate the
time. The first is on everyone's
desk today. You should have a
cookie.
From the New Mexico Coalition of
Main Street communities. Just a
couple of comments on that Mr
Speaker and members for every $1
invested in the state Main
Street program, the private
sector has invested $44.50
locally in main Street
communities, so they're
wonderful generated for economic
growth in our communities, and
then secondly, Mr Speaker, I
know that the gentleman will be
introduced.
With the school board
leadership, But I did want to
take a moment here to introduce
one of our school board members
from Gallup McKinley County, and
that's Mr Kevin Mitchell. If you
would please stand
Welcome to the House.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Gentlemen from
better NALEO representative G.
Andres Romero. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and there was a perfect
segue to introduce our
scoreboard Association guests as
you're aware, the New Mexico
School Boards Association
conducts its annual annual board
Institute during the New Mexico
legislative session every year.
So tomorrow morning.
Seven o'clock at the convention
center. So General lady from
Valencia. I was wrong this
morning. It's at the convention
center. So excuse me for that,
Um
But it will be from 78 tomorrow,
inviting. Certainly the members
of the Education Committee to
the breakfast, but I hope I'm
not stepping on any toes but
inviting you all to engage with
your school board members from
your community we do have
Several guests up on the
rostrum. Um so if you all would
when I mentioned your name,
please rise to be recognized
Christine Ludie.
Paulie had Emilio.
Marvin had Emilio.
Kevin Mitchell Demery maker.
Tammy Carter.
And a close family friend has
been for a long time. Joe G in
our executive director of the
School Board Association.
Welcome to the House New Mexico
School Board Association.
Welcome and thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Representative Lane. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I have a memorial so
it ask unanimous consent that
the House memorial be removed
from the speaker's table and be
made the next order of business.
What's your objection is
ordered Speaker Would you give
me that point? The record
reflect that election necessary
for placing House Memorial 37
and final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the memorial. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. So for the body,
they're well aware of this
organization. It's a national
conference of state
legislatures. And so this is
their 50th anniversary that
we're celebrating, and NCSL
actually is very unique.
To New Mexico. I'm not sure how
many of the members know this
history.
But it was actually the
brainchild was formed out of
Albuquerque.
Um, for NCSL. And so for those
who maybe haven't had a lot of
contact with him, CSL, everybody
in the chamber is actually a
member of in CSL, and they
provide services, not just
members, but also our staff.
Bipartisan research and policy
issues, and Mr Speaker. It's
actually been one of my sort of
personal privileges to serve on
the National Executive
Committee. And I've gotten to
know many of the other speakers
and leaders from across the
country and see how other states
operate and how they fix similar
solutions that we to what we're
facing, and it's been very
enlightening and so highly
recommend this organization.
I also want to flag for the
members of the national meeting.
Is. Let me pull up. My calendar
is August 5th, 6th and 7th in
Louisville, Kentucky. So I hope
members will show up for that.
It's a three day conference and
lots of good policy
presentations and a great way to
get to know other legislators as
well. Um and so, Mr Speaker, I
think we have a more of you
could have the clerk. Please
read
Clerk to read House Memorial 37,
a memorial honoring the National
Conference of State Legislatures
for its creation in Albuquerque
and on the fifth 50th
anniversary of its founding in
January. 1st 1975
Whereas over the past 50 years,
the National Conference of State
Legislatures has evolved to
become the premier organization
solely territorial legislators
and legislative staff. And
whereas the national Conference
of State Legislatures was
created from the merger of three
organizations that served or
represented the state
legislators and shared the
belief that legislative services
one of democracy's worthy as
pursuits.
And whereas after a series of
meetings of those organizations
in Albuquerque in 1974, the
National Conference of State
Legislatures was founded on
January 1st 1975. And whereas
the National Conference of State
Legislatures is bipartisan
organization with three
objectives to advance the
effectiveness, effectiveness,
independence and integrity of
state legislatures.
To foster interstate
communication and cooperation
and to ensure that the states
have a strong, cohesive voice in
the federal system.
And whereas our nation's state
legislatures are America's
laboratories of democracy and
have continually shown that they
are the bodies to tackle
emerging challenges.
And whereas state legislatures
are where people from very
different backgrounds
representing very different
communities can come together
and find common ground
And whereas the National
Conference of State Legislatures
has facilitated the exchange of
ideas, provided critical
research and information and
encouraged a rigorous review of
complex issues confronting our
communities, states and nation
and it strives to strengthen the
bonds between America's state
legislatures and the
international community.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that the
National Conference of State
Legislatures be recognized and
commended for its superb
leadership and commitment to the
legislative institution. And be
it further resolved that the
National Conference of State
Legislatures be congratulated on
this occasion of its 50th
anniversary in 2025.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted the National
Conference of State
Legislatures.
Is the debate on House Memorial
37.
Generally from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I'd say the
NCSL is a really important
organization, One that I have
been participating in as a
fellow with the opioid policy
members from across the United
States, which has taught me so
much but also
And looking at our workforce
issues in some of the groups and
conferences that they've had
specifically to a lot of these
different issues, and I'd say
going to their their national
conference this past year in
Indianapolis was amazing, and
it's just the way the the things
that they offer to us and the
way that we're able to interact
and conference with other
legislators from across the
United States has been
Ah, really influential part of
me becoming a legislator myself
in working on these specific
type of policies, issues, and I
think, as mentioned even earlier
by represented the
representative lunch from
About the budget, Um, conference
that they had and how they
They have given special mention
to New Mexico and and how we
have been champions and how
we're doing things here and
I think it's just really
important for all of us, those
that have not attended any of
their conferences or any of
their policy. Um, um individual
conferences that take place
throughout the year, I would say
get involved, especially to our
newer legislators get involved.
You're gonna learn a lot.
There's a lot of benefit when
you go into it With that
intention, you're going to come
out with a lot and you're going
to have a lot to offer us back
in New Mexico. Thank you. Mr
Speaker Appreciate the time
further debate on the memorial
Gentlemen, I'd like to before we
close. I'd like to add my words
of encouragement and support for
this memorial and all of the
good work that NCSL does on
behalf of ourselves, our staff
and all of our constituents.
Gentlemen close Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I ask unanimous consent
of the house. The records show
that the role has been called
and all those present vote in
the affirmative, and that NCSL
moved their headquarters back to
New Mexico.
You heard him and you heard it
here first.
Objection so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
with more euro 37.
The the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by vote
of seven in the affirmative zero
in the negative house memorial.
37 has duly passed this house.
Congratulations.
Right on announcements. The
other gentleman from Cinquanta
present Montoya. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I stand on a point of
personal privilege point. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um
Yesterday, the Senate confirmed
a new C y F D secretary and
first off. I'd like to say I
wish Secretary Casada as well.
This is going to be one of the
toughest jobs.
To turn around an agency that is
in crisis.
Um, Mr Speaker. I do have
concerns about this crisis,
though.
Mr Speaker. We have 15 days
remaining in the session over
640 bills have been introduced.
And there have been 160 messages
from the governor.
Of those bills, Mr Speaker 11
bills are directly referred to
reforming C Y F D.
Or
Further scrutiny being put on C
Y F D. Um But Mr Speaker, even
the Secretary has stated that
the that the department is in
crisis and vowing to turn things
around.
But Mr Speaker of those 11 bills
that have been introduced to
reform C y f D or make attempts
to fix the 50 or even some of
these bills are just to diagnose
the problem that exists at C Y
f D of those bills.
Mr Speaker. These are bipartisan
bills by the way, some have been
introduced by Republicans. Some
have been introduced by
Democrats and Mr Speaker. I
might add in both chambers 11
bills.
Mr Speaker, even though there
have been 160 messages from the
governor, and even though this
new secretary has come in, and
said that that this department
needs turning around
There have been zero messages
from the governor.
Concerning Children, youth and
Families Department. So, Mr
Speaker, I would just ask to
whoever
Uh, that the fourth floor
listens to, um
We need to deal with this all of
our constituents across the
board.
Both chambers. Both parties have
been hearing from our
constituents saying fix this.
This is a crisis and it needs to
be fixed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. General
Lady from Bethnal Santa Fe with
another announcement. You spoken
quite a bit today. Thank you, Mr
Speaker for recognizing mean? Um
I get to have the opportunity
today to recognize an
exceptional achiever in New
Mexico from Mora County, and she
has been she has visited us many
times. And this is Kylie the
hell who is my shadow For today.
She came last year, and she's
been coming for many years.
She is from an exceptional
family there and what a and she
has been.
Pretty crucial and in my time as
being an advocate as being
involved in politics, and then
now is a legislator. She keeps
me on my toes, and she's only
16. I met Kylie when she was
eight years old, Mr Speaker, and
from the moment I met her, I
knew that she was exceptional.
and I knew that her future was
late. She was laying out a
future for herself to become
Our future governor of New
Mexico Love it. Yes, thank you
And some of the things I'd like
to boast about. Kylie, who she
doesn't really She's not a
boaster herself, but I get to do
that today. She's planning to
attend You and M in the fall,
graduating in May 2 years early.
She just turned 16, Mr Speaker.
She is part of the motor
Mountaineers four h. President
she's participated in Girl
Scouts, Big brothers, Big
Sisters, the Poetry Buddies
riding club shooting, sports
National Honor, Society, track
and cross country, and that's
not the complete list. Mr
Speaker.
Um, but she comes with us today
with a message of concern, and
she wants to bring some
attention to issue to US
legislators concerning the calf
Canyon fire. Ah, she's concerned
about the
I'm grateful to our
firefighters. Our local
firefighters who fought for the
integrity of the rural
Residents and families.
She says. We must look to the
future incidents.
So that these incidents don't
occur like the calf Canyon fire.
And we have to have a heart and
compassion When we look to the
future, we need strong
leadership.
I get a little I get a little
bit plump. Because this is this
is near and dear to me as well.
Too many of us here.
I mean, strong leadership, she
says to relieve are the
minorities and the communities
who cannot help themselves in
these areas, she says. My uncle
is Jack V. Hill, the fire chief
of chat.
And he has demonstrated how
tirelessly his he has worked
along with others and other
volunteers. Firefighters.
Today, even today to work to
continue to keep continue their
work because it's ongoing to
take on what it's gonna what it
means to rehabilitate our force
in a rural communities.
And she says she has to remind
herself
We include the forest stream
what we're doing with 34 station
and those sorts of things and
I've talked to her about our
budget and what we're doing
there because we are looking to
mend and she says, Oh, I have to
remind myself you all love the
trees here and I said, Yes, we
all love the trees, but we love
our people in our communities to
especially in these areas and
we're doing what we can to help
them.
But she wants to resonate that
awareness and she brings that
here today, Along with other,
um community community members,
and she knew some of our future
farmers of America as they're
looking and talking to us. Let
us remember that who they're
fighting for what their messages
to us and thank them for being
here in participating in these
debates and the awareness that
we all need to remember why we
are here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Joe. Lydia. Welcome
to the house to your guests.
Thank you for all of your work
and your advocacy. We appreciate
you. Welcome to the House
Lady from Cibola, McKinley
Berna, Leo San Juan.
Socorro and Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you
guys noticed you had a little
bag of disco Cheetos in your
desk. I stayed up to five
o'clock this morning, making
these things.
You know, I hope you guys enjoy
him.
You know, and this is on behalf
of rural hospital for the
steering New Mexico.
As you all know that a lot of
our hospitals are struggling,
and they're in jeopardy are
getting closed. And we really
need to support him. Because you
know if you live in Albuquerque,
you're fine, Mr Speaker. But if
you have to drive from
Like value of Europe in Davao,
150 miles to a hospital in his
clothes, Then it becomes a big
issue and with Amber's speaker,
I hope you guys enjoy the school
Cheetos. I'm a little bit tired
from cooking so much last night,
but it's all good. Thank you
very much, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you
for that disco Cheetos.
Gentlemen from Eddie and from
Chavez, Percent of Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I rise just to respond to my
friend up in the corner back
there.
That's a really small bag.
A really small bag, and I think
he can do better than that. He's
not listening representative.
That's a really small bag.
And on top of that, Mr Speaker.
As he talks about those people
that drive 150 miles. He should
also be worried about the price
of gasoline. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker
on that on that note from all
those counties that note told me
down there.
Will you yield to me absolutely
ideal to you can yield to you
because I have the floor. So
thank you from all those
counties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
You know that is a big issue. I
have people in my part of the
district that don't have running
water, and they do have to write
a long ways for gasoline or too
hot water. You know, here we
take it for granted Mr Speaker,
that it's a sad that done deal
and it's not
You know, from the price of fuel
goes up and you have to haul
water for 5060 Miles.
That's not including
If you have to go to the
hospital where you have to go to
the grocery store, But these are
big issues in the real world,
you know, and my district is the
rule list. I think it's almost
frontier.
Most of them and I have probably
about the
Biggest district, other than
representing Armstrong. He got
more landmass, but as far as
that is concerning, it is a big
concern that we really need to
see what we do to not hurt
people that depend on traveling
to get necessities of life.
Very well generated from burner,
Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move a good with
that order of business committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered.
Mr Speaker.
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 271 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Doreen
Y Guy goes chair, move Adoption
We are on adoption of a Federal
committee report on house Bill
271. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Hosni. The committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to miss referred House
Energy, Environment and Natural
Resources Committee Substitute
for house Bill 133.
Has had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house judiciary
can be a substitute for house
Energy Environment. Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 133 do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair speaker Move
adoption adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House energy and outdoors is
committee substitute for house
but 133 but a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House energy, Natural
resistant Environment Committee
substitute for House B 133.
All those in favor say Aye.
Proposed name.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 137 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 137 do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr Speaker. We would
option on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 137, but a favorable
committee report and House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for hours with 137. All those in
favor signify by saying, Ah, I
The eyes have it committed
report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your transportation,
Public Works and Capital
Improvements Committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 232 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then referred to
the Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Dan Hoffman Peel
chair Mr Speaker with adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house Bill 230 to all
those in favor and if I was in I
It wasn't a community adopted.
Mr Speaker, your rural
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee tomb
has been referred House Bill
251.
Has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do not pass, but that
House rural development, Land
grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 251 pass and then referred
to the Appropriations and
Finance Committee. Respectfully
submitted Christina Ortez chair.
Mr Speaker move adoption. We are
on adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house Bill
251, but a favorable coming to
report on house rural
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee
substitute for house with 251 of
those in favor signify by
saying Aye. Name the eyes of a
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, your rural
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee has
been referred House Bill 269 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass as amended and
then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Respectfully submitted
Christine Ortez chair.
Mr Speaker move, adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house Bill 269. All
those are probably sane. I
I was supposed to me.
Absolutely No, Hmm.
Yes, have a commune report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your rural
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 270
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
of Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted Cristina
Ortiz chair Mr Speaker moving
option adoption of a favorable
committee reporting House Bill
270 all those in favor say the
public saying I opposed Nay,
yes Commuter report adopted
Mr Speaker, you're enrolling in
engrossing committee has been
referred House Memorial to House
Memorial. 23 has had them under
consideration. Reports that same
have been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory deciding by
the officers of the House
respectfully submitted.
Cynthia Borrego chair.
Adoption, Mr Chair.
Mr Speaker.
We are on adoption of favorable
committee reports on House
Memorial to in house memorial 23
All those in favor say Ni
Opposed, nay, productive that
the record reflect
That all duly enrolling and
grows copies of housing
Memorials two and 23 were signed
by the officers of the House in
Open session. Mr. Speaker,
you're enrolling in engrossing
committee tumor has been
referred House Memorial 31 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same
That same has been duly enrolled
in a gross perpetrators
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair.
Adoption. Mr. Speaker. We're on
adoption of a favorite committee
report and has memorial 31 all
those various it If I was saying
I
Proposed name, the committee
productive direct reflected the
duly enrolled in and grows
copies of House Memorial 31 were
signed by the officers of the
House and Open session. Mr.
Speaker, you're enrolling in
engrossing committee tomb has
been referred House Memorial 35
has had it under consideration.
Reports seem
Has been duly enrolled in a
gross preparatory designing by
the officers. That house
respectfully submitted. Cynthia
Borrego chair
Move Adoption Mr Speaker on
adoption of a federal community
report on housing Morial 35. All
those in favor probably say
nine.
Proposed Nate report adopted
that the record reflect that the
root duly enrolled in a girl's
copies of House Memorial 35 were
signed by the officers of the
House in Open session Lady from
Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. And now being 1159
am I move? We adjourn until 1201
pm Objection. It is so ordered.
Mr Speaker. I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
Objection. It is ordered.
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules basis
Spending at the records show
that the journalists been read
in full and approved subject to
revisions and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business.
Heard meeting of legislation.
Objection. It is so ordered.
Is the gentle lady from better
NALEO Ready on item.
Number
Five.
Yes, I am. Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point record
reflect that all action
necessary, replacing House Bill
101, as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that ventilated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. This is a simple bill
that addresses the behavioral
health needs of firefighters and
emergency responders by allowing
state local and regional public
fire agencies.
To create support programs for
their employees and volunteers.
This bill will make the peer
support services confidential
and limit liability for the
provision of peer support
services. With that I stand for
questions. There is debate the
gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero. Representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Speaker to the
general Lady Yield.
I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. So in sections two, I
believe. What are the
department's doing now for PTSD?
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um,
that That's a good question. I
do have a firefighter here
somewhere. I know that a p D had
I'm not a P D. Albuquerque Fire
department has something of a
peer support program. Other
places may or may not work
trying to kind of standardized
things and I will tell you one
of the reasons and carrying this
bill as I had a firefighter call
me in the interim last year.
And say, Um, we're gonna We get
PTSD. That's almost a given. And
what our supervisors frequently
tell us how to treat it is to
drink alcohol. So, um
That's not a good thing.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. No, That is not a
good thing And you know there's
different ways to cope with
that.
But, um
Whenever I was whenever we
talked about this last year, I'm
a big advocate for PTSD and in
veterans and firefighters, and
they both get it.
And unfortunately, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady, um
My appropriation didn't go
through for a program that would
really help that.
And, uh,
Mr Chair and gentle lady. So
If if I come to work one day,
and I, you know me. I'm kind of
a hypothetical edges. You've got
to give me an example. And you
notice that, you know, maybe I'm
not myself And maybe, you know,
I'm not engaged in my job.
What would you do at this
current time right now, Uh, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
Oh, my expert may have that
answer just in time.
So, Mr Speaker, I did get the
answer, gentlemen, so that your
supervisor would probably
Send you home, Essentially and
and have you
Hold on.
And reach out to the clinical
direct director to divide to
provide direction on clinical
services.
Thank you, Mr Chair around, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
So you know, that is super
important whenever we're talking
about physical and emotional
illness.
Failure of using coping
mechanisms loss of interest in
the job.
And you've got to really pay
attention to your people.
Because sometimes they don't
want to tell the supervisor.
And you, You have to have an eye
for that.
And with this new service
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
What can you tell me? Kind of
what? This pier This pure person
looks like.
So it would Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it would be another
firefighter, generally a veteran
who has a little bit more
experience under their belt and
someone that the firefighter
could trust.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady I was I was wondering, is
there is it just one person? Is
it a board of people?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, this
essentially sets up the
framework for each individual
department to set up their own.
Um
Their own framework. But this
lays down the ground rules that
there has to be training that's
approved by the state fire
marshal for you to be a peer
support provider that you have
to go through the trading and
I'm sure there will be screening
of folks depending on the
department, etcetera, So I'm
sure Albuquerque has
Lots and tiny fire departments
may not have more than one or
two.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
And I think that's admirable for
us to put something together
like that. Some of my concerns
that I did have was, um
The funding aspect of it, and I
know that you did take the
appropriation out and and that
concerns me a little bit because
I know it takes money to make
Good programs work.
And Mr Speaker in general Lady.
We were talking about a $9.5
million appropriation to get
this off the ground. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
original property appropriation
was 500,000, but we decided to
strip it out because it's a
short session and we we wanted
to get the framework in place to
come back for appropriations
next year and a longer session.
Thank you, Mr Mr Speaker and the
lady.
It bothers me that you wanted to
pull that out because we have.
We need to support that kind of
funding if we're going to make
something work, and I feel like
you're already behind, trying to
get it going.
Mr Speaker is in lady.
And
One of my other questions was
I wanted I would prefer the
General fund pay for this. So,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, is
this money going to come out of
the General fund? Whenever you
do get ready to appropriate the
funding for the program, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, yes, and
and it's like all of our
decisions up here. You have to
kind of play, play the game and
figure out where how you can get
this past.
We didn't get it passed last
year. We didn't want to wait
another year to get the
framework set up because we were
afraid we would get stuck in
appropriations and be tabled so
that that was a decision that
was made in cooperation with the
folks working on this bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady and the reason I
like to hear that you're
bringing your pulling it out of
the General fund and not the
Fire Protection fund is because
a lot of these departments and
I'm sure your expert knows this.
We run on fumes anyways. And you
know, to pull out a big big part
of money from that potential
fund, I think would be
detrimental to
A lot of the fire services
around the state.
And Mr Speaker and gentle Lady.
So
What is have you contacted the
fire marshal's office. And do
they have the workforce
participation, too?
I guess. Entertain a program
like this, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr Speaker. We have we have been
in contact. My expert has been
in contact with the state fire
Marshal. They don't have the
workforce now, but they're kind
of working on putting it
together.
And Mr Speaker in general Lady.
I appreciate the honesty because
I keep up with the state fire
marshal and I know that they're
always struggling for
investigators. They're also
struggling for people at the
academy to teach and do their
outreach programs. And I just
want to make sure that this is
not gonna, um overwhelmed them
in any way because this is such
an important piece of
legislation here and and I do
believe in what you're what
you're trying to lay down.
So thank you for the debate, Mr
Chair and then the lady. I
appreciate it is further debate.
The gentleman from Chavez, Eddie
and Otero, Representative
Townsend. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Will the General lady yields
lady I'm
It's going through the F I R on
this. And if you can
I was listening to responses and
And I noticed that the
First line of the F I R. Says
the LFC budget recommendations.
For FY 25 include a $9.5 million
Um, appropriation from the Fire
Protection fund.
Which was an increase of
approximately 10% of the actual
spending. So does it come out of
the Fire Protection fund or
where does it coming from? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I'm not
sure what the fight what? That
what you refer, and I don't have
an I r but it will be coming out
of the General fund, not the
Fire Protection fund. So we're
speaking general lady was it
line item and HB two for
funding.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't believe it was in HB two.
We weren't able to get it in. So
as I said that the money that's
coming out of the Fire
Protection fund I have. I don't
know what that's for, but I know
that our bill was 500,000 from
the General fund.
Okay, Mr Speaker. General Idea.
Take you, You know, based on
that, but
In my district. I am constantly
Challenged by, uh, farming that
are very protective of the the
of the Fire Protection Fund and
It appeared to me when I read
the F I R that that
Explicitly said where the money
was coming from, So I would just
I hear you, but I also I'm
reading that I r And there's a
difference there. If
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
can't speak to that.
Well, I appreciate that. Let me
Let me move on. Just a minute.
Um
Do you have any idea how many
fireman
Might
Utilize this new, um
Treatment plan.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it's unclear. Um it's kind of an
unknown, but but the hope is
that many firefighters will will
use this, uh as opposed to
alcohol or some other things,
and the goal will be to have one
peer support Firefighter for
every 10 firefighters so
Um
I had no idea. Mr Speaker, You
know what the level of
Of
PTSD. Influencer was within
Within that department, a little
bit familiar with law
enforcement, but I had no
Um, idea and fire department.
Um
Speaker general Lady
If it is, if we get it set up
like you're proposing, and it's
one in 10.
It seems like to me.
That we would have to as
legislators be cognizant.
The hours that would take away
Or
I don't know. Takeaways the
right term, but then the amount
of hours that is going to be
concerned, maybe rightfully so.
I'm not arguing that point, but
it's going to affect the
structure of the fire
department.
Ah, well, those do you believe
in that?
The amount of men and women on
duty.
That might be in in treatment.
Will affect the mission of of
the Fire Department and the
budget of the fire department as
as individual
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, cut on
the contrary because losing a
firefighter is a lot more
expensive in terms of time and
budget, as opposed to keeping
them, Um
Keeping their behavioral health
healthy, essentially.
And we also have. We also are
not laying out exactly what it
has to look like so it you know
Departments who have smaller
budgets will maybe do things a
little bit differently. That's
why we're leaving it open to
each individual department to
figure out what works best for
them.
So is your intent. Mr Speaker
and General Lady to really
forces down and department.
Mr Speaker in general, I
wouldn't say force. It's an
option for them.
I appreciate that, Um
I'm still a little bit
concerned.
Us impacting the mission of the
smaller
Units having enough firefighters
to actually go to
I wonder if we're going to have
Impacts the budgets requirement
to hire more people. I mean,
Have have this have the smaller
departments weighed in on this,
so we understand.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
It. It
They're looking at a Albuquerque
fire department. Kind of as the
big brother kind of to show him
the way and it will not impact
the mission. It may impact
budgets, but again, that's
totally up to the individual
Fire Department. How they're
going to, uh
Run this program if they choose
to do so.
I appreciate that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, um
And I'm not gonna just beat us
to death. I just wanted to make
sure that
As we implement this new
Process.
That the smaller departments
whether they're volunteer paid
firefighters.
That the impact of
Of addressing something that may
need addressing. I'm not arguing
that whether it does or not,
that we don't undermine their
mission and make it impossible
for them to do what they're
required to do, and that is to
protect the constituents and
speaker Thank you, gentlemen.
This further debate Gentlemen
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will
generally the yield Mr Speaker,
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Can Can you walk me through? I
represent rural fire departments
as well. So can you walk me
through how? How This is going
to work in a rural, uh, fire
department.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
in the smaller departments. If
someone is having difficulty,
let's say with a substance use
or alcohol use disorder. They
have a list of
Peer support folks that they can
call and as I, As I have said,
We're not forcing anything. It's
not a one size fits all. It's a
it's a the department is up to,
It's up to them to decide
exactly what it looks like.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
probably didn't phrase that
properly. Um, we have a lot of
volunteers in San Juan County.
And so will that be different
for volunteers as it would be
for a paid fire department, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, No.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. So
let's just assume that I'm a
volunteer. And I have this, um
And I want I want this. I need
this.
So Burnley was going to do it or
Albuquerque is going to do that.
It. Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
goes through the state Fire
marshal's office so there will
be resources throughout the
state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, so I
wouldn't have to call down and
come down to Albuquerque to get
this support. Then if that's the
case, then how soon will it be
out into the rural parts of the
state with volunteer fire
departments, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that's hard to say,
since we are not having an
appropriation this year, um, but
this sets up the framework for
the You know, folks want to do
it, Um
However they want, you know if
they want to do fundraisers and
get money to pay, you know it
can look like whatever it looks
like in in each individual
committee, but, um, it will take
some money for the Fire
Marshal's department to develop
the training and get folks
trained.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of
the things that you know when
you're from the rural parts of
the state. Everything happens. I
25 and so if we're going to do
this, and we're going to give
them the tools in the toolbox to
to really make this effective,
I'd love to see the framework to
and and how soon it will be to
the rural volunteer fire
departments.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
can't. I can't foretell the
future.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um, So if you visit with
volunteer fire departments in in
the state
Mr Speaker. I have not. But my
expert witness has and I'm sorry
I didn't introduce them. This is
Miguel Tip man who is the um,
president of the Albuquerque
Firefighters, Union and state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So
As your experts visit with the
volunteers throughout the rural
parts of the state. Um what was
I mean, What? What did they say?
And how did they say that they
would need this and go about
getting it.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, My
expert says that behavioral
health mental health is at the
top of the list for all the
departments, but unfortunately
at the bottom of the list for
much of management, so the
firefighters themselves are very
much in favor of it.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
concur with this. I think it's a
great um you know a great tool.
Um, but I'm just afraid that
toolbox is going to be an
Albuquerque and it's not gonna
Be available to those in the
volunteers.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it is
already in Albuquerque. And what
Albuquerque and the fire marshal
are trying to do is to spread it
out from Albuquerque.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um one other question then.
Let's just say I was a volunteer
for 12 years, 1520 years and I
have that would I be able to use
this?
Tool, even though I'm now
retired, or I'm no longer
serving as a volunteer.
Absolutely. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, retirees are one of
their top priorities.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. But what
if they weren't retard? What if
they were just volunteering and
served for five or so years and
got in a really sticky situation
and decided this is this wasn't
for them anymore. Mr. Speaker.
It's for all firefighters.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. That's all I
have to be. Gentlemen from
better Naleo. Representative
Ream. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
Mr Speaker and will the general
lady yield Mr Speaker, I yield
to the gentleman from Bernie.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady, That's all I
have to be. Gentlemen from
better Naleo. Representative
Ream. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
Mr Speaker And will the general
lady yield Mr Speaker, I yield
to the gentleman from Burnley.
Oh, Mr Speaker in General Lady,
let's go to the title and says,
create a peer support program
for their employees.
What prevents the agency from
doing that currently
Mr Speaker. Nothing.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
think that's really the point.
The Bernalillo County Sheriff's
Department has that a PD has
that.
When you hear that the
Um, an officer involved in a
shooting or some big incident is
on administrative leave for
three days, they must meet with
the psychologist before they can
never returned back to duty, And
I think they could do that.
Madam Speaker and, um
General lady, the your expert.
That's there he represents. The
Albuquerque Fire Department. Do
they have a union and could they
Put this in their union
negotiations. Mr Speaker. He
actually represents the whole
state of New Mexico, and they
anyone can put what they want in
their union negotiations. We are
trying to set up a framework for
statewide so that folks know
How to do things that and the
fire marshal's office is going
to, um, to have the training for
folks. There's nothing that's
stopping it now We're just
trying to make it a little more
organized and a little more of
an option for even smaller
districts.
Uh, Mr Speaker and General Lady
from Bern, Leo.
Is. Can you tell me where the
funding comes from? For the
state Fire fund?
That you know that the fire
department utilize Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, that's not in
this bill.
Okay. Uh, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I know you stripped the
appropriation out, which was
kind of a unique trick that we
see occasionally to make
something German.
But, um, you can look at how
you're going to get your money.
Um
And I think that's where you
need to go get your money. And I
think that for education of the
rest of the body, it comes from
insurance premiums.
And if there's not enough money
in there, then we should be
raising the insurance premium.
So I the Fire Department needs
the money. We need to go ahead
and fund it properly. But I
think that's a mechanism to go
ahead and fund it. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Debate generated from
Beverly and torrents,
representative Lord
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
generated from Berlin County
please yield yield to the
general lady.
Um, Mr Speaker representative
Who's your expert again? What is
his name? He's with burn Leo
County. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and General Lady. His
name is Miguel. Tit Hman.
And he is with the Albuquerque
Fire Department as their union
president and also of the state
of New Mexico.
And burn Leo County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Representative, just writing
that down.
Um
So I do have some questions.
Um, I when I was looking through
here, and maybe I missed it.
Is there. Usually there's
something I've talked to a lot
of the union leaders.
And other counties. I know their
support for this, but I don't
see anything that they put into
the F I r or any analysis. Do
you have any support from other
firefighters? The unions like in
Torrance County or Santa Fe, is
that in any of these madam chair
and representative, Mr Speaker,
Mr Speaker? Sorry I'm first I'm
on the floor. I'm sorry.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, As
my experts said that behavioral
health is the number one issue
for firefighters, Uh, small
departments, large departments,
unions, etcetera.
So I wouldn't expect it to be in
the F I r necessarily
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
representative usually when
there's something and it's just
strong and I know that it is
because luckily, I have phone
numbers for my unions. Except
for you, sir, in my district
that I can talk to because
I'm a firm believer that
whenever we pass anything, I
like to talk to people with
boots on the ground.
So I like to make sure that this
is something that they concur
with. And they have, but I would
have liked to have seen
something like some letters from
them so I could look said Oh, I
see that Torrance County or
Berlin County supports this.
So, Madam Chair. I'm sorry.
You can put a shock collar. Zap
me if I do this again, Mr
Speaker.
Representative, Um can you tell
me
How
I know you said there's going to
be one peer support for every 10
firefighters. Is that what I
understand? How does that work
out?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
That's the goal. There's no
requirement for that, Um
And people will have to
essentially be volunteer to be
peer support workers, So the
hope is that there will be 1 to
10. But there's nothing in the
bill that says if you can't get
to that ratio, you can't do the
program.
Okay. Thank you. Mr. Speaker.
Got it right this time. Mr
Speaker Representative, so
So the goal is to hopefully get
one person for every 10 and when
we're doing our data does that
include all of our volunteer
firefighters as well? Are we
just looking for
For people that are not
volunteering. How does it in the
ratio of all firefighters
estate? How does that play out?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
department specific. But as I
said, it includes all
firefighters, Volunteer, retired
working volunteer, not retired.
Because we all know it's hard to
retire from a volunteer job.
To Mr Speaker and
representative. It's It's a the
people that I know that are in
firefighting.
Are still somehow end up being
back and doing something with
Firefly. They end up being
volunteering or something else.
So, Mr Speaker and
Um, representative
Did I? I was trying to look
through. This is there
Any part in here. The bill that
says that there is a mandatory
referral for referral to a
licensed
Therapist.
Thank you, General Lady and Mr
Speaker. There is no mandatory
referral, but part of the
training will be
How to refer who to refer to
what? What services might be
most appropriate.
Okay, Mr Speaker and
representative, I think
Okay. The reason I bring that
up.
It's because, you know, well,
I'll just explain in case people
don't know.
When you say to anyone I am
going to harm myself or others
that sends off an alert that
they need to have a
psychological evaluation. I keep
wanting to call it 5150. Then
I'll call it that here.
That's a 72 hour hold.
Would you think that might be a
good idea to add to this bill
that in certain situations where
it is?
Um, when they're saying, I mean,
what I don't want to see is they
go to the peer support.
I don't want him to go to the
peer support, and there's
nothing mandated in here that
hey, when they say they have to
harm themselves or others. You
must refer them. Actually, that
would I think at that point b to
law enforcement because they
have to do an evaluation on them
immediately.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
General lady that that is part
of the training And as I said,
before, we're not going to
mandate things so that each
individual fire department can
figure out what works best for
their people and where they are.
So, Mr Speaker representative,
would you if I made that an
amendment? Would you say that's
an unfriendly amendment and I'm
not? I'm trying to be honest and
sincere here. I what I don't
want. Here's my fear. Okay,
honest fear.
This moves forward.
It's up, and I haven't gotten to
that portion yet. Somebody's
going to make this peer support
team.
And if they don't for some
reason, mandate that what I
don't want is a firefighter to
come and say, I feel like I am
going to kill myself or kill
someone else and nothing gets
done. Would you consider that a
friendly or unfriendly amendment
for this bill?
Mr. Mr Speaker. And generally,
general lady, um, that pretty
much will be part of the
training of the requirements of
what you have to do if someone
expresses self harm. And my
guess is I'm not an expert that
fire departments already have
something along these lines for
just that reason that they're
not waiting for this bill to to
say, you know if someone if
someone tells their supervisor
or co worker or whatever
I'm suicidal that they that they
won't just say okay. Have a good
day. Mr Speaker, Representative
expert. Can you guarantee me?
Can you show me something that
all in the code somewhere?
Not just in this, but I mean,
I'd like to. I'd rather see it
in the bill myself as an
amendment, But can you guarantee
me
That there is something right
now. Within when something
within your firefighter code
And even then, is it may not be
applicable this but what is the
code? And where would I find
that That says we must
Refer.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. It
is in the mandatory training.
It's a two week training. Um and
there will be mandatory. There
will be training on mandatory
reporting for the peer support
providers.
Okay, Madam Chairman and Mr
Speaker.
I'm sorry. You
You told me I could zap your
next time. Yes. You can have a
Taser. You can just Taser me
from the car message will be
entered, duly noted.
Mr Speaker.
Um
I wish that you would consider
this a friendly amendment
because there's no harm or no
foul on this all I want to make
sure I just want to make sure
that
If a for the sake of a
firefighter's life I don't want
to go over hopefully and maybe
it'll end up in there because my
fear is
It won't
Be mandated and I would rather
see it do that, because I don't
want any of our
Firefighters.
And thank you for your service
and what you do, too.
Not get the resources that they
need. So Mr Speaker and
Representative on page Hold on.
I think that
I'm flipping over to page two.
Okay, So, um
When we talk about
And I apologize Mr Speaker and
said I have the amendments. I
have your amendments in line it.
It doesn't give me line numbers,
so I apologize. So it's under
Section 21 Page two new material
when we talk about confidential
communication
Means a written or oral
communication between an
emergency service provider and
their peer support team.
Is that something when
How are we going to let our
firefighters now? Are they going
to get something like you know,
if you go to a therapist, they
have police sign our HIPAA.
Is there going to be something
in writing that says this is
absolutely 100% confidential.
I met him, Mr Speaker, Madam
Speaker. I almost made a mistake
for the good shoot. We change
Sorry. And General lady, um,
they will have to anyone who
will be a peer support provider
has to find has to sign a
confidentiality agreement before
they are allowed to even do the
training. I must I'm hearing
Thank you. Madam Speaker. I just
got a giant notes. Remind me,
Mr Enamel messed up on this, Um
Madam speaker, representative,
Um
Is there a how does it work?
Because I'm trying to align this
when you go to see a therapist.
How does this work if
I know that they're going to
have the training.
To do that, and they're going to
science. But is there a contract
between the person coming in?
And the peer support because I'm
thinking of houses can be done
over phone or the unit record it
to say everything you say here
is is
Is, um confidential or how is
that going to play out to the
person knows for sure they're
kind of entering into a
contract, either in writing or
verbally over the Mister Madam
Speaker and General Lady. The
idea is that you have trusted
members in the department. So
the firefighter who is in need
of help.
Knows that that there's
confidentiality and they trust
this person.
And, um
Madam's okay. Mina, speaker and
representative, and that's
another thing. I would I have
some kind of concerned about, if
if this was my bill, and also
meant it to say
It should be something in
writing or
Something recorded just so that
you have that documented.
Um, that both parties consent to
being confident that that this
they know that they can say this
and it's more of a contract.
Like every time you go in you go
sign that hippo. Think doesn't
matter if you signed it, 100
times of tango Doctor have to
sign the hippo thing. And I know
this isn't HIPAA, but in the
same token, I think it would be
better if there was something in
writing or something.
Um, where it was recorded. And
again. That would be another
amendment. I would consider the
definite referral. The
definition defining very clear.
This is something that is going
to be confidential is that both
parties know this for sure.
So going on on Page two.
Okay. We talked about
All the definitions of things
that can happen and
Um, um The interesting part is
I've learned a lot from my
friends that are firefighters
and E M t s about the stuff that
they see.
You know, and I also have
friends in law enforcement. I
get to hear about the things
that they see. And I could
definitely understand why
They would need peer support.
And you go through all the list
of things. Um
That they will look for.
And then when you go to page
On page two down at the bottom.
It was a portion
Okay?
So, um, we're gonna look Madam
speaker and representative
Donna, there's support. That was
a part. That was a minute. Um,
paged to
And it looks like including and
then going to page three.
Firefighters, paramedics and
dispatchers. Was there a reason
why? Because I wasn't in that
committee. Why, if you could
just tell me real quickly, why
that was removed and was it
further explained in a different
portion?
Madam speaker in general lady
dispatchers and, um
Paramedics are considered
firefighters so just to tighten
up the language, we we took them
out. Okay, Thank you.
Madam speaker and represent I
was just curious of why that was
taken out.
Okay. So on Page three
So we talk about a peer support
program.
And that is going to be
administered.
But
Hold on one second. I'm having a
hard time hearing.
Thank you. So, um Madam Speaker
and representative Peer support
program is going to mean a
program administered by state,
local or regional public fire
agency that delivers peer
support. So who just can you
explain to me who is going to be
Who is going to make up
All of the rules. Is it going to
go to
The state.
Local or regional hold on one
second.
Sorry, Madam Speaker. It's
really hard. When you're hard of
hearing. It's it makes it very
difficult. So can you explain to
me, um, in the peer support
program?
Because I'm confused. What's a
state, local and regional?
Is it going to be made by one
person?
And then given to state, local
and regional, just trying to
figure out how it plays out with
my local guys. And how does this
all work out on those three
different levels?
Miss Madam Speaker and General
Lady, the state Fire marshal
will have the curriculum and the
local departments can request
being part of being part of the
program to get their people
trained.
And then the individual as I've
been saying that individual
departments were not putting a
lot into what they must do,
leaving it up to them to know
what's best for their
department.
Okay, madam speaker and and
represents so
So I let me see how much sense
you're gonna There's going to be
A curriculum.
Outline, but then it's up to
each
Local to figure out how they
want to adopt that. Do they have
the leeway to adopt it at will.
Mr Speaker, Madam Speaker in
general Lady. The curriculum
will be to train the peer
support providers. There will be
definite, um, goals and
objectives and all of that kind
of stuff, things that they will
need to cover and when the peer
to peer support providers will
be trained, and then the local
departments can decide who who's
going to be the peer support
people and
And what they're what it's gonna
look like in their department,
All the peer support providers
will be trained the same
But in terms of how they are,
how they are deployed and used
within any individual department
is not. Um, in this bill. We
want to leave it to local
control.
Thank you, Madam Speaker
Interruption That explains how
was trying to figure out how
that all works because I had the
three different
Departments that would be
looking at that and again. This
is a part that I really hope
that
I You make sure
Um, Madam Speaker Represent your
expert over there. Please make
sure that they understand that.
If somebody comes in and says
they're going to harm themselves
or other and begging you to
please put that in there because
That's the crux of all this part
is at that point, they must they
can't
What I don't want to happen is
what I said earlier. Don't want
somebody to say I'm gonna kill
myself or harm others and that
Peer support person not
understand how incredibly
important that is. So Madam
Speaker representative on Page
three when we talk about
Um
The peer support team member and
kind of the people that are
going to be on the peer support.
So
In the amendment portion. We
struck a hospital staff cleared
your educated, We may anyone
who's taken the peer support
training approved program now
because that portion was struck
out. I have a question on that.
Madam speaker and
representative.
Is that going to be anyone?
Could anyone take that? Or is it
going to only be people that
Are either volunteer
firefighters or paid
firefighters. How does that look
like?
Mr Speaker in General, Madam
Speaker. I'm sorry. And General
lady. It will be firefighters.
Okay?
That was the main thing that
madam Madam Speaker and Russian.
I didn't want it to end up being
just anybody because it's very
these are things that are very
specific to firefighters that
needs to be firefighters dealing
with firefighters.
Um
On this page.
Can you explain to me?
Um Madam Speaker and
representative expert, maybe can
answer this question.
Is there a portion in this here
that says
Here's another thing I don't
want
Somebody volunteers.
And they don't do things like
they're supposed to do in the
training.
And that
Person deteriorates gets worse
harm themselves or others.
What would the liability look
like for that peer support
person?
Mhm, Madam speaker in general
lady that is, and I don't have
the same page numbers as you. Um
it will. The standard is a
failure to X X exercise ordinary
care and Madam speaker my knee.
I have a knee replacement, and
it doesn't like to stand. Is it
okay if I sit
Of course, you know, Laney.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you, Um
And thank you, Madam speaker and
allowing that for her to be able
to sit down, So I'm going to
jump ahead then.
Can you define for me? Madam
Speaker, representative expert
What you mean by exercising
ordinary care? Is there some
sort of definition of that?
Miss Madam speaker in general
lady that has that is a phrase
that has been used in common
practice in New Mexico for
Decades is my understanding.
Okay. Man, Madam chair and
represented apologize. I have
the amendments in order. That's
why pages don't line up, so I
should. I should have said I
have that.
Okay, so
Madam speaker and
representatives, So you took out
gross negligence or intentional
misconduct.
And just have
Exercise ordinary care.
Can you just define a little
bit? Why? What was the reason of
taking out the gross negligence
cause to me that seems like a
A better definition. I know they
It was almost like it's a gross.
I mean, it's very
Straightforward. Is there a
reason why it was amended from
gross negligence or intentional
misconduct to just failure to
exercise ordinary care? Madam
Speaker in General Lady? That's
because those two terms gross
negligence and in in
Intentional misconduct are not
defined elsewhere in law.
Thank you, Madam Service. I
understand that now what you're
trying to get to this is a
common use word and you want to
take out words and what used
weren't used in common use.
Okay, let me go back, so I
jumped ahead a little bit. Um,
Where was I? Okay? I already
went over that Madam speaker and
represent on Page four. I would
like to see the mandatory
referrals.
Um, is there any
Okay, so I'm looking through
hold. I'm looking through the
definitions on her real quick.
I'm trying to look at the
people.
That are That's a question I was
trying to formulate. So Madam
speaker and representative
What this. Would there be any
exclusions like I mean it kind
of all ties in, um somebody
Needed was having a hard time
with their marriage because I
see on here critical incidents.
Grief support line of duty,
serious injuries, suicidal
thoughts.
But I don't see things like
marriage. Like if somebody's
having a hard hard time with
their marriage, would that be
something that they could go to
talk to peer support for or
anything that that would be
excluded? Other than that, or is
that included?
Um, Madam Speaker and General
Lady, um, under section B. I'm
not sure what looks like Page
two. There's a list that starts
with physical and emotional
illness. Failure of usual coping
mechanisms, loss of interest in
the job or normal life
activities.
Personality changes and loss of
ability to function. So there is
there is not, um
Nothing is excluded.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
represented France and I had
glossed over the head. It
circled, but I forgot to go back
to that portion because it's
very important.
That
These people that are getting
trained.
Understand.
That's something that looks
looks insignificant once you
scratch the surface can be huge,
because maybe the marriage issue
has to do with all the other
things that are require a lot
more depth. So Madam speaker and
representative is there
Any thing in here, going back to
what we had addressed.
The most extreme, which is
referral.
Or calling law enforcement. Let
somebody know that this is a
possible cycle is going to harm
themselves or others. Is there
any mandating
In this bill that says, you know
what this is way bigger than the
scope that I can handle. Here's
a list of people that you should
probably go talk to about your
issues.
Madam speaker in general Lady.
It's not specifically in the in
the bill, but that's the kind of
the impetus of the peer support
is that they work with clinical
folks, and they know who and
how. And rather than saying, you
know, you call these people that
peer supporter will help you
figure out and and get in touch
with the right people.
And I will also say, Miss Madam
speaker in general Lady that
what you're talking about
whether they have to phone call
for a hold. They're doing what
they're doing. They've been
doing so this is this has this
is just another tool in the box.
It's not. This is not where
we're going to say that you must
do a B, C and D in situation A,
B, C and D because the
departments have already had
their
Their measures in place to allow
for those things.
And thank you, Um Madam Speaker
and representative and I agree
with you on that. And I
understand what you trying to
say. I just would like to have
seen
An amendment where there is a
mandatory referral just so it's
very, very clear on especially
on the suicidal thoughts and
especially for somebody who's in
over their head on peer support.
Ah, Madam Chair, Robson. Will
there be any oversight like
people to periodically check in
with the peer support to make
sure they're okay? UPDATES is
going to be updated training.
Madam speaker and General lady.
It's not specifically in the
bill. But
The the hope is and I know it's
probably not true Universal and
that's not part of this bill and
something we need to fix that.
They have some sort of a
clinical person, you know, maybe
not employed by the department,
but someone in county government
or in something where they can
have referrals.
And Madam chair and represent I
really agree with that 100%
because we need to make sure
I kind of look at, um
I kind of look at this as you've
got.
Above a solid friend. You've got
a peer who has training but at
the same time, I don't want them
to ever think there a therapist.
Do you know what I mean? I'm
trying to make sure that they
understand Look your peer
support. These are your
limitations. You're probably
going to get in way over your
head. If somebody says this this
you need to make sure that you
refer them.
Because what I don't want is
them to keep going to the peer
support for something that's so
severe and catastrophic. They
should have sent them right off
the bat like I mean, I think in
my head when I look at this
Um Madam Speaker and
representative expert that
They go to the peer support that
somebody they trust somebody
feel familiar with, but that
person should not take it upon
themselves to think that there's
a therapist that they should
immediately start trying to
refer them now.
Madam Chair, representative
expert. What happens to the peer
support?
If they're in over their head
and the person now I'm fine. I'm
good. And I'm not talking
suicide. Listen, something else
like something that they're
like.
Holy smokes or having nightmares
are not sleeping. They're doing
these other things, but they
won't take a referral. What is
that peer support persons Next
step.
Madam speaker and General Lady.
That's not part of this bill.
This is merely setting up the
peer support network and the
training program to train peer
support.
Supporters.
Madam speaker representing
expert. I hope you listen to
that. It's kind of important
that we make sure that we have a
couple of things in their
mandatory referrals would be
good for everything, but
especially for anybody who's
suicidal. Also making sure that
our peer support people
I don't know what it would feel
like to be a peer support. Have
somebody that's got so many
issues you like I don't know
what to do with this person. You
know? Where do they go? What?
What do I do? I mean, I there's
going to need to be the peer
support is going to have
somebody that they need to be
able to call and talk to you or
something has to be done in that
part. When you guys are making
these rules, I would really like
to see you say Okay, when we do
this, we're going to make sure
that our peer support people
understand They're not a
therapist, and if they get in
over their head, this person
won't do this. Here is the next
step. So I'd like you to
consider that when you
Guys are implementing this.
Many men I need to look. Yes,
it's still you. I Madam Speaker
represent experts. So it is.
What happens. Is this in the Is
there anything in the bill that
says what a firefighter can do
if they have a complaint about
the peer support person? If they
have a complaint? Who do they go
to?
Madam Speaker in general Lady
the fire Fire Fire departments
have those kinds of regulations
in place. This is this is just
one small tool We're not looking
at the training will cover
What? It's a two week training
to cover. You know when you
should take it upon yourself
when you should refer when you
should talk to a clinician of
whatever sort, so we're not
going to get into all of the
other stuff. It's not part of
this bill.
Well men, chair and and and
represent. I would argue that
it's because we're actually
talking about the peer support,
and these are
You know, Per the Masons were
supposed to discuss these things
so we can make a decision.
Ah, my firefighters and use have
reached out to me. They agree
with it. They some have said
they do some issues about how
the liability plays out.
But for to make a decision.
I understand what you're saying.
We're doing the generality of
the bill, but it's I get scared.
When this bill moves forward
about how all this training is
going to look and what a person
does if they're over,
overwhelmed or who they file a
complaint to, um, Madam Chair
representative are they going to
have to take in that training is
also going to be harassment and
sexual harassment or ethics
violations being taught to this
pier persons. They know it's not
okay.
To take advantage of this
person.
And anyway, Madam speaker in
general Lady that's already part
of the workforce weren't again.
We're not going into those kind
of things. This is about setting
up a peer supports us, right
madams.
Madam speaker and
representative, um so going on
to
Page five.
Oh, you don't have Page five.
It's Section five.
And then when we talk about
Limited liability and then you
added for the peer support
services provided
Except in actions for medical
practice, a peer support team
member who provides peer sports
service and the public priority
that employees appear sport
team.
Shall not be liable for damages,
including personal injury
Wrongful death President Can you
and then that's the part where
we go in there. So in that
portion, and this is the one
that I actually have union
leaders reaching out to me.
The person who is doing the peer
support. Are you saying
Is not held liable.
Unless there is a failure to
exercise ordinary care. That was
the main question that they've
been asking me, Madam Speaker
and generally, yes.
And I would hope with that. I'm
sorry, madam Speaker.
I would hope that with that
comes
Again.
The training to understand.
Again, it goes back down to I
wish I like bills with a whole
bunch of clarity where I can see
all the moving parts of a bigger
picture person. I like to see
the whole thing.
I would like Also again, Um,
Madam Speaker, representative
expert to make sure when you do
the training when they write up
this training that they make
sure to include
That
This person when they become
peer support, science and
document that they understand
they could
If they did not do
extraordinary exercise, ordinary
care that they will be liable
that they will end up going to
court because
I don't want that to be a
surprise at the same time. I
don't people are scared. I like
transparency that they know
totally. The portion of the bill
says this except in these
situations, so that when they do
the training, everybody
understands If this happens,
this happens. This happens. This
might make you liable to a
lawsuit Madam speaker and
representative, and I'm trying
to think if I have any more
questions on this.
One second I looked through all
of my notes.
Um, Madam Speaker represented
expert. I appreciate the time
and that includes my questions.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next. We
have the gentleman from Otero
representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Speaker will
the kind general lady from
Burnley? Oh, please Yield.
Madame Speaker. I yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, General lady, And I
appreciate the bill brings
bringing
Being brought forward today,
Madam Speaker, General Lady, I
hope I can keep my
My words in place today.
Madam Speaker, General lady, So
I see. I've read the bill. A
bunch of times I've read the
Amendments a bunch of times I
have some questions here
regarding this critical peer
support program and just pretty
much my first questions will be.
What is it?
Entail. So
Madam Speaker, General lady. So
what qualifies an individual to
serve as a peer supporter?
Within the program. Madam
Speaker, General Lady
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
Generally it will be up to the
department who it is, Um
But generally it will be someone
who is more senior who has more
experience. They will get the
two week training. They will
also get suicide prevention,
training and some other things,
So it's up to the department
itself to decide who they're
Who their peer support workers
of peer support. People are
Thank you, Madam Chairman or
Madam speaker Rather and General
lady. So are there like minimum
training requirements within
this two week course.
For the peer supporter, Madam to
representative Madam Speaker,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, we
are trusting the Fire Marshal's
Academy of Fire. March State
fire marshal to come up with
those we do. I do not want to
put in this bill that we're
going to train on a B, C and D
And then next year we needed to
add E. We're leaving it up to
the expertise of the people who
will be doing it.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General waiting. So we spoke
about the fire marshal being in
control of this. I
I have neglected to find that in
my bill, Madam Madam Speaker,
General Lady, could you please
refer me to it? I know it's in
there.
And I'm under the the substitute
with the amendments in context
or the amended bill, Madam
Speaker.
Madam speaker. Give us a second.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, Page three B.
Section three.
Each peer support team members
shall complete a training course
approved by the state Fire
marshal's office.
The training course, shall train
peer support team members to
provide peer support services
for matters that include, and
then there's a list substance
and substance abuse.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and thank you, General lady for
pointing me to that. That
portion I had circled on this
green one. But then I lost it. I
apologize. Madam Speaker General
Lady, so
I'm glad that there's like there
There will be a structure to
this, but there's also going to
be some kind of
Ability for local control and
local decision making, which I
do appreciate so madam Speaker
general waiting. Will we have an
Well, we have some kind of
process.
To measure the effectiveness of
each of the support.
Programs within each smaller
community. Madam speaker
Ventilating
Madam speaker and gentlemen, the
increase in the use of clinical
folks will be there their
measurement that they're getting
more people referred to clinical
help.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General lady. So then we
will be
Tracking the clinical referrals
or or some kind of medical
referrals that come from the
programs. Madam Speaker, General
Lady and How will we know if
those were dealt with
efficiently? Madam Speaker
Generally speaker in general
Gentlemen. They keep track of
how many contacts there have
been with the peer support and
and again. It's local control.
So we're I mean, we're not going
to put in this bill that you
must have an audit every three.
Whatever it's it's up to the
departments and the union in the
state Fire Fire marshal. It's
kind of a team effort.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Speaker in general lady and I do
like that approach. I think it's
a good collaborative approach to
have everybody have a seat at
the table and they're the ones
that hold their departments
accountable. Madam Speaker,
General lady, So I had a
question on your bill. Page
three.
Section three. It's the first
Sentence underneath the title.
It says any state local or
regional public fire agency may
establish a peer support
program. Madam Speaker General
Lady Why is this not mandatory
to ensure the well being of
fire?
Fire personnel in its
department. Madam Speaker
General Lady Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, it basically comes
down to money. We're not going
to put a mandate on on
departments to do something when
we haven't given them the money
to do it.
Thank you, Madam Speaker in
general lady, So I agree with
you that we shouldn't be putting
forward unfunded mandates. Madam
Speaker, General lady, But I I'm
I believe
If I was in a local community
like my community, we have a
volunteer fire department in the
county. Right, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, this is probably
the last of our concerns right
now because we're putting out
fires and trying to aid folks in
the community. Samarian Speaker
General Lady How are we going to
then be able to know that this
Initiative is indeed effective
and can be helpful if this is
not
Something that we
Must
Put forward in each community
instead, it's it's an opt in.
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Madam speaker in general Lady.
They know through the, um I A F
F that peer support works. And,
um, we we don't want to say to a
fire department that that they
must do this at some cost. Um
And as I said earlier, when I
was speaking, that is the number
One concern for firefighters is
behavioral mental health, So the
firefighters themselves are
Are asking for help in this
area.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General lady, So it's my
understanding that there may
already be current support.
Under the bureau.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, Can
you confirm whether we currently
have some kind of support for
critical stress debriefing?
For team members. Madam Speaker
General Lady is that currently
available somewhere?
Madam speaker in general men. It
is available, but it's it's a
much bigger pool of folks. So
this is firefighters only.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and General Lady, So
this is currently available, But
it's
Who else is the pool of the
folks that are involved in? This
Is it e m s? Is it fire and
police who is involved in the
current
CMS bureau was, uh, initiatives
currently, Madam Speaker,
General Lady and gentlemen,
That's not part of this bill, so
I don't know.
Madam speaker general leading We
are trying to fill a gap.
Madam Speaker, General lady and
I'm just trying to understand
how large that gap is.
Currently with support services.
So, Madam Speaker general lady,
My question is, Is there
something anything currently to
help these folks that this would
only complement? Madam Speaker
General Lady?
Madam speaker and gentlemen, as
as stated before. Albuquerque
has already doing this. Some
other departments are already
doing it. So this is just to try
and expand, expand it.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
Alright. I would actually be
very interested to see reports
from Berna, Leo County, or I
believe he said Albuquerque fire
because I would love to see how
that's complementing the current
needs of the community. Madam
speaker, gentlemen or I'm sorry,
General Lady, an expert do we
currently have any kind of
handouts that I could access
online or something to see the
efficacy of this program?
Madam speaker and gentlemen.
Yes.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
in General General lady, So I
would just find that Albuquerque
Fire department.
Madam speaker and it would be on
their main website.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
under behavioral health or peer
support.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and General Lady. I will
be looking for that. And I'm
really interested because you
know me. I like my I like fact
driven decisions and evidence
based approaches as I'm sure we
all do. Madam Speaker General
Lady so
We're talking about local
control here with the folks who
are in the programs and we want
to make sure it's locally
controlled.
So how can we ensure that these
peer support programs are
tailored to address the diverse
needs and fire departments
across the state? Madam Speaker
General lady because I know in
Albuquerque, for example, it's a
It's an urban area, whereas
where I live in Otero County,
it's more more rural. Not as
urban So madam Speaker, general
lady. How are we going to try to
address the needs of rural
Communities, especially
regarding the ones that are in
areas where they have larger
needs, such as forest fires in
the summer. Madam Speaker
General Lady
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, the
fire marshal knows those things.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
lady, So do we know if there's
fire Marshal has has a check ins
periodically with each fire
department to see their diverse
needs and ensure that we're
meeting those Madam speaker
General Lady Madam Speaker and
General Lady that that's not
part of this bill.
Madam Speaker generally. Well,
we're giving the authority to
the fire Marshal's office. I
would assume Madam speaker,
general Lady per Page three.
The bottom of the page. Probably
20 something or other that
Since they have this new
responsibility that then they
would need to check in to ensure
the diversity of our status
indeed affected properly. Madam
Speaker General Lady Would that
be a correct statement? Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I'm not
going to tell the Fire Marshal's
office how to do their job.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General General Lady. I
appreciate that so
You know, I I do want to make
sure that the fire marshal has
the
Ability.
To adequately meet the needs of
the diverse communities in our
state, So I will. I don't. I
know we're not trying to mandate
him or her to do something, but
I certainly want to ensure that
those folks in communities like
mine that are not just a cookie
cutter, Albuquerque Last cruises
Santa Fe, whatever I want to
make sure that we have the
support necessary to ensure that
the diverse needs of our
community.
Is indeed protected because
Madame Speaker General Lady
I know how hard these gentlemen
and general ladies work every
single day to protect
Alamogordo, Otero County, the
whole state, Madam Speaker,
General lady, and if we're not
meeting the diverse needs,
that's a concern for me, Madam
speaker, So I hope that we can
address that in the future.
But I will continue on here.
Madame Speaker General Lady
regarding the confidentiality I
see that at the end of the bill
here.
I believe Madam Speaker, General
Lady. It starts on page.
Five of the new bill.
Or maybe it's page four. Madam
speaker.
Madam speaker. We do have the
amendments in context up so we
can follow along. Oh, cool.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, General waiting. So I'm on
page four of the amendments in
context, and it says all
communication between emergency
service providers.
Confidential.
If they're made well, the peer
support team is providing peer
services and then on the bottom
here, it talks about.
How this would go into effect
unless a peer support team
reasonably believes that
disclosure is necessary to
prevent death.
Substantial bodily harm or
commission of a crime. Madam
Speaker General Lady
With this provision.
What? What would not be
A scenario where they would have
to report Madam Speaker General
Lady
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
it's not spelled out in this
bill as it is in other places,
But this is where mandatory
reporting is. These are the
things that must mandatorily be
reported.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
Lady, so
So it wouldn't be like when I go
to confession with my priest. He
can't say certain things.
Publicly. I don't think he can
say anything publicly. Madam
Speaker, General General lady,
But within counseling, for
example, I don't know the
counseling world so I would
defer to to you. Probably you
have some expertise in health
care, Madam Speaker, General
Lady.
If someone is going to commit a
crime hurt somebody hurt
themselves or kill somebody or
themselves. That would be reason
to disclose. Would there be any
other kinds of disclosures that
could be in this bill? Madam
Speaker, General Lady? I don't
see any others. But maybe you
could help me with that.
Madam speaker in general,
gentlemen. Not that we know of.
But again, it's in other places
in law. Okay, Thank you, Madam
Speaker and General Lady. I
appreciate that, and I certainly
want to make sure we're covering
our bases as I'm sure you do.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, so
The ongoing support supervision
with that
Will there be like ongoing
support check ins for folks who
may not be wanting to
To do harm to themselves, or
they may not necessarily be
wanting to do something to kill
somebody. But Madam Speaker
General Lady Let's just say they
have a behavioral problem.
Right, Madam Speaker, General
Lady if they have a behavioral
problem, will these support
piers be able to check in
periodically with them to ensure
that they are
Okay that they don't need
further medical treatments. And
how how will that work? Madam
Speaker General Lady Speaker and
gentlemen, that again? That's
not part of the bill. Um, we are
leaving it up to the departments
If they want to come up with the
rule that says you must check in
with them every three days,
then fine. We're not going to
say in this bill, what that will
look like for individual
departments trying to keep local
control.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady. I appreciate that
answer.
I think I'm sorry. Follow ups
are part of the curriculum.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady.
So they are. They're part of the
curriculum is that is this the
two week training that we spoke
about?
What's this curriculum? Madam
Speaker Generally, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I don't know the
curriculum. As I said, We're
leaving it up to the fire
marshal, too, to do what's
evidence based in terms of
firefighters?
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General Lady, so
I see that there is let me let
me find my bill Page, Madam
Speaker.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
Lady, so
I'm just I know that we're
seeing where it's local control.
But is there any kind of
standardized curriculum that has
already been promulgated from
the fire marshal? Just for basic
training? Madam speaker, gentle
lady, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, gentlemen, the fire
marshal, I'm sure has many
curriculums and there are
national curriculums around
this. Um, as I said, we're
leaving it up to the fire
marshal to determine whether
they have to create their own
curriculum, too.
Best meet New Mexico's needs or
use some national curriculum or
some other departments.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General lady. So then with the
current folks who are
volunteering or working for fire
departments
And let's just say someone
currently says something
alarming. Let's just say I feel
like today I want to kill
myself. Right, Madam Speaker,
General lady, if that's current,
if that's what's something
someone says currently
Would there be some kind of
mandatory root root requirement?
For
A supervisor to report that to
somebody, Madam Speaker General
Lady and if yes whom Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I
discussed that part of the bill.
It's on the bottom of Page four
and again. We're not going to
say that you must report to the
HR director because of volunteer
department doesn't have an H r
director. We're not. We're
trying not to
Put people in positions where
they can't meet what we're
asking because we know there is
a large variety and what fire
departments look like around the
state?
Madam Speaker, General lady and
I thank you for that. I
appreciate that answer, but I
want to make sure that folks
aren't slipping through the
cracks. Madam Speaker General
Lady. If there's a there's
someone in my department if I'm
the fire, chief of volunteer
fire chief
And I hear someone under my
command, telling someone else
that they feel like they want to
kill themselves. How can this
individual not be mandated to
report to somebody? Anyone?
Local local police officers,
anybody?
That this person could harm
themselves or others. Madam
Speaker General Lady Madam
Speaker. This has already been
discussed. There is mandatory
reporting.
And I'm speaker generally in
place.
Okay, so it's not in the bill,
But there is currently Is it a
statute? Is it a promulgated
rule? Madam Speaker, General
Lady, Where is this to be found?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, it
actually is in the bill. The
bottom of Page four under beach
too.
Appears support team member
recently believes that
disclosure is necessary to
prevent death. Substantial
bodily harm or commission of a
crime.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, So
It says all communications
between Agent emergency service
providers.
Is confidential unless Madam
speaker, general Lady, but where
specifically, does it say must
or shall report Can you turn me
to that page, Madam Speaker
generating
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
it's in the curriculum.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. So where
Which curriculum always now,
referring to Madam Speaker, the
only curriculum we've only
spoken about the one that the
fire marshal will develop or
use. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. I
appreciate that, and I
I trust the judgment of the fire
Marshal. I would not
Hesitate. Why wouldn't dare to
Question his authority or his
efficacy in his rural madam
speaker to the lady, But I do
want to make sure that is in
there, so I will be continuing
to look for that.
As well as for the Albuquerque
Fire Rescue, which I'm still
trying to find the report, But
I'm sure I will find it soon.
Madam Speaker, General lady.
Well, I'm looking for that madam
Speaker.
General lady. I'm wondering how
a peer support programs address
the risk.
Of secondary traumatic stress.
For folks. Madam Speaker,
General Lady.
Hmm. Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, it's in the
curriculum. That's what the
curriculum is about, is to make
sure that the peer support work
Firefighters know what they're
doing, and um, and also have the
support that they need.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you and General lady. I
appreciate that as well. And I
would just hope that like this
sounds like a very nice
curriculum. Madam speaker
generating, but I want to make
sure that this goes to all the
different departments and that
it's indeed funded.
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Madam Speaker, I would just
suggest order in the house,
Madam Speaker.
Madam speaker.
Gentlemen, Can you please cite
the 202 number Speaker? I
haven't announced. My amendment
have not moved, requesting order
in the house. Madam Speaker,
Madam Speaker, As you have
alluded to I have an amendment.
How about that?
Madam Speaker, I would like to
move this amendment Can you
please give the two or two
number, gentlemen?
Of course, Madam Speaker. The
202 number is 0.2279 to 1.1.
Generally from Benaglio. Is this
a friendly amendment? Madam
speaker? It is not
Madam speaker has the general
lady had an opportunity to read
in for the amendment.
Madam Speaker and General Lady,
I can read that fat.
We're going to pause for a
second to allow the amendment to
Is there any debate on the
amendment?
Representative, Madam Speaker.
Would you like me to introduce
the amendment?
Gentlemen, I think you already
did with the two or two number
and moving the amendment.
Okay. You want to speak to the
amendment as to what it does?
That's fine. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Just real quick. I
wanted to make sure that folks
know what the amendment does
because the amendment in context
is kind of confusing and the new
bill Madam Speaker, General
Lady, the original legislation.
In this green.
Had an appropriation to ensure
adequate funding.
Madam Speaker. I request order
in the house.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. So as
I was saying, Madam speaker
The original bill did indeed
have adequate funding for these
peer support folks in
communities across our state,
Madam speaker generating and
that's actually the only reason
this was deemed at your main
Madam speaker general lady now
that this legislation has
stripped the appropriation, in
my opinion, it is not Germaine
and it does not accomplish the
goals.
Of the actual piece of
legislation.
So, Madam Speaker. I am a
reinserting the appropriation to
ensure adequate support for
these services for our hard
working men and women in and
fire departments across our
state. Madam speaker. That is
what this amendment does.
Thank you, gentlemen. And I
believe there's debate on the on
the amendment general lady from
Otero and I'm sorry. Burnley on
torrents.
Thank you, Madam Speaker like
Oh, I'm now in a terror. I'm now
in your county representative.
Okay, So, Madam Speaker, um,
Representative. We outside,
gentlemen, Will you please yield
your time?
Madam speaker, of course.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, uh
And represent him. Sorry. I did
not hear.
What page? I'm sorry, So I have
two bills and that's what I'm
trying to figure it out. I have
got the one with the amendments
You was looking at the green
one. Can you tell me what page
and what line that was from?
Yes, Madam Speaker. One moment,
please.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. So on
the original bill, Madam Speaker
The
Appropriation was online, 12 and
13 of Page five.
But Madam speaker, I can divert
you to the current legislation.
Madam Speaker. I believe I've
I've lost my copy of whether it
is Madam Speaker.
It is now going to be re
inserting the stricken language
that was taken out on Page five
of the new bill with amendments
in context at the bottom. It's
the last two lines which I
believe are 24 and 25. Madam
speaker general waiting
So hold on, But we're still
madam speaker represents. I'm
looking here and I see that and
thank you for bringing up this
section, so I see and the
original bill that's in the
green on Section six.
There was an appropriation for
$500,000 appropriated for the
General Fund, the state Fire
marshal's office.
For 2025 to implement this
training.
So it's interesting.
Madam. Okay, Just check in. Make
sure some answer. Madam speaker
and representative.
So now that is stricken.
So where is it? If that stricken
Where would this I understand
what stricken Because if this is
what made this Jermaine and it
was part of the budget
I'm trying to figure out why
this was removed in the first
place. I don't think you can
really answer that. Could you Or
could you speculate on that?
Madam Speaker, General General
Lady. I will. I will keep it to
my amendment.
But the amendment was intended.
I believe from the sponsor to
insert adequate support for
these
Lifesaving peer support program
establishments. Madam Speaker
General lady and if we don't
have an appropriation, Madam
speaker
And we are not and in the
original bill does say may
create this would not
Ensure that safety of folks in
fire and E M s who are working
day in and day out, Madam
Speaker, General Lady to have
this kind of security for these
folks, because Madame Speaker
General Lady, the peer support
and all the good things that are
included in this bill would not
be funded. So, Madam Speaker,
General Lady these fire
departments that already
strapped for cash, barely
finding folks to even fight
fires and their communities
would then have more potential
responsibilities with
So any kind of adequate
Finding and Madam Speaker,
General Lady. I don't find that
to be fair, Madam Speaker,
General Lady Matter Speaker and
Representative. I agree with you
100%. That's why I was asking
that and I'm glad you brought it
up.
Um, usually what happens. Madam
Speaker representatives that
when we get bills that come to
us when there was no
appropriation, they die.
They go straight into death.
Just they die right there in the
committee.
So I'm just
I agree with you 100% more than
that is that if we're saying
that this is what got the bill
through to say there was an
appropriation in the very
beginning on Page five, Section
six.
Which would guarantee that
there's an appropriation is
going to go through. This is
what gets voted on.
I guess.
I can't wrap my head around.
Why that would be stricken out
of the bill. If that was the
whole guarantee, right, Madam
chair and represent that
guarantee was that here was the
money and now there's no money
so your goal is than with this
amendment.
Madam speaker and representative
is that you want to put it back
in to make sure this Bill Moose
forward with appropriations like
it did in the beginning? Is that
what's that we're trying to
accomplish? Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Mr. Mr Speaker. You've
changed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General waiting.
Sorry. I'm trying to you're
trying to trip me up here. Mr
Speaker. I could tell I'm just
kidding, Mr Speaker, General
lady, But as I was saying,
Previously and I'd love to
continue. Madam Speaker. This Mr
Speaker, General Lady, this bill
only went to Judiciary Committee
and it's the only the only place
that was sent and it passed.
Madam Speaker generally, but it
passed without an appropriation.
So, Madam Speaker generally, I
couldn't tell you what
appropriations would do to the
bill, if indeed it was sent
there as well. And they said,
Oh, well, there's a there's an
appropriation. It's not in the
budget. We're just going to
table it. So, madam, Mr Speaker,
general lady. My speculation on
that would be
First of all, this is important
funds that we need to protect
these folks and ensure that they
appear support. But Mr Speaker,
general Lady
I want to make sure that this
would
Survived the muster.
Of the legislative process
because now it doesn't have
teeth. In my opinion, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, this
legislation doesn't have an
appropriation, so it can say
Well, this is nice. This may
help you good for you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, but
there's no money involved. There
is no actual support services
that would be funded.
Through these efforts. Mr
Speaker, general aiding and if
there's no funding
Mr Speaker Generating. I fear my
fear is that folks in Otero
County and in Alamogordo, where
I represent and I'm blessed and
honored to represent these folks
will not adequately have the
funds to ensure that these
firemen
You can go home.
After a long day's work and have
somebody to rely on at work.
To ensure that they have the
support and Mr Speaker, General
Lady, This is pretty much my my
largest concern regarding this
appropriation of being stricken
entirely from the bill, and in
my opinion, it defeats the
purpose of the legislation. Mr
Speaker, General Lady
And Mr Mr Speaker can't zap me.
I got it right.
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and representative, I
agree with you wholeheartedly. I
actually had forgotten to ask
that question. And I thought I'm
really glad that you brought it
up because
What I would hate. Um so now let
the cat out the bag. I
absolutely love this bill and I
support it. I do have problems
with the fact that things aren't
mandated and I do worry.
Training won't be done properly
and I worry about peer support
being liable to be sued. Those
things do bother me, but not
enough for me to vote No on
this, But my issue is that
This bill could technically die.
Mr Speaker representative, and
they put all this hard work to
get this bill passed.
And it could end up dying
because there's not an
appropriation. So I agree with
you full and full support
because we need to make sure
that our firefighters are taken
care of, and that includes
making sure that appropriations
need to stay in because that's
how the bill came out in the
first place. We want to make
sure that this bill goes all the
way through to the finish line.
Doesn't get vetoed. Doesn't have
somebody say Oh, there was an
appropriation so absolutely
agree with you 100% on this, Mr
Speaker Representative. This is
important Amendment they bring
forward Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Made on the amendment Gentlemen
from San Juan. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Does the gentleman for
more Tero County yield
Mr Speaker. I'm glad to yield
for to my friend from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Um, I actually would
be supporting this bill, except
for the appropriation being
struck out.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
let me let me tell you what my
concern is.
Ms Speaker. Uh, my concern is in
the absence of the
appropriation. That was that the
bill initially was introduced
with
In the absence of that money.
I'm afraid that the firefighter
fund, which is already very
light and is for it for other
purposes, Mr Speaker will then
be tapped.
To pay for this.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
The other thing that I'm
concerned about is by doing
this the potentially burn Leo
and Albuquerque who already have
this program Graham and place if
the money's for this can now be
paid for out of this fund.
I think we will unfairly harm
other fire departments across
the state. So Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm greatly
concerned. I was looking forward
to supporting this as I've had,
As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, my firefighters
back home.
Like this.
And I don't think that I can
support it. Not not because Mr
Speaker and gentlemen that I
don't like the purpose because
the reality is what we're doing
is we're making this voluntary.
We already know that Burn Leo
and Albuquerque are already on
board and doing this.
I just think that we're going to
transfer the cost.
From the city of Albuquerque and
the county of Virgilio turned
the fund.
Um So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I hope that
There is an opportunity to for
us to put this appropriation
back on.
And Mr Speaker. I hope that
you're able to do it. But
gentleman from Otero
Uh, what? What do you think My
concerns are valid for all of
the other fire departments
across the state.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. I
believe your concerns are valid
regarding this appropriation and
the amendment that I have, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, because at
least in my county in my area
My my firefighters are reaching
out to me locally in the county,
saying we support this and we're
glad that there's money coming
to us to help with these
behavioral support services to
make sure that the job that we
do that's already extremely
hard.
Can at least be alleviated with
some kind of support services,
Some kind of supporting net, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and
furthermore, I would like to
note all the analyses we have
On the bill. Especially Mr
Speaker. The analysis that we
got from the fire marshal. It
talks about how the
appropriation will help the Fire
Marshal's office to implement
the training courses and trained
peer support specialist Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, But since
now that this has been stricken
from the Bill and Judiciary
Committee
Then I'm concerned. I don't know
what the fire Marshall believes
is adequate because there's no
money in the new bill. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so I find
that to be such a giant gaping
hole in the entire legislation
that I don't know how effective
it will be. Now I do support the
intention. The spirit of the
legislation. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but I certainly do
not support stripping out
appropriations needed
To implement the product, the
programs that they're intending
to put forward Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
from Otero, Um
In the absence of the
appropriation.
Does it state that if there is
no money for this
That folks who would want to
take part in it.
Cannot that that once there is,
if there is no money, there's no
participation, or Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, does this become an
unfunded mandate that the
natural source for the funds
would be the firefighter? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I would assume if
this was put into place that
there would be a tapping of some
kind of fund if there is one
available, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but I will note the
previous commentary that I or
the previous debate I had with
the general lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Indicated that there is a
requirement for a mandatory
reporting. And so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, although the program
itself is a May I believe Mr
Speaker, Page four.
Or maybe it's page three. Mr
Speaker. It's a may establish
It then says shall report
regarding self harm. Harm of
others dead death or bodily.
Substantial bodily harm
Commission of a crime. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, there is
shall language in here that does
mandate reporting as the general
lady clarified to me of the
physical bill. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, this would now
absolutely being unfunded
mandate with no dollars going
down to the districts locally.
Going down to the communities
locally, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
and so I do find this to be
something concerning at least to
me because Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I know, especially in
the county. We're always looking
for volunteer firemen, Volunteer
fire women, firefighters who
want to ensure that our
community is safe, protected and
keeping public safety as I'm
sure all of us in this body.
Absolutely agree with so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I would just
be inclined to agree with that
sentiment that this is a
mandate, but it is not funded
with any kind of funds. Because,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, the
judiciary Bill did indeed strip
that and I find that to be
Inadequate in ensuring the
efficacy of the legislation. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm disappointed
for the stripping.
Of the appropriation.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I'm going to support your
amendment.
Because I want to support this
bill.
Um, but Miss speaker and
gentlemen in the future, maybe
we need to consider in this body
introducing
Future legislation that says if
During a bill during a a bill
going through the process that
has an appropriation that if the
appropriation is stripped, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen that
especially during a budget
session when Germany is a
question that future years that
The bill would automatically
come under main. So bell. I look
forward to maybe running that
bill with you in the future. In
the meantime, I plan to stand
for your amendment. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Further debate. The gentleman
from
Chavez only and just for the
record for the clarification of
the body. The bill has an
executive message has executive
message 20. That is why it is
German Gentlemen from Eddie
Chavez only represented Mason.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, will you You are little
lighting block, gentlemen, will
you yield Mr Speaker, The
General Bloch yields to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
understand support. I was
wanting to talk on the bill with
this amendment to me.
Helps.
Qualify the bill more to my a
little more to my liking. I hate
mandating people to do things
and not giving him the tools to
do it with.
Appeared to peer is great. We
support our firefighters with
everything every part of our
heart and soul.
But I don't want to put those
period appear guys in a
position.
Without any support.
I stand in support of the
amendment. Thank you.
The lady from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I moved to table House
former number one motion to
table House apartment number one
All those in favor of the house
in I
Oppose any
guys. The ice habit house,
remember number one has been
tabled.
Gentlemen, from Otero back to
you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you Generally, so I find
it unfortunate that didn't go
through. But, you know, at least
you have a message. At least you
have cover there.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So I
will continue here on the
questions that I prepared him on
my first page here.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
So, um, in my community, I want
to make sure Mr Speaker General
lady that we have feedback.
And support from folks across
the state as I'm sure we do So,
Mr Speaker Generating Could you
tell me some of the institutions
and and groups across the state
that are supporting this
legislation? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it's the New Mexico.
Professional firefighters and I
a F. Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in General Lady and thank you so
and, um professional
firefighters. I guess that is a
trade organization for
These groups across the state
and it does this include all 33
counties in this organization,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
statewide professional
firefighters.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generally, but specifically, is
it in every county? That's what
I'm what I'm asking. Do we have
members of this organization in
every county that are members of
this group that has endorsed the
bill? Mr. Speaker? General Lady
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. And do we know if
they endorse the bill before it
had its appropriation stripped
or afterwards, Mr Speaker,
Generally, speaker, gentlemen,
we don't know.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
have they given a dated letter
saying they support the
legislation, and if so, which
date was given on the bill?
Because I know what day it
passed. Judiciary. I want to
know was that before or after it
passed judiciary with the
amendments stripping the
appropriation, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, my expert witnesses,
the vice president of that
organization.
That's all. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Generally. So as the vice
president, I suppose you you
still support the legislation?
I'm not asking a question to the
gentleman. I'm just asking the
General lady so they support the
legislation. So, Mr Speaker,
generally can you tell me about
this? I
What is it? I A F F.
Is that what we've referenced
Madam, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it's the International
Association of Firefighters.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that
clarification. It's good to know
who is supporting what I know.
We have a lot of acronyms in
this in this building. I know I
get a mixed up, So thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
uh, I'm going to continue onward
here on the bill itself, and Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
We're talking about the
mechanisms in place for
reporting. We've already talked
about that on pages. Three Mr
Speaker, General Lady, But does
this include folks who are
medical
Medically, folks who have
medical licenses, such as
Counselors.
Doctors.
And other folks who will be
adequate to be able to help
these folks. Do we have a
network of people in the state?
Mr Speaker, General Lady to
assist
People with behavioral needs.
Mr this bill that was asked and
answered, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I I guess I didn't ask
that question. I'm wondering.
Who asked that Mr Speaker
generally I was here for the
entire debate.
Gentlemen, he was asked and
answered. Please proceed.
Okay, Mr Speaker generally.
well, I do not know if there's
going to be doctors and folks
who have
Degrees and certificates in
helping folks with behavioral
needs. And I'm just gonna assume
no, because I did not get an
answer. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I will continue onward
because I just find that to be
very distressing in my opinion.
But Mr Speaker, General Lady
Is there some kind of feedback
mechanism for people in these
programs?
To be able to help aid the state
and the fire marshal and
bettering the current program
and
Aiding in the continued
Expansion of services. Mr
Speaker, General lady after
someone is helped
Could there be something that's
not a mandate, but something
that could be given
To the state or to the local
agency to show how this helped
them. And if it didn't how we
can fix the gaps in our current
services, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
there's nothing precluding it.
We are not mandating. As I
stated multiple times. We are
not mandating that any
particular fire department how
they run their program. We're
leaving it up to local control.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I did
not ask about a mandate.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I asked
if there is currently or will be
some kind of
Let's just say through the fire
marshal. They're the ones who
have to administer this. So Mr
Speaker, General Lady, will
there be an online form, for
example to help gather
information? That is not a
mandate. We're not saying you
must do this. We're not saying
locals have to do this. We're
saying Mr Speaker generally is
there something to aid in the
administration of this proposal?
To help the fire marshal.
Continue to add adequately serve
this population. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, as previously stated,
I'm not going to tell the state
fire marshal how to do his or
her job. If they choose to do
that, That's fine. I don't know
what the mechanism would be. And
so I'm leaving it up to the
professionalism of the state
Fire marshal.
Mr Speaker, General Lydia and I
appreciate that. My question was
not saying to the fire marshal.
They must do something. My
question was merely. Is there
some kind of comment section
where they can give a comment
Confidentiality to the fire
Marshal. Mr Speaker. Generally,
it appears I'm not going to get
an answer to that. So I'm going
to continue onward with my
questions.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
so
We've talked about budgetary
provisions that were stripped
And the amendment was not
adopted. Mr Speaker Generating
so I see that there's there's
large gaps in rural counties
that don't have these services.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, do
we know if they can work with
local fire Department or I'm
sorry. Local police departments
and other people who are first
responders in the community, Mr
Speaker.
To pull resources to help
administer these kinds of
programs.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
there's nothing in this bill
that prohibits it.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady
we spoke about Albuquerque. Do
we currently know through the
current system because we
already have a pilot, right?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, is
that a collaborative approach
with the fire Department and the
police departments or any local
first responders in Albuquerque,
where the
The program currently exists.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, there
is collaboration and cross
training, but they each
maintained their separate
energies.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that
answer as well. I think it's
good to have collaboration
between all the departments. Mr
Speaker, General Lady because
here in New Mexico, where rural
state as we all know, and it's
important to to pull the
resources that we do have so
that when we do have mandates,
as in this legislation to report
we have folks that will indeed
help us in this administration.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
would hope
That locally that we would have
this kind of approach and I hope
the spirit of the legislation,
if not, the actual wording of
the legislation will aid us in
doing such things, Mr Speaker
General waiting because I
personally know my fire chief. I
personally know my police
chiefs, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker. I would request
order in the house. Thank you,
Mr Speaker in general lady. I
appreciate that, so I don't see
any specifics on what the
training is. I see it regarding
specifically what must be
What must be referred, but I
don't see where must be included
in the curriculum. As we said,
was the fire marshal's
prerogative, which I would not
dare tell the farmers or what to
do. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady I see here we're talking
about Mick Pearce Support
Services Confidential, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, How do we
ensure confidentiality through
this legislation?
Do we have some kind of
encryption process? Mr Speaker,
General Lady, How will we ensure
that confidentiality stays
within the department? No one is
singing.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
don't spell out in this bill.
How that is done that is left up
to the departments.
And there. We don't need to do
encryption. Necessarily. Not
There's I don't know if things
will be emailed or whatever, but
each department has its own
rules and regulations around
confidentiality.
All right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I asked that question
because I see on Page two of
your your bill.
With the new material, it says
Confidential communication means
a written or oral communication
between an emergency service
provider or a peer support. Team
member. So, Mr Speaker, general
Lady
When I continue onward with the
bill on Page five.
Mr Speaker, General Lady on Page
five C. On Section four. It
stays making
Disclosure disclosure shall
notify the emergency service
provider of the disclosure and
writing.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady I
see on Page two, it says written
or oral, But on Page five, it's
just writing. Why did we put
that like that? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
that's if they are going to make
a referral.
So it to to provide the
disclosure in writing to the to
the supported person that there
will be, uh, a referral.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So with the referral be
Confidential communication with
that fall under a confidential
communication under the bill, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
referral will be in conjunction
in co working with the with the
supported person. Okay, Mr
Speaker generally so it says it
must be
In writing. But let's just say,
Mr Speaker, General lady that
there's a There's a situation
that's imminent.
Where someone will immediately
potentially harm themselves or
others. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
If it's in writing. How do we
ensure that that is made?
Eminent to ensure that this
person is protected as well as
the folks who may or may not be
involved in the situation. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen,
departments already have those
kinds of things in place. This
is not affecting any reporting
that's required by the
department for Suicidal this.
This does not change that.
This just talks about how it
will be worked with the peer
support.
Okay?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So
there's currently already
I guess rules and charge or if
there's already rules, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, then do
these conflict with the current
rules because it says has to be
in writing. Do we know of the
current rules require writing or
because I would assume Mr
Speaker, General lady or a would
be more expedient, especially in
a situation where there could be
imminent. Bodily harm, Mr.
Speaker. Generally, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, this is only in
relation to the peer support.
whatever the departments have in
place already that are not doing
Peer support will continue this
in no way affects them.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
I will. I will hold that. I will
hold you to it. We're on video
that this will in no way affect
them. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I'm just worried about any
kinds of lawsuits that may come
in place If someone is saying
well, current regulation, Mr
Speaker General Lady says one
thing.
And then Mr Speaker general
leading this bill says another
thing. I just want to make sure
that we're closing. The loops of
folks are indeed protected,
regardless of if there is some
kind of imminent situation where
there needs to be immediate
services and requirements. So,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I will
absolutely hold that to you. I
appreciate that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm going to
continue on Page five here.
Where we were talking about the
the reporting, and then I'm
going to go to a section five.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
Here in the bill. We added some
language and judiciary
Committee, it says failure to
exercise ordinary care.
Provided that the liability
shall be subject to the tort
Claims Act. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, can you tell me
what the ordinary care is? And
if if that is indeed something
that's defined in the
legislation, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, How will that be? Mr
Speaker, General Lady, How will
that be?
Remedied through the tort Claims
Act. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen asked an answer.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
don't believe I heard a question
about the Tort Claims Act. I
didn't ask one. I believe
representative generated from
burning looting NASCAR and I
believe the gentleman from San
Juan didn't ask one and
definitely not the gentleman
from Lee or Eddie asked one. So,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I'll
ask again.
How will the failure to exercise
ordinary care?
Be subject to the Torque Claims
Act within this legislation. Can
you tell me what that care would
What would the lack of care
would
Subject this individual to file
a claim through the Torque
Claims Act.
One second
Uh, Mr Speaker that is outside
the the
Parameters of this bill. Mr
Speaker, General Lady
respectfully.
I'm going to take you to page
five.
Lines. I believe, probably 1716
says Failure to exercise
ordinary care provided that the
liability shall be subject to
the tort claims Act. How is
that? Not in the scope of your
legislation? Mr Speaker
generally.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that is
outside the bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady I just
read from the bill.
Respectfully, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I want to make
sure
That the person who fails to
uphold whatever it is that is
ordinary care in your
legislation.
Has coverage under the tort
claims Act, Mr Speaker
generally. Then what can you at
least tell me why you put that
in the bill in judiciary?
Mr Speaker in general men, the,
um the committee recommended it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Did we know what the
recommendation came afterward?
What was the concern in
judiciary for not including
subject to the tort Claims Act,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Or can you tell me why the
amendment was put in there from
from what?
Argument or what concerns
Speaker and gentlemen, I I'm not
an attorney.
Um, it was it was a Republican
Amendment.
Um And if we may ask, I believe
it was
Um
It was either the gentleman from
Aztec or the gentleman from
Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, I will trust that it could
be the leader. Or it could be a
gentleman from Chavez, who would
be
I I forget Mr Speaker. I don't
live in Chavez. I live in Otero.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
will continue here. But that's
good to know that that that the
concerns were alleviated in the
In the actual committee. So
Mr Speaker. Generally, I talked
to attempt a little bit about
healthcare involvement. So, Mr
Speaker general waiting. Do we
know currently the current
program with
Albuquerque. Do we know if Mr
Speaker General Lady Albuquerque
has collected collaboration and
connections with folks that the
local hospitals, local
behavioral health centers and do
we know if that's the kind of
model we want to bring forward
in this legislation? If that
does indeed have local
Programs in Albuquerque, Mr
Speaker, General, Ladies and
gentlemen, this was spoken to
earlier. The Albuquerque burn.
Leo County does have clinical
staff that they use and the hope
is that that all departments
would have access to that, but
we're not putting it in the bill
because we know that that's not
always an available thing. So we
don't want to make a hardship on
departments that don't have that
capability.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Yeah, I would
certainly want to foster that
kind of connection collaboration
with those local medical
facilities Because Mr Speaker,
General Lady, at least in my
area we have the Gerald Champion
Medical Center It's now owned by
Krista's Saint Vincent, and they
do a great job and ensuring that
we have local collaboration with
our our first responders. Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I know
that the Alamogordo Police
department
And the record of fire and all
of the folks involved are
working hard together to ensure
that that is collaborated with
properly. Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I am gonna have a hand out
here from the I F F which
endorsed the bill. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, and it's talking
about the developed and
delivered support training by
peers.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, it
says currently that an in person
format class, which is topped by
two instructors.
On two consecutive weekdays and
limited to 30 students.
That is what they currently
offer. And then Mr Speaker,
General Lady, they have one.
That's over three seconds three
consecutive days and limited to
25 students. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady. We spoke earlier
about a two week class doing of
that two week class that's
currently been spoken about is
in any way comparable to this. I
a F F peer support training.
Mr Speaker Generating
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
um, the two week curriculum, As
I have repeatedly said, is going
to be left up to the the fire
marshal that the FF does their
trainings mobili. They traveled
throughout the country, so it's
a It's a much narrower training.
But again, it will be up to the
fire marshal to determine what
curriculum and how how they do
it. Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in general lady because I do
want to make sure that
I know, I FF says right here
that it takes about 4 to 6
months in advance to schedule a
class in a local area. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I want to
make sure that we're giving the
proper abilities to these fire
departments that to know about
the current classes or whatever
is proposed by the fire
marshal's throughout the
curriculum that's promulgated by
the state or a curriculum that
may be adopted from a best
practice from the I A. A F F.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So
this says right here, I'm
guessing this is probably
comparable to the state says
right here that the person
format is $9000.
To put it on. And Mr Speaker,
the the virtual format is $4600
to put put on Mr Speaker,
General Lady, So my concern
stems from the lack of
appropriation here, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Are we confident
that anyone anyone in the state
Other than Albuquerque. That's
already doing this will indeed
jump on board, knowing that it
may potentially cost upwards of
$8000 9000 dollars. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Speaker and gentlemen, we are
hoping that every firefighter
department in the state
Puts behavioral health high on
their list and starts to fund
things, But we are not. We don't
know what the costs are. That's
I f f This. The training has
nothing to do with I F f. We are
not going to have to schedule
them. It is 100% the
responsibility of the fire
marshal to get the word out to
folks, which I'm pretty sure
that office has frequent contact
with firefighter department
throughout the state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Generally
so currently in the I'm not
going to speculate on the
potential.
Fire marshals curriculum. I'm
going to talk about what's
already happening. And
Bernalillo County in
Albuquerque.
Mr Speaker, General lady. So who
are the first point of contact
and emergency situations for
people currently in the peer
support services in Albuquerque,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, That's
not part of this bill. That's
why we're leaving it up to local
control. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Respectfully I want to
understand what this peer
support specialist
Or there's peer support training
will do in local communities
like mine.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So we
have utilized Albuquerque as the
gold the golden calf. So to
speak, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
we have utilized it as the
ideal.
Program that we want to emanate
in local communities as the
purpose the literal purpose for
this legislation, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, So my question
again.
Would be how who who, who are
the first point of contact and
emergency situations in the
current system that we're
intending to emulate through the
language in your bill, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen asked
and answered.
Mr Speaker General Lady who
asked the question.
Okay, Wait a minute. We've been
at this debate now for two
hours. I've heard these
questions answered several
times. Um, I suggest that we
Continue the debate. Ask
questions respond to the
questions, but we are not going
to get into a back and forth
about what was Astor wasn't
asked. I've been sitting here
and listening to debate in my
office and a lot of those quit.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Finished there.
I apologize, and we need to make
sure that we move on with the
debate. So I'm going to
respectfully ask that we ask
questions. We answer the
questions.
Don't be repetitive, or I'll
have to interject again.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, I I guess I did not hear
the question to who the first
point of contact would be in an
emergency situation. Mr Speaker,
which was a very basic question
regarding the actual Burbage in
the legislation because that
person would need to report per
Section four, which starts on
Page four.
And it ends on Page five. Mr.
Speaker generally so Mr Speaker
general leading
I appreciate that.
Whatever the potential answer
may have been that I could have
potentially not heard.
Mr Speaker, General lady, but I
don't really necessarily
understand the hesitance to want
to continue to flesh out What
this peer support service
trainer or the first point of
contact for these individuals
would be Mr Speaker, General
lady, Because in my opinion, I
find that to be an important
Piece of the administration of
this bill. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I find it to be important
to know who these individuals
must reach out to.
I find it important, Mr Speaker,
General Lady to know how this is
administered per the legislation
in Section four of your
legislation that indeed tells
who we have to report to in what
circumstances and it is.
Indeed, here in the legislation,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So I
try to be very good Mr Speaker.
General Lady to keep it to the
bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I try
very hard to keep it to the
letter and and and the intent of
the legislation because it's
here in Section four who needs
to report team member reasonably
believes that disclosure is
necessary to prevent death and
sent bodily harm, Mr Speaker,
General lady and then it
continues here, Mr Speaker,
General Lady repeatedly in this
debate.
I have been said.
My question has been answered
when I haven't even asked the
question before Mr Speaker,
General Lady regarding the Tort
Claims Act, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I was the first
person asked a question about
that. And I was told, Oh, it
doesn't It's not in the bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So
this is truly going to be a
debate about the substance of
the legislation that this
institution is deemed to pass.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, then I
would contend it is the duty and
the prerogative of this body. Mr
Speaker, General lady, too.
Look at the legislation that
we're reading and actually
answer the questions regarding
it. Because, Mr Speaker, General
Lady if this was my bill on the
floor for final passage, and it
only went through one committee,
its appropriation was stripped
entirely, and I was literally
asked basic questions about the
basic details of my bill. I
should have an answer to that,
except for
Well asked and answered Mr
Speaker, General Lady, so I
don't find it to be, too if
you're going to have to ask
questions about the bill, please
do so if not, we'll move on to
the next speaker. Mr. Speaker,
General General Lady. I will
continue to ask questions about
the bill. But I fear I truly
fear.
That this institution will not
allow me to continue my
questioning of this legislation.
Mr Speaker. So, Mr Speaker,
generally I have a I have a
bunch more questions. I'm happy
to continue, but I want your
questions on the bill and the
General lady will as well as
questions. So the best of our
ability and one more one. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General.
Ladies, so
I will continue to to then ask
about the cultural and
linguistic considerations of the
legislation. Mr Speaker, General
Lady So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, have we spoken to folks
and all the areas of the state,
especially in places like in
tribal nations in places in
underserved communities, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, are we
taking into consideration
culturally sensitive and
appropriate materials?
For the individuals have we had
conversations regarding folks in
rural new Mexican, New Mexico
and places such as that who may
need
Different different cultural
competencies and different
languages. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, As I
said before, this is the vice
president of this the I F F New
Mexico, so he talks with with
firefighters from all sizes and
as I have previously stated the
curriculum will be developed by
the Fire marshal's office. We
are not putting in law. What
kind of curriculum what they
have to do its. We are leaving
it to the expertise of the
experts.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. And I'm so
glad that the fire marshal has
had time and attention to speak
in every county in every tribal
nation and ensure that every
individual stakeholders needs
have been have been met Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I am very
delighted to hear that I find
that to be great and incredibly
important and very good.
Because Mr Speaker General Lady,
I think it's important to keep
every new Mexican in mind while
we are doing this work to ensure
that we are providing services
for peer support, training and
giving people the necessary
tools to carry out their duties
as folks who protect us every
single day in fire, Mr Speaker
general leading
I've talked about inter agency
collaboration. I didn't really
get an answer, but I'm glad that
some people are working
together.
Service feedback. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I talked about
that and planning.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I've
talked about public awareness,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, and
since there is not an
appropriation, we can't do much
public awareness on the
legislation. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, So I I I find it to be sad
that we can't get to the details
of the Bill And Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I might just not
vote for it because of the lack
Of ability to answer questions
on the legislation. Mr Speaker,
but I will continue because I
can Mr Speaker Generating, But
before you do, so I do have to
drive the body's attention to
the fact that there is a senator
on the floor of the house.
I don't know how we feel about
that.
Um Oh, wait. It's Senator West
says he's forever a house member
Welcome representative. More. My
starts in the house. Welcome
back, Gentlemen, you may
proceed.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Thank you, General
Lady and welcome, Senator
Maestas all the way from the
other side of the moon. You
know, maybe the dark side Mr
Speaker all the way from the
West side.
Mr Speaker. I appreciate that.
And you know, Mr Speaker didn't
have much much else here to say.
But Mr Speaker, I did want to go
over the years. It seems like
the initial bill here. The far
Marshall was very supportive of
the 500,500,000. I wish it was
500,500,000 Appropriation, Mr
Speaker.
General General Lady and
Especially what I caught my eye
was the grief support the
serious injury or illness.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I I
know that you have an expert
here, vice President from from
the Fire department. I wrote it
down somewhere, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Can you tell me statistically?
How our current folks who are
firefighters affected by these
these incidents that happened at
work, Mr Speaker General
generally and then could you
tell me
Uh versus the average population
who are not firefighters.
How much higher are these
incidences Because of this PTSD
and this stress that's incurred
from the job, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, My
expert doesn't have exact
numbers. But of course, we all
know that they are at higher
risk for PTSD, Sleep disorders,
Suicidality, those kinds of
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you, General lady and I find
that to be shocking as I'm sure
we all do. Mr Speaker generally,
and I do want to make sure these
people have the support.
That they need and I find I have
many friends who are indeed
working locally. Mr Speaker,
Generating in fire and M s. I
know people who are first
responders, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I know that this is
indeed stressful work and its
many times thankless work, Mr
Speaker.
General lady, So I appreciate
the answers here today, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I will
continue to
Advocate for the betterment of
these folks in local communities
to have to have peer support.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I find
peer support to be important for
every single new Mexican safety
because if the best folks in our
communities these first
responders are getting this
support, then we know that they
are the strongest and most able
bodies of people in the entire
state to serve us well to
protect our communities. When we
call 911, we know they will be
there. We know there will be a
doing a great job. And so Mr
Speaker, Generating, That's all
I have. And I appreciate the
body's indulgence. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Wait. Gentlemen from Lee
representative Scott.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady from Bern Leo.
Yield, Mr Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
When
Faced with the question.
Of this nature. I generally
refer
To my hometown for advice and
counsel.
And what I got back from them.
Was that many of these services
provided by professionals are
already available. Did I hear
that? That is not the case.
In the Albuquerque Fire
Department. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen. No, That is not the
case. What This is is to have a
another firefighter to go to who
can help you? It's peer to peer.
It's not that services are not
available. These piers will be
trained on what what kind of
referrals they can make an and
as was stated before.
Many departments have have some
affiliation with the clinical
team.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
The professionals that would
normally provide these services
would have
Master's or PhD level.
Training to provide them is that
Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, are
you speaking about who The
referrals are made to
Mr Speaker in General Lady? Yes,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
that is already common practice.
It's psychologists, counselors.
Whatever this bill does not
change any of that.
That Mr Speaker and General Lady
they concern
With my local
Folks responsible for these
activities were
That a person with minimal
amount of training.
Would be in their words risky.
Could you address that concern?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
what the training is about The
purpose of this program is to
have fellow firefighters and as
stated frequently, usually
fellow firefighters who are more
seasoned who've been around
longer, Um
This is this is a peer to peer.
This does nothing that the
person
The person who who needs the
counseling is always free to
call up and get an appointment
or go through their department.
This is just another tool so
that if they don't know if they
need to do that, or if they
aren't comfortable doing it,
they may be more comfortable
with the peer. They can go to
the pier and the pier will be
trained by the fire marshals.
Training.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady
this person is in effect the
front door to a person that
feels like they might have some
mental health issues that need
attention. Is that accurate
speaker and gentlemen that that
could be the case they could be
the front door they might you
might need you might be able to
go in the back door and call a
counselor yourself. It's not a
It's not a gatekeeper, but it's
one way to enter into that that
realm.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, it's
felt
By your expert witness that this
minimal amount of training would
be appropriate to provide those
services. Is that accurate? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, they are
not providing those services
They are providing peer support,
and they are peers, and they
have a two week training. So
yes,
Okay?
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker,
and thank you, gentle lady for
your answers generated from Eddy
and Lea, representative Brown.
You. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will
the general lady from Bernie
Leo, please? Yoda, Mr. Speaker,
I yield to the general lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I know it's been a long
debate, and I just have a few
little quick things If you'll
just indulge me, please. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
I'm a little bit confused about
the path that this bill has
traveled.
I'm looking at
The green copy of the bill, and
it has in the upper right hand
corner of the first committee.
Referral is it's listed as
health and human services and
the second committee,
appropriations and Finance.
So I'm comparing that Mr
Speaker, General Lady to our
daily bill Locator also with a
cover of green paper.
And it says here, Mr Speaker
that this bill was pre filed.
Is that correct, gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker,
General lady, and then it says
the first committee referral as
House Judiciary Committee which
kind of conflicts with what the
bill itself says again, it says
health and human services
Uh, Mr Speaker. Generally he
could use this. I'm a little
confused. What? We're really how
that happened for perhaps and I
don't see, it noted here in the
bill Locator. Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker in General Lady. We were
also confused by that happened,
Um, So, uh, we did add in in
Section five. New material
limited, limited liability.
So
I This? The speaker could
probably speak to that better
than to that. That is that is,
in fact, correct. Um, as you
know, gentle lady and members of
the body. When we are referring
bills, some bills could truly
overlap with all
910 committees we have. And so
that was a judgment called Made
by me to refer to judicial
committee that appropriations
than the appropriation was
removed in conversation with the
chair of appropriations. We
decided to drop that referral
and I announced that in open
session to the body. Yes, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. I I know
that at times in open session,
you make a diversion for a bill.
Um
I just kind of go by the bill
Locator. And if I don't see it
noted there then I guess I'd
have to go research when it was
said, And when so, just a little
confusion there, Mr Speaker, So
thank you for those answers much
appreciated.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So I
understand I don't have a copy
of the fiscal impact report in
front of me, but I heard it said
just a few minutes ago that
apparently they the estimate of
cost is $500,000. Mr Speaker,
General Lady is that accurate?
Mr Speaker, and it was not an
estimated cost. It was going to
be the cost to try and get us to
one peer supporter, pretend
firefighters, But we what we're
doing with this bill, having
stripped, the appropriation is
setting up the framework.
To hopefully come back at some
future date and get the
appropriation, But we did want
to get the framework in place
because we kind of saw the
writing on the wall that we'd be
tabled in appropriations, and we
don't we want the framework to
go forward. Thank you so much,
Mr Speaker in General 80.
So it's an interesting note for
all of us as legislators that
this is perhaps one method of
getting a bill in without an
appropriation, and my next
question was going to be, and I
believe you have answered it now
that there is nothing in the
budget currently for this, So
thank you. Thank you for that.
I'm just another question or
two. Mr Speaker and General
lady, Um, I'm taking a look at
section for the bill, and this
has to do with confidentiality.
Appear support.
And Mr Speaker generally forgive
me, but I'm wearing my lawyer
hat right now, and it says here
that all communications um in
peer support, um would be kept
confidential.
And this would apply to civil,
administrative or arbitration
proceedings.
Um, Mr Speaker and General
Ladies, So I take it this would
not
If a district judge and say if
there's a criminal matter
somehow wrapped up in
One of these peer support
sessions.
That district Judge's order
could
Basically negate this because
this this is, says civil,
administrative and arbitration.
But if there were say, a like I
said, a criminal
Elements somehow involved. So,
Mr Speaker generally with that
Would that be accurate?
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
am not an attorney, but I will
tell you that this passed
unanimously through judiciary.
Yes, Mr Speaker and General
Lady. I'm not sure that really
gives me much.
Solace because sometimes we miss
things, but I think it's
important. I raise it, Mr
Speaker in general lady because
A firefighter who decides to
give peer support to another
firefighter.
Um
Would maybe feel protected by
being told
You're protected if it's civil,
administrative or arbitration
type of proceeding, But there
may be a criminal matter in
which case you wouldn't have.
That protection and so I think
Mr Speaker, and generally, um,
and just a little concerned that
This framework, actually.
May increase liability for well
intended firefighters who are
trying to help a colleague and I
think that's a consideration
that that really needs to be
dealt with. At some point. Um,
but let me move on. I think I
have just one more thing, Mr
Speaker.
And this has to do with Section
five of the bill. There was an
amendment to basically refer to
A failure to exercise ordinary
care.
Provided that the liability
shall be subject to the Tort
Claims Act. So that's a clue, Mr
Speaker to all of us that this
did go through judiciary, But
could you just tell me a little
bit? I know you've said that the
fire marshal will determine what
would be taught in any kind of
training.
Um, Mr Speaker, General lady,
but would there be an
explanation of what the ordinary
care would be?
In a counseling situation. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, I
would assume so. Um and and I've
gotten a text that says the peer
support are expected to act as
an ordinary person would act
towards their fellow
firefighter. That's ordinary
care.
And then the definition of
ordinary care is that which is
provided to Juries in the
uniform jury instruction.
Right, so
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that. Um, I have a general
concern, Mr Speaker and General
lady that
I think peer counseling occurs
already.
I think people care about other
people They want to help their
fellows.
They're going to do this anyway,
in a little bit of training
about, you know, maybe what to
do or not to do or this is best
practice. I think that's
helpful.
But I think there still is a
liability issue here. And I'm
not sure that fire departments
would really want to take on
more than they already are
responsible for, so I'm very
impressed with people who go on
to get graduate degrees and
credentials and counseling.
They serve a very important
function, but there's a lot that
goes into their preparation, and
it's not just a two week course
so I I just I'm concerned, Mr
Speaker. Generally, they have to
express it.
That I think this is
trying to institutionalize
something that it's really
already happening and again, we
can enhance training already.
but to create this structure.
I think is could could really
cause some problems down the
road. And so I do. Thank you for
the legislation. Mr Speaker.
Thank you for the time.
There's for the debate.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind lady please yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield. Thank you,
Kind lady. I have just one
question I was trying to
Find it in the bill and
Um, this peer support group will
will it have oversight from from
a licensed clinician or
Counselors, somebody that's
gonna
Assist those that peer support
group in some of the harder
cases.
Speaker and gentlemen, as
previously stated, this is left
up to local control. That is
best practice, but I don't we
don't want to put in this bill
that that's a mandatory thing
because we realized that not
everybody has access to those
services so we would recommend
it as as a, um, the best
practice, But it's not going to
be mandated because we don't
want to leave out.
Small, um
Rural volunteer fire departments
that may not have those Thank
you for that kind Lady and Mr
Speaker, the the
Um
Training. Is it going to be
developed locally? Is there
going to be one training that's
standard across the state?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that
the state Fire Marshal's
Marshal's office will determine
what the what the training looks
like What the curriculum is how
big it can be, How often they do
it, But we do know that it will
be two weeks. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and kind of lady, so it
will be a state standard type
program.
Um
Run through the fire marshal's
office and not by the local
fire, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
it will be approved by the fire
marshal but can be run by
However, the department decides
So, Mr Speaker Kind, ladies so
The tunnel burn Leo Fire
Department can develop their own
program and then send it up to
the fire.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
Fire marshal's office will
develop the curriculum.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Kind lady. That was That
was what I was trying to get to
thank you very much. Mr Speaker
for debate, gentle, later, too
close.
Mr Speaker. I move now that HB
101 as amended, do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 101 has amended
The vote.
Is now.
The vote is about
Votes still open. You can hit
the button.
The vote is not closed by a vote
57 in the affirmative, six and
the negative house, Bill 101 has
amended its very passes house,
Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker.
I request to explain my vote.
New Mexico Rural 7-10. We don't
explain our votes on the floor.
Mr Speaker. That's a rule in the
House Rules of New Mexico.
Said the rule
All right, gentlemen, from
earlier several marrow. Are you
ready? Mr. Speaker number eight
point of order Speaker. Can you
get me to that point that the
record reflected all actions
necessary for placing house Bill
171, as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. So this is an order. He
didn't get a chance to read the
rules that he wanted to read to
you about that you can do this
on the floor. We are on the
floor.
Thank you, General lady.
Alright, so we're on the high
school graduation requirements.
Bill House Bill 171 as amended
amends the high school
graduation requirements, Bill,
You probably remember this bill
from last year. It's been
changed. Currently, Students
will have to take 24 under this
proposed bill.
Credit, so that would be the
minimum required, Um, credit
amounts everywhere in the bill
and the fundamental philosophy
of this bill is to give student
choice so within each of the
subject areas, students will
have at least one credit that
will be fulfilled by their
choice in math.
In science in social sciences.
A few things, Mr Speaker and for
those that are interested in
really a breakdown of what's
Being changed on Page three of
the Legislative Education Study
Committee analysis. There is a
breakdown of those credits. Um
All right. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I'll stand for
questions.
Is that awaits. So, you know,
debate generated from the leaves
are brown.
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker,
Will the gentleman from
Benaglio, please yield
Mr Speaker all yield
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that.
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
um
I must say, I am very
disappointed that this bill does
not specify
Um one half unit in personal
financial literacy.
That that would be a requirement
for high school graduation, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, remember
in debate last year on this
bill.
That when I expressed that same
concern, um the answer was well,
um, financial literacy is
embedded in economics and social
studies.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen and
speaking with quite a few
people, students
Teachers and others who are
observing our education system
that it's not enough, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, um, it's
kind of a drive by approach.
Yes, a little bit is taught here
and there.
And yes, I believe the standards
indicate that some of these
topics should be taught.
In little segments to Children
as his age appropriate, but
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I am
quite convinced.
Because of all the people. I've
talked to that financial
literacy, a course in personal
financial literacy.
Needs to be a for for for full
focus course.
Um, my proposal in years past
has been half a unit.
And rather than disturb anything
else in the categories of
requirements, I propose that it
would come out of the electives
column.
So we just reduce the electives
by half a unit and I believe
under your bill this year where
we to do that via amendment that
there would still be five
electives for students, and I
think many people would find
that very reasonable.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
um it makes sense.
That this would be a standalone
course. And in fact, Mr Speaker
may be members of the body are
not aware
But this is the trend in the
nation for for education.
Financial literacy is considered
a key.
To education reform.
And so just to give you a look
at the trend on that Mr Speaker
and gentlemen and members in 19
and Excuse me in 2019, so not
all that long ago.
Just six states required
students to take a stand alone
Personal finance course.
But now, just a few short years
later, 25 states
Are doing this now and I won't
bother to list them off Mr
Speaker.
But that what That means is that
53%.
Students nationwide are now
having to take a course in
financial literacy for high
school graduation. So, Mr
Speaker, that is a very clear
trend.
Mr Speaker. I think this this
material
It is especially important for
students from low income
families.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
spent 27 years
On the board of directors of
legal aid in New Mexico.
First with the southern New
Mexico legal Services and then
when we did a state wide merger
with New Mexico legal aid
And I did that, Mr Speaker,
because I don't want anybody to
live in poverty.
And oftentimes, poverty is
generational, and it may often
times be do
Not knowing how to make sound
financial decisions, So I
believe that this is information
that every student must have.
And I believe the whole goal of
anti product poverty programs is
to lift people out of poverty.
Now, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think we know from last year's
discussion on high school
graduation requirements that
financial literacy is actually
now offered.
But only as an elective.
The sad news is that only 11% of
students take the course.
Most students are not getting
adequate.
Education.
In this area.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
what is caught what is taught in
Financial literacy courses.
And I think that list I'm going
to give you is one indicator of
why this needs to be a full
focus Standalone course.
Things like banking.
Checking accounts savings
accounts.
And they'll just because you get
some checks doesn't mean you've
got the money to back them up.
You have to know that
Check alone is not anything
unless there's money in the bank
to back it up.
And financial literacy. They
talk about insurance, Car
insurance, auto insurance, auto
insurance, car insurance.
Home insurance, all those that
you can go on and on in that
field.
It's about school loans. Should
you take one out or not?
Maybe you want to stay in ST in
New Mexico and take advantage of
the opportunity Scholarship.
Rather than go to another state
to get your education. What
makes sense for you in the long
term?
It's about credit cards, Mr
Speaker.
I know so many young people
who've gotten credit cards.
And just went to town with him
and didn't realize they were
getting themselves into a
mountain of debt.
They need to know how to avoid
those traps.
Financial literacy is about
investing.
Saving
And more so than that is
investing how to turn your money
into more money.
It's about setting financial
goals for you and your family.
It's about payroll deduction.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
remember my Children getting
their first jobs in their first
paychecks and how dismayed they
were when they looked at the
stubs to realize a lot of that
money. They thought they were
going to get went to taxes and
withholding instead.
It's about Bitcoin.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't even understand Bitcoin,
but a lot of our young people.
This is apparently the wave of
the future and they didn't need
to know about these things.
So those are just some examples.
There is a very rich content the
whole subject of financial
literacy, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen from Bernie Leo.
Studies show that students who
have
A sound education in financial
matters.
Have higher credit scores.
They have higher savings rates.
There are also people who
qualify for the workforce.
Better than those who don't have
financial literacy knowledge.
And I might just point out to Mr
Speaker that, um, of the 25
states that are requiring this
course These are red states and
blue states. It's not a partisan
issue. It's a worst. What's best
for our students issue.
We have a coalition here in New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
And it's growing day by day.
These are people who say yes.
We need to have this as a high
school requirement.
The Albuquerque Hispano Chamber
of Commerce is one Albuquerque
Chamber. It's Greater
Albuquerque, Auto Dealers
Association, New Mexico Chamber.
Bankers Association, Independent
community bankers.
C P. A s
Thornburg Investment Management,
And then there are a number of
education organizations as well,
Mr Speaker.
The coalition for Public
Education supports this.
Jump Start New Mexico next Gen
personal finance here in Santa
Fe, ST John's College.
Teach, plus New Mexico.
And then there are anti poverty
groups that are behind this as
well.
United Way of North Central New
Mexico home wise
Prosperity works.
West Think New Mexico and again
the coalition is growing day by
day.
Our own state treasurer. Laura
Montoya. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
is passionate about this issue.
She spoke to our house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, and this is one of
her priorities for
Young new Mexicans.
Because it makes a difference.
And she tells the story of
Native American
Young people who pawn their
jewelry because they need to buy
something, and oftentimes they
end up losing.
These beautiful pieces, some of
which you know their families
have have have done because
They kind of made a bad move in
finances, and that's tragic. I
think
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Many polls have been taken on
this issue in New Mexico. One is
Many polls have been taken on
this issue in New Mexico, one as
Many polls have been taken on
this issue in New Mexico. One is
Many polls have been taken on
this issue in New Mexico one as
recently as January of this
year, so just last month
85% of the people polled say
that there should be a high
school graduation requirement.
We have polls that say, 76%.
I've seen some as high as 90.
The bottom line is gentlemen, Mr
Speaker.
People want this course.
I received a letter recently. Mr
Speaker. Let me see if I can
locate it here.
From a young man.
And here it is, um
His name is Edward.
And I think he's
Either an elementary student or
I'm not sure. No, he's a middle
school student.
Not going to give you his last
name, but his name is Edward,
and he's from Polk Middle
School.
In the South Valley of
Albuquerque, and I loved his
letter.
And it gives me joy to read it.
Mr Speaker. Here's what he said.
I'm not going to read the whole
thing. I'm just going to point
out a couple of things.
He told me about school lunches,
and he says he wishes
They could have chicken salad or
hot wings and more salads like
Caesar salad and then veggie egg
rolls.
So I appreciated hearing about
that. I think that's good news.
But also here's what was really
poignant to me in the letter, Mr
Speaker, he said.
He wishes.
They would teach him and his
fellow students how to do taxes.
And how to get ready for life.
And that's Edward.
From Polk Middle School.
It's not unusual to hear things
like that. When you tell people
do you want to learn about
And one of the first questions I
asked Students group is what
would you think about having
financial literacy as a
requirement for graduation, and
they're all in favor?
And so Edwards a little ahead of
his class.
And asking for that, but I
appreciate him.
So, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen.
I just want our young people.
To have the kind of education
that keeps them from going into
poverty helps lift them out of
poverty, and I believe that a
knowledge of finances is
absolutely critical.
Absolutely critical.
For young people, and I don't
want them to leave high school
without knowing at least the
basics.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
could
I could have an amendment on
this actually had one drafted,
but I'm not going to introduce
it today. I understand all the
work that's gone into this house
Bill.
I'm not going to quit.
This will keep coming back.
Because I listened to my
constituents whatever age
It needs to get done, and I
don't believe we're doing the
doing the job to the extent that
we should so
You might be relieved to hear.
I'm not going to bring an
amendment. Um
But again I'm not the only
person who feel strongly about
this issue. Um, a lot of people
in this chamber actually, who do
support this idea?
And I appreciate each and
everyone.
So the discussion will continue.
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr Speaker, I thank
you for the time lady. There's
further debate generated from
Ben Ali, your representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with a
gentleman from burner Leo Yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Um, I taught at
In the business department at
CNN for a number of years and
um, became a firm component
Proponents Excuse me financial
literacy because I saw so many
situations where our students
had made or were making terrible
decisions.
About the use of money and about
how to manage money that we're
going to follow them for years
and years in their lives.
Um
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
There's so much pain so much
heartache we could stop.
By being sure that our young
people are exposed to some basic
principles about how to manage
money.
And it would seriously I think
impact and improve our
Our rates of poverty.
It's I remember, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. One young woman she
was about 19 years old. She's
going off to college. At one
point, she got credit cards in
the mail.
Nobody had bothered to tell her
how credit cards work. She had
run up she uses before she was
21 years old.
$50,000 in credit card debt.
Um, that is a life changer.
And, um
I just Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Think it's
think it's imperative that
financial literacy be a required
course.
And so that we can help these
young people prepare for life,
which involves money, which is a
piece of life. Thank you.
General further be Julia from
Bonanza presented of Moya Money
but memorable Moya apologies.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Benaglio yield
Gentlemen, is your mike
networking.
Do you want to borrow your
neighbors?
Mr Speaker. Oh, there we go.
Miss Speaker. I'll yield to the
generality.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have
the privilege of sitting on
education committee. So in which
I
Extremely appreciate the
discussions that happened during
the interim and in our
committees. So so I I value the
knowledge that comes out of
there.
Um and being a current teacher
myself. I definitely get to see
everything firsthand. Not only
having I have a senior and a
junior currently in high school,
so so, uh, I'll be pulling my
hair out when it comes to me,
especially because I'm a senior
sponsor. But
Um, but I wanted to When when
this bill came up last year.
Um, I had a lot of concerns
about it. And, um and really
when, when the work that was
done for the interim. A lot of
my concerns were alleviated. I
think one of the major things
was I did not a last year. I
think PE was half was reduced to
half a credit and being a coach
and
Uh um.
Former PE teacher myself. I
understand the importance of
getting our young people moving,
um, and many of them, especially
with a phone in their hand.
Don't move unless they're made
to move. So so I I personally
think it needs to be more. But I
also understand that the least
amount that we as a state
Require all of our districts to
that We mandate they they
require is better local control
for each and every district. We
have 89 districts out there.
That come from all different
aspects of life. Um, we we have
city we have country We have
industrial. We have oil and gas.
We have ranchers. We have
everything out there and
The school boards and the
superintendents and and the and
the people in that community are
the ones that need to determine
what their
Um students need to succeed in
their area.
It is not necessarily. I mean, I
can only speak to what's going
on in Valencia County. But even
in our different we have three
high schools well and then a
couple of alternative high
schools. There are still
differences there.
Um So I love the fact that this
bill
Um, still requires that every
school offers financial
literacy. It's still requires
that they offer, um, that they
still have to offer Algebra two,
but it doesn't require on the
state level and it gives each
and every district that
opportunity in order to
Um
Customize their the needs of
their students. Um, there's two
units in here that that if any,
any district wants to require
financial it they can
Um and, um and I have to. I know
I can speaking from my high
school right now, it's offered
as a well. It could be an
elective, too, but it's mostly
taken as a math.
Requirement.
And, um, it's either that or a
calculus, so a good chunk of I
think probably a good percentage
of of my seniors are taking it.
Um and and, uh, I see them doing
all the projects in my
classrooms, but I but I do love
that. There is so many
Um
Avenues for a student to take
ownership.
Of their education.
Um, for the English. There's
three consecutive required.
And then that fourth year they
can take something that is
specific to their to their
pathway. You know what? What is
it they want to do if they want
to be a create, you know, we
have a movies and and, uh, and
theater coming into our state so
they can take a creative writing
class class, something that's
suspicious
or sorry. Specific.
To them, and that's what I like
about it. This this gives you
that avenue. If you need to take
it, uh, go back to financial
aid. If you need to take it as a
math requirement, Then you take
it as a math requirement. If you
want to take it as a as a as an
elective, then then you don't if
you have a different goal, it's
still you're still getting it in
other areas.
So those are the kind of things
I think the more that we can get
away from mandating and giving
the control to each, Um each
district
We're going to be able to see
growth in all the districts, so
I I 100% approve of this and I
and I definitely voted for it in
in committee and I hope to see
it go all the way. Thank you.
There is for debate The Julia
from Chavez representatives L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Well, the gentleman from Burnley
Oh, yield. Mr Speaker. I'll
yield
First off. I
Do you want to let the body? No.
I did support this bill in the
committee.
As
Push all the time.
And everybody in this chamber
knows
That I am for more local
control.
Mr Speaker. I also pushed for
cursive writing to be taught in
our schools. And to me that's
very important.
If our Children cannot write in
cursive nor read in cursive, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, they
cannot read the United States
Constitution nor the bill of
rights.
To me, that's very important.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
My kids were very fortunate
because they had to take out
their first bank loan whenever
they were nine years old.
They were involved in four H.
And they took a couple of
projects that required them to
go down to our local bank.
Make application for a loan the
head to understand what
collateral was they had to set
up a budget. They had an
interest rate that they had to
pay, albeit very, very low to
help these young kids get
started.
But they learned personal.
Financial literacy.
And it has served them the rest
of their lives so far.
Mr Speaker.
Whenever we are looking at these
new units that we have
implemented in the Education
committee
I say that there are two units
set by local school boards are
tour charter school governor but
governing bodies
I agree with representative
Mirrorball Moya.
That we need to get our kids
more active.
They need to get up off their
butts. They need to quit sitting
behind a computer and they need
to get outside and meet real
people.
It's just me, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
But I am also concerned just
like representative, Brown said.
We are not teaching Children the
entire aspect of what's going to
happen to them.
Once.
They get out of high school.
If Mother and daddy are still
Paying for them to be their
child until they're emancipated.
They really don't realize what
kind of a jam they could get
into.
Mr Speaker.
I would like to ask the
gentlemen what his thoughts are
on, including financial
literacy.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Thank
you for that question, because I
noticed the others that had
brought it up. Hadn't asked the
question. Um I teach personal
financial literacy as a part of
economics, so currently in the
standards that were just
adopted, um, Wall adopted last
year and implemented for the
first time this year, students
from kindergarten all the way
through high school.
Have financial literacy embedded
and in high school, they're
required to take economics and
personal financial literacy. If
you notice on your legislative
education Study Committee
analysis, there's a breakdown of
the standards so over I think
the number was 13 of those
standards are personal financial
literacy.
Many that were mentioned, um,
here today are taught by me in
economics and personal financial
literacy that would keep it as a
requirement for high school
graduating in my case, seniors
taking my class, but it was
brought up about middle school
as well.
There are
Uh, how many here?
Seven standards throughout
Middle school, where students
are taught personal financial
literacy in middle school, so
it's definitely present
throughout the bill and is
required as part of their
economic, personal financial
literacy, So it is very
important and is reflected in
the bill.
Well, Mr Speaker, maybe that
does need to be brought out more
and more whenever you're talking
about that being brought up in
Which area did you say? Because
it could. It could be applicable
in the math, part of it. The
social studies part of it, but I
get that economics. I get it.
But do we need to stress to our
schools that this does need to
be taught?
Miss. You Take your choice
school boards on where this
But personal financial literacy
will be
Thrown at these young kids so
that they can come out.
Of high school.
And get into the workforce and
still be responsible without
going into debt.
$30,000 on a credit card.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Um, I
do know that and trust that our
educators follow their standards
because that is what guides us
as educators to teach. What are
students should and need to
know. And I know I've been part
of several professional
developments over the past two
years.
To implement the new social
studies standards in our
curriculum, so I know this is
new, but it's also being
implemented in our classrooms.
Right now.
Mr. Speaker. You're talking
about a P s.
Is this the standard throughout
the state of New Mexico and all,
uh,
Uh, he did. Nine of our school
districts. Is that the norm on
when this is going to be taught
Speaker General Lady? Yes, the
standards are statewide. These
are state standards and those
professional development
opportunities were more than
just a P s.
Well, I appreciate that answer,
but
Do we? How can we rest assure
that this is being done? Is it
The folks that have called me me
telling them go to your next
school board meeting. Inquire
about this. Go to your high
school and visit with the
principal there. Talk to your
superintendent. How do they go
about resting Sure that this is
being done.
Mr Speaker, General Lady the way
that educators are evaluated is
by our school site, principal or
assistant principal. Whomever
might be our supervisor in our
observations in our evaluations.
We have to give our lesson
plans. We have to give them in
detail. How are lessons that
they're observing? Or that
they're reading in in our
reports?
Or up to New Mexico standards.
so we are personally held
accountable by our site.
And our our our principals and
supervisors that we are teaching
to the state standards.
Well, Mr Speaker teach,
sometimes teaching to the state
standards kind of gets fuzzy and
lots and lots of areas. You know
that as well as I do, and
especially whenever we have
somebody that comes in and says,
I'm making a new rule.
Especially after we have passed
a law that was signed.
I really have a problem with
this. So whenever we you were
talking about the standard
center set, I guess maybe I'd
like to verify
Your co sponsor, the co sponsor
of this bill, um, leader laying
down there.
I guess I'd like to know whether
that is being taught up in his
area.
I'm putting you on the spot, Mr
Leader.
Gentlemen from San Juan. You
have the floor. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Generated from Chavez with an s
so financial literacy is offered
as an elective course at Aztec
High School.
I've had some discussions with
this course with my
superintendent who's actually
here somewhere.
Um
We can't phone in a friend. But
My understanding is offered as
an elective, and it has
Um, I think mixed enrollment
among students. And then, of
course from the
Economics and social studies
classes.
Um, that is taught through the
same curriculum and standards
that that the gentleman from
Burnley was describing.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan.
Whenever we are talking about
incorporating into the social
studies, part of or even the
math, part of it or using it as
one of the electives set by the
school board.
Parents can require a request
that this be
Set up in the schools throughout
that particular district.
Mr Speaker generated from Chavez
so that I think that's part of
the beauty of this bill is
what's important to my district
in Aztec may not be the same
thing as what's important in
Roswell, for example, and so the
two local credits if if
financial Literacy is that
important to our local community
than this allows the board to be
responsive to those types of
communications and implement
something like financial
literacy as a requirement, in
order to graduate from, say,
Hashtag High school
Well, Mr Speaker and both of
you, gentlemen.
I was kind of blown away
whenever I heard the report that
said that there were 25 states
that had already implemented
that. Did I understand that
correctly?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Yes.
You are correct about that Mr
Speaker.
Is that telling us that we need
to set up and we need to start
paying attention because I
really don't want any of our
kids that are
Getting in the workforce while
they're still in house high
school. Lot of them are
They are earning money, and then
they're just so shocked.
Whenever all these weight all
the all the money that they lot
of the money that they earned
has been deducted and they're
not understanding why
I think it's important that we
set up and realize that a lot of
these kids do not see that
training done at home, because
maybe there, folks
I don't know how to balance a
checkbook.
Better in debt.
That is causing them to sink
deeper into debt.
I am concerned that these kids
that are coming out of high
school that are going off to
trade school or college or
whatever field of work that
they're going to get involved in
at the time.
I don't understand.
Just because the chick is there
doesn't mean that that chick is
going to clear than they don't
understand that. Hey, I've got
all these checks left in my
check, but I can continue to
write.
They cannot do that. But that is
the mindset of some of them.
I would encourage Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
That the local board listen to
the parents of each one of these
districts.
And if there's enough
Concern.
By the parents of these youth
that are in our schools.
That they do take heed that they
sit up and pay attention and get
on board with this personal
financial
Literacy. I think it's of utmost
important.
Thank both of you all for your
responses, and I do hope that
everybody at home is paying
attention over this issue.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady for the debate.
Get a lady gentlemen from
Katherine Granted,
representative parasols.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. What
would the gentleman please
reeled Speaker. I'll yield to
the gentleman.
I've been listening in Mr
Speaker. I had my own
reservations about the bill. Of
course, I'm going to support it.
I just Mr Speaker.
Hope that and I love the local
control. Thank you, Leader Lane
for you know, letting us know
that these school districts can
implement this as part of their
curriculum.
I think, Mr Speaker. You know, I
at home. I try to help. You know
the the youth and grown adults
try to to
Cash flow their daily life and
you say what? How does that
happen?
I had a gentleman, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen that came to my
office.
And and we're making
arrangements and he wanted to
help for
Help this family for service
funeral expense.
And he says, I just wish I could
do this. And I just but I can't.
As we kept talking with one
another. He, you know.
He just wanted to share his. His
situation is financial burdens
and its problems.
And so I said, Well, come to my
office and we'll sit down. I've
helped a lot of people in
similar situations.
Learn how to handle and control
of their debt and learn to
Control their checkbook instead
of them, controlling them.
And so what? I did Mr Speakers.
Listen to the gentleman. He
shared me share with me that he
was making
About $85,000 a year his wife
was making about another 25,000
a year.
And so they were making a decent
amount of money.
Uh, to be struggling.
And I knew where the gentleman
lived. He lived in a single wide
trailer.
And and so I said, Well, it will
if you'll share with me your
expenses.
And share with me. These your
You know what? Where you're at.
And your, uh, income.
I will help you build a cash
flow deal.
And so I sat with him for just
about 30 minutes, 2030 minutes
and just, you know, helped him
out.
You know?
That man.
Every time he sees me, he and
his family he was able to cash
flow.
Ah and change completely, uh,
his way of living.
I taught him a little bit about
what Short term debt does long
term debt. What's healthy debt?
What's not healthy debt?
And how to how to, um, how to
control the money flowing out of
his checkbook per month.
And you know, he still sees me
and he always comes up and make
sure to say hi.
The reason I'm talking about
this, Mr Speaker is that is
financial literacy? Um, although
it's not
Something that is is going to
be, uh, mandated in this in this
Particular bill.
I find it that it's very, very
important because as people as
Kids are leaving your debt. Your
credit is your word. It's what
who you are as a person.
And sometimes they see it real
easy. I'll just buy this and
it's only $100 here, $300 there
and pretty soon they're choking
and debt.
And so any, although they want
to keep their word they have put
themselves in a situation where
they're struggling.
And they're financially.
Bound and and they're not able
When I real emergency comes to
take care of of maybe there
needs and whether it's to travel
for medical appointment or
whatever those those emergencies
if its tires or a new watching
machine, whatever it is
The point that I'm making is
something that that they have
forever. So I just appreciate
the bill. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
Thank you. For all the hard
work. You guys answered a lot of
the questions before I got on
the board. But I really
appreciate this. And I hope our
school districts understand and
implement it as much as they can
throughout the state so that we
have
More people with better
financial literacy and can
control their debt. God bless
Senior for the debate. Gentlemen
too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um,
certainly happy with the with
the
Discussion as much as I was able
to be involved in it today. I
just want to make perfectly
clear for the body that personal
financial literacy is required
from K through 12. Certainly the
fact that we have robust
standards and a name to reflect
the importance of personal
financial literacy is all
throughout that legislation, and
it has been mentioned about
local control and giving our
students options when we're at a
time when our attendance is very
low amongst our students, we
need a way to
Engage them in the way to engage
them is to give them options.
To give them choices and let
them in a controlled way guide
their future and their
interests. So with that, Mr
Speaker, I move that house Bill
171 as amended. Do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill 171 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Well, it's about clothes.
What is not closed by vote of 57
in the affirmative, one in the
negative house, Bill 171, as
amended, has duly passed this
house from Otero represented
block.
I'd like to go back to you to
explain your vote under rule
7-7, you are allowed one minute
to explain your vote.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, And this
is regarding hospital 101.
Correct. Mr. Smith is correct,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I voted yes. On House
Bill 101 due to the
Importance I see of folks in our
firefighter community that need
these supports, but I was very
hesitant to support it, though,
because of the lack of an
appropriation, which makes there
be no teeth to assert.
The proper amount of money in
the community. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Mr. Speaker. Point of
order us also like to explain my
vote. Go ahead. Dear Lady House
Bill one on one. Yes, Yes. Go
ahead.
Um, Mr Speaker. Thank you so
much for this opportunity to be
able to explain my vote. Um, I'm
very hesitant about this vote.
I'm very afraid that we're going
to have a bunch of peer
supported people who don't
necessarily know what they're
doing, Um, afraid that some peer
supported people will not have
the thorough training to
understand when somebody may
want to kill themselves and
urgent That is I worry about
I look at. It should just been
somebody who's going to refer
somebody to get the help that
they need immediately without
waiting and trying to pretend to
be therapist. And I'm very
concerned about this moving
forward with no appropriations.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and put a
personal privilege chairs
protective. I'd like to offer an
apology to university Block
four. Not laundry. Explain your
vote immediately after the vote.
Ah, also a good lesson for all
of us. So when we invoke rules,
we should be trying to be ready
with the rule number. That way
we can cross reference and then
a lesson for me. Slow it down a
little bit. No harm, no foul and
giving it a minute until we get
our bearings. So thank you for
explaining your votes on house
Bill 101.
And
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Research. Um, not chasing
represents the Penske.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to the
next order of business messages.
Objection. It is so ordered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed. Senate Rules Committee
substitute for senator at
Resolution one as amended and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Sherry D. Luhan, Senate chief
clerk, Mr will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 137 as
amended Senate Bill 153 and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Generated from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation.
Objection disordered.
House Memorial 43 introduced by
representatives Pettigrew and
Townsend, a memorial requesting
that the New Mexico Legislative
Council create an interim
committee to review State Agency
rules. House Memorial 43
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew and Townsend.
As more of 43 have been read to
us by title is ordered president
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Born on which one was that house
memorial 44, introduced by
representative Sanchez de la
This late in for the correction
of property assessment
disparities between residential
and non residential properties.
House Memorial 44 introduced by
representative Sanchez de la
Cruz, Luhan and Castano,
44 have been. It was by tireless
or printing referred to the
House Commerce Economic
Development Committee.
House Memorial 45, introduced by
representative Casey Memorial,
requesting the New Mexico
Coalition of sexual Assault
programs incorporated to
reconvene the task force
organized pursuant to House
Memorial 40 of the first session
of the 56th Legislature and to
continue the work of the task
force to make recommendations
for policy and legislative
changes to improve local county,
state and federal jails and
detention and correctional
facilities.
Compliance with the Federal
Prison Rape elimination Act of
2003 housing Memorial 45
introduced by representative
Chasity
How's the morning 45? How many
it was by titles order printed
and referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Memorial 46, introduced by
representative Sanjana Memorial,
requesting that New Mexico's
congressional delegation's
support funding for the federal
Affordable Connectivity Program
House Memorial 46 introduced by
representatives Sanjana has more
than 46 have been. It was my
title disorder president
referred to the House
Transportation Public Works in
Capital Improvements Committee.
House Memorial 47 introduced by
representatives, Thompson had
Emilio and Cates Memorial
requesting that the University
of New Mexico study the creation
of an undergraduate and graduate
degree program in music music
therapy. House Memorial 47,
introduced by representatives,
Thompson had a Meo and Cates 47
have been great was by toddlers
printed referred to the House
Education Committee.
House Memorial 48 introduced by
representatives Johnson Little
Allison and Lent Memorial
declaring February 2nd 2024
American Indian Day in the House
of Representatives has memorial
48 introduced by representatives
Johnson, Little Allison and lend
a House memorial 48 to us by
Tyrell Disorder not printed in
place on the speaker's table.
House joint resolution 15
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew and Townsend, a joint
resolution proposing to amend
Article four of the Constitution
of New Mexico to create a
permanent interim administrative
rule Oversight committee and
allow that committee to overturn
executive Agency rules. House
Joint resolution 15 introduced
by representatives Pettigrew in
Townsend,
How's your resolution? 15 have
been there twice by timeless
order not printed.
You guys are paying attention to
the printed
I could have gotten away with
it.
His order printed and referred
to the House government Election
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill five,
an act relating to elections
prohibiting the possession of a
firearm within certain distances
of appalling place during an
election, providing exceptions,
providing a penalty. Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill five.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill Five
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Joint Resolution nine as
amended, introduced by Senators
Neville Tools and Stewart, a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article 12 of the
Constitution of New Mexico by
repealing Section six and adding
a new section six to repair
replace the Public Education
Commission with a state school
board to set policy have control
management and direction of
distribution of school funds and
financial accounting for all
public schools, as provided by
law.
And direct the public Education
Department. Senate Joint
Resolution nine as amended,
introduced by Senators, Neville
Souls and Stewart Joint
Resolution nine, as amended, is
referred to the House Education
Committee.
Lady from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business.
So, you know. Objection. It is
ordered announcements are
allowed no miscellaneous
business.
Announcements generated from
Vermilion Nixon. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, the house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting this
afternoon 15 minutes, the floor.
So hopefully in 15 minutes from
now.
Member signaled
General men from Sibila and
McKinley.
Mr Speaker. Gracias. Your House
Labor, Military and Veterans
Affairs Committee will need 15
minutes after we get off the
floor.
We only have two bills. We
should be out of there by at
least 1130.
Members take note and bring
dinner. Gentlemen from River
River Sandoval.
And all those other beautiful
counties. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Taxation and Revenue Committee
and Senate Taxation, Business
and Transportation Committee
here in this chamber from 8 to
930 Sharp Thanks, Sir. Members
take note. Gentlemen from Eddie.
Chavez, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Appointed
personal privilege. Stage your
point.
Mr Speaker, Um, a little earlier
today, there was
Question of
You know, and the member's
rights you were gracious enough
to consider it. We circle back
and I just wanted to thank you
for that.
Thank you. Gentlemen. Appreciate
that.
Any other announcements. Speaker
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Burnley. Oh,
thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
House Education Committee will
meet tomorrow at nine. AM so
please members note the time
change because of the New Mexico
School Board Association
breakfast at seven o'clock at
the convention Center Convention
Center, seven o'clock School
Board Association, nine o'clock
house education. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Members Signal
generator from Burnley. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I want to announce that
CPAC will start
Immediately after the floor
session in 317, and House Health
and Human Services Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
830 in 307, and Saturday morning
at nine. We don't know the
location for sure yet.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, dear lady CPAC today
after floor health tomorrow, got
it. Any other announcements?
Alright.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move that the
house stands in recess until
1030 am tomorrow morning.
Thank you members. The House
