Representative Bachmann Bill.
Well cost close. We have a
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation, led by the gentleman
from Colfax Curry, hard
inquiries, and McGill and Union
representative Chatfield
Dear Lord, I thank you this
morning that we live in a free
country.
That we can all to come
together. Discuss are the things
that we hold in common.
Discuss those things that we
hold in different
And come to a mutual consensus.
And what's the best?
For all of us and for the state
of New Mexico.
That we could try.
I ask these things in Jesus'
name. Amen.
Good general lady from Sandoval
and bitterly your representative
cage lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the
It will the gentleman from son
Juan representative Montoya
leaders in the pledge to that
New Mexico flag salute the flag
of the state of New Mexico.
But the Zia symbol of perfect
friendship Lady from Bernard
Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that sort of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business Objection Disorder.
Just go to the gentle lady from
earlier presented. How can you
be healed for the announcement
You very much Mr Speaker. I am
flying high because today is
Aerospace Day in the
Legislature.
So we have a number of really
special things going on. But
first I have a certificate. If
Madam Clerk you can please read
it to read.
The House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico
recognizes the New Mexico
aviation and aerospace industry.
Whereas New Mexico is the
birthplace of the United States
space and missile programs.
And whereas aviation and
aerospace play a critical role
in the lives and safety of
residents and impact virtually
every sector of the economy.
Such as agriculture ranching,
the film industry, health and
medical fields, Manufacturing
recreation, travel, tourism,
banking and retail business. And
whereas New Mexico the center of
Space Valley is the third state
to host human spaceflight, with
32 people having traveled to
space from New Mexico
Some multiple times. And whereas
New Mexico is home to 63 public
use aviation facilities.
Six air traffic control towers,
10 airports with passenger Air
service serving 2,500,000
passengers annually and more
than 5000 licensed pilots
serving New Mexico residents,
businesses, ranches and farms.
And whereas New Mexico offers
perfect conditions for aerospace
operations, such as launching
rockets and recovering payloads,
including favorable elevations
and average of 340 days of
sunshine annually, abundant land
and a sparse population.
And whereas
New Mexico is home to more than
80 innovative aerospace
companies performing satellite
component and rocket design.
aerospace, part manufacturing
space Launch services and data
analytics.
And whereas commercial aerospace
in New Mexico provides
considerable economic and
employment impacts for over $300
million and over 80,000 jobs
And whereas
Three major federal resource
laboratories in New Mexico have
a combined annual budget of over
$6 billion and employed over
21,000 people.
And we're as New Mexico is home
to flight testing facilities
with access to over 6000 square
miles of restricted air pace,
airspace for major United States
military installations and 20
federal, state and privately
funded laboratories. And whereas
New Mexico is ranked in the top
three states for drone friendly
skies, and we're as New Mexico
is home to many superb sites of
air and space activity,
including the United States.
Army White Sands Missile Range.
the National Economics and Space
Administration, White Sands Test
facility.
Kirtland Air for Air Force Base,
The United States Space Force
Rapid Capabilities Office.
The Air Force Research
Laboratory. Sandia National
Laboratories, Los Alamos
National Laboratory and New
Mexico State University's
Physical science laboratory.
And we're as New Mexico is home
to the world's first purpose
built commercial spaceport
Spaceport America, which hosts
suborbital launches and will
Sunday host launches into orbit.
And whereas New Mexico is home
to leading research
universities, including the New
Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology
Which operates the Magdalena
Research Observatory, and the
very large array
The University of New Mexico,
which is home to the Institute
of Meteorites.
Meteorite IX and New Mexico
State University, which is a
core member of both the Federal
Aviation Administration's Center
of Excellence for Commercial
Space Transportation and the
Center of Excellence for
unmanned Aircraft Systems. And
whereas Spaceport America hosts
the world's largest college
level students racket
competition, the Spaceport
America Cup.
And whereas New Mexico will
continue to lead in aerospace
education through its superb
science, technology, engineering
and mathematics, education
programs and the world class
research universities.
And whereas the New Mexico
Airport managers association
And the New Mexico chapter of
the Aerospace States
Association or sponsoring events
in the New Mexico State Capitol
to highlight the contributions
of the aviation aerospace
community in New Mexico.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico that
today the people of New Mexico
recognize and celebrate the
accomplishments and hard work of
all those involved in New
Mexico's aviation and aerospace
industry signed and sealed at
the capital in the city of Santa
Fe.
Is there.
Debate on the certificate.
And the certificate. Nope.
Nope. Gentlemen from Chavez,
Percent of Embry. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, I'd like to thank
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
for for bringing this
certificate. Roswell is the home
of modern rocketry. Um, Robert
H. Goddard launched the very
first
Liquid fueled rocket outside of
Roswell on March 16th 1926.
And really gave birth to the
modern rocket propulsion. Ah,
the other thing going on in
Roswell right now, as we are in
a competition with the Reno air
races to host those races to
become the permanent home of the
re known, uh, national
championship air races and
We've been getting a lot of
support, including from the
gentle lady from Santa Fe, and
we really appreciate that. Thank
you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. Go too far
because we are going to be
singing Happy birthday a little
later.
How to sell from Chavez.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
I don't need the lady to yield
But I also want to thank her for
what she did. A couple of years
ago. We got tour facility down
there at the Roswell Airport Air
Center.
And many of y'all don't know
this that airbase the Air Center
down there in my area is the
second longest runway in the
United States, so we're able to
do a multitude of things down
there.
But the representative
Gathered up several of us and we
got to go watching great big
dirigible. I guess that's what
you'd call it. And then I was
able the morning that it was to
lift off about six o'clock. 615
has stepped out my front porch
of my house there at the ranch
and
Get to see it take off and it
was pretty remarkable, Mr
Speaker, So I wanted to thank
you for that, and we are on the
cutting edge, especially with
the air races that are gonna
hopefully coming to our area.
Thank you very much.
Anymore to beat on the
certificate to gentle lady from
Catrin Zokora's Sierra Valencia,
representative Armstrong
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady for bringing
this certificate. I stand behind
any kind of air Anything. Air
balloons, airplanes, space.
Whatever it is my dad. General
lady was known for owning the
most Cessna 195 airplanes in the
world.
And so I'm very excited to stand
in support. I've been flying my
whole life. My husband's a
pilot. My dad was a pilot.
And, uh, I appreciate the
certificates. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Well. Oh, gentlemen, from Dona
Ana, representing small Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I
also want to thank the General
Lady from Bern Leo for bringing
this certificate today, Mr
Speaker, Dona Ana County and the
White Sands Missile range,
which, of course, spends
multiple counties is core to
this nation's history in space.
Ball in many different facets
from our defense side to our
space shuttle program. Mr
Speaker Now with Spaceport
America, we again are at the
forefront with our partners in
the world when it comes to
travel to space, the myriad
scientific
Logistical tourists and other
opportunities that come with
that Mr Speaker. I'd also invite
everybody out to the last Cruces
airport. In my view, perhaps the
prettiest airport in the state
of New Mexico and one Mr
Speaker, where there is more and
more interest, including with
senator souls, bringing things
like air races and
demonstrations.
Mr Speaker. We also trained Navy
pilots out there every year.
And, of course, the history that
we have there, particularly
again on the defense side is a
rich and proud one. Thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, General lady Gentlemen, as
a
Fellow space nerd. Thank you for
bringing the certificate forward
and having your esteemed guests
appear as well. Thank Mr
Speaker. So, my husband said
today, New Mexico is a rich
history and aerospace from white
sands to Los Alamos. We're
seeing this industry grow, and
we're seeing the dawn of a new
space age. RC is at the
forefront of it all.
The state of the art spaceport
in tenants are leading not only
the U. S. But the world in
advanced technologies. I'd like
to introduce someone who's
sitting on the rostrum roster
right now. Very, very special
person because she has literally
been out of this world. Her name
is Jamil A Gilbert and she was
astronaut. Seven. Wow, that was
cool.
Um add virgin galactic. How'd
you pull that One off? That was
Journalism. New Mexico native A
product of our very own school
system she grew up in Las Cruces
graduated from Las Cruces High
School and attended New Mexico
State University.
And last year she flew to space,
So I seem to me to describe the
experience and a captivating and
compelling way and I cannot wait
to see her story more to be
introduced more and more
students in the state and to
inspire the next generation of
new Mexicans to get involved
with space. Um
Welcome to the House.
And last, but not least, Mr
Speaker. I know that was a long
certificate. My apologies. We
are forming the aerospace
caucus. If anybody is interested
tomorrow morning room 3:15 A.m..
There will be breakfast
burritos, and we are kind of
talk about how the next go
legislature can directly affect
and help the space aerospace
industry. So thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. And
congratulations on a rose
Aviation and Aerospace day here
in the house.
Members before I continue at
like for us to, um
Indulge a little bit here. Um,
but today is the anniversary of
the loss.
Of captain Matthew King, who, as
many of you may remember, so
brave, inherent and heroic
Braulio County firefighter who
sacrificed his life
Whilst they're being the
citizens of this great state on
July 16th 2022 about a year ago.
Or a year ago. Today we
celebrated his life with the
passage of House Memorial 31
declaring February 6 2023
Lieutenant Matthew King Day in
honor of his memory and legacy.
Um, as you remember that
remember, that was a fitting an
honorable tribute to an
honorable man and fallen hero
who embodied everything that a
firefighter aspires to be.
If you see folks out in the
gallery or here on the chambers
wearing red, it is in honor of
Captain Matthew King. So if you
please rise and hold a moment of
silence and your thoughts for
Captain King and his family
Thank you rest in peace.
General lady from McKinley
representative Lindstrom. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Today, I would
like to recognize it's a special
privilege for me to recognize. I
believe the only national blue
ribbon school in New Mexico
today and I wanted to explain a
little bit about what that is
The national blue Ribbon Award
is a prestigious honor.
Bestowed upon schools and
recognition of their exemplary
academic achievements and
commitment to excellence in
education. And this year Lincoln
Elementary School from Gallup
McKinley County schools has been
honored to receive the 2023 Blue
Ribbon award. And Mr Speaker,
I'd like to ask the clerk to
please read
The certificate to read.
Your lady will get a copy of the
certificate down here shortly.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um and Mr
Speaker, if you would please ask
the Children that are here in
recognition recognition of this
the right. I believe they're in
the gallery Sure are there they
are waving Can all the students
of Lincoln Elementary School
please rise to be recognized?
I was wondering who all those U.
C l A switchers were up there.
I'm glad they're from here, not
from U. C. L. A
Click to read the House of
Representatives of the State of
New Mexico congratulates Lincoln
Elementary School.
Whereas Lincoln Elementary
School in Gallup has been named
a 2023 national blue Ribbon
School of excellence for his
exemplary high performance, and
whereas achieving the
prestigious title of national
blue Ribbon School is a
testament to the unwavering
commitment to academic
excellence, innovative teaching
and supportive learning
environment demonstrated by the
dedicated educators staff.
Parents and students of Lincoln
Elementary School.
And whereas this esteemed
recognition reflects the
collaborative efforts and
outstanding achievements of the
Lincoln Elementary School
community, highlighting their
exemplary commitment to
fostering an environment that
promotes student success,
character or character
development and community
engagement, And whereas the
National Blue Ribbon School of
Excellence Award, acknowledges
Lincoln Elementary School is a
model of academic achievement.
And a source of inspiration for
educational institutions
nationwide.
And whereas the educators,
students, staff and parents of
Lincoln Elementary School are to
be commended for their
exceptional accomplishments and
for their dedication, hard work
and spirit of excellence that
defines this outstanding
institution.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico.
Congratulations be extended to
Lincoln Elementary School for
being named a 2023 National blue
Ribbon School of Excellence
signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank
the clerk for reading today we
have in the gallery, third
graders, fourth graders and
fifth graders, and I couldn't be
prouder of these kids. I mean,
this is a major accomplishment
for them, and I want to thank
the body for helping me. Welcome
them here today.
Congratulations. Lincoln
Elementary.
And gentle lady before we move
on. I believe we are celebrating
a birthday today.
With your permission. We will
have the gentleman from Chavez
offer rendition of Happy
Birthday.
From Chavez to sing it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I think
Um
Could you could you
I was I had to That point.
Sir, we are singing Happy
birthday, You know Noor of the
generated from McKinley
Representative Lindstrom. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. I will ask for
some help this time.
And if you would all join me.
Alright. Happy birthday to you
Happy birthday to you. Happy
birthday, dear. Gentle lady from
McKinley.
Happy birthday to you.
Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady. Thank you. I'd like
to thank the gentleman from
Chavez. I don't think he knew
who he was going to be singing
Happy birthday to today, but I
thank you very much. And it was
interesting today when I was
giving a quick tour to all the
Children from Lincoln were on
the floor and they sang Happy
birthday to me, but
The students sitting next to me
said, And what is your name?
So I said, My name is Patty. So
it was just happy birthday,
Patty. But I want to thank the
kids and thank all of you for
the singing today.
Thank you. Happy birthday,
gentle lady.
Come again. Naleo represented
Garcia.
Progress is estimated speaker
camera representantes is the
mouse speaker. I have two
outstanding shadows today that
I'd like to introduce. And if I
we could hold our applause until
I introduced the second one is
two miles speaker. First of all
we have my Hailey holiday.
And my Healy is a senior at
Mayfield High School.
And, uh, the
She is a dedicated member, Mr
Speaker of the War City Girls
soccer team.
And I'm mohini showcases or
athleticism and team spirit on
the field.
Contributing to her team's
success.
And beyond sports testimony
speaker she has excelled
academically.
Earning recognition and
membership in the National Honor
Society.
A testament to her commitment to
academic excellence.
Amy is also actively engaged in
community service estimates.
Speaker
Do her involvement in your life.
Administrating or strong sense
of social responsibility.
Additionally, estimate speaker
her passion for music is evident
that she lends her voice to the
large city choir showcasing
artistic talents and
contributing to the vibrant
musical community at our school
is the most speaker. I also have
Pearl Carter.
Pearl is a junior at Mayfield
High School.
Is a dedicated, hardworking
student.
Taking on the challenge of
honors and AP classes. She
demonstrates a strong
commitment.
Two academic excellence.
For holds the position of vice
president.
The French honor society
showcasing her passion for
language and cultural exchange.
Is the captain of Mayfield High
School dance team called
Mayfield Diversity dance, of
which he leads with integrity
and skill.
Speaker outside of school pro
dedicates her time as an altar
server at Holy Cross Catholic
Church, and she's been doing
this for eight years. This to my
speaker.
And lastly, Pearl exemplifies a
well rounded and conscientious
just
With the job.
It's a hard for both learning
and service and her involvement
in the last lesson program
herself. Direct sellers tomorrow
speaker So help me welcome these
two beautiful ladies to the
chamber. Welcome to the house
and las eras.
That's the mouse speaker. One
last note.
The last note these Ah
These very charming and
intelligent, lovely ladies have
informed me that there's some
capital needs.
That Mayfield High School.
It's the oldest school, the
older high school in the Las
Cruces area.
Apparently, there's some
Infrastructure decay.
Going on with the school, So I'm
going to write a letter to the
school board.
The superintendent after the
session, and then my support in
terms of capital outlay to kind
There are further announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernard,
Leo and Sandoval, Representative
Cates. Thank you very much. Mr
Speaker. I just like to bring to
the body's attention that today
is also disability or awareness,
right? Business ability Rights
awareness Day. Um, I want to,
um, challenge everyone in
today's chamber to diversify
your workforce. Um, have you
Hired individuals or volunteers
in your campaign or your jobs
that have different abilities
and thank you very much Mr
Speaker in the interest of time,
man. Make my second
announcement. Go right ahead,
young lady. Okay. Thank you very
much. Today, uh, on your desk,
you will find two passes to the
Anderson and Brazos Albuquerque
International Balloon Museum.
The passes are provided by the
museum in the museum's
Foundation board of directors,
and the museum is celebrating. I
can't believe this 19 years and
they invite you to come and see
all that has to offer. Um I
can't think of anything that's
more New Mexico, then chili and
our hot air balloons. Today's
aviation Day.
Um, When I travel, the country
or even Europe, they brag about
their hot air balloons, and then
I find out there's five of them,
and they think it's so special
and so please go and check out
the museum. It's great. It has a
whole since pre covid a whole
interactive areas, so it's
wonderful experience for the
whole family. And thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady, generally from
Burnley and torrents,
representative Lord
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
wanted to let everyone know that
tomorrow is a day for Israel,
the capital Wednesday, February
7th from 12 to 1 in the rotunda.
It is brought to you with
bipartisan support in the
Senate Senator Craig Brant and
Senator Jeff Stein born will be
punished for the hostages and
reading names of the hostages
tomorrow. That's 12 to 1, the
Rotunda. Thank you gentlemen
from earlier percent of the
cruise.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It's my
firm Belief, Mr Speaker, that
education is transformative.
And so because of that, it is my
absolute pleasure.
And privilege, not to mention
that it's cool.
That I get to introduce my two
shadows who also are with you in
Lhasa program and I asked my
shadows earlier, I said
What is the acronym Stand for?
So in case you don't know
members, it stands for engaging
Latina and Latino communities
for education.
And so my two shadows today, our
first Carolina Herrera, she is a
student at Mayfield High School,
where she has a junior. She has
also a budding artist, and she's
not quite sure what you want
what she's going to do when she
gets to college, but she wants
to go there. She didn't mention
they're saying we need nurses,
so it's it's my pleasure to
introduce her.
Also next with me. I have
Christian Gonzales. He is a
junior at Gadsden High School.
He's also a basketball player
member of the National Honor
Society that they're just
amazing students, both of them.
Christian said that he he's
thinking about being an
accountant. I said, I hope you
do because we need accounts. We
need people that like numbers.
And by the way, Christian, we
have some amazing numbers.
People here in Santa Fe at the
capital. So, Mr Speaker, if you
would help me welcome them to
the house today. I would greatly
appreciate it. Thank you.
Welcome in Las Eros, all the way
from southern New Mexico.
Let's go. Next lady from
Katherine Sierra Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I have a really
important announcement. Mr
Speaker. Today is the first
annual Catrin Sierra and Socorro
County Day here at the
Roundhouse. Yes, thank you.
And I want to. First of all,
invite everyone.
Ah to the La Fonda hotel
Tonight. We'll have street tacos
and other things available for
you to eat and drink. We also
will have door prizes. I have
not been to a place yet. That
has door prizes, so that should
be incentive to go to our get
together on your desk. Ladies
and gentlemen, is bag with the
gold outline it says Gateway to
the healer.
Catrin Sierra and Coral
counties. I just wanted to talk
a little tiny bit about all of
those different counties really
quickly to your CIA's home of 19
Artisan Hot spring spas.
Ah, it has two of the most
visited lakes in New Mexico,
which is Elephant Butte Inn,
Caballo.
The real grand flows right
through the middle of town.
We also are the home of
Spaceport America in Sierra
County and
For sure. The New Mexico
veterans home and we're very
proud of those things and many,
many more quarrel. County is the
home of the very large array 27
radio telescopes that form the
world's most advanced radio
Astronomy observatory. They are
getting ready to do a multi
million dollar expansion there,
so we're excited about that. I
can see them out. My
Kitchen window.
Um, the Magdalena Ridge
Observatory, uh, in the new
Mexico Tech is in Socorro
County. The Bureau of Geology
and Carl County is where Smith's
tonight which I know you all
remember my bill from last year
was was found the basketball
Apache Wildlife Refuge. Sylvia
to National Wildlife Refuge and
the Camino Rail.
Trail goes through there, and it
also has is the home of a four
day school week.
Catherine County is the largest
county by area in New Mexico,
almost 7000 square miles.
And we have not one stoplight.
We're pretty proud of that 3500
people and a population of
12,000 ish elk.
Ah. So when I say I remember I
represent more elk or cows than
people. Sometimes it's true. Mr
Speaker, Home of the cat of
cattle ranches, the healing
National forest, he'll equipped
dwellings the catwalk.
Sawmills, logging, guiding,
outfitting and also home of two
other schools with the four day
school week and Mr Speaker. I am
in a competition.
To give some of the best things
to my representatives from from
this one is from Socorro County
or tease jerky, and so enjoy
that, along with your baggie of
several goodies from all three
of those counties and we stand
proud and please try to join us
tonight for the first annual Get
together. Katherine Sierra Coral
County. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, and I
don't think any beef jerky was
delivered to my office. Just f Y
I
It's on its way.
Thank you.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Luhan. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, Ai to stand proud to
to inform us that it is
disabilities. Right? Rights
Awareness Day 2024. We have been
meeting all all morning long and
had many, many speakers at the
rotunda this this morning And I
just wanna say thank you to all
The work and the leadership we
have in this chamber regarding
our disabilities policies. And
and with that, Mr Speaker, I
would like to introduce my
guests here and the rostrum.
Please go ahead, young lady.
Thank you.
So
First off. I'm going to
introduce Miss Katie Alice. She
was board certified social
worker, a disability rights
activists and media coordinator.
Thank you for being here with us
today. Katie, Um, with her are
Amira Rashid, Daniel Valdez,
Phyllis Connor, Melissa jabber
Michael Martinez and Elizabeth
Lake.
They are all advocates.
Advocates of disabilities and
off to the side here, Mr
Speaker. They're not on the
roster because we ran out of
room are familiar Faces that we
know we have Mr Joel Davis.
And Joel is, um
Has been a disability
developmental.
Um, advocate as long as I've
I've known working here on the
Senate and now in the House. Joe
is part of the Developmental
Disabilities Council. He's a
chair to elevate the spectrum.
Well in elevate the spectrum. He
is the vice president. Excuse
me.
Also with him is Alice Liu
McCoy. She's the executive
director of Developmental
Disabilities Council overseeing
office of the Guardianship
Office of Special Ed on Birds.
And office of self advocacy. Mr
Speaker. We also have some
guests in the gallery. Um, we
have Jennifer Sanchez with a
developmental Disabilities
Council secretary and elevate
the spectrum.
She's a secretary. We have
Lauren Dean Mark of New Mexico,
a board of directors and self
advocate from Santa Fe. We have
Jennifer Donnelly, who is a
parent reaching out in an
executive director, Mr Speaker,
We all give them a round of
applause. For all the work and
advocacy they do. Welcome to the
house, Everybody. Thank you for
all of your work.
And advocacy.
Mr Speaker. Like I said, we have
had landmark legislation for our
state and with sponsors who have
been here with us to ensure the
change. The changes we need are
here and coming and we always
know there's more work to be
done. And I want to
To give thanks again to
everybody in all their work to
ensure that we are going to meet
those needs and those demands of
our disabilities community and
thank you again, everybody who's
here, everybody to hear as
you're advocating come and talk
to us and tell us all the needs
and everything we need to get
done for you. Thank you. Thank
you, gentle lady. Welcome to the
house. Everybody.
Gentlemen from Lincoln Otero,
representative Lincoln Vincent.
Sorry.
You look like Abraham Lincoln a
little bit. Thank you very much,
Mr Speaker before I give you my
important announcement that is
not the rim rendition that I
thought that, uh, representative
Embry was going to give on that
birthday. Little nervous. Um, I
think I need to give them a pep
talk next time. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I mean, Mr Speaker
because tomorrow
I'm gonna ask him to do the same
thing for my wife because it's
her birthday, and I want him to
step it up a little bit, Mr
Speaker.
Tomorrow. I want to remind
everybody that we are going to
have our Lincoln County Day.
And we are going to be serving
brisket luncheon here for all of
our legislators and staff.
And, um
It's going to we're going to
serve hickory smoked brisket
loaded mashed potatoes.
Confetti corn.
Mental beans, salad bar dinner
rolls, dessert and bottled
water.
And it's sponsored by the
Lincoln County for AIDS Council
and Mexico State University
Cooperative Extension Unit.
Service, So I was talking to
representative pedigree, and he
thought that it might be a good
idea for us to get all these
Um, extension agents together
and maybe let them all you know,
feed us all at one time and see
if we can really step up their
game. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Pants for Lincoln County Day.
Gentlemen from
Um burn. Earlier, representative
Romero.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I got
caught up in the brisket talk
their moment ago. You had him at
brisket, Gentlemen. Definitely.
So thank you. Mr Speaker. I do
have two additional shadows with
me today, both from in Lhasa. I
have Alexandra Cisneros. She's a
senior at Mayfield High School.
Um she's been involved with in
Lhasa and enjoys her
involvement. Also in her student
government. Um I also have Julia
Marina, who is a junior at Las
Cruces High School, who is also
actively involved in in Lhasa
and has been so so.
Since her freshman year of high
school.
So if we could welcome both of
them to the House of
Representatives, Welcome to the
House. Cerro's
Before I continue the next
members. I'd like to recognize
several guests. Schools up in
the gallery, starting with
And rise and be recognized Naka
High School, the Native American
Community Academy South Valley
Academy at the Disco Heritage
Academy. McKinley Middle School
here is in the Middle School and
the Santa Fe Indian School Rise
to be recognized. Welcome to
Year House of Representatives
Charcoal shirts. Bring one down.
Gentlemen from leave. It was a
Pettigrew with more brisket
news.
You, Mr Speaker. And I
appreciate, uh, represented
Vincent's and Lincoln counties
Efforts here in you gotta
respect represented Vincent with
respect to
He always brings it across nice
and gentle. I'm kind of more of
the bull in the China closet.
And and so with respect to that
I want to bring our four h out
solid.
For the House of Representatives
for the staff.
For the Senate.
For everybody here.
And I would like Mr Speaker and
in, uh, representative Vincent
to see all of our four H work
together and just do a whole
week.
Of nothing but taking care of
everybody and and bringing it to
bringing it on.
Because that's what we do.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentle lady from Burnley,
representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members. I also want to have you
welcome my two shadows for the
day from analysts say My first
shadow is Sandy Juarez, who
entered the master's program as
a freshman and his diligently
completing her course work for
both high school and college.
She's accumulated 26 high school
credits, along with her college
credits.
She has consistently giving back
to the community serves as the
student representative for her
school's governing council. She
has been a part of our conscious
community by volunteering her
time in serving, learning into
areas 30 therapeutic, horseback
riding for students and
communities who have
disabilities, which is highly
appropriate today.
On our disability day and is an
assistant with preschool
students at the Kids campus a
birth to pre K Lab School of
Santa Fe Community College.
And, um, my second shadow today
Within loss it is and I'd like
you to stand aerial Castle 17
years old comes from Santa Fe,
New Mexico and is participating
in the Santa Fe master's
program, aerials childhood
aspirations of becoming a famous
actress nurtured by supportive
parents who facilitated
auditions.
Parking lasting love for acting
alongside her passion for the
performing arts. Ariel has many
hobbies, including competitive
cheerleading tennis community
service, a deep commitment to
social justice, graduating high
school with a dual associate
degree in business and
accounting, she aspires to
devolve into political science.
And pre law
In her upcoming journey. Her
experiences have heightened her
awareness of community needs and
policy impacts, creating a
passion for helping others her
new future. Future career plans
consist of working for the
government. Whether it is
congresswoman or judge, um,
accomplishing many great things.
I'm sure both of these young
ladies so please
Help me welcome these
Beautiful young ladies. Welcome
to the house in Las Cirrus.
Gentlemen from Otero represented
block
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
don't know if this falls under
miscellaneous business or not,
But Mr Speaker, I just also
wanted to
Join in and say What a great day
it is to have Disability Rights
Awareness Day in the House of
Representatives and this whole
capital. I was blessed to be
there this morning in the
rotunda to talk with the A lot
of my colleagues who are here
right now, and it was great to
just see all the advocates and
talk about the needs and Mr
Speaker. I will also continue to
advocate for
More funding for the DD waiver.
I hope our good friends in the
Senate are listening because we
want that extra $10 million. We
hope we get it in the budget. So
if anyone in the budget process
is is listening
Please.
Put the money in there. So, Mr
Speaker, I also wanted to just
say thank you to Ariel and Sandy
for being here as shadows. Today
I, too graduated from the
master's program. I didn't quite
get an associates degree by the
time I graduated high school,
but I did get it the year
afterwards, so I just wanted to
say thank you to them for being
here and congratulations, and
someday you will be in one of
these seats. I'm pretty sure of
that. So thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Get the Lady from towns,
Representative Ortez. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Today I'm honored to
sponsor some tokens of
appreciation from the New Mexico
Higher Education Department have
a blue bag. One of the
Many blue bags on your desk. You
will find a coffee mug that will
keep you energized while you're
working hard on behalf of New
Mexico students and because
their future is so bright body
and Mr Speaker, you will find a
hat that you can wear to shield
your eyes from their exciting
and bright future.
And because every New Mexico
student deserves to dream about
college, you have these
stickers, college material, you
can hand out to your
constituents and
So hand them out. And if you
want more, let me know I'll get
into you next Tuesday is the
higher education day in the
rotunda, so you will get to
learn about the students who
have benefited from scholarships
like the opportunity
Scholarship, Adult education,
Lower Loan repayment program so
you should check them out. They
will be 24 colleges and
universities in the rotunda.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Body. Thank you for your
lady. Your lady from Burnley or
presented them, Herndon. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and Mr Speaker.
I am proud to present two
outstanding shadows who are
following me today? The first is
Jaden Luna, a senior at last
Crisis High school where she is
the president of the last
Cruces.
Uh, in last club, not only that
she has been inducted into the
French, the music and the
National Honor Societies and Mr
Speaker. She is second chair,
cello, lowest at her school and
one day she's going to play for
us here in the house. She is
Going to be attending New Mexico
State University where she will
be studying engineering, But
hold your applause. I have one
more person to introduce to you
so meet Erica Gonzalez. She is
currently a junior at Mayfield
High School. She is she is on
the yearbook.
Club team. She is the team
manager of the Mayfield
Diversity dance. She has also
been inducted into the National
Honor Society and the French
Honor Society and Mr Speaker.
She has the highest G P A of any
junior attending May feel high
school. She aspires to be an
amazing lawyer just like you, Mr
Speaker, So please welcome.
With my two shadows. Erika
Gonzalez and Jaden Luna. Welcome
to the House.
Gentle lady. Lunch is on its way
to your office. Courtesy of me.
Thank you for those kind words.
Gentle lady from Bernal. ER
presented chasing Mr Speaker. I
only have one group in the
gallery now, but you'll
introduce them. Let me just tell
you a little bit about them.
They're the costs of first used
youth ambassadors. It's a local
youth volunteer program.
Here in Santa Fe and the first
judicial district and youth
learn about the child welfare
system and aimed to educate them
on how to be compassionate and
loyal allies. They're joined
today by their executive
assistant and youth ambassadors
coordinator Elizabeth Happily.
Welcome to the house. Please
write to be recognize.
So good to have so many young
people here today. I feel like
we've got lucky this session
with a lot of groups for HF FAA
So good to have so many young
people here today. I feel like
we've got lucky this session
with a lot of groups for HF, a
similar project and so many
others.
Um, gentle lady from Burleigh O.
K. C.
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr Speaker, Your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to has been referred. House Bill
nine has had it under
consideration reports in
recommendation that it do not
pass.
But that House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill Nine
do pass and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Diageo's chair.
We are an adoption of favorite
committee important House, Bill.
Nah, No, We are adoption of an
unfaithful committee report on
House Bill nine, but will come
to report on the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill Nine. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Supposed to say.
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred house built to
13 has had it under
consideration and reports Same
without recommendation as
amended and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee.
Respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Speaker move adoption adoption
of a report without
recommendation and House Bill
213 all those in favor say if I
was in I
I was supposed to name
Yes, yes. Have it committed
report Adopted Mr Speaker, your
Health and Human Services
Committee to whom has been been
referred House Bill 289 has had
it under consideration reports.
same with recommendation that do
pass and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
share Move adoption adoption of
a federal committee report on
house Bill 289 of those in
favors. And if I was saying I
I don't suppose Nate.
83 has had it under
consideration reports, same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that Health, Health
Dance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair.
Over adoption. We are an
adoption of an unfavorable
community port in house Bill
293, but a favorable coming
report on House Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house Bill 293. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
Supposed name.
The committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
to house Bill 230 has had it
under consideration reports.
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Respectfully submit.
Do you want to Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of a favorable
community reporting house Bill
230 All those in favor Say 85 by
seven. I
All those opposed in a eyes have
a committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Joint resolution, 13 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair?
Move adoption adoption of a
federal community report and how
is your solution? 13 All those
in favor signify by saying Aye
supposed to say yes, have a
committee report adopted?
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Memorial 25 has had it
under consideration reports,
Same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Do you wanna Johnson Chair move
adoption.
We are on adoption of our
favorite committee report has
memorial 25 all those in favor
say Aye, those opposed a S have
a committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
tomb has been referred House
Bill 181 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted during
White Guy Goes Chair, Mr.
Speaker. Move adoption adoption
of a federal committee important
hospital 181 all those papers
and if I would say no, I
suppose. Name the eyes Have it
committed adopted Mr Speaker,
Your Commerce and Economic
Development Committee to has
been referred House Bill 249.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
Respectfully submitted. Dorian
White Guy goes Chair, Mr.
Speaker. Move Adoption. We are
on adoption of a Federal
committee report in house Bill
249. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
I suppose in a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, your
Commerce and economic
Development Committee to has
been referred House Bill 290.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then referred to
the Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Doreen Y Guy goes
chair, Mr. Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a favorite committee
reporting house Bill 290. All
those in favor signify by
saying Aye, supposing eight.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted Mr Speaker, your
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee to must be
referred House Memorial 44 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Doreen
Wagon gives chair
Mr Speaker. Move adoption
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house memorial 44. All
those in favor signify by saying
Aye, as opposed to a the Civic
Committee report adopted that Mr
Speaker, your Appropriations and
Finance Committee tumor has been
referred. House Bill seven, has
had another consideration,
reports say with recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker. We
would option adoption about
Federal Committee reporting
House Bill seven. All those in
favor signify would say Ni
I was supposed to name the eyes
have it coming report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to miss
been referred House Bill 28 has
had it under consideration and
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
Respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker. Move
adoption adoption of a favorite
committee reporting house, Bill
28 All those two papers that if
I was eight, I suppose name
The committee adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to miss
been referred House Bill 29 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a Federal committee
reported hospital 29 all those
in favor in the privacy and I
was supposed to be a commute
report adopted Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 130.
Has had it under consideration
reports. Same with
recommendations recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
Respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker, Move
adoption, some clouds sitting
everybody. We are the adoption
of a federal committee report on
House Bill 130. All those in
favor signify by saying nine
opposed nay.
Cloud seeding. Here we come.
Committee report adopted Mr
Speaker. You Appropriations and
Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 148 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker Move
adoption adoption of a favorite
committee reporting husband 148.
all those in favors and fibers,
and I was supposed to
The committee report adopted
Yes, Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and finance
committee team has been referred
House Bill 232, as amended has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker, Move adoption.
We are the adoption of a federal
committee report on House Bill
232 as amended all those in
favor say if I would say nine
supposed name the S adopted Mr
Speaker, your Appropriations and
finance committee to has been
referred House Bill 253 has had
it under consideration in
reports. Oh, and reports say
Recommendation that it do pass
as amended any one of them big
cups of coffee, Nathan Small,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker, Move
Adoption.
We are in adoption of a favorite
community support the House Bill
253 and everything else, the
clerk said all those
embarrassing problem
Supposing a community adopted Mr
Speaker. Your Appropriations and
Finance committee tomb has been
referred House Bill 270 has had
it under consideration before it
Same with recommendations that
do pass as amended, Respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in hospital 207
deal those in papers and if I by
saying I supposed name report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee to has been
referred House Bill 274 has had
it under consideration reports
with recommendations that it do
pass and then referred to the
Taxation Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen share adoption adoption
of a favorite committee
reporting hospital to 70 for all
those in papers filed by saying,
I
Also Pasni.
The Icelandic community adopted
Mr Speaker, your energy,
Environment and Natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred. House Memorial.
34 has had it under
consideration, reports say with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Matthew
McQueen share adoption adoption
about favorable committee
reporting House Memorial 34 all
those papers and if I would say
nine supposed name
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 162 has had it under
consideration and report Same
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but that the House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 160 to do pass
respectfully submitted.
Christine Chandler chair, Mr
Speaker. Move adoption laughing
at me.
We're in adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 162. All those but a
favorable community. Report on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 162.
All those in favor signify by
saying, I suppose, in a
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House transportation, Public
works in capital improvements.
Committees substitute for House
Bill 190 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do not
pass. But that
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House
transportation. Public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
substitute for hospital 190 Pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption. We
are an adoption went on Federal
Committee report on House
transportation Public Works in
Capital Improvement Committees
Substitute for house Bill 190.
But a favorable committee report
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House
transportation, public works in
capital Improvements Committees
substitute for House Bill 190.
P P p. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those opposed. Nay, the eyes
have it. Committee report
adopted Mr Speaker. Agriculture
is sick. Yes, and water
resources committed to him has
been referred House Bill 301 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
submitted Susan K. And at a
chair.
Adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee reported
in house Bill 301. All those in
favor signify by saying nine
supposed name. The Sabbath
Committee report adopted Mr
Speaker, Agricultural say Kias
and Water Resources Committee
tomb has been referred House
Memorial 33 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Susan K. It at a chair
adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report on
House Memorial Memorial 33 all
those in favor.
Signify by saying nine.
All those opposed. Nay Ecevit
Committee report adopted
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business messages.
Objection. It is ordered.
Into the sun.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 14.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended
Senate Bill 152 as amended with
emergency clause Senate Bill 159
as amended and request the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
entered message from the Senate.
Mr Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the house that the Senate
has passed. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill six as amended.
And requests the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sheri Dean Wuhan, Senate chief
clerk message will be entered.
Lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker, and we would go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation it
is ordered.
House Memorial 52 introduced by
representatives dela Cruz,
Bacca Sanchez and small memorial
requesting the higher Education
Department to undertake or
contract for a study of the
feasibility of creating a
graduate student loan program.
House Memorial 52 introduced by
representatives dela Cruz, Baca,
Sanchez and small
How's Memorial 50 to help
migrate was by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee.
House Memorial 53, introduced by
representative Vincent A
memorial, declaring, February
7th 2024 Lincoln County Day in
the House of Representatives
House Memorial 53, introduced by
representative Vincent Memorial
5300 towards my title disorder
not printed in place on the
speaker's table.
How's Memorial 54 introduced by
representatives Terrazas and
Jones and Senators Brit Diamond,
Brentley and Hemphill.
Memorial, requesting a study for
responsible spending and higher
education.
House Memorial 54 introduced by
representatives Terrazas and
Jones and Senators Brentley and
Hemphill House Memorial 54 have
been raped twice by title, is
ordered printed and referred to
the House Education Committee
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 14, an act relating to
executive reorganization,
amending, repealing and acting
and recompiling sections of the
N M s a 1978 to conform laws to
the functions, powers and duties
of the healthcare authority in
other state agencies affected by
the creation of the authority.
Prescribing penalties, making an
appropriation Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 14,
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 14 is referred to the House
Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended an act relating to
judicial salaries, providing
that justices of the state
Supreme Court shall receive a
salary increase removing
cellular salary formulas for
Magistrates making an
appropriation. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for center bills. 70
years referred to the House
Judiciary Committee Bill 152, as
amended, introduced by Senator
Hemphill an act relating to
background checks. Amending the
criminal history investigation
procedures for the early
childhood education and care
Department and the Children,
Youth and Families Department.
Specifying who has to undergo a
background check, providing
definitions, declaring an
emergency Senate bill 152, as
amended, introduced by Senator
Hemphill Bill 152, as amended.
Is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 159, as amended,
introduced by Senator Campos
An act relating to higher
education, creating the higher
Education Trust fund and the
Higher Education Program Fund
providing an annual distribution
from the trust fund to the
program fund making a transfer
from the Tax Stabilization
Reserve to the trust fund.
Senate Bill 159, as amended,
introduced by Senator Compost
Senate Bill 159, as amended,
have been read twice by title.
His order printed
Just kidding.
You're listening. Good for you
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill six
as amended ah in act relating to
cannabis regulation, changing
definitions, providing powers
and duties, providing procedures
for criminal but history
background checks prohibiting
drive up windows at cannabis
retail establishments, removing
the prohibition against a person
owning both of cannabis license
and a license under the Liquor
Control Act.
Prohibiting co location of
cannabis activities and
alcoholic beverage sales or
service activities to the public
or members of private clubs.
Providing for investigatory
confidentiality, allowing for
licensee conversion from
non profit for profit corporate
status. Changing packaging
requirements, replacing license
sure, with registration of
cannabis training and education
programs.
Including the Cannabis
Regulation Act in the
Racketeering Act, the
Delinquency Act and the Uniform
Licensing Act, including
cannabis in a list of contraband
in jails and prisons.
Creating crimes prescribing
penalties. Repealing a delayed
repeal, amending, repealing and
enacting sections of the N M s a
1978.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill six
as amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bills six
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Mr Speaker. I move into that
next order of business Third
reading of legislation.
I see no objection. It is so
ordered members. We have four
items on our third reading
calendar today.
We've put out notice to both
caucuses.
About what we're doing today.
We're going to start
An item number 13 gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Are you ready on
that item?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Will you get me
to that point let the record
reflect.
But I'll actually necessary for
placing House Bill 195 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
generator to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. House.
Bill 195 updates the
Opportunities Enterprise Act to
include housing fund and include
a representative on the
Opportunities Enterprise. We're
Review board to oversee some of
the housing efforts. And
essentially, what it does is it
provides loans slash capital for
housing development projects
that are specifically for low to
middle income households.
And Workforce development
housing that's near to economic
development areas, And with
that I stand for questions. If I
may I apologize. Mr Speaker. I
have two witnesses with me
today. I have Daniel War with
with the governor's office, and
I have Marquita Russell, who's
the CEO of the New Mexico
Finance Authority. Thank you and
without a standard questions.
Thank you. There is a bit will
go first as gentle lady from
Berlioz's representative Dixon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield?
Yes, I yield to the gentle lady
from Bergoglio.
Thank you.
I know Mr Speaker that several
other of our colleagues have
questions. And so I thought,
maybe I'd start with some of the
basics if that's okay. Mr
Speaker in general lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. General Lady.
Wonderful. I'd like to start
with
Um, the housing component that
is being added to the
opportunity. Enterprise Fund. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Why are
white? Why does this legislation
proposed to add funding for
housing development?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. We have a
real lack of supply and housing
market right now and especially
for projects that are
affordable, not necessarily
affordable housing per se, but
housing that is affordable for
middle income earners. And so
what this fund would do is it
fills that gap? I know there's a
lot of pieces to the housing
puddle puzzle, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and this is one
aspect that's ensuring we have
more housing that's affordable
for the average of Mexican
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady and Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. Am I correct and
understanding that
There is not a similar fund or,
um
Grant or loan program that
fulfills this specific need.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, because this
fund really goes to increasing
the capital of available for
developments that aren't
necessarily for very high cost
of living. This is a very unique
fund that would exist. There's
nothing like this under the
Mexico Finance Authority and as
we know, the mortgage Finance
authority also has a separate
Duty to really serve those who
need more things like affordable
housing or really help getting
from one rent to our one monthly
payment to the next.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. You mentioned
the mortgage Finance authority,
and I just wanted to clarify. Is
this taking resources? Is this
taking money from em FA or
impeding their authority in
anyway? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. I
absolutely not. In fact, as the
F I R from the LFC noted there
is already $75 million. That is
going to um No way. I apologize.
We go back, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I believe it's 85.
Million dollars. That's going
directly to M F a separate from
what this fund is.
And Mr Speaker and gentle lady
could housing development
proposal work, both with
The Opportunity Enterprise Fund
Housing developed Development
Fund and MFA. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. Yes, they could.
Mr Speaker in General Lady,
Could you tell me how many
housing units are we short here
in New Mexico?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, at
least 30,000.
Uh, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you very much. And what is
one of the biggest barriers to
increasing the supply of
housing? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. As we
know the cost for creating a
development or very high, And so
what often happens is it's a bit
on on spec a little bit. Where
When you build a house, you're
hoping that someone will buy it,
But to have that finance and get
started can cost a lot.
In addition to make a profit off
of the housing the people build
can be also quite expensive,
Raising the cost for housing in
general, Mr Speaker, General
lady and so what this bill would
do is ensure that they have that
starting capital to really start
investing in key areas and
what's exciting about the bill,
Which I think Mr Speaker,
General lady that this body will
enjoy is if you go to page
Pull it up really fast if you go
to page
Sorry. It's a bit of a long
bill. Uh, page 2021. You'll see
some of the pieces that are very
important. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady for mm fail to consider,
including that the proposed
housing project complies with
with laws has evidence that it
would, um that that there's not
enough for sufficient housing
available in that area and that
other pieces that may be
important. It also ensures that
it has local support and
financial need is is exist as
well in that region. Also, Mr
Speaker generally if I may just
one aspect of that as well is
that there is a club
Back there. There's a clawback
provisions in here, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady that explains if
someone were not to honor the
agreements than the loan that
they enter on through this
funding, how we could club that
back and what we'll be able to
do, Mr Speaker, General Lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker in General
lady. Um I appreciate that. You
identified several of the
criteria or provisions that are
going to be used to determine
funding and I'm wondering if you
could speak to, um, the fact
that this is actually
A lot of this bill is already in
action with the Opportunity
Enterprise Fund. Is that
correct? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. Yes,
The opportunity Enterprise Fund
was passed back, and I believe
it was 2021. We were co sponsors
on this bill. Mr Speaker,
General Lady back then, and the
vision we had was that we'd be
able to rehabilitate a lot of
our main streets or economic
Development drivers that we
could see really start seeing
that take off and flourish and
so they were able to begin their
loan process and their
application process this past
year in 2023, they had 33
different projects that came to
them that would have requested
something like $133 million by
remember correctly, and it was a
cross section of New Mexico. 42%
of these applications came from
rural or frontier areas with
very specific language about how
that would work.
And they were able to select
seven, but they're still going
through the underwriting
process as we can't necessarily
identify those at this point, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, what's
exciting about this list? And
I'm happy to share it with
anybody in the room. It's a real
mix of folks. There's motorcycle
bus expansion office complex, a
pecan processing. There's a
refinery. There's a Boba Tea
restaurant really, just a mix of
all different types of
businesses. Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady that is very
helpful. And what is the process
for the opportunity? Enterprise
Fund? You mentioned something
about a review board. Could you
elaborate on how projects are
selected? Um, What are the what
are the guardrails to make sure
that these are worthy projects.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generally, I'm pulling up
in the section of the bill where
I can go through some of the
guardrails for you. So just give
me one moment while I pull that
up. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady again,
Starting in page 12, you'll see
some of the specifics that
overview that that that oversee
all of the opportunity
enterprise projects and you know
there's some things that are
very important that we want to
keep the you know that they are
in coordination with department
that they are ensuring their
following state laws. Um, you
know that that their finance and
the proposal works, but the
oversight committee itself that
you mentioned is called the
Opportunity Enterprise Review
Board.
And this currently has 1412
members on it of different
backgrounds to help identify and
oversee the projects that we're
looking at. This bill would
increase that number to to be 14
instead. And I'm just going to
bring up that number that that
list for you so that you have an
idea of who is on that board.
But if you have another question
while I'm pulling that up, I'm
happy to answer. Mr. Speaker.
General Lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you, gentle
lady. Yes, In terms of, you
know, it sounds like it's a It's
a robust board with a good bit
of experience and um and the
rules or the criteria set forth
in the bill, and, uh
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady, Am I
correct and understanding that
The review board after going
through an initial round of
applications, their policy
committee came back and made
some specific recommendations on
how to improve the functioning
and the process for the review
board. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. It is,
in fact, quite a diverse group
of people that are on the board.
My expertise handed me the list
and it's the New Mexico
Department of Finance
Administration Secretary Wayne
Probes We have the Mexico trip.
Leisure. We have downtown Las
Cruces Partnership Vice chair,
Jennifer Garcia Kozlowski and
are in the chair of it is Duke
is Joe far of Duke City
commercial in Albuquerque. So it
is a really diverse group. They
did have some recommendations,
however, after their first round
of applications, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, one of which which
I really appreciate is that
initially as their grading this,
um the projects are great in on
0 100 scale for a variety of
reasons.
And initially they gave a bit of
a bump to rural or frontier
areas. Um, and and what they
found was that just wasn't
enough and they wanted to ensure
they were doing more. And so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, the
review board came back and and
enabled the N M f A to increase.
What that, um, consideration is
for our rural communities, Which
is why a lot of these details we
keep in the rules process in the
underwriting process. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, we want
that flexibility to fix our
programs as they move along.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentle lady. I really
appreciate you highlighting sort
of the difference between what
we want and statute and what we
want in rules. And as I've
mentioned before, I really, um I
find continuous improvement to
just be a wonderful aspect of
governing. And so, um, thank you
for mentioning how
We can do that with our rules
and we can come back and make
changes. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, could you remind me how
what? What changes are there
going to be to the composition
of the board when we add in this
housing component? Yes. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General lady that will be adding
to individuals who are experts
in housing, as appointed by the
governor and at the request of
the auditor, we have removed the
state auditor from the board as
well. Mr Speaker, generally.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentle lady. Um, I You know,
I really appreciate you bringing
forward this legislation. It
fills an enormous gap in
The housing continuum that we
talk about here in New Mexico
and by supporting our developers
and providing capital access to
capital for housing development
infrastructure. We can really
support an increase in supply of
our workforce housing. Um and so
with that, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady
Um, those were all my questions.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Next. We have the job minute
from Lee representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker, wrote the
General lady from Santa Fe
Yield. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
yield to the gentleman from Lee
County.
Miss Baker, General Lady, this
is, uh, two tranches of funds is
that
Is that correct? One of these is
for the opportunity Fund and the
other one is for a housing fund.
Is that accurate? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Yes, that's accurate. The the
economic Development Wing the
opportunity Enterprise from the
referring to was already passed
around three years ago. And then
this. What's this bill is adding
is a separate housing fund as
well too.
To that. Thank you for that. Mr
Speaker. Generally. Can you tell
me how much money
Is allocated to each of these
funds, please. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So to begin with back three
years ago, we started it at $70
million to get the fun off and
running now within the committee
substitute for the budget or
hospital to it is another 50
million is added to that
Economic Development Opportunity
Enterprise Fund and then a
separate $125 million is in the
housing fund.
Okay, So this commitment this
state commitment
Is Mr Picker in general Idea?
Total of $175 Million is that
accurate?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Yes.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, Jim Lady, let
me just speak to the opportunity
Fund first.
These are for commercial
projects.
Could you describe what typical
project might entail?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. You know,
actually my own there at a
company in my district, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen that actually
applied and was an applicant
this year. Um, and so what they
do is they deliver locally grown
produce in Santa Fe, and they
have a company that that that's
what they do and moving that
around That way. There are
nonprofits in here. There are
four profits in here. There are
those that as I mentioned
engaged in agriculture, there's
a breweries that applied biotech
campuses. It's a real array. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen of Economic
Um, opportunities that
individuals are finding across
the state. And so it really is a
broad broad array.
Mr Speaker in general lady all
of these projects.
Would be commercial projects.
they would have some sort of a
profit motive behind them. Is
that accurate general lady?
There has been a request for the
gentlemen to remove their
jackets.
See no Jackson sorted. Thank
you. Thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That's right.
These are these are business
endeavors to drive economic
development. Create more jobs in
our communities. Yes, Mr
Speaker, General Lady could you
describe Are these
Grants coming out of this fund,
or are they loans coming out of
this front? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Yes, These are loans they are.
They have to have more. They
have to have an interest of more
than 0% attached to them, and it
is a revolving loan revolving
fund, so as individuals pay back
what they have received that
goes back into the lunge into
the funding generated man.
I assume that things are
projects that have been on
finance a ble in the private
market in order to come to the
state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm sure you saw
me in my my expertise. Not
necessarily. Sometimes for
these, This is a gap funding
filling in the difference.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, can
you describe
The results so far as to
delinquencies whether this fund
is holding its own making money
or costing the state money.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. As this is the
first year that the applications
have gone out and we and they've
just begun the underwriting
process for seven of those
projects. We don't really have a
test frame for this in here.
However, I will say that in the
statute itself, there are
reporting requirements of the mm
FH report back on the health of
the fund and on the repayment of
those loans, etcetera. The other
piece, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
that I will point to is that
overall in the New Mexico
Finance Authority has a pretty
healthy can say repayment
record and so overall as we're
looking at where
We have a loan underwriting, uh
and entity in the state, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. New Mexico
Finance Authority has been
really successful in getting
those repayments done, and I
feel very confident that they'd
be so Miss Speaker, General Lady
or there any yardsticks, for
example on how much of a down
payment is required.
What is the maximum loan amount
that is available or the folks
coming to the state for this
assistance required to have any
skin in the game?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Absolutely. You know, uh, so the
loan terms their set of terms
that they required. This
includes guarantees required
minimum equity contribution of
10%. And then they have to have
collateral as well. So minimum
loan to value of 80% as well.
There's other piece of this as
well. The term is up to 15 to 30
years, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Ladies and gentlemen,
it changes the minimum terms to
be fit, at least 15 years. Um
and then finally, there's also,
um
The fixed? Yes. So those are the
pieces of their I do know, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen that you know
when they were looking at the
different projects and looking
at what was possible, you know,
in the application process, they
had a very large project that
initially came to Mm Fe in this
last round, and when they began
the underwriting process, they
felt that it was better to to,
um
To distribute those loans to
different organizations that
would be better prepared,
considering this guidance to
repay their loan.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Could you could you describe
What, if any.
Conflicts with this financial
services available in the
private sector.
How does this put the state in
competition with private sector
dollars?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That's a great
question. And I'm glad you asked
for that clarity because I did
check in with my expert on that
one. So they are required under
the statute to ensure that there
that there is no other process
or availability of funds or
capital and that they were
feeling this this gap that
exists, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
So Miss Speaker General Lady
These projects could not be
financed in the private sector.
Is that accurate? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the amounts in which
they are being financed through
the finance authority could was
not being filled or not possible
through a private bank
commercial bank that existed and
they have to show proof that you
know of that process.
Okay, let me see if I could move
over now to the housing
authority.
And that is our call.
Where the previous answer was
funded with $125 million. Is
that accurate? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen? Yes.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
This would be contracts with
Individual homeowners or
developers of larger projects.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The developers
of the projects
And Ms Speaker, general Lady is
could you describe for me the
characteristics of a typical
project that is single family
home?
Square footage. Multi family
dwelling square footage cost per
square foot, etcetera. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen on page two in the
definitions that kind of offers
from this, So I'm going to try
not to read too much of it, but
I'll give you some highlights.
So first of all, it's to support
housing for low or moderate
income residents.
These are not the million dollar
apartments that we want to be
seeing. Spring up, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we want to see places
where we see a workforce
growing it also, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, is when you go into
page three on this. It's very
specific that involves the
purchase planning designing
building, surveying, improving
operating, furnishing, equipping
or maintaining of land buildings
or infrastructure to to support
that expansion, and it's also
Yes, it's private. Yes, and then
it also includes that, um that
these are private entities, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen that are
working together with the with
the with the mm fa on these
projects. So, um the other piece
actually do want also mention is
that in eight in section H, um
it would would also be for
workforce development housing,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, or
affordable housing
infrastructure projects as well.
So essentially, we want to see
that where people are where
people
Are living. That's where they
have jobs, and that is a big
piece of this as well. So
there's some guidance in terms
of what types of development of
this fund should be supporting.
Ms Speaker.
General lady. Same question, I
suppose, with respect to private
sector involvement. To what
extent will these alarms to
developers?
Displacing private sector
mortgage financing.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So the big issue
that I mean, I we see a lot in
Santa Fe. I will all point out
because that's my district and
we see it a lot. Is that Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, as our folks
are, as developers developing
the plots of land where they
where they're going to look at
and figuring out how many units
will be for affordable housing
the other costs for the rest of
the development.
May go further up right? You may
have more expensive units
because of the number of
affordable housing units you may
have and so because they are
trying to turn a profit, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, it makes it
more difficult for them to have
moderately priced below market
below. Market priced housing, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so what this
enables them to do is to offer
more of that below market price
housing for workforce purposes
and again as I mentioned with
the gentle lady earlier from
Burnley Oh, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
That what this does it ensures
that they're that they're
working with the local community
and that they do have the
financial ability to take that
on, so no, they are not
displacing anyone in the private
market. Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
it just makes it possible for
these developers to create and
develop housing that at a lower
cost, and they would have
otherwise.
And MS Speaker, general Lady, I
presume that would be a
consequence.
Requiring a zero interest rate
on these loans.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
The interest rates are set at
60% of the prime interest rate
that we see nationally, so they
are able to offer them at a
lower rate. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
But Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
believe I read in the
legislation, the interest rate
could not go below zero.
Does that imply that it can go
to zero?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm going
to look at that language right
now. As we're talking, you are
correct. That cannot go below
that amount. But let me find
that language.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen in in
practice with the NMFS was just
confirming they do not offer 0%
loans for for profit product or
entities. I should say, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Okay, Ms. Speaker, General Lady.
Bit confused. This would be
Not considered for profit in the
Low income circumstance.
Or would that still be a for
profit endeavor? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, so the entity that
would be entering into a
contract with Mm FA under the
terms of this program would be a
private company, a private
developer that would do that,
And so they do not. And I'm
favoring their fate does not
enter into 0% loans with private
developers or private
Um, entities that are applying
for the Opportunity Enterprise
Act Fund.
So this potential for a 0% loan
would be from the developer to
the purchaser of the home is
that accurate?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So there's zero.
The the M F A does not interact
with the eventual purchasers of
the homes through this through
this piece, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we see that more
through a Or would that maybe
through, um you know, home wise,
you know, other other projects,
other nonprofits that may be
assisting with that process, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, this bill,
All it does is ensure that those
developers have the capital.
They need to start these
developments that will offer the
workforce housing or the
moderate, moderately priced
housing.
That we need in New Mexico.
Mr Speaker General 80. Thank you
for your answers.
Yes, My concern is there are
Very large number of homeowners
in this state with conventional
mortgages.
And something in interest for
those mortgages. And this
Program would seem to provide
Minimum.
A pretty substantial advantage.
To the folks wanting
Two.
Participate here.
And
That's all I had. Mr. Speaker
generated. Thank you for your
thank you. Next. We have the
John Lady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, well,
the general lady yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the General Lady from Santa
Fe.
Thank you.
Been listening to the debate and
I feel like there was some
really well ask questions. Some
of the ones some questions. I
have had two and trying to get
my, um
Get information and wraparound
of with the bill what it's doing
and from its initiation three
years ago with the Enterprise
fund that was created was that
fun Mr Speaker created
For large enterprise.
Um, entities to take those
loans, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. I mean, it
could be as I mentioned one of
the first projects that they
were looking at Underwriting
initially was a fairly large
manufacturers Solar
manufacturing company, But in
the end, they felt that they
that they were in better suited
and better place to underwrite
other programs Instead. What I
want do want to mention though
in terms of the last question
that was asked
Just for clarification for the
body. There would be no loan
between N M F A and this housing
fund to individual mortgage
owners. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
General Lady just to be clear
Like I own a home. I pay my
mortgage. I would not be able to
get a mortgage through this
program. This is specifically
for developers, and I hope that
helps some of the further
questions.
Mr Speaker. I think that's where
the concern lies. I think I have
some of the same concerns as a
previous gentleman regarding two
of those those types of
Need some clarification on the
commercial development in the
developers who are going to be
asking for these loans. Are
these developers going to have
president as developers that
work in have their business in
New Mexico? Mr Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. Yes, they
have to be New Mexico Companies.
Thank you, Speaker. Thank you,
Um, General lady, and when they
get the their their support
through this funding through
this loan
How much of that of those
developers are going to be
meeting the needs of
affordability? Housing? Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. So the
objective of this fund is to
really focus on, um, creating a
housing market. That's that's
below market cost, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and so, um, Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
generated on that. So I'm just
getting the clarification so it
does offer the infrastructure
development for affordable
housing, and I do want to
mention that because it's a
little bit exciting. In my
district. We have an affordable
house.
Using development that came up
about a decade and a half ago.
Um it's it's a It's a great
spot, but only half of it was
developed The city already
Paid everything else. It's it's
in good shape. They have a whole
other half that hasn't truly
been developed and in
conversations with some of the
folks in that area. What they
really need is a road that would
cost $9 million. For example, in
this one to connect the that
area to the rest of the city
into all their lines, Mr
Speaker, General Lady this fund
once it's set up and established
That that that area could then
have that infrastructure built
out so that it connects the
affordable housing to the rest
of it. So that is the
infrastructure to be available.
Mr. Speaker, General. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
lady. Why aren't we looking
towards local government for
counties and cities for those
infrastructure with through a
tiff or through other
developmental opportunities, Mr
Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, not every city
or county or local entity is in
a position to offer. This. Mm fa
is a unique place where loan
underwriting happens until the
other expertise to do it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, But it's is
it not in the purview of an IMF
A that they are going to take
the least amount of risk. So
then they would then be
excluding those those areas that
wouldn't have those
opportunities to begin with. Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, you
know again, we can I want to
just point out on the on the
bill itself. Some of the
considerations they have, um and
actually actually, give me one
moment. I'm going to look at the
presentation that the New Mexico
Finance Authority provided to
On the to our oversight
committee, one second
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, dear lady for the moment,
so when they're looking, and
they're looking at applications
in the current fund that exists
there, looking at community
impact and support for the
economic about one's job
creation and employment,
applicant readiness and need
business location industry. So,
Mr Speaker, General lady, what
they're really looking at is
where can they make the most
impact and ensure that they are
able to get their repayment
done.
Thank you. Mr Speaker generally
understand all that, But at the
end of the day, they have to
make the least they have to take
the least amount of risk. And
just as you mentioned with the
Enterprise Opportunity Fund,
they had to change the measures
in which they initially were
supposed to make funds to bigger
industry. Is that not correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker. Generally, I think that
this is the answer, but correct
if I'm wrong, um, that they're
looking to mitigate risks
through other avenues as well
When they're looking they're
looking at where will it have a
deep impact? Mr. Speaker,
General Lady does that answer
the
Question.
Speaker General lady not really,
not to the full extent and and
with the other opportunities and
other infrastructure.
Pieces that we have through
local governments and utilizing
infrastructure development and
giving our taxpayer dollars to
those opportunities. I think
that we're going to come back
here and figure this out as this
is a pilot program, and I do
have some other concerns where
Mr Speaker generally, er have we
propose those those?
Most needs are in planning with
this fun, Mr. Speaker, General
lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady again.
If you look on page 21 that
outlines some of these efforts
to ensure the funding is going
to projects that really matter.
And so you have. Where 21 line
three. You have provided
sufficient evidence that others
means of financing are
unavailable or insufficient. You
know, you have other pieces that
Ensure that is for local that it
has local support in financial
need. Um, it also explains that,
um, um, the prior to the house
assistant Mr Speaker, General
lady that they will, um
That it's expanding housing
throughout the state. So there's
a number of places Mr Speaker,
General Lady would ensure that
the housing is getting to places
where it's most needed. Thank
you, gentlemen. Mr Speaker. So
who's going to ultimately make
the decision where these
planning these needs in these
areas are going to be located?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, so the board
will prioritize them. And then
it goes to the N M F a process
of our underwriting. And then
that's how those get those
decisions. Get made. Thank you,
Mr Speaker General later, So
there is a board that will go
through the broad process and
they will they will assess the
greatest needs in areas where in
the planning of where we're
going to be spending these
dollars. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. They will create
the rules surrounding the use of
the fund and the application
process and all those details
and in that process, they will
also be considering these these
apple.
Cations, and then again once it
comes to the underwriting
process, and it goes to N M F A
So they really do work together
to make sure this is it's
getting to the most need.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I don't know that answered
specifically, they will generate
the rules. They were the board
and they will
Then process applications.
And as as we're looking at the
greatest need in our affordable
housing.
In development. As this funny
will go to, um then they will be
The process will then go to who
deciding Once it's up many
applications I would assume are
going to be, um
Entered given to the board, who
then will decide where the most
need is and location in our
state. Mr Speaker, General Lady
Mr Speaker, General lady, So,
um, they started the rules. They
set up the the application
process. And then once those
applications come in and pass
that deadline, then the board Mr
Speaker, General Lady will then
look at, um all the projects and
put them in a prioritization
order. At that point, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it is up
to the IMF, a staff and team to
do the underwriting process to
ensure that they are securing
what they are offering loans out
to and then they'll go in that
order of priority.
Mr Speaker, General Lady and one
of the questions that came out
earlier was regarding
profitability, so
What do these developers say if
they in Santa Fe, one of the
Arab maybe even in Towers
County, Mr Speaker were property
and location is highly desired.
And affordability is especially
I can speak in Santa Fe County.
Mr. Speaker is very hard to
find.
Where then?
Would those developed? How would
they be prioritized to develop
in those locations where I would
feel those applications would
meet the needs and maybe make it
to the top of the list? Mr
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. As we mentioned
there will be a whole rules
process that happens within a
and within the O. E. R B board,
the
Opportunity Enterprise Review
Board and looking at what that
prioritization should be. I want
to be clear, though. You know
they there's need across the
state were 30 30,000 units short
across the state and you have
needs and Otero County, for
example, where they're very
eager to grow in southern New
Mexico has so much economic
development happening. It's very
exciting, but we want we don't
have the housing. We have people
coming in from El Paso, Mr
Speaker, General lady working in
New Mexico and having those
jobs, Mr Speaker generally so
again when they're looking at
these, they're not just looking
at. Is this going to provide X
number of units? It's what does
the
That due to the community, What
does that do for workers in the
state? And will that help drive
more housing and and making sure
that people who live here can
afford to live here?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I just have some concerns
because the underlining um
Issues for our state. White
people are not moving, and we're
not having as much development
and economic development
In our state go towards some of
the issues we have with.
Our education and, um other
bottom line issues. How are they
going to factor those issues
into where they are going to
build and develop? Mr Speaker?
General lady? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, You know what's great
about the diverse mix of the
board that we have that comes
from across New Mexico and
different levels of leadership,
Etcetera on the Opportunity
Enterprise Review board is that
they can again try the first
round of applications and and
look through and see what
they're receiving back. Mr
Speaker, General Lady should
they decide to
At any other, um, criteria for
consideration in this. We want
to give them the flexibility to
do that in real time, so they're
not constantly having to come
back to the statute and change
that within it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I think that was that
was important thing to say that
How much is or is this going to
go through rule is going to be
decided to go towards
affordability. Housing what
types of housing are they going
to prioritize? And again? I
guess I keep going over this
location. Is that all going to
be decided by rule? Mr Speaker,
General Lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. The application process is
decided by the board and what
they said. And how they do that.
Now there is learning as I
mentioned earlier from what
we've seen from the economic
development arm of this the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
So there is learning that's
happening actively and that
that's part of it. The financing
for the new fund would also
prioritized projects in
municipalities where they're
improving zoning practices. And
these are you know, nationally,
uh, considered zoning practices
that will improve the outlook
will improve economic
development in the regions as
well. So they are looking at all
of these aspects to make sure
that we are putting putting our
funding into housing where at
where our workforce needs to be.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generally, I appreciate you
saying that and understanding
that we're looking at where the
zoning czar changing again. I'll
come back to Santa Fe County and
city of Santa Fe. We have
changed some of those barriers
in changing some of our zoning
to allow for more housing
development on the east side of
our county of our city, because
we know that there is a
Thing in our city and our county
called gentrification. And that
means when
Housing has become so
unaffordable and the
Those that move into a certain
area, um, outbid and have more
money and more means and those
with lower means than are moved
to a different part of town and
city. And that is what has
happened here in Santa Fe. So
with those zoning changes here
in our good city and are good
county would would they then be
prioritized to have more
affordable housing or housing
development on the east side of
Our town.
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I can you
rephrase the question. I don't
understand. You just mentioned
Mr Speaker that you are the
through your bill. There's
prioritization where they're
looking at zoning changes for
housing and you know and allow
ability to my understanding and
recently in the last year we
have changed some of those
zoning um, zoning, um
And the east side of our city
and our county of Santa Fe, and
I'm asking so then would that
mean that they would give
prioritization to have
development and housing on that
side of our town? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I don't want
to comment on any particular
counties movement and what
they're doing specifically at
this moment, Mr Speaker, General
lady, but one of the I was just
talking to experts right now.
one of the conditions that they
are they are considering is that
there are timelines tied to, um
to the development and that
process.
General lady. Thank you. Thank
you for
Answering that in that way, Um
Earlier. Mr Speaker we talked
about, um
Barriers and one of the barriers
you mentioned was starting
capital. What is and what would
be the starting capital or the
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Ladies, So what
this will do is as we mentioned
this earlier as well will fill
those gaps that exist for
funding. And so you have that
folks will get some from
commercial funding. Mr Speaker,
generally, some from Let's say,
even at an M F a projects as
well. And other infrastructure
projects that simply aren't
funded through capital through
commercial loans.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally. What does that
percentage breakdown? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady again.
We want to give the flexibility
to the fund to work in a way
that's going to be effective.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
when we look at the New Mexico
Finance Authority and their
success rates of having again to
to you to get their loans repaid
and how these projects come
back. Um you know, I feel very
confident Mr Speaker gentility
not just through the leadership
of Marquita Russell, but
throughout mm fa that they have
really created an organization
that's enviable in much of the
rest of the country so that we
are able to make the right
investments in that sense now,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, if we
find that there are rules
Are not necessarily effective or
that we have concerns. We can
absolutely look at that in
statute, but in our experience
again through this fund through
the venture Capital fund that
they have created, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, you know, we've
seen them be very successful.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I have no doubt in my
mind how capable Marquita
Russell is an M phase with
administering and and holding
those loans and funds. We are
the We are the body that give
them the
The language in which and how
they should manage those funds.
And so that's why we're debating
this, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
um
Mr Speaker generally, how does
this work with other This piece
of legislation work with other
pieces of legislation and maybe
you can't comment on this, But
there are in the works to help
an M F a
Create planning in in
collaboration, Mr. Jindal, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Ladies, So, um
I apologize. Can you repeat the
question?
Mr gentle Mr Speaker generally
what other pieces of legislation
are are there in working in
parallel to help or organized
around this fund, Mr Speaker
Generator
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Ladies, So there's
a bill in the Senate currently
to 16 that would allow the
They allow the local government
planning fund to look at a
affordable housing plans as
well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
I just want to be clear and have
the body. No, Mr Speaker that
there are other pieces of
legislation that are being put
together that we can get a
better picture, which I'm still
trying to get a better picture
of all the the
The pieces of legislation and
all the funding and everything
that we have moving towards
housing and that we are
responsible to understand and
how all these pieces are fitting
together, so I just wanted to
make sure that this body
understands that this is one
piece of legislation will be
seen others, probably in the
future and how they go hand in
hand. So, Mr Speaker generally,
how will those two those pieces
if all past work together to
improve?
The funding for NM FA Enterprise
Fund with housing Mr Speaker
generally, thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
You know again, it goes back to
the idea that we often talk
about in this building, which is
housing is not just a one bill
fixes it all. It really is
pieces of a broader pie. And so
a lot of what we're seeing
happening. We're talking about
affordable housing, or we're
talking about the office of
housing overall, the coordinate
some of these considerations.
This fills the unique whole of
trying to get more housing
that's available at under market
costs.
And encouraging that kind of
behavior. Now this now I will
say that this this uh this bill,
these proposals went through the
our interim committee. The
oversight of the FAA oversight
Committee at least twice that we
talked about these particular
roles and how we'd want to
govern this fund overall. So for
us, Mr Speaker, General, Lady,
this what we're creating here is
after much conversation, which,
with that, and with that interim
committee and in conversations
with the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I appreciate that
information and I am an adviser
have been on advisor and Mm FA
Oversight committees since I
started
In my role as a legislator, and
though we were informed about
this, we didn't we didn't
endorse any legislation, or, um
Have any kind of deciding
factor. We're just giving a
presentation, which I greatly
appreciate. Um and I did have
questions myself. And, um
And a J. F. C.
Um, earlier on the budget
process of this, So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
This is
Again the pilot project and
trying to put all the pieces
together of how funding is
moving and how many housing
changes were looking through
legislation process which we do
need which is really important.
I think that for me, um and
listening and understanding
this,
the
Prioritization of this bill is
to help developers fill in the
gaps.
And you said Mr Speaker and
please, Um please.
Correct me if I'm wrong. You did
say that this is going to
Fulfill needs for affordable
housing by those developers. Is
that correct? Mr Speaker
generally. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General Lady
on this distinction is that it's
housing That's affordable. So
under market median costs the
will allow for infrastructure
improvements for affordable
housing developments. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I hope
that through the efforts of what
we're doing with this pilot that
we are looking at all those
other opportunities through the
application process.
With our local governments, as I
mentioned before, with those
opportunities that they have
through through tax incentives
and other incentives, as we are
moving to understand how our
taxpayer dollars are being
spent, and I would say, the more
we bring into light of how we're
doing that, and each county has
their different needs. As we
always talk about.
And, of course, as a
representative for Santa Fe.
County and city of Santa Fe. I
have to ask these questions
because we have such a huge
need, but they're different and
they're diversified as far as
those that are in our rural
communities, especially and I
want to make sure that I am am
completing some of the questions
that I'm receiving from my
constituents and others that
have questions about
What is what we are doing with
our housing and the funding for,
um with our taxpayer dollars, so
I appreciate the debate. I'm
going to close with with
One last question, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
And Justin highlight of how
important a lot of this work is.
I just want to mention again and
maybe it's not a question Mr
Speaker generally, but there is
an issue especially here
heartfelt here in in the
district that I represent about
gentrification, and when we were
Going through interim committee.
We were we were given the
opportunity to have, um,
presentations and whenever I
asked those questions or
question about gentrification
and what's going on with our
housing
It was met with
Pretty much no response, So I
just really want to emphasize
that that is an issue for me,
and I really will hope that
through the application process
or through the rule makings that
is highly considered. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Generally do you
appreciate the time? Thank you.
Next. We have the gentleman from
Otero. Thank you, Mr Speaker
with the kind general lady from
Santa Fe, please Yield. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Otero County.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady.
And you know, I heard this in my
committee. I had concerns about
the bill. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I don't have too
many questions for you today. I
know you were expecting a couple
of hours, but I only have a few
questions here. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady I My first
question, I guess would pretty
much be and I believe the
representative from Santa Fe
also
Said, has asked questions about
this. But how would this fund
mesh with current federal
programs for first time
Homebuyers? Mr. Speaker? General
Lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. I was
enjoy debating with you on
economic development, so it's
always a good time, so I'll
speak slower, so we do it
longer. Er, um, in terms of how
it jives with, um, sorry how it
works with federal programs.
Again. You know what this is
about is developing, um, housing
units that are below market
cost, right? And so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, To that end, we want
to make sure that that those
that
It just increases the supply
that exists for homes that are
more affordable to new Mexicans.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally yeah, that helps me a
little bit so they would still
be able to get those programs
since this loan is going to the
developer. Not to the actual
Homebuyers. That what? I'm
understanding Mr. Speaker.
Generally, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, that's
correct. Got it? Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady and then
something that my colleague from
I believe it's Lee and
And Eddie. Mr Speaker
generating. He asked about the
percentage rate for the loan.
Does this loan percentage go off
of what is promulgated or or
done at the federal level with
the Fed and Mr Speaker? General
Lady? Could you just tell me a
little bit about current rates?
And if we expect those to change
it all? And if they do change,
how would that affect this? I
believe it says 60% number in
the legislation.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, just
for clarification. Just getting
clarification on that. So it is
60% of what is the prime rate
nationally for again. These
developers not necessarily for a
mortgage, home owner or holder
mortgage holder. So in that
case, for example, we have seen
fluctuations in the market in
terms of what you can get in at,
you know, I got lucky I got in
about 3%, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
a couple of years ago, and then
we saw those rates skyrocket. We
do.
Considering how inflation has
been moving, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and at a national
level, I mean, there is some
consideration that we will see
those steady again. So again,
you know there is we are
susceptible to what's happening
at a national level. But it
remains that 60%.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
ventilating. So then
I guess my question is, I truly
have no idea.
What is that percentage rate
because I know currently in the
market for just a homeowner.
It's about 5.5%, maybe a little
less. What would it be for a
E homebuilder to get alone just
to start building Mr Speaker,
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So it would be
the primary that you were
discussing, plus considerations
for risk as well. However, one
thing that my experts wanted me
to point out as well is that
this is funding. That doesn't
necessarily, um
This is running. That doesn't
necessarily is necessarily
available, especially for
infrastructure. So that's what
the gap is being filled.
Got it. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady that that is
helpful, So it would be the
current rates plus any kind of
risk factors involved. I know
when I got my mortgage, which
was also about 2.8% something
like that. We were very blessed
in that regard, but it was like
a point scale. They have points
for you know if your credit rate
is this, and if you have this
much debt, and if you have this
much
If your credit score is higher
than the lower so I would assume
it's similar to that, Mr
Speaker, General lady, So I'm
wondering, how does how does
this if it even does consider
the property tax rates in the
specific counties in the formula
that the O E R B, i believe
would be looking for Mr Speaker.
General. Lady Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Thank you for the
question. It won't It doesn't at
all.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally that's one kind of key
concern. I have, because I know
some counties. I know McKinley
counties is pretty high for
their their property tax rate. I
think some I think Santa Fe
County is fairly higher than
other counties. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, if we're talking
about equity and the people
getting these loans, I would
just maybe urge consideration of
those property tax rates because
If I'm a low income home buyer
and I buy I buy that one of
these low income houses it's
built with this fund if I live
in such a high market for my
loan, I will still be paying
more on that property and what
the cost was. And Mr Speaker
General Lady would that be in
just the main cost of the
building itself?
Or would my property tax only be
on the valued rate? That's kind
of my question, Mr Speaker,
General lady because I don't
want poor people to have to buy
a house and then have a huge
property tax bill at the end of
the year, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Because this is
not a subsidy program. It would
not affect I do want to go back
to what? I had the conversation
with the General Lady from Santa
Fe about the considerations that
we're already seeing with the
opportunities enterprise funds
as it stands, so the community
impact and support job creation
and employment application
readiness and need business,
location industry and what I
really like about this mix of
Um, considerations when they're
looking in prioritizing What
businesses make sense is that
you see, there is consideration
to what will be the impact on
the community be what will
ensure that they're getting paid
back. What ensures that This is
going to be a successful effort
And so even in places you know
to your good point. We have
different property tax costs and
etcetera and excise taxes that
may exist in different places.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
You know, I think looking at
what's the economic development
happening? What's the workforce
needs that are occurring and
ensuring that our workforce can
afford to live with. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. General Lady. Yeah,
I appreciate that, And I think
it's important probably to just
have the conversation I don't
know about if it's actually
directly tied to this this fund,
But Mr Speaker, General Lady, we
talked a little bit about the ER
be bored and I want to tell the
folks on the Zuma if they didn't
hear earlier, it's the
Opportunity Enterprise Revolving
fund board.
And I appreciate CEO Russell for
providing me that data that I
requested from the committee the
other day because and I
appreciate I really do
appreciate the reordering of
increasing prioritization to
frontier and rural counties and
communities. Mr Speaker, General
Lady. However, I see this new
list.
That I received from CEO
wrestle.
And
From the top seven projects.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Well, actually, let's go back.
Let's go. Let's go back to the
first o E. R B.
Projects. They were all in the
top four counties in the state
with populations. So that was
Dona Ana Santa Fe Burner. Leo
and Sandoval.
So with the new repair,
prioritization of frontier and
rural counties that I received
From CEO wrestle.
It now has only one
Frontier.
Community on the top seven. So
Mr Speaker, General Lady
I'm wondering, Is there anything
else we can do to ensure that
the O E R B
Re prioritizes or even gives
higher priority to these more
rural counties and communities.
Mr Speaker generally, and I
apologize for the lengthy
question, But are we considering
that? No, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. I think
it's a relevant question as
well. I think the big piece in
here is that there's a lot of
learning that's happening as we
continue onward. So, um
You know through, you know, I
see the top ones you're
referring to, But I also see the
bottom ones as well. And you
know again, you see a lot of
urban also in that mix as well,
But I will see, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is that you know they
are doing significantly more
outreach to rural communities.
There's emails that have gone
out to us as legislators, Mr or
that will go. No, that did go
out. They went out. Sorry, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, about when
the application open what those
terms are who's available, and
that's just the opportunity
Enterprise fund. They've been
doing more consultations and
webinars available for chambers
of commerce and things. You know
a lot.
Have we have some great
programs, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
throughout New Mexico, But half
of the battle is making sure
people know what they are. So I
think that they really invested
and they saw a problem which was
not enough people knew about it,
and none of projects knew about
it. And they are addressing it
through more outreach. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and I really do
appreciate that, and I
definitely want to continue to
work with Marquita Russell or
sorry, CEO Russell and all the
great people at the NME fa, I
sit on the oversight committee
and I certainly want to have
that collaborative approach
because I know in the E R B
first round the 33 million
Otero County had three different
projects that were submitted for
for funding here. And Mr
Speaker, General Lady. None of
those got funded and that that
was one of my big concerns
because in Otero County like we
mentioned earlier, we are a
border county and people a lot
of folks, at least in my area
they commute from El Paso.
And I don't know why they would
commit from El Paso because
their property taxes so crazy
high But Mr Speaker, General
Lady, A lot of people also
commute to chaparral and places
like that, and it's huge
commutes and a lot of time on
the road and also we're talking
about infrastructure as well.
It's a cost that we have to
consider. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
I know that we re ordered the
The new ranking profile or
whatever. We're calling it, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I see
some. Some of my one in my
county is so close right? There
is one That is for $500,000 in
Otero County. It doesn't say
what it is.
But I would just love for us to
be considered for these funds
because my my constituents
We want affordable housing, and
we talked about affordable
housing a lot, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, and so I think it
would be great if we could bring
it to our county. Because right
now we have developers who want
to build in Otero County, but
they just cannot afford to build
affordable housing. So, Mr
Speaker, generally we have these
beautiful homes that are being
built in Otero County that I
could never afford in my
lifetime. Maybe in my lifetime,
but
It will be a few decades down
the road. But Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I want to make
sure that we have people who are
workers working class new
Mexicans able to afford housing,
and that's what we're trying to
get. I think both of you and me.
We both agree that that's where
we want to go. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I know those kind
of wording. I apologize.
But can we start talking now
about the O E R B board? Is it
going to be the same board that
is for the O E. R B and for this
enterprise fund or will it be to
boards? Mr Speaker? General
Lady? Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. So it is one board.
One thing I do want to mention
though in light of your
comments, I think they're really
important. There's two pieces so
one anyone who didn't make it
through round one. And I hope
you do take this home can
automatically update their
materials for around two, so
they're automatically entered to
to come in for this round that
Is currently open, and I would
encourage your folks to do that.
But I also think increasing the
capacity for this fund that
proved to be so popular is
really going to create more
opportunities for these projects
and to see that it's not just
the top seven, but that maybe
it's more projects that we can
see that expansion happening. So
I really and again also the
consideration of housing. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I didn't
just pick Otero County the hat
or make you happy today. I
really do see that is a place
where there's so much economic
activities happening and I want
to see new Mexicans having those
jobs and working there. The
South is just Southern Mexicans
doing amazing.
Things. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen to that, and my hope
is that by expanding the
capacity and what's possible,
and also that second round that
we'll see more projects from
Otero County and other rural and
southern areas.
Thank you so much Mr Speaker and
gentility and that's great, and
I certainly want to continue
working with CEO Russell and
everyone in the interim
oversight committee, which is
fun. I actually love that
committee. It's one of my
favorite committees. Don't tell
Elliot C and the rest of them,
But it's It's It's on the top
there. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, um
Regarding the board. I did have
some concerns about the number
of seats on the board.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Currently it's 12 and I see that
the updated legislation as two
seats and Mr Speaker generally
as someone who's who's served on
some boards and knows people on
boards, a larger board is a
little more difficult to Ringel.
So to speak, Mr Speaker, General
Lady so
Uh, I just wanted to ask why you
changed it to increase the
number and
Why is it that there's only two
who are going to have the
experience in housing building
and development? Mr. Speaker to
the Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So in addition
to the two that are on here as
you as you probably know,
because you have the same
materials from the Internet. I
do. Um ex officials are also
added in there as well. So a is
also added on there, so that
would be three experts in
housing of some
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and that that's a
great segue because they do have
a proposed amendment that I
would just like to share with
the body and I would love to
move that for consideration. Mr
Speaker, and I'm happy to read
it to 02. Whenever you're ready,
Gentlemen, are you moving house
Full? Remember number one to
house Bill 195. Mr. Speaker. I
sure am.
Alright, Call vote. Mr. Speaker,
please.
Did you say? Roll call? You've
gotta roll call Mr Speaker.
Alright, the amendments gonna
get passed out and then we'll
Thank you. Gentlemen. The
amendment has been passed out.
Gentlemen, What is the 2 to 8
number at the bottom of your
amendment? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I apologize. I said
202. I don't know what year I'm
living in right now. But the 2
to 8 number is 0.228072 0.1.
Very well. That is what I have,
and I believe that's what the
other side as well.
Ah, gentlemen to explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and I will just quickly
explain this amendment. It is
to essentially keep status quo
on the board.
Of the E. R B and so it tells
you what it strikes at the
bottom of Page seven or striking
lines 24 to 25, but we are
including the legislative
councils appointees. Two of
those two have experience with
housing, and so that is
something I feel is important.
It would essentially put six
Designees.
On the governor's secretary, so
Secretary of Economic
Development Secretary of finance
etcetera, and then it would put
six that would be appointed by
the Legislative Council. Mr
Speaker and those are the
changes in the amendment.
Squared of the
Sponsor of the bill.
To tell us if it is a friendly
or unfriendly amendment or to
ask questions if she needs to.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
Have a couple of quick questions
just to be clear that this would
go back to being a board of 12.
Is that correct? Gentlemen? Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker. Generally,
that's correct. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
And and the reason for removal
just for clarity's sake.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. Well, I believe number one
personally aboard of
12 would be more manageable for
the state.
Number two. I believe that it's
necessary to have that
legislative input and buy in.
And I
And I believe that that's
something very important. Mr
Speaker. Generating. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. You know we were
discussing it over here because
it's an interesting proposal.
Um, you know, in conversations
with so I guess I'll start with
that. We see it as gently
unfriendly.
And what can I explain that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and so the
reason for it is because we feel
that this that the composition
of the board is manageable. Mm
fa has a number of boards that
are between 12 and 16 members,
and it's served fairly well for
them. We anticipate again the
experience we've already had
with the board and as we
continue to grow, we feel that
it's better to add these. These
two individuals three to make it
to turn into a board of 14 with
that conversation housing. So
while it is on from
It's not
It's not terribly unfriendly.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. I'm glad that it's not
terribly unfriendly. I try not
to be very unfriendly. Mr
Speaker to I'm sorry. I was
distracted. So is it friendly or
unfriendly? Unfriendly? Okay, we
have an unfriendly amendment is
the debate on the amendment?
Gentle lady from Bernardi,
Europe's Dixon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from um Otero yield
Mr Speaker. I gladly yield to my
friend from Bern, Leo.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um, I think it's a It's an
interesting amendment that
you're proposing, um, a couple
of questions that I want to sort
of.
Um
Walk through those in
Helping to understand my
perspective on this.
Could you do you know, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, how many
vacancies are currently on the
review board?
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady from my understanding, and
this could be absolutely wrong
And I know CEO Russell knows the
answer. I believe there may be a
couple vacancies.
But I am not 100% Sure, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, Currently
there are there are two
vacancies on the review board
and Mr Speaker, gentlemen, do
you happen to know who made
those initial appointments for
the vacancies?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I do
not. But if you have the answer,
I would love to hear it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So, in fact the
two current vacancies are from
Legislative Council.
Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Do
you know when the governor makes
an appointment?
What is the process? How long
does that typically take?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Well, I believe it
depends on the board regarding
this specific board, though I
believe it would probably be a
fairly
Easy ordeal. I believe that's
the word I would use. So I
wouldn't say they would need
full Senate approval. Mr.
Speaker generally, if that's
what we're trying to get at
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So
One of the one of the challenges
that I think we have been able
to see where with the review
Board for the Opportunity
Enterprise Fund is the delay in
getting the appointments from
Legislative Council from from
the members who make those
appointments in getting those
folks appointed to the board.
Whereas Mr Speaker gentlemen,
when the governor makes an
appointment
They can start serving
immediately.
So my concern with the
amendment and though I am a huge
believer, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
in co equal branches of
government and you know, making
sure that the Legislature is
fully authorized to really exert
and represent the people.
There are some instances Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, where I
actually feel it would be
beneficial for the appointees to
be able to get on the board and
serve immediately. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Do you?
Um
And maybe this actually isn't a
question. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the other thing that
I'm concerned about by reducing
The number of people on the
board as as the amendment
proposes to do is a loss of
diverse experience and
geographical representation. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, do you have
thoughts on that?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, and I appreciate
that concern What This actually
does. It doesn't reduce the
number of people on the board.
It keeps it at the same level
that it currently is Mr Speaker,
general waiting, but I would
certainly make the case that
this actually would increase
representation because as a
legislative council service or
Legislative council body would
appoint these individuals who
Would be acting on this board.
that does indeed regard housing
and economic development and
building that would be a
requirement of two of these
individuals per the amendment,
and I can and it's I believe on
Page eight between lines three
and four. That's what we will
insert to ensure that those two
individuals
Would have that experience. So
Mr Speaker, generating it would
not only increase the
representation and I believe
equity on the board it also Mr
Speaker, General Lady would
indeed affirm our legislative
powers to become a co equal
branch. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so I
do understand that, um, for the
first part that the two members
appointed by legislative
Council, um, that you're
proposing would have experience
in housing, building or
development sectors. But
Am I incorrect that
For Page eight. Line four.
You're striking the word six and
changing that before, So that is
a reduction there of two.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. Yes, that's correct. So on
page
Eight line for We will strike
the word six. Insert in lieu
thereof four and only four would
be in the banking and finance
industry, commercial or
industrial credit, private
equity and venture capital or
mutual fund, investments, real
estate, etcetera. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, they're
currently already is
representation on the board with
those folks we just want to add.
Additionally.
On the Legislative Council side,
folks who have that experience
in building housing and
development sectors, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, which I actually
think would make the board less
corporate and make it actually
more representative
representative of the state, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
But
What the intent of the bill is
to do is to add
Two members with more of the
housing experience and not
Reduce the wide array of
experience that comes from, for
instance, someone with urban
planning experience or
environmentally sustainable
construction and development.
Or
Engineering, construction and
construction management. So my
fear Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
is that
Net.
Worst net is zero.
Um, So you're adding to which we
already were planning to do, But
you're then removing to and I
feel like the loss of those two.
Would be detrimental to the
experience and diverse
perspectives that are gained
from having a wide.
Array of perspectives on the
review board. Um and so for
that, for those reasons, I
appreciate the intent, however,
I cannot support the amendment.
Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment that generated from
Bernalillo and Torrance.
Representative Lord Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
from terror County please yield?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from
Bernalillo and Torrance. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I just want to
make sure I'm understanding this
correctly because we just had
this handed to us. So what we're
doing? It looks like
After and from listening to the
previous debate on Page 724 and
25 were striking the two members
appointed by the governor who
shall have experience in the
housing building or development,
And then we're replacing that on
the next page. Hold on.
Where you have insert to public
members appointed by the New
Mexico Legislative Council, who
shall have experience in the
housing and so we're taking it
from the governor. Give it to
the Legislative Council. And can
you explain to me more? I know
you just briefly. What was the
reasoning for that? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. General Lady number
one, I believe.
We spoke about it earlier. It
was too
Make our branch of government
coequal on this board. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady if we have
six, appointed by the governor
through her cabinet, etcetera,
six appointed by Legislative
Council, it would create balance
and equity in there, Mr Speaker,
General lady. Furthermore, I
believe Mr Speaker General Lady,
it's been commented that this
would take away current
representation from the board.
But as we previously established
in the last conversation, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
There are two vacancies on the
board. These individuals would
merely fill those two vacancies.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, Okay,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
makes sense as I'm looking
through that, and I agree with
you 100% on that We want to make
sure that we always have balance
and you know, it's just like
with spending right? We don't
want anybody to have more power
and anything that we have to
have a voice she gets to the
governor gets to have a voice.
But in this I understand you
want to make it more balance to
bring the power back into the
legislative branch. So I thank
you. That was my only question I
had on that. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Debate on the
amendment.
Right, gently gentle lady from
Oh, there she is Generated from
Senator Fairbairn. Thank you. Mr
Speaker Will the general
gentlemen yield Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I gladly Oh, to my
friend from Santa Fe. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Just a quick question of of what
you're asking to do in this
amendment. Um, to quote you have
you would like to add to public
members appointed by the New
Mexico Legislative Council who
show have experienced in the
housing building or development
sectors, Mr. Speaker. How is
that different?
Or what does it add in
comparison to what is already in
the bill? As I read the bill, I
think we cover this.
This this type of experience and
representation on the board.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally, that's a
great question. And so this this
portion where essentially moving
it from under the governor to
appoint these two individuals to
moving it to Legislative Council
and Mr Speaker generally, I
believe Legislative Council
since we have such a vast array
of people who serve
On that committee that it would
bring more equity and diversity.
in my opinion to the board,
whereas someone appointed by the
governor, I believe Mr Speaker,
generally, her concerns would
already be alleviated and be
represented on the board by the
individuals she has serving at
the top of her departments in
the cabinets who would already
be serving in the sixth member
positions on the board. Mr
Speaker generally, thank you, Mr
Speaker. How many members from
the Cabinet are on the current
board? Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally so, according to the
current statute that we're we're
amending Secretary of economic
development.
Or the secretary's designee.
Mr Speaker. Next we would have
the secretary of Finance and
administration. We would then
have the secretary of General
Services. Mr. Speaker, we would
have the state treasurer or the
state treasures and designee.
and then Mr Speaker, we would
have the executive director of
the Mortgage Finance Authority
who was also appointed by the
governor. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Thank you respected. Thank you,
gentlemen.
That is quite an array of
Folks on that board.
Um
And I can be quite honest. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't know
that.
You know?
I understand that we would have
a need for this expertise.
Whether it comes from
Legislative Council, or it comes
from the executive.
I think that there would be
intersections of finding
As it be finding those that
would like to serve Mr Speaker.
I feel like I think that you
know, I understand where you're
coming from.
The general perspective.
Of of my thoughts. Um what you
were trying to achieve your I
just feel like it's already been
included in the bill, but just,
you know, from a different
Um, office making that
appointment. Um
Is. Is there any Is there any
other significant change through
your amendment here? That would
would change up this bill as it
is, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally. No, This is pretty
simple. It's pretty much what
we've discussed keeping the six
member board from Legislative
Council.
Keeping the six members from
The governor who is appointed
these individuals or their
designee. So Mr Speaker, That's
pretty much the big change, But
I would note Mr Speaker, the
designated is not necessarily
defined in the legislation. So
Mr Speaker generally the
governor could indeed appoint
somebody who who they believe
would serve properly and
economic development finance
etcetera on her appointees, Mr
Speaker generally, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I hear your argument.
And
I understand it.
Quite frankly, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, I think what I
would
I asked Who is, you know, the
council here would with the
language experience in housing,
building and development. Does
that mean that
Those to be appointed would be
developers. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. This language was copied
from the original bill so I
would not want to
Speak for the sponsor and what
they were envisioning for that
definition. But Mr Speaker,
general Lady from the way I'm
reading it, all they have to
have is experience and housing
building or development. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I believe
if Let's just say somebody had
experienced building tiny homes.
Then I believe that would count
as housing experience. Mr.
Speaker General waiting and I
would actually welcome such
experience on this board speaker
General Gentlemen in the bill,
is it not more expansive in in
delineating that experience, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, So, yeah. Currently yes,
Currently on the board. There is
no one that would have this
housing experience, so I would
definitely say it was expensive
with this legislation. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I understand your why
you are asking for this
amendment and
Um there is some other cleanup
things. I guess you you enter it
as well. But I think that that
is substantial and
I think that in my opinion, I
guess from this is that I think
that that
Without the change of that
language, then it's kind of a
moot point for me this for so
thank you for your thank you for
bringing this up and thank you
for the debate. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Joe for the
debate on the amendment, the
gentleman from San Juan
representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker Does
gentleman from from Otero County
Yield. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gladly Yield to my friend from
San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, just briefly, Um
I I, um
Very much understand your, uh,
the thought behind, adding,
folks who have experience in
housing.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, I the
Um, a lot of the debate on this
bill, and and and and these
funds have been
Whether or not the money should
just be, it would be better
spent with M F A, which are all
housing professionals.
Rather than putting this with NM
FA, who are investment
Professionals.
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I think that's the
big difference here. It's why
I'm having a hard time.
Supporting the underlying bill
is because we are taking money.
That I think, gentlemen, let's
keep it on the amendment,
please. On the amendment, it is
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it is
about
The expertise.
That is currently on this board.
Mr Speaker.
And the expertise is not in
housing.
And so I'm I know you have some
other things in your your
amendment that have to do with
But with
Who makes the appointments.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the reason that I support your
amendment is because, as it is
right now, there is no
requirement for people who are
going to be lending money.
Taxpayer dollars for housing
projects that have no
experience in housing.
So Miss Speaker and gentlemen,
more than a question just a
statement that for that reason
alone, I will support your
amendment because I believe that
is a great weakness in this new
venture. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentlemen
from Dona
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House floor Amendment number
one.
Alright, We're on a motion to
table house floor Amendment
number one of our of yes and the
amendment would have been tabled
would have nowhere back in the
amendment.
The gentleman has to ask for a
roll call vote.
And we're getting ready for the
board operators before we open
the vote.
Don't go anywhere.
Let me repeat that a vote of
yes, and the amendment would
have been tabled. It would have
nowhere back in the amendment.
The boat is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Close to 41 in the affirmative
25 and the negative House floor
Amendment number one to house
Bill 195 has been tabled.
Gentlemen, from you Sell the
floor. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
And I appreciate the discussion
on this. I think the board
makeup is a is a fun topic to
talk about Mr Speaker, General
Lady and I will. Certainly If
this passes I will be
Carefully looking to see what's
happening and getting involved
in Mr Speaker. General Lady, I
guess my my key concerns. I kind
of talked about them already.
Rural representation in people
receiving these funds and then
ensuring that it's not just an
Albuquerque, Santa Fe last
cruises and re Rancho, but it's
across the entire state.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
still have huge concerns
regarding that. Because I see
what the PRB funds even with the
re re prioritization of rural
and frontier communities. We
only have one on the top seven
on the top 10. We have
Three Mr Speaker, General lady
and I would just love to see
more of that because I
especially no in my community,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, we
have people who want to work.
They want to be productive
members of our community and
they want to succeed in life.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
think if we re prioritize and
ensure that that this is not
just going to be a Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, Rancho.
Las Cruzes project where they do
have many more nonprofits and
folks to help people in low
income scenarios. But in places
like where I live, Mr Speaker
Generating where we certainly
need this kind of investment,
and we want it, and we truly are
desperate for it, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, but I I just have
many concerns regarding that
because
I think real New Mexico is
Contributing their fair share.
And I think we should have
representation on this, Mr
Speaker. Generally, that's all I
had. But I really appreciate the
bill. I think it has an
interesting thought process
behind it. I know I have some
concerns about the makeup of the
board and things like that. But
I will certainly be paying close
attention to the rest of the
debate. So thank you so much. Mr
Speaker. Generally, I don't know
if he had anything to add to
that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen for the
conversation.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Dona Ana
representative ladder.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will
generally the yield Mr Speaker,
I yield to the gentleman from
Dona Ana. General Lady. I like
this.
Because I think it gives
Developers and and people
involved in housing affordable
housing an opportunity to expand
and to grow.
Um, quick question. I have a
nonprofit
That builds affordable housing
in my area.
And this nonprofit allows the
potential buyers of these homes
to put sweat equity into the
home in order to get you know
that's how that's their down
payment on the home. So, with
this nonprofit still be able to
take advantage of this program
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes.
So thank you for that, John
Laney. So another thing that I'm
thinking of is because you know
you had mentioned earlier. A lot
of people live in El Paso come
to work in New Mexico,
especially our industrial park.
So is when when you mentioned
that, I said, I have to get on
the board and talk about that
because
I had a question that I wanted
to ask you. I think it was on
Page two lines five through
seven, section a. There.
So it's It's uh, affordable
housing Infrastructure Project
means infrastructure projects to
support housing for low
Or moderate income residents. So
if I'm a low income resident, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, what
is my price range for the home?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So what This
section does is it provides for
the infrastructure aspect of
this What's determined as low
and moderate income, which still
go through MF for those
determinations. Thank you for
thank you for that general lady,
Mr Speaker. So, uh, if I know,
uh, Director Russell is there
and I have a lot of respect for
her, and I really, really value
her opinion on this.
So if you could humor me and
please give me like a range, Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady of Low who
Who can afford a low income home
or who who's low income that can
afford a home as opposed to
moderate income.
Gentle lady. Mr.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So what's
one more minute, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So for this
section in particular, it's
about the infrastructure
building out in particular. And
so the example I gave earlier
that that project in my
district Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
is a low income housing
affordable housing property that
that's that's the intent of what
that development should be. And
so what this section
specifically gets into is the
building out that infrastructure
for that, so that not a million
dollar road that I mentioned
earlier.
They could apply in theory that
that developer and they could
get that funding to put in that
last strip. Really, It's his
last trip. Just kind of make
them connected. Um, you know, in
terms of what types of housing
this will be affecting, the
objective is to get more below
median price houses in New
Mexico. And so I know that my my
experts looking but you know,
for Santa Fe, you know that's a
very different number than it
would be for Otero County or
Dona Ana County, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen or Albuquerque or
brittle Leo County, for that
matter.
So you know, I believe that a
lot of that is going to come
down to, um you know those those
numbers and how those play out,
But the objective is to get more
housing that people can afford
to actually buy and not just
being you know, half a million
dollars a debt every time they
want to buy a house. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, gentle
lady. Mr Speaker, For example,
there's a lot of homes being
built in my in my area.
And I think they're averaging
about $300,000 a home.
And so what? What? A $300,000
home! Mr. Speaker, General Lady
beat, you know if if a developer
is building those type of homes,
single family homes to three
bedrooms. So with the with the
with that development be
eligible for for for this and to
apply for these funding, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, So the
objective is to encourage them
to build lower cost homes, But
the same quality of homes for
those individuals and that's and
that's why this capital
investment that's beginning
phase really helps out a lot.
Thank you for that. General Lady
and Mr Speaker, and that's why I
like it because it's going to.
It's going to build affordable
housing for the employees of the
Industrial Park.
Or the employees of the school
district for the employees of
the small businesses that are
that are growing and there are
there in the area. So so this
this assistance is this, uh,
this loan program that that
developers can apply for for
infrastructure of what I would.
And I would imagine. Mr Speaker
General Lady is water,
wastewater streets, natural gas,
things like that.
And and I think that's really
that's that's really going to be
able to help these developers.
Mr Speaker General Lady be able
to get over that.
Just just make that make it to
the end so they can provide so
they can build those housing for
those folks. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
And that's exactly right. You
know, we were nearly at full
capacity for workforce right
now, and we want people to come
back to next. Want people to
come home again and be able to
afford to live here and work
here, Mr Speaker? Gentlemen, you
know, we want to see the people
who are police officers are
teachers come from the
communities where they're
serving and so insofar as that
we can encourage people.
While we step back for a second,
But the other thing I know about
people, at least in my district,
and I'm sure in yours as well.
We're really prideful folks, and
you know, people want to be able
to work hard and earn the house
that they you know, they've been
working towards Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, but we have to do our
part to make sure those homes
are affordable.
Thank you for that General Lady
and Mr Speaker and and
Those are the type of families
that we want to help young
families who are just starting
out. Uh, families who are
looking to buy that dream home,
quote unquote and I, and I
appreciate this this
legislation. I appreciate what
you're trying to do. And I
really do think that this is
going to help many, many more
people and not just not just in
the metro areas, but especially
in the more
Rural areas where that housing
Mr Speaker, Young lady.
May not be there if it wasn't
for the infrastructure, and this
money is for that infrastructure
and that money is going to allow
these developers to build those
homes and those areas. Mr
Speaker, General Lady that will
allow our families to have their
first many of their first home.
Thank you, John Lee.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Ben Ali, you
and torrents, Representative
Lord. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and
I forgot to look at my board to
acid gentle lady. I don't we, Mr
Speaker. Generally I forgot to
look at what counties you're
from Santa Fe, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, that makes it very
easy speaker utility from Santa
Fe County. We please yield your
time. Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady for Burnley in
Torrance County.
I got sidetracked. Mr. Speaker.
Somebody made me homemade
biscuits. Cheetos and I've been
trying to not eat them, and I
just have been sitting here
eating them, so I apologize for
the distraction. So I have a
question on my
My concerns on section 15.
And
And by the way, I really
appreciate Mr Speaker and gentle
lady when you have a bill, and
it has everything in it so I can
see the bigger picture of what's
happening because sometimes it's
very hard when we get something,
and I don't I have to go back
and try to find the N M s A and
try to figure what section is so
I have it right here.
So
Before I get to the part that
you're changing.
Um, it looks like right now
currently, so the reports go the
governor, Legislature
Legislative Finance Committee.
New Mexico Finance Authority,
and there's no question I'm just
kind of going over this so I can
get to where I'm going in the
question.
And then on page 25.
Um, reports provide details.
And we just crossed out
regarding enterprise to
assistance from the opportunity
Enterprise Revolving Fund and
Housing Development revolving
fund.
And then we go down the
different things we're looking
at.
Ah, and then we get down to
Online 20.
The number of affordable housing
units and workforce development,
housing units supported by the
housing development Assistance.
So I had some questions on
those.
It looks like from understanding
correctly, So I want to see the
bigger picture when we get the
finance reporting back.
Do we know, Um
If that intended beneficiaries
of the low and middle income
people will that actually be the
ones who get the housing and how
will that be demonstrated from
on this page into a report?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. That's I'm
really glad you had that
clarifying question. That's a
really good one. So as we
discussed, this is about having
housing that's affordable, not
necessarily affordable housing.
How this bill supports
affordable housing is that
infrastructure and so that
example, I keep going back to my
district in, you know, in this
report, it would say, um, the mm
phase.
The housing fund through the
Opportunity Enterprise revolving
fund. That program was able to
support development for X number
of units of housing that's
affordable and infrastructure
for sewer lines, Road building,
etcetera that supported why
number of affordable housing, so
the distinction is that when
we're looking at housing that's
affordable and what MF A
includes in that report. That
will be very clearly like X
number of units, etcetera,
etcetera.
But that when we're talking
about the affordable housing
aspect, it's how many units were
supported by that
infrastructure.
Okay. Mr Speaker and General
Lady, um
Do we know what the average
lease terms are going to be?
Mr Speaker Generating. Not at
this moment, because again, this
is this in particular is about
the agreement between the
developer and the opportunity
Opportunities Enterprise Fund
Act. Okay, and Mr Speaker, and
generally do we know how many
units or how much per square
footage
Mr Speaker, General Lady again.
We You know they're when they're
looking at these considerations.
They're looking at the entire
package of what's being provided
and how that's filling in this
workforce housing need that we
have and so in some areas, you
know, there's a lot of
discussion about having work
play live areas right so those
units might be more townhouses.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, which
would make sense in a more urban
population. Maybe there are more
homes, small homes that you know
The gentleman from Dona Ana was
mentioning homes that remind us
of post World War two.
Homes that are there for
families to have. I think,
Willie what we're looking at Mr
Speaker. General Lady is for the
Opportunity Enterprise Review
board to really consider that
entire picture and prioritize
based on that.
Okay, Mr Speaker and General
lady. So what? I'm gonna let you
know is I'm going to present an
amendment that I think would
help clear some of this up
because I think for us to make
an informed decision.
On how this is going to play it
and include the public. I think
we need to add a few more
things, Mr Speaker, General Lady
and given the opportunity to
explain to you what it is and
tell you why I'm bringing that
forward. Would you like to move
the amendment into? I don't know
if we have it yet. We don't have
it yet, so you'll have to send
it. Bring it up right. And Mr
Speaker, I have a question with
the new rules. Is it still going
to be Amendment number one?
That's what's waiting to put on
there is that correct Floor
Amendment number two.
Okay, Give me one second.
Alright, General Lady, we have
copies of the amendment. We will
give our surgeons and
opportunity to pass those out.
Then I'll come back to you to
read the 2 to 8 number and
explain it. Standby. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Sounds like somebody's illegally
parked.
Representative Duncan, Please go
move your car and get told.
We've got the amendment.
Alright, gentle lady. What is
the 2 to 8 number at the bottom
speaker? It is 2 to 885.1.
That's what I have. I believe
that's what the body has. Will
you please explain the
amendment? Absolutely. So this
is House Floor Amendment number
two to House Bill 195. The whole
purpose of this is, um I would
like to see
Increased reporting and data to
make more informed decisions for
us in the public so we can be
more transparent. I believe we
have 75 million in the budget
for this.
Basically what I'm looking at is
number five the average income
of persons leasing or renting
units in the average income of
purchases for units finance the
housing development assistant
The interest rates of housing
development loans if the loans
are made to different interest
rates and the profit made from a
housing development project by
housing developer and the cost
per square foot, So it's purely
just to give us more data. So
when this comes back, and we're
all looking at this, we have
those questions answered, and we
can make better decisions with
more transparency. Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. Let's go
back to this call. Sorry. Sorry
I interrupted you. I'm so sorry.
Real Call the okay. You got
Roco.
Sponsors is a friendly
amendment. No, Mr Speaker.
Would you care to explain why
Thank you, Mr Speaker? I would
appreciate always more data is
always an important thing,
especially when we're doing this
work. It's very difficult for
any MFA to have access to
particular five and seven that
would be very difficult for them
to calculate, especially
especially when we're looking at
these projects, for example, if
they get funded to begin the
development
You know, let's say in 2025 they
begin that process. They
wouldn't know that profit that
that housing developer had
turned over because they
wouldn't have necessarily been
completely built out yet, so
this is not a friendly
amendment. Thank you. Debate on
the amendment.
General Lady from Bern l'Europe
sedative chasing
Mr Speaker. I moved to table the
amendment right? We are in a
tabling motion to House floor
Amendment number two to House
Bill 195. A board of yes and the
amendment would have been
tabled. They would have known
we're back on the amendment.
And there's a roll call vote.
The vote.
The words about clothes.
The vote is now closed by board
of 36 in the affirmative 24 in
the negative House floor
Amendment number two to House
Bill 195 has been tabled Your
Lady from Berlin and Torrance.
You still have a floor. Mr
Speaker. I'd like to say I was
shocked that that was moved to
table, but I'm just saying, I'm
extremely disappointed because
my intention on this is we don't
have enough data.
And there's not enough
transparency. I just thought
people would be more bipartisan.
Say you know what?
It doesn't matter. It's
representative Lord, We're still
going to vote for that because
we do need more transparency in
this bill. The other show I have
is that when I go back and look
at things
My district in Torrance County
has not been included, and I
know it's because they haven't
applied, but I feel it's a
responsibility of the people
that are putting this problem
together to make sure that
districts like mine and Torrance
County that need the most help
so again disappointed about not
wanting to be transparent. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Lady. I will
Please ask you to refrain for
Making those kinds of
statements. I don't think anyone
here is against transparency and
I take great offense when that
is mentioned on the floor like
that, So please, let's not do
that. Apologize, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
There's further debate The
gentleman from Catherine Grant
in Hidalgo, representative
Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
General lady, please Yield. Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from catching Grant
and Hidalgo.
Thank you, Mr Speaker generally,
so I was just been listening.
And, uh,
And just I just had some
concerns.
And so I keep hearing that, Mr
Speaker generally that this
money is used for
infrastructure.
And I guess, let me
Let me back up a little bit. Mr.
Speaker generally.
I think we all agree that the
basic understanding of economics
is supply and demand.
We don't have the
Housing to keep our costs down
for you know for this. This
Holmes, is that something that
you agree on?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I think the
housing market we're seeing
across the nation. Um, where?
you know, we're facing a housing
crisis across the nation, and
there's many aspects to what
that might be, But we absolutely
need more supply. Absolutely.
I think, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I think we have a
combination of people who owning
second homes that are sitting
considered vacant. Airbnb s and
stuff like that.
We have just the lack of, uh,
houses that were built after the
2008 crash. I think we have
Ah!
We have not to. Not enough
participation while our labor
participation rates are down. I
think we've got interest rates
that are also a factor now. And
so there's several factors that
are causing this lack of
inventory. Would you agree with
that?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I think there's
I think there's a lot of reasons
why, and I think there's some
that I agree with you on that
and someone you and I could have
a good coffee and chat it
through was more too, because I
think this is a very detailed
Housing market that we do have.
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I think I don't have
all those answers. I'm just
stating some of the ones that I
think are
An issue.
But and we all
Understand that when the prices
of homes are going up the way
they are recently
It's hard for young individuals
to be able to afford homes.
And so if they go out there, Mr
Speaker, General Lady of the
make even 50 $60,000 a year.
It's still difficult to purchase
a home.
Uh, under these conditions,
Would you agree with that? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Yeah, I would agree
with that. So, Mr Speaker.
Generally, the reason I'm
bringing that up is I think we
have you know, I think the
general idea of what we're
trying to do here is
interesting, and I think it's
something that could could
probably work. And so I'm just
gonna ask you a few questions
because I kind of been in and
out of the chamber running,
taking care of things, and so
Ah, I might have missed some of
your answers. So if I'm
I ask you something the second
time, please bear with me, okay?
Um
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
This. Your bill? Um, goes into
Different types of of
participation. I'll call
participation in in these
projects.
Is it more lean toward
Development.
Or single.
Uh, housing or or just an
apartment development. Can you
just kind of give me a quick
Ah, overview of that real quick.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes. So what
this bill would do would enable
the Opportunity Enterprise
Review Board to look at
applications for development and
look at them in the hall. How do
they affect the community? Does
the community support these
projects? Um, side note. I have
projects, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
that my community is not
supported. And I think
absolutely. I want the O E. R B
to consider that when they're
looking at these
And so when they're looking at
those developments, what are the
housing needs that exist there?
You know, the gentleman from
Dona Ana also mentioned, you
know, getting those waste lot
waterlines. How are we making
sure they are getting
connection. They're looking at
the whole project. And at this
point and this bill, we are not
encouraging one type of housing
that fits everybody And this is
the way we solve our workforce
solutions Because, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I thank you and I
Probably would agree that
there's just not one size that
fits all for anything really in
New Mexico.
I do agree with that. I do agree
that there's not one thing If
it's everything, so, um, Mr
Speaker, General Lady that being
said if we're going to develop
development, I'm just trying to
understand here. Are we giving
this
Are we trying to help developers
to where they can take a track
of land and put the
infrastructure there?
To develop all the going to calm
the lots.
That are all throughout an area.
So that they can be resold and
build homes on that. Is that
what this is kind of wanting to
do? Original lady? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. That's
that's exactly right now. One
thing I wanted to if you don't
mind me mentioning this as well,
You know, they're absolutely I
think a lot of us have concerns
about, uh, you know, people
buying second homes and having
this this effort and my
conversations with developers,
you know that are looking at
Santa Fe and really trying to
build these more affordable
units. Um
What's difficult for them is
that they have to have a lot of
investment up front before they
turn over a single dollar. And
so what happens that I've seen
in my own district is, um you
you'll you'll see somewhere and
it'll say, like, Build the unit
to your specs. Exactly what you
want. You just have to buy it
now And in nine months, it will
be exactly what you want. Which
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, for the
average person, the average
worker. I think I would say for
many of us here.
That's not a possibility the
only person that could afford to
pay a mortgage while they're
paying a separate mortgage or
paying a rent is somebody who
has a lot of money. And so what
this program would inherently do
is take that need to get lots
and get property sold out of the
equation and allow people to
have the capital to build out
and really start selling these
these these homes that are more
affordable, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
and so I'm just want to make
sure I understand this, So I
I'm going to pretend that I'm
the developer.
And I come to you and I say, You
know what? I need participation
on this new development. I'm
gonna have a I don't know.
50 lot. Uh, partial, it's going
to have your basic
infrastructure. You know your
street your maybe not sidewalks,
but we're gonna go ahead and put
in, uh, a gas line. We're going
to put the sewer infrastructure.
Maybe we don't even put a sword
infrastructure. Maybe it's in
certain areas it's going to be
you'll have to get a septic
system.
Or but we're going to have for
sure. Power water.
And, um
We'll just start power and water
and sewer, okay?
And so I go and I cut all these
Make this 50 home development.
This program would help me as a
developer.
Fund that is that what? I'm
understanding, Mr. Speaker.
General Lady Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, and you would
have to enter an agreement with
them about the cost of homes
they would be selling and all
those pieces yes.
That's not New. Mexico NM FAA
have lean on the entire
Um, development And does it
require if I understand
Properly an 8020 participation
rate.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Could you
repeat that second half your
question? Apologize is is does
the Mm mm. FAA have
A lean to this property as it's
being developed.
And there's a participation rate
or that you know the down
payment that they have to
participate in such a project as
a developer, 20% to 80% loan
value.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I think what a
lot of us enjoy about working
with my my. My expert is the
details that she goes into the
summary of it. Is that the it
depends on the project. It
depends on the other agreements
they have with loans in place
All of those aspects I would
encourage you and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen to look on page 14 and
beginning on on a section C line
five. It describes the the
agreement essentially between
the authority and the
opportunity enterprise partner.
And then the claw and then and
then how they will begin to
develop the callback or
recapture provisions should
there be a default or an issue
like that?
Can you just in general just
explained to me by the time I
read it, and we just go back to
court house that we can run
through it, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady real quick. Just give me a
synopsis of that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So what
effectively says that the
agreement they have to come to
They have to prove And while
they're developing these aspects
of this faculty fact um they all
provide clawback recapture
provisions of financial plan
detailing the contributions and
obligations that exist. Um, they
would specify the rents of black
hackable applicable and how much
that would cost. That's more so
for the on the other side of it.
And then it also allows them to
take possession of the property,
including the succession of all
rights titles and interests on
certain ones. Now, that's in
particular for the enterprise
development projects, but that
would also still be in the case
for the housing ones as well.
So I'm understanding Mr Speaker,
General lady that they have
provisions in there that if
That they can claw back this
project. Obviously, if they
don't pay the bill.
Um, they can claw back this if
they developed this and there's
not This isn't affordable
housing in my understanding that
also, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. One
moment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Their their
aspects if they don't abide by
the agreement, there are things
that, um fake can do to, um,
effect the the developer who
broke the agreement. So in your
example, if the the lead Loney
the person receives the loan
charges more for the development
than is the median price or is
outside of the agreement. They
came to. There are things that
they can do, including
increasing the interest rates
that they charge on them and
making sure that they are paying
In their fair share to make to
make to make it right.
I'm sorry. Repeat that one more
time. You kind of lost me there.
Mr. Speaker Jack, Mr. Speaker.
Generally sorry.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if
they breach any of the contract
provisions, they can escalate
the loan. They can require that
it all be a do immediately back
to an M F. A. They can increase
the interest rates. They can do
more things that would hold the
the company where the
organization liable and
responsible for breaking the
terms of their their agreement.
So what you're saying Mr Speaker
generally as they can call
alone.
If those that's what we call it
a banking and you can call alone
Do
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, that's
that's correct, And that's if
they stay out of the parameters
of affordable housing. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, if they
break the agreement that they
came to with any MFA in the O E.
R B board and in any way they
would then have the ability to
escalate the loan. As you
mentioned call, call the loan or
in other ways as well.
So that is one aspect is if they
don't abide by the by the
principles that they sent out of
how much these they're going to
charge for these units.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, I
again I'm not trying to
Tear down your bill here. I'm
trying to understand it. And so
me saying that I'm trying to
understand the parameters of
what you're talking about. When
the agreement I don't know what
that would be. I mean, they and
so the reason I'm saying that
before I go on is
My understanding. I want to make
sure I got this right Is this
for the purpose of creating more
affordable housing or to allow a
developer tools to develop an
area because there's two
different things going on here
If I come as a developer, and I
see that, and I said, you know
what I'll develop.
100. I'll take this 100 acres
and I'm going to make it, uh,
one acre lots and I'm gonna get
the development the funds to
develop that area with
infrastructure like we're
talking about, and I decided to
build
I don't know.
Three quarters of a million
dollar homes or million dollar
homes, Custom homes in there.
Yes, I am.
Following one portion of of what
you were doing talking about,
which is creating inventory for
the stadium, Mexico but another
the other side that's not
affordable housing. So I'm
trying to understand that.
Or am I bound by my agreement in
this bill to say you know what I
am to develop this?
This property and I'm gonna take
this 100 acres and I'm going to
make it into maybe half or
quarter acres and make it up
three and 400 lot development
and I'm going to make it
affordable housing for single
family units.
Just an example. Mr Speaker,
General Levy. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, so throughout the bill, we
leave a lot up to the board to
decide and rules, etcetera. But
this piece in particular, I
think the proposal this act is
very clear. And so if you look
on page for line 22, it's it
defines workforce development.
Housing is below market housing,
Addressing demand for workforce
housing for middle income
workers in proximity to
employment centers. It clarifies
And also the page before on line
three. You know some of the
activities that can take place
planning, designing building
surveying all the things they
can do with that money and how
that would work.
So the reason why I point that
out is that
If they if wants to use this
fund for loans for developers to
build out housing that we want
them to build out, Um
They They're going to have to
consider these aspects as well
when they're loaning that money
out, and they absolutely
candied, um, deed restrict. They
can say that this disagreement
only exists if a B and C
parameters are met, and again,
those are based on the
affordability there based on the
population, it's supposed to be
serving, etcetera, etcetera.
And if they break out of that,
then they can, As you were
saying, call the loan or
increase the interest rates,
etcetera.
And so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, you know it's it's so real
quick.
Because of the cost of new
construction, Okay?
Being a such a big factor.
Okay, Um
Do you have any idea of because
I'm going to ask you this?
What
Per square foot of building new
development, a new home
What That number is just a
range. I mean me and arrange and
then and I'm not talking. Let's
throw out the million dollar
homes. I'm talking about your
18.
100 Square foot home.
Three bedroom, two bath.
We're talking about just nothing
fancy. We're not talking about,
um you know, granite
countertops. We're just talking
about a nice livable home that a
single family unit can be
utilized by someone that, um
Wants to have their own home.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. You know, at the
top of my head, I don't know the
answer to that aspect, but I
think that's why the gentleman
from Otero's question about the
board makeup is so important. We
want to make sure that the
experts that are commenting on
housing and again what is
housing that's affordable versus
affordable housing that line
these experts that are going to
be on the opportunities up the
ER B board are going to be
critical to defining a lot of
those aspects. But that is
information that I will say, Mr
Mr Speaker.
That, um, the N M F a over the
opportunity Enterprise board
will have to consider
Because when they're when
they're coming into these
agreements, and they're asking
for these applications to be
made that the answer the
question of how much per square
foot really does come into play.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady, I
guess what I'm trying to do is
I'm trying to grasp this where I
say, you know, I love I like the
idea in general I just was
trying to. I think there's some
other members here that are
trying to just kind of grasp her
grasp. Grasp this in a point
that they can say I can. I can
help someone come into a new
family dwelling or, you know or
etcetera.
But they want to make sure that
that's happening. So I think
I'm still trying to get to
understand the process, but it
sounds like there has a lot of
different avenues that this can
go. So I've seen her not I
think, Marquita. I think that's
what it is. It's kind of far for
me to see. But it looks to me
like if I just want it, So just
clarify this for me. I go in
there as a developer. I get the
loan participation loan. I don't
know 80 20%.
I get the terms and conditions
for it to me. Affordable
housing. I turn around, I say I
developed all this. All these
all these lots and I do these
lots and then I say, okay?
These are this this now I'm
gonna resell them as a
developer. I don't necessarily
have to build a house. I can
just sell a lot is that is that
going to be an acceptable term
under this in this bill?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Likely.
No. And the reason why is that
we want to see more units built.
That's a good answer. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, General lady. So
then that means that someone is
going to then this developer
then is hopefully
Going to and I don't like to
really put these parameters but
if we want to make affordable
housing in order to do that, you
have to have maybe three units
that you offer in that
development so that they can.
they can so that the developer
can purchase purchase the
packages. You know the building
packages and they're the same
thing And they're construction
workers are repetitive, so they
can build something faster, more
efficient.
Rather than a custom home on
each lot. Is that something that
we're talking about? Mr.
Speaker? Generally, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes. Perfect. That's
what I wanted to hear. Mr
Speaker, gentle lady and is in
so that being said, I mean, I've
seen
And again, this is very
difficult to
To debate on every area because
Santa Fe like you said earlier.
Mr Speaker, General Lady is not
the same development as silver
City or Las Cruces or Carlsbad
or wherever yet, we all need
affordable housing and in our
areas, right? I mean in my
quadrant. I want to see some
affordable housing My dad, just
so you know, Mr Speaker, Joanie.
I come from a family of building
and I know Billy materials and
banking supper Well, so I
understand this pretty good. And
I know that right now in our
quadrant in our area were
struggling, Mr Speaker, General
lady to get
People that contractors to come
and build even a customhouse.
It's taken us about two years
and so I see the need.
So here's my next question.
Speaker General lady are How do
I have
What
What guarantee do we have?
That we're going to see these
dollars spread out evenly, and
this doesn't just get swallowed
up by last truces, Santa Fe and
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. You know again, I
think even just seeing what's
already happened with the
economic development dollars in
the opportunity Enterprise Fund
as it stands that the first
learning was exactly what the
representative the gentleman
from Otero mentioned right? We
had a significant number of the
25 corridor represented and
immediately they went back and
reconsidered.
The calculus and calculus. The
math that goes into um um
The point is they have how to
get to 100 points and they
change that up. And they did
increase the syndicate Lee once
For example, in that one again,
it's 100 Point scale. And if you
come from a frontier area they
went from 10. Additional
automatic points are being
frontier to 15 and I would
expect and hope and encourage
them face to put on similar
aspects for the exact reason
that you mentioned gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, if you have a developer
that is ready to work in a rural
county and ready to do that
investment, they should
absolutely get more.
Um more points more more
credence in this process, a
higher place than all the
developers that automatically
come to Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, Speaker, General
Lady, um
I'm gonna go back as my mind's
just I'm just kind of
My mind's
We're you know, running through
all this and I'm thinking.
Okay. If I'm going to put myself
as a purchaser now
I'm going to be
Family of four. I come in. I
want to buy a home. These
developments that we're talking
about.
What I mean, What would you
consider a fair?
Range to pay.
For a three bedroom, two
bathroom bath house.
And still be able to to for this
median income.
Individual myself to afford.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. You know
my other expert who is here as
well mentioned as well that, um
it's about 203 103 $100 per
square foot, Depending on where
in the state Those costs are
going to come up, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
That's right.
My apologies, Mr Speaker
Generally, that's right. And so
you know, if we look at an 1800
square foot house, and we can
change it, I mean, I'm just
using that, but even if it's a
1500 square foot house at $200
300,000 dollars
And so that makes it difficult
for a person that's you know,
still making $50,000 a year and
then their their loan.
Uh and I want to understand when
I go as a purchaser, Let's just
say I do the 1500 Basic house
$200 a square foot. That's
As $300,000 I walk in
And I talked to you guys about
this and I want to purchase a
house.
What is my down payment?
Do you waive that?
And what terms do I get?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Again, we
understand that housing is a big
puzzle, and they're all
different aspects to how that
works for this bill in
particular, And in this program,
this is about increasing the
supply of moderately priced
under median priced housing to
increase the number of houses
that are available for below
market rate, right.
And so, with that being said,
that's one aspect now, if if you
need additional assistance in a
variety of ways, MFK has
programs and they oversee that
individual bar that individual
person that's going to buy that
home. That aspect of it, But
those are two separate pieces of
this really important housing
crisis that we in Mexico face as
well as others in other states.
Mr Speaker. Generally, they just
handed me as something here.
Show that
Phoning in a friend.
I like that. Mr Speaker. I'm
just so let me ask you. This is
Grant County Luna County
Economic Change that up. Are
they included in this, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay, so anywhere. Any county in
all 33 counties are eligible for
this program. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Yes. That makes me feel better.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General lady,
So I just did. I just got my
amortization schedule here. I
just look at 300,000 bucks 30
years and I pursued at 3%.
That's about $1265, not
including TN I so it's probably
gonna be closer to $1400 a
month.
Um, And so I just want to make
sure that these people are able
to afford that again. I'm not
trying to tear this down. Mr.
Speaker gentlelady trying to
understand it. I want to make
sure that it goes to all
quadrants All 33 counties. I
want to make sure Mr Speaker
General lady that we have, um
You know that are single family.
Units are available to the
people that live in New Mexico
that were born and raised here.
I'm not trying to exclude people
are moving here. But you know,
Mr Speaker gentlelady.
We are pricing our Children and
our grandchildren out of
housing.
And absolutely right that we
need to increase our our mentor,
E.
But I think of I think of our
kids and how difficult it is.
For them to just move into a
house.
I got my first home. I bought my
first home speaker, General Lady
because at the time they had a
program that you could get. It
was basically didn't have to
have anything down to purchase a
house. And from there, I
leverage myself and got myself
to where I'm at today.
But
We need to have some some
balance in that right. We need
to still be able to do that. And
what? The only thing that I'm
afraid of the only thing that
concerns me, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. I don't want this to get
abused And although because I
can say as a developer
Hey, I'm gonna I'm gonna develop
homes and I am creating
inventory.
But it's not affordable to your
person that's out there making
even with with two people that
both parents working making
$30,000 a year 40,000 that's
$15,015 an hour.
And they're making $60,000 a
year. It's such a gap to
purchase a house, and that's
what makes it a little bit
difficult. I think it's tough to
buy a house at this time, even
at making those dollars, but it
can happen and I appreciate what
you're doing.
Um and I really do like this. Is
there anything else that you'd
like to express to me? So you
know that you think I should
know about this? And is there
actually any flip this over is
there
Are there going to be as this?
Can this be used for multi
dwelling units. And what are the
other versatile types of
housing?
That this fund could be used for
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. Let me get you
an answer on on the various
types of housing that they're
looking at, and that we're
looking at in this bill, But I
do want to mention something. Is
that our concern right now is
that that we don't have the
supply that we need for
development and when you when
you get out development and a
place like New Mexico in a place
like Santa Fe, for example, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, we run into
the situation Where in Santa Fe,
For example, we require at least
30% of the units are affordable
housing.
For example, And so what does
that mean for the developer?
They're going to drive up the
cost of everything else, right?
And so what This does is creates
a supply of housing That doesn't
have to be $500,000. And I mean
and and Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
you're not wrong. It's a bit out
of control right now. My
husband. I bought a house. A
year later, He went up 100
decade and then it settled a
little better. That's not right,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, that that
that's how do you expect anyone
to get in that market? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, So I do want
to mention that
If we do nothing, it doesn't
increase the supply that exists.
We don't get any new units, and
that is why it's important to
begin and look at this from this
aspect. That's one aspect of it.
The other piece of that I want
to also mention is that, um
When we're looking at the sizing
of housing as well, you know,
1800 square feet where you live,
is very different than where I
live. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, are
developments and our work play
live units are smaller 1200
Square feet. You know, even 1000
Square feet is something that
people do live in here in Santa
Fe are Casitas Do have families
live here, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and so I do think
that's a part of it as well.
The last thing I want to mention
is and I asked my speaker, my
experts to write down the
different types of domiciles as
you were asking about Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and so it
the goal here and I knew some of
this is that we want to support
a broad range of housing for the
exact reasons that I just
mentioned right now what? What
fits in Santa Fe, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen and are limited water
requirements is different than
other areas so it could be multi
family rentals. It could be a
single family ownership. It
could be a mixed use of those
things, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
But we want to give that
flexibility so that this program
grows with the people that are
coming home to live and work
here.
Mr Speaker generally, thank you
very much. I think you know, I
think I have expressed that I
like what is going on here. I
know that you're trying to think
at the end of the day is just
creating inventory is a plus, I
think this is a start.
Um, I think that if we can, and
I agree with you that what works
here in Santa Fe absolutely
won't work in my area.
Those those numbers that we
talked about those parameters
that create housing, Whether
it's a size of the house, the
square foot of that of the
Uh, price per square foot square
foot size of the dwelling the
interest rate that time
advertised. Those are all
factors down payment and so
forth. There is a lot that goes
into it, And that's what makes
this a long, lengthy process to
to to, uh, debate, but I really
appreciate your answers. I got a
good grasp of what you're trying
to do.
And I appreciate you. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Generally, thank
you.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan
representative Montoya family
here from San Juan.
Flip a coin.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does a
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
I thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally I appreciate this
debate today, in part because I
think this is maybe the clearest
presentation so far that I've
heard.
On the program, So I do
appreciate that. Um, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady, um
I I believe it was mentioned
earlier by one of your co
sponsors that
That this was different.
Then what?
If a programs are is that
correct? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Yes. So
so, Mr Speaker, and generally
I've I've listened and I think
I think, in part, Mr Speaker.
And generally, I think that is
correct.
But I think in part there is
some overlap. And if I could
express that to you, I'd like to
talk to you about that. Just a
little bit. So Miss Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um
The housing development, the
single family housing
development is something
That does not exist
specifically.
With a so I do appreciate Miss
Speaker and gentle lady. That
portion
Uh, of this.
Ah!
Of this program.
And Ms Speaker and
And generally from Santa Fe.
I think that there is the
ability to make housing single
family structures more
affordable if it is in a
development where maybe multiple
homes can be built
simultaneously, spec homes can
be built.
Um
But
But Mr Speaker and General idea,
I think
The single
Dwellings, the single family
dwellings. I think what you are
offering here is different than
a But Mr Speaker in general
lady, I'm not sure how
The program is different when
we're talking about
Apartments or rental units. So
can you explain to me how how
This is different in that.
Area.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So this program
that were developing is not an
income restricted restricted
subsidy program. This is all
about building out their units
that we need to have that and so
as much as I m F a
I see them going hand in hand in
a lot of ways, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, because as much as
FAA is buyer focused, buyer
oriented, this is really about
developer focused developer
oriented to build the units that
are going to have that was
better. Better Price. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, worker
units.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
I guess.
From the standpoint of
apartments.
I don't see how that's different
except for that developers would
be able to charge
Higher amount.
It. I know that Miss speaker and
gentlemen, as far as workers go
and worker housing or affordable
housing
Uh, in New Mexico.
Ah M F A has requirements that
if there is a development used
for this for affordable housing
or for worker housing.
That
I believe the ratio is 80%
versus 20% have to be its income
restricted. It's specific to
income and miss speaker and
gentle lady thus far.
That's still is a huge need.
In New Mexico is for those folks
who can least afford it.
But Miss speaker and generally
there are no such restrictions
here.
Which
It just to me. It seems like the
developer will have the
opportunity to develop.
These homes get a break on
developing his homes and then
can charge the maximum amount.
I'm not sure how that helps.
Where we believe the need is,
which is the lower income folks.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm actually
really glad you you got into
this because I keep saying
housing that's affordable, not
necessarily affordable housing,
And I think that distinction is
extremely important. And I'm
glad we can kind of get into
this little bit. So right now a
new Mexico our wages are
increasing faster than most
other states. Any other state if
I remember correctly, any other
state right now we're at full
employment We have you know,
people are working in our
unemployment is significantly
lower. We as new Mexicans and as
leaders in the state should be
extremely proud to see those
shifts in those changes and
I love seeing that, but I don't
want to see and what I want to
see is for those wages to
increase the prevailing wage
when Amazon moved into
Albuquerque went up by dollars,
not just sense by dollars. You
saw this shift happening in our
economy. We want new Mexicans to
try to get and to have the skill
set to earn more money per hour
that they're working in their
lives in New Mexico.
So I m f a all of their rentals.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, our
income restricted housing and
and should you price out of that
Because you now make more money
because the workforce that you
are filling in can no longer is
no longer at that cap, which is
60% of the median wage for most
60% of the median wage, which is
for most programs.
Um, it restricts a big
population. We're focused on and
so absolutely, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, you are 100% right
that we want to see more housing
that exists for low income, But
we also need a lot of middle
income housing as well, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and for
somebody that makes pretty good
money, And I mean pretty good
money in New Mexico beaten
median household income in New
Mexico is 54 around $54,000 now.
If we're folks that, um, that
earn more than that we want to
make sure that they have a place
that even they can afford to
live and that they're not
getting into half a million
dollars of debt, especially
after getting college Educ Wall.
I'll take that out because Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, this body
has done work on that. So we
want to make sure that we're
filling in that gap for folks
that are making this prevailing
wage above. You know these
poverty levels
Speaker and gentle lady, I guess
my concern here is, let's say a
housing development where to go
into place here here in Santa
Fe.
What is the Keep
A wealthy
The individual from
Ryudo. So
To purchase a home here.
Because there's it doesn't seem
to somebody could get a second
home.
Through this. I'm not sure how
this helps our housing. Uh,
somebody Mr Speaker and
generally could buy a home for
the purpose of then renting it
out in Santa Fe.
I don't see how this helps
without some sort of restriction
without some sort of guidelines.
I don't see how this helps.
Markers. This seems to me that
this would benefit anybody just
by there being more inventory.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Again or not
again. I shouldn't say that. I
think, Mr Thank you, gentlemen.
When I look at Santa Fe,
especially and I think most of
folks that are here know this
about Santa Fe. I'm proud to
represent my district,
particularly because I represent
the east and south side of the
city. Um, you know when we're
looking at the property that as
I mentioned that the median cost
of a house in Santa Fe is over
$500,000 A lot of that is not
driven by my district where most
of the workers who work in our
hotels and work you know, in our
in our hospitals and work at our
stores live.
They live in my district, and my
folks can't afford the million
dollar homes that are driving it
up. When you look at this county
of Santa Fe, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, those houses are even
more costly 800,000. I believe
more than 800,000 is the average
cost for a home in Santa Fe
County again because people are
building these large lots. The
reason why I mentioned that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, is getting
back to your question, which is
that when people are looking at
a second home, they're not
looking whether workforce where
the workforce is living now,
what's good about this program
and through the real rulemaking
process?
Is absolutely there are things
that Mm mm fa and the
Opportunity Enterprise Review
board can do to ensure that
these are not being sold a
secondary homes to individuals
the and they can put those
pieces. The reason why it's
important remains enroll. Missed
making, Mr Speaker Gentlemen is
it is not reliant on it being,
you know, a 60 Day session for
you know that it doesn't have to
happen require the governor to
have buy into it that they can
change those rules. If those
restrictions are not working,
and they can they can, as I
mentioned earlier.
You can have deed restrictions
that on on their agreements with
their developers, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, speaker and gentle
lady, I guess.
That is really the crux of my
problem with this bill, because
we do have if you go community
to community to community.
There is overwhelming need
For affordable housing for
people who live here in New
Mexico.
Right now. There are people who
who are driving from town house
to go to work in Angel Fire or
Red River or or Eagle's Nest,
because there's no worker
housing there in the area. Where
where the worker housing needs
to be. But Miss speaker in
general lady now what could
happen is a development could go
in take advantage of these
funds.
And you could and someone
developer could literally
Build.
A this type of affordable home
in in the the area of Red River
or or Eagle's Nest.
And there's no restriction as to
who could then purchase it. And
Miss speaker and generally the
folks who with who already have
good credit.
Who already have
Ah, the ability to afford
something like this.
They'll do it. They'll go and
purchase it and it was still
doesn't fix the problem that
we've been talking about. So
Miss speaker and generally that
is my concern.
Um, not necessarily the housing
developments. I like the housing
development portion of this
because that doesn't exist
anywhere currently in New Mexico
is for single how single
structure single family housing.
I think that portion of this is
unique to this. But Miss Speaker
in general Lady
The The problem I have is the F
a model.
To move up on that list of
projects with an M F a
You.
Um, half you can move up that
list by how much money the
developer brings, and it moves
them further up the list. But on
top of that, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady, there's about a 17
to 1 ratio of dollars that come
in for doing it for low income
folks. And I think what we're
doing is if we if we put money
into the exact same type of
Apartment structures.
What we're doing is we're
diverting money away.
Which
If we just gave the increase,
and it was specifically for
worker housing.
We could do many, many, many
more projects because that
dollar is multiplied 17 times
over.
Um, but the speaker in general
idea, it does appear as if that
this bill has
Has legs, and it's a move
forward, even though I believe
we have a better vehicle.
For this. Um So, uh, I my
concern, Miss Speaker and gentle
lady is that there is nothing
prescriptive in this bill, not
prescriptive enough. I believe
for what? I think New Mexicans
are actually clamoring for
Mr Speaker. There is no
definition of affordable
housing. There is no definition.
Ah of what income level.
Could then have at least
preference.
To buy these homes. Um
And, uh,
Or or there is no preference as
to who could rent the apartments
that are built.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm I'm I'm going to be
introducing an amendment here in
just a second.
And I'm I'm wanting to at least
put a definition in
As to what
Low and moderate.
Or low and and and
Middle income workers are
Um, Miss Speaker and General 80.
I'm wanting to use the
definition of 200 up to 250%.
Of the poverty level.
And some speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, the poverty level for an
individual person for a single
for a single person. Household
is 15,060 $15,060 per year.
That's the poverty level 250% of
that.
Is $37,650.
Um, now I'm gonna I'm gonna look
at the far end.
For a six person household.
The poverty level for a for a
family of six is 40 just just at
$42,000. But Mr Speaker and
General 8200 and 50%.
Is a is an income of $105,000.
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
That is That is one thing that
the amendment that I'm going to
propose here in a second will
do. But the second thing is it.
Ah!
Puts a requirement.
That these units are not rented
or sold to individuals.
That have a household income of,
uh more than $250,000. So Miss
Speaker. I believe that's been
passed out.
And so, miss speaker at this
time, I'd like to move. House
Floor Amendment number 232 House
Bill 195, and I'd like to ask
for a roll call vote.
You have the roll call.
Everybody has the amendment. I'm
hearing you know back there?
Yes, we have it.
The 2 to 8 number Mr. Speaker is
2 to 8074.3. That's what I have.
The gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. To some
degree, I just explained the
amendment in advance, but once
again, Miss Speaker and gentle
lady the amendment
Does what I think the need.
And that that is the greatest is
not just to increase inventory,
but to make sure that inventory
is directed to those who are
blocked out of the market right
now.
And so much speaker. That is
that is workers, um, and
moderate income residents.
Ah low and moderate income
residents who have an income of
up to 250% of the federal
poverty level.
And Mr Speaker and generally the
second item that it does is it
requires that the folks who
build these developments will
either sell or rent these homes
to people who have who are at
the 250% of, uh of the poverty
level.
And with that, Miss speaker,
I'll stand for questions from
Santa Fe. Is this a friendly
amendment? Mr Speaker? It is not
And if I may explain it for a
moment, the problem Poverty
limit is a bit problematic in
this overall. Um what we're
really trying to do is maintain
the definitions we have and
remain in line with the federal
definitions. We have. So right
now this we use the hood area
median income, and that truly
varies County by county. So, for
example, in Santa Fe, I believe
100% of that area. Median
income, you know, in somewhere
else, it might be 120%. I think
that's that's a big piece of it,
too, is that it's a bit too
restrictive.
It would really limit the types
of housing that would be
possible through this program,
and that would be problematic.
And then three again, we have a
number of programs through Mm Fe
that allow and MFA at the
flexibility to change rules to
still have oversight from the
Legislature without having to
wait for a governor to put it on
their message or something like
that, so well, I appreciate the
spirit of this conversation. I
believe that what this bill is
trying to do is fill in a gap of
housing that is affordable to
workers, and I believe this
would conflict with that. That
goal.
Is the debate on the amendment
to promote that represented
block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind gentleman from San Juan,
please Yield. Yes, Mr Speaker. I
would yield to the gentleman
from Otero County. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So quickly. I'm just reading
your proposed amendment, and I
guess
I didn't catch this Mr Speaker
in the original bill, so I'm
really glad that you did.
Because Mr Speaker when we read
through these million page bills
or this one's pretty long, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I I didn't
catch that There is not a cap on
income. Some Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is that correct in my
understanding that there is not
a cap on income currently in
this
This legislation for the
addition of this low income
housing, Mr Speaker, Generality
or gentlemen? Yes, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen. Yes, that is
exactly correct. There is there
is no cap. There is a vague
overall description of low and
moderate income. But there is
nothing that
That describes
Or gives a definition and all
I'm trying to do is define that
in this bill.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, and I think
that's super important because
with the legislative process we
want to be as prescriptive as
you said as possible. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and I think
that's something that we want to
certainly add to this
legislation. I think it would
actually improve exponentially
the piece of legislation because
we are saying specifically who
were trying to target because Mr
Speaker, gentlemen as you and I
probably both agree.
This is the American dream.
Owning a home having a job being
able to lift yourself out of
poverty. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I guess I had a quick
question on that does this
definition require it only at
the point of sale. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, let's just
say a year down the line. I lift
myself out of poverty because of
this legislation, and I'm able
to support myself and lift
myself into a higher income
bracket. Does this change that
at all? Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
No Miss Speaker and gentlemen,
This just means that the point
of the purchase or the rent
Don't
Uh, that if if, at any point
their income level changes, it
doesn't matter. They own the
home they've gotten in. They got
in when they were in a certain
position, and this does allow
them to pull themselves out of
that position. Potentially
where, um, where they're able
to.
Maybe realize the American dream
of homeownership as well. And
the speaker and gentlemen, I
guess the other reason that I'm
Very much interested in putting.
A definition on who can purchase
or who can rent.
These homes.
Is because
Frankly, if we in my mind, we're
diverting some of these dollars
away from where it is doing
that. And so I'm concerned that
what we're doing is we're
diverting those dollars away.
From the pro programs that help
The poorest among us Instead,
it's leaving it wide open to
where a developer can build a
home can quickly sell those
homes to anybody.
And and that is my concern. And
so I think there at least at the
very at the very least, as you
stated and in your question.
That at the point
Of purchase or the point of
initial rental.
That if they if they then move
out of that area, it doesn't
matter. They moved into the home
at that point, and and then they
can use their money for other
things as they are potential
income grows.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and I think that's
the key concern that I had.
Specifically with this
legislation. It's not as direct
as I'd like it to be like I love
the legislation. I really do.
But Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I
would hate for a situation to
arise. Where, Let's just say
we're talking about Santa Fe.
Where we are now, and there are
some houses that are going from
millions upon millions of
dollars, and they're like houses
that would go for
304 100,000 in my district, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, So I think
it's important that the sale of
the the home goes to someone who
truly needs it. Someone who
wants to work in society who
just cannot afford a home right
now, because of the cost. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I just want
to make sure that that I'm on
the same page as you
This would allow that individual
who's building the homes to not
just go go ahead and say, Well,
I'm building low income housing
and then sell them at market
rate.
To someone for for I don't know
$600,000 for
Two bath three bedroom house, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I hope that
question, gentlemen, that's my
concern that I am concerned that
what's really needed here in
Santa Fe.
Is not more $500,000 homes that
are much less than the million
dollar homes that exist.
But for the folks who live here
or who work here but are living
everywhere else.
And driving here every day. I
think this would be a good
investment if we could allow
those folks to live here near
their jobs that would actually
take less wear and tear on our
roads. We wouldn't be risking
your life between Albuquerque
and Santa Fe at Rush hour.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
I'm concerned that what this
does it just it's benefiting.
The people who are just benefit
if there were more housing
Which, if we continue to do
that, at the lower end, it would
open up more in that middle
range without targeting the
middle range. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, and I
really liked that about this
amendment, and I won't. I won't
rattle on and on. I just wanted
to say thank you for bringing
this forward and I think that's
actually would improve the
legislation. Thank you, Mr
Speaker from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House Floor Amendment number
three.
We are on a motion to table
House Floor Amendment number
three.
Did you ask for?
He asked for roll call.
And I grant through the rope.
Of years in the amendments have
been tabled over back in the
amendment.
Was not closed by voting 41 the
affirmative 25 in the negative
House floor Amendment number
three to House Bill 195 has been
tabled back to the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. As as a realtor. I do
agree that more housing
That is affordable is an issue.
Ms Speaker and gentle lady. I
just
A little disturbed that
Ah!
That I think we're taking money.
That first off could be
multiplied to a greater amount.
Is being diverted away from
The most vulnerable.
Up the ladder just a little bit.
And I with that I just can't
support your legislation. Thank
you. Mr Speaker generated close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really
appreciate the robust
conversation and the reminders
of all the different ways that
we are looking to solve this
housing crisis that we have, and
it's wonderful to see that
indication of all of our
colleagues really to ensuring
that we have housing for our
workforce. I believe this fills
in an important aspect of that
that calculus and ensuring that
we have a housing that is
affordable for people to really
build their lives and come home
to New Mexico And I believe
this.
Does that without Mr Speaker? I
move that house Bill 195 do now
pass. We are final passage of
What about clothes?
What is on closed by one of 50
in the affirmative, 16 and the
negative house. Bill 195 has
duly passed his house.
Gentle lady from Virgilio
representatives. Narayana Are
you ready? An item 14.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
am. Would you get me to that
point that election necessary
for placing? How's your own
solution? 11 on final passage
has been taken and is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the generator to
explain the resolution.
Right, Mr Speaker House direct
result.
How how Straight resolution. 11
is for the Legislature to accept
the federal government
retrocession of jurisdiction to
concurrent state and federal
jurisdiction.
Kirtland would like.
Currently Air Force base would
like a partnership between the
base and the community so that
they can open up a 70 acre
parcel of land for commercial
development.
Or to bring more industry into
the area.
The area is near Gibson and San
Mateo. Debate later, close.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um, Mr Speaker. I move
really move. House Bill House.
Resolution. 11 do not past
What is enclosed by what have 65
in the affirmative. Zero in the
negative. How's your resolution?
11 has really passed his house
generated from Berlioz's Every
welcome hero. Are you ready on
Item? Seven. Mr. Mr Speaker. I
am. Will you get me there? The
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
91 on final passage has been
taken and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm here
to introduce House Bill 91 as
amended.
And what has spilled 91 as
amended does is, it meant amends
the geothermal duties of the
energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department to include
applying for federal grants, and
it also establishes the
Geothermal resources development
fund.
And the re geothermal Resources
Revolving loan fun. This is
passed before unanimously in
this house, and I stand for
questions from Chavez
represented Henry.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Will the
gentle lady from or sorry. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from Berna Leo healed.
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Travis.
Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady, as I as
I understand this bill,
essentially has two mechanisms
for for funding for these
geothermal projects. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Yes, that's correct.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
there is a a loan fund and a
grant fund.
Um what
What is the
I guess Success rate of
geothermal projects.
One moment, Mr Speaker, one
moment.
And while we're waiting, Mr
Uh, Mr Speaker, And I thank you
gentlemen for waiting.
The geothermal that we're
proposing in the state of New
Mexico is a new advanced
technology. And so the proven,
um, projects that we know of so
far are situated in Utah.
So based on those models, and
then with the further geothermal
research that's been going on
with New Mexico Tech University.
We will be advancing the latest
technology in that field.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Generally
the I understand that there is
some employment of new
technologies, uh, so forth, but
I'm I'm curious about the
projects in Utah and what kind
of success rate they have had
how many have successfully
produced geothermal power and
how many have failed.
Mr Speaker, and, um gentlemen
from Chavez, The Utah plant is
the first of its kind, so that's
still under review evaluation.
And, of course, as with
As we've discussed before
Geothermal power is, um,
probably one of the most natural
clean sources of energy. And so
I imagine Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that the success rate
will be very high in Utah.
Thank you, General Lady, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, um
Will the the projects that
qualify for this either the loan
portion or the grant portion?
Only be those projects employing
the new technologies.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is one of the determinations
that will be made by the
secretary of the energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. So if a
Ah, an entity a person or
business entity comes to apply
for either the grant or the loan
and wants to employ more
traditional technologies.
For geothermal exploration.
Would that be
Uh, denied.
Mr. Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
No, I think right now. The
research is moving in such a way
that all part part of the
evaluation of what is existing
and part of the evaluation of
what needs to be developed
further is all part of the
research and development
process.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Uh,
General lady Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Um, So my concern is that
Ah, And I understand there is
new and developing technology
which makes uh
Perhaps projects a bit more
successful, but
What we have so far is about a
two thirds success rate.
In geothermal projects, meaning
about a third of the time they
fail. And so I'm curious about
what sort of recourse the state
of New Mexico may have. In the
event, one of these projects
fails.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think for the Lord, for the most
part, this is why this needs to
be, um, monitored and the
oversight needs to be within the
Department of energy, minerals
and natural resources.
Because there is a school of
development that's related to
older geothermal research. And
then there's the school of
research that's bringing us into
the more modern and advanced
technology, so that's something
that would be within the purview
of the department.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. So so Energy Minerals
Natural Resource Department will
Promulgate rules that may
address. Uh
Recourse actions if the project
fails.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would imagine that
In the rule promulgating
process That would be something
that would be discussed. So I'm
not in the position to say
whether it will be or will not
be, But I'm in that process.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. I think that is is simply
something that definitely should
be addressed in the rulemaking
process. And I thank you for
that.
So, um, the these newer
technologies that are being
developed for
Geothermal projects. What does
that entail?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Um, I
will tell you that I've learned
a lot in this process. However,
I
I'm not close to earning my
degree yet in geophysicist.
Businesses. Um, but what I can
tell you is what I understand it
entails drilling down.
Into the core of the earth,
probably to where maybe 100 200.
50
2 250 degrees and as you're
drilling down, you're already
determined reaching certain
points and, um
And so that's going to be
That will continue, um, until we
reach the heat points, um
In the drilling process that
will be, uh necessitated in
order to generate what they're
anticipating to generate. Thank
you, Gentle lady. Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady is there also sort
of a horizontal lateral
component to that drilling.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
there is.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady, and then is there
hydraulic fracturing as part of
that technology.
Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen. There is,
however, the distinction and why
we relate to energy is that
we're not injecting that process
with any type of
Thank you, General waiting, Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady. I'm sorry.
I missed the very last part of
that statement. Could you repeat
it, please?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, What I
was saying was that
Hydraulic fracking is part of
the process, however.
It is a clean renewable energy,
thereby
When you're drilling into the
core of the Earth, you're not to
generate the heat to bring up
the heat. You're not needing to
inject.
Any type of chemicals in order
to break down.
And get to what you want to get
to the the heat itself when you
are going in will be jet will
Transmit forward again. I said
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't have the terminology of
from the science perspective,
but that's my understanding.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady, But I do believe that part
of the
The fracking process for
geothermal products involves
injecting acid does it not
Mhm. Um, Mr Speaker, and, um
Gentlemen, I I really do not
know I can't answer that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady, um
I think
And
It is my understanding that some
Um
Geothermal products or projects.
Excuse me are able to use older,
no longer producing oil wells is
that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct. It is possible to
extract heat from those older
wells. And I'm uh
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
sure that all of that will be
part of the exploration and
development and research part of
it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, um
Are there any concerns about, uh
induced seismicity when you're
dealing with these geothermal
projects?
Mr Speaker, and, um
And gentlemen.
And this is where the department
comes in because they would be
the energy and natural resources
Department would be, um,
responsible for the permitting
process.
And part of the permitting
process would be to protect
Um, any disruptions
unnecessarily or to indicate
specificities as it relates to
not just that particular
activity, but it
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I mean, I just I am not an
expert on on this either. I
don't have a PhD. I'm not a
geologist. Um, but I do know
that
That a number of geothermal
products, particularly in
Switzerland, and South Korea,
had serious. Uh
Increased seismicity issues and
those can't I don't think those
can
You know, necessarily be
addressed at the permitting.
Process.
Um, And so I'm curious as how
this may be evaluated when we're
dealing with projects in New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm not familiar with those two.
Locations that you indicated.
But I will say that
As we've been experiencing.
Um, the crisis and climate
change. We've been seeing a lot
of differences occur in terms of
seismic seismic activity even
here in the state of New Mexico,
so it is. It may be one of those
factors that perhaps may not be
associated directly with
permitting, but it could be a
factor that they can consider in
terms of
Just placing it in there for
consideration. That's all I can
really say to that. Thank thank
you, General Lady. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, I
I do agree with you that I think
geothermal is very exciting. I
think New Mexico has great
potential for it.
Um, I just had a few concerns
that I wanted.
To be addressed. And you have
done that. Very graciously. I
thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. No further
debate later. Close. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I now move that
house Bill 91 as amended. Do now
pass passage of House Bill 91 as
What is everybody walking around
without a jacket?
The other guys sitting in the
chair. I see.
What about the clothes?
It is not closed by one of 16
the primitive five and the
negative has been many one is
amended, has really passed his
house general Lady from Real
Rivas and the wells and towels.
Are you ready on item? 15
speaker Will you get me to that
point record reflect that
election necessary for placing
house Bill 209 on final passage
has been taken. It is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that generally to
explain the bill.
Mr Speaker. House Bill two, a
nine, amend state statute and
removes the batch requirement
for cogs.
You know, debate
See no debate.
So, you know, debate generated
close. Um, Mr Speaker. I move
that house.
House Bill 209 do now pass final
passage of House Bill 209. The
What is enclosed by what have 65
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house Bill 209 Azula
Peasant's house. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Dear lady,
Dear Lady from Bentalou.
Mr Speaker, I will be going to
that order of business messages.
Objection. It is ordered clerk
to read a message from the
Senate. Mr. Speaker. I'm
directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 37.
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 88.
Senate Bill 116.
Senate Bill 127 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted.
Sherry D. Luhan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
Gentle lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker. I'm moving to go to
that order Business Committee
reports. Objection. It is so
ordered Mr Speaker, your
transportation public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
has been referred House Bill
286 has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Respectfully
submitted. Dan Hawke. MOVIE Hill
Chair. Mr Speaker moved option
We are an adoption of a federal
committee report on House Bill
286,
making sure everybody can hear
We are on adoption of a
favorable community report for
House Bill 286. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
Almost opposed name the eyes
have it. Committee report
adopted,
Mr Speaker, your transportation
public works in Capital
Improvements Committee to has
been referred House Bill 300.
Has had it under consideration.
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
Respectfully submitted. Dan
Hoffman v. Hill chair Mr Speaker
moved OPTION We are on adoption
of a favorable committee report
on House Bill 300. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed to me.
The nays have the eyes have a
committee report adopted?
Lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker. I won't go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business is
ordered members quick
housekeeping that will conclude
third reading for today. We are
waiting on a bill that is being
rushed down as we speak, so I'm
gonna go back to intro here in a
little bit, um to do that bill
and also a few other Senate
bills that are coming.
Um, and then we'll break in.
Folks can go to committee. Folks
can go to dinners, folks can go
to parties, whatever else
General lady from Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I rise on a point of personal
privilege, please purpose of
your point. Mr Speaker. I hope
you will allow me a little bit
of leeway here. I'd like to do a
quick poll of the members of the
house and it'll it'll
Define what I'm fixing to do
here. Okay, Go ahead. Let
general how many of y'all have
ever been to a rodeo.
That does my heart good.
And the reason I'm bringing this
up, Mr Speaker, there are three
individuals that represented the
state of New Mexico at the 2023
National Finals Rodeo, one of
them was shed may feel from
Clovis, New Mexico, going in
wearing number 11 on his back in
calf roping, Mr Speaker.
I happen to be there the night
that the arena record was broken
by the the young man that was
roping right in front of shad
shed, came out as the next Roper
and broke his record.
And fortunately that calf got
And
I I was waving.
Those people that were from New
Mexico gave him a hearty round
of applause.
Mexico.
He was there with his team
roping partner and Logan was the
healer, and they did
exceptionally will at the
finals.
The third individual I'd like to
of bring years your attention to
Is Miss Emma Cameron.
In the press release. It says
she's from Santa Fe. I heard
otherwise that she was from
Stanley, New Mexico.
And she is Miss Rodeo America
2022 and Mr Speaker. All three
of these individuals did a
wonderful job representing the
great State of New Mexico. So
thank you very much actions.
Any other announcements,
Gentlemen, from Burnley you
thank you. Mr Speaker. Your
House Education Committee will
meet tomorrow at 830. So members
I had mentioned the other day we
would be eight o'clock.
But we've had a change in the
agenda so we'll meet at 830
tomorrow. 30309 so 8 33 09
members.
833 or nine members take note.
The gentle later from Katherine
Sierra supporter Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Speaker just wanted to
remind everybody about the
Katherine Sierra and see Coral
counties legislative meet and
greet at the La Fonda.
From 6 to 9. Please come and
celebrate our counties with me.
Thank you. Note. The gentleman
from Chavez, Representative
Henry
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is my
understanding that the gentleman
from Lincoln and Otero has
informed the body that tomorrow
is his wife's birthday. I just
want to say I'm starting to not
feel very well and I may not be
here tomorrow. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I will not excuse you
from the floor tomorrow. So you
and we're going to do a color
the house.
So you will have to be here.
Gentle lady from gentlemen from
Dona Ana. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Your House Appropriations and
Finance Committee will meet 15
minutes after the floor
concludes today in room 307.
307 member signal generally from
really was on the one side of
fair in towns. Mr Speaker, I
have to rise and, uh, in a point
of personal privilege to if I
could point Well, I have to
write brag about my rodeo stars
to Mr Mr Speaker. We have
mixture heroes grandson. Stetson
won the four h ribbon roping and
tie down calf roping and he's
the state champ. I want you to
know that
And then his cousin Wastes E
one, the four H breakaway roping
and go time state champ, So I'm
real proud of these kids are
junior high school kids and they
live in Rio River relations,
Gentle lady from Burnley or
represent of Thompson. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, the House
Health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow.
At 830 in room 307, and we have
a lot of folks presenting bills
and other committees. So please
try to be there. Thank you.
Members take note.
Gentility from Burnley or
preserve. Very well, Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Just want to remind the
members of the House labor
veterans and military fairs that
we do have our dinner this
evening hosted at 530 at the
bullring. Thank you. Members.
Take note, the gentle lady from
Dona Ana representative of
Diego's Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will your house commerce will
meet tomorrow at 130 or 15
minutes after the floor session.
Thank you. Members signaled any
other announcements. Gentle lady
from Burnley, or percent of
Hawkman video. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I just want to remind
everybody Don't forget about the
aerospace caucus tomorrow. 8
A.m. 315 members take note any
other announcements?
Yes, I have an announcement.
Right members. We
We have to expunge.
The committee report. Apologies.
Okay, We are going to fix a
committee report. I believe the
minority whip has been briefed,
and I believe that leadership
Uh, on the democratic side have
been briefed. Here's the deal.
The vote is not going to change
What will change are the names
of the people who voted.
This is on house Memorial 17.
Coming out of government
Elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
The clerk will fix the vote to
reflect accurately the two no
votes which are inaccurate in
the report that we read out
Ah, previously
Um not then change the vote just
changes the names of those who
voted in the negative to reflect
the proper names.
See no objection. It is ordered.
Alright, listen up.
We will be removing house Bill
316 from the House Rules
Committee.
And we will refer it to the
House Judiciary Committee.
The 2 to 8 number is 2 to
8093.1, and it is sponsored by
representative Ream and others.
All right. That will be house
built. 316 removed from the
Rules committee referred to the
House Judiciary Committee. 2 to
8 number is 2 to 8093.1,
sponsored by representative Ream
and others.
I see no objection. It is
ordered.
Generally from Borloo.
Mr Speaker Now being 1159 am I
move? We adjourn until 1201 PM
will come to order Mr Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that
journal show that all those
present in this morning session
are present in this afternoon
session. If there is an
objection it is ordered Mr
Speaker ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that the
journal has been read in full
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
Order of Business Committee. If
there's no objection, it is
ordered
Gentle lady from early. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I move to go to that
order business introduction of
legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 37
Act relating to food authorizing
the creation of the state meat
inspection program to ensure the
safety and quality of meat for
human consumption, providing
penalties. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 37 Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville 37 have been there
twice by title is referred to
the House, agricultural sectors
and Water Resources Committee.
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee.
substitute for Senate Bill 88.
And act relating to credentials.
Enacting the electronic
credentials Act to allow the
taxation and Revenue Department
issue electronic credentials for
driver's licenses and
identification cards, Senate tax
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 88.
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for
Senate Bill 88.
Is referred to
The House transportation public
works in Capital Improvements
Committee, then the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
Senate Bill 116, introduced by
Senator Hickey for the
Legislative Finance Committee
and act relating to state
reserves, providing that the
tobacco settlement permanent
Fund is not a reserve fund of
the state striking outdated
provisions in section 6-4 Dash
nine and a mess a 1978.
Being lost. 1999 chapter 207
Section one as amended Senate
Bill 1 16 1 16 have been it was
my title is referred to the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 127, as amended,
introduced by Senators tools and
act relating to licensing
amending the Professional
Psychologists Act, amending
definitions amending the
structure of the New Mexico
State Board of psychologist
examiners.
Clarifying terms, allowing a
prescribing psychologists
prescribe and administer, intra
Clarifying terms, allowing a
prescribing psychologists
prescribe and administer
intramuscular and subcutaneous
injections, creating a committee
to evaluate licensing complaints
against prescribing
psychologists. Senate Bill 127
as a minute
Said about 127 is amended have
been read to us by title is
ordered.
It's referred to the House
Health and Human Services
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
Generally from earlier
percentage JC, Mr Speaker, Will
we go to that artifice, nous
announcements in miscellaneous,
pessimistic objection is ordered
one last chance for
announcements.
Tomato.
Alright little Lady from earlier
Chase E.
Mr Speaker of the House 10 in
recess until 11 am tomorrow
morning.
February. 7th. Is that about
right?
Sounds about right to me. The
