Representative luhan represented
mason representative more yeah
representative centers
representative torosis
vice sure because the honor
and cheer or ten year
okay we have a quarrel
there are no deviations to the
agenda today so first up we have
house bill two fifty one
gentlemen.
Please present your bill thank
you
should have the committee
substantial front of you let me.
Should should be three
we might need a second
representative dunkin to get the
second page
on if.
Once you get it can you move the
move the committee so.
It's going to take us a second
medical domino give you a little
inside as the way we have this
you want to wait yeah I think
that we need to move this sub
before we have the discussion of
the sub.
You have three pages
I think you
mister mrvice chair.
So you need with this
the others three years so i've
had two side yes
which went you and also
madam chair while we wait I have
some guests in the audience can
I introduce absolutely
representative so I actually
have some students of mine and
and he's a woods which is funny
mister mason a representative
mason calls me his cell make as
we share
office here well my so made home
basically is mister bolla
history teacher is also the
staters representative and so
can you please stand up and have
all of the students from staters
introduced themselves.
The.
Yeah.
What's what i'm accounted I feel
how to meal
as a product.
So I am so proud of these guys
so can one you guys kind of tell
us what is staters for people
that don't understand what the
status
what status do what what what
are what do you do.
Community.
Projects like we've done things
giving past year recollected
food and tad and money and we
don't
get the.
The.
This is why it's like
do you have to meet certain
requirements in order to be a
part of it yes.
Please
go you've probably heard of the
mexican
state.
Many years ago the fifties
before
they're a whole at high school.
Voice theater
serve and that's
where these corner
organizations want to be a lot
of across the street so
I think we're.
Yeah.
They used to read the board.
Serve across campus
community clean up but.
There are
years.
House.
Excellent excellent I also have
the other side I have some more
good so I have I have a blend
high school meesa so and and I
think infinity also rate
in infinity it's high school and
in
yeah please please stand up and
introduce yourself.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And this is general for no.
So many of these students that
are in here are also my physics
students that are
right now finishing up their
engineering project they're
creating a blue car so so
hopefully the hopefully that a
lot of them had success I know
some of them struggle a little
bit but I think they're trying
to figure out thank you they
give us thank you so much rep
and think it welcome seeing
democracy in action
you should always bug your
representative she will bring
you food and do snacks and
straight as for everyone
so ordered
I told you I was punchy this
morning gentleman we have your
committee seven hand can you
please read out the number at
the very gotten
yes manager two two seven seven
eight six point one.
Madame motion to move the sale
of second wonderful this this
sub has been moved and second
and we are going to discuss the
subso going explainably
substitute thank you manager
last year we presented this same
bill as the committee sub we
sent it over to the senate side
and what we got back was nothing
like it it had what they did was
take thirty one license plates
in the state of new exco and
they decided they would make
stickers instead of the plates
and so the governor was gracious
and that send me a letter and
said that's not what we want we
want to play and
smoke you bear has a rich
history in the state of new
mexico and sold um I will finish
up display this this has the I
think the important things that
it the initial peace fifty
dollars forty there after twelve
dollars is for the making of it
and issuing and
and the remaining fees
will be sent to the energy
minerals and natural resources
for spire prevention.
And if it there is an end if
nobody buys the plate in the
year after twenty six if it's
dropped below fifty percent then
they won't continue to make it
now i'd like i'd like them my
fellow rep and sponsored to talk
a little bit about the history
behind smokey there.
Thank you madame chair and the
committee members.
This year we were able to do a
house memorial for smoky bear
and he's eighty years old and
I think this bill especially
this year since it's smokey
bear's birthday.
And I really want to make this a
fun thing especially on the
floor because
I want to muster up enough
support to get representative
mcqueen to vote for this bill
and I need to help do it
and if we pass that
I mean we've we've made history
and I know that smokey bearer
would be happy and he wasn't
able to be there for the house
memorial because he was gone on
the same but what it what a good
birthday present i'd be for him
this year.
Thank you matter thank you
representative and send I i'd
like to see that as well perhaps
smoky bear could be I don't know
the could be warned by someone
representatives as
we're going to go to a to
support in the audience if you
support this bill the
development of a smoky bare
license plate that would serve
the the the firefighting
community and honor an icon and
new mexico icon please raise
your hand.
You should all raise your hands
I shouldn't be a editorialising
from here thank you very much
if you'd like to speak in
support of a smoky bare license
plague you can go hidden sand up
and the mikes will pick up.
It's it's ok if you don't want
to if you are in opposition to
the smokey bare license plate
please raise your hands
don't look back
is there anyone on the zoom who
is in support of smokey bear
who'd like to speak up.
Ok I think it's probably okay if
they raise their hands fine
opposition now.
Could worry to go to the
committee for up for questions
represented mason did you have a
question of course.
At the
statement to start with it all
it is surprised me when this
thing didn't go through last
year and the but you know
mcquain is the house that there
is
senators that will not be for
license plates also we had one
in the committee when the one I
took last year that stood up in
committee not both her license
place the same as we're going to
then you are only one question
how long will this take is it
hard to get federal approval or
you think it's discounted as
slam down
thank you madame chair
representative mason
we do not know the answer to
that
we may be a little bit
on our date is twenty four july
one of twenty four that may be a
little bit
early I had been unheld
determined that so.
I don't know the answer thank
you thank you
represent it and one of these
things I was rating on the on
the regional bill
said that it could be a lengthy
process.
So I hope not I hope it goes.
Those they fast and we get
smoking the bareless thank you
represented thank you thank you
rep mason I believe it smoke
there
rate weekly talk a lot about
this last year represent reason
would you accept an amendment on
the fly
venture
would you accept an amendment on
the fly with our smoky that
they're not I I was toother last
year
smoky bear representative mason.
And members of the committee
representatives made about more
thank you madam chair thinking
representatives I this is
probably one of the few times
that I agree with the governor
and of the
I too don't think that a sticker
is good enough there's certain
things that probably we could
just use a sticker but smoking
very smoky bears pretty
important you know been here
eighty years and what he stands
for is huge especially in our
state especially in the recent
years with all of the fires that
we've had across the state so I
really like that the proceeds
from this is going towards fire
prevention and that is huge
especially during the interim
this committee he got to
tour the los language which was
decimated and so so anything
that we can do to help our
forest service to help prevent
that from happening again it's
huge and any any little bit of
funding helps so I one hundred
percent of proof of this thank
you
thank you represent the assess
thank you manager also in in
support of this bill you know
i've got to some history so my.
Wise great uncle
used got the right brothers
award and that's you get that
when you fly fifty years without
a incident and swas like driving
for fifty years without a a
parking ticket and so he he was
he was a big part of of spotting
fires for the forcers and so I I
don't know how many years you
help them but he did receive a
his name as bob alexander music
on the record and he received a
place and I remember seen it
with a picture of smoky bear
on when they found him on the
plane and they they said i'm on
the planet if you're seeing that
famous picture and they put him
on that plane and they took a
picture of him sitting on the
plane so he has that you know
he's passed away since then
but he worked with a forcer so
that's one of the things that
you know when when I hear this
plate that's what it made me
think of the other thing is you
know i'm better or
may.
My friend represent moya
mentioned fire prevention it's
that that some of the funds are
going and all those very small
every penny counts we just you
know just like in our area my
district just like it of many
districts we sustained fire
damages right and for flooding
and at whatever and we you know
our soil conservation districts
were just here yesterday and we
didn't get to talk about them
much but those full confirmation
districts work with other
agencies in in thinning forest
and cleaning up the underbrush
in the stuff that starts fires
and so we
the famous all town of you know
satellites near silver city
thank god that they had a
project that hit started just
right before that and it cleared
all the acres there when we had
a wildfire and is because of
that work that it didn't burn
some of the structures of or or
spread and destinate another
another one of our beautiful
towns so you know it's you know
it we've got a work together on
this I in its this is us once
mall little peace but I am i'm
i'm happy that you brought this
and that you guys re
are bringing it again and i'll
go with their pressure window.
I'm i'm sure he'll listen to me
to both
thank you that's all I have
think you ripped us
thank you madame chair think you
guys should bring this like
representative
that the devastation in my
community the last two years or
two years ago was was enormous
so and I think we do need to
give him some appreciation it is
prior fire prevention and I
think that you know I support
this will hardly and thank you
guys for ringing a ford thank
you madame cherkin can my good
friend here tell you the
personal history between his
wife's family and smokey bear
yes please
thank you madame chair so my
wife's my wife's grandparent.
Was on the
crew that rescued smoky bear and
we've looked everywhere to try
to find pictures to where we can
validate it he's passed away now
so that you know a lot of that
history was gone but
my my wife's dad remembers him
telling her about being on that
crew and
with the
smokey bare hot shots trying to
get some pictures possibly to
where I can validate it I can't
validate it yet but i'm going to
continue to try
thank you for that
representative
there is a connection with tas
public who were also you part of
that crew so perhaps you should
come up to tas and visit me will
go to the problem will have some
conversations with a some of the
folks who have.
Who have memories of that as
well.
Did you guys go it i'll make a
motion to do passm.
Matter of chairman I make a
motion for do not have house
bill.
Two fifty one
but a due pass on.
Language and cultural friends
committee sub on two fifty one
i'll second that manager that we
have a do not pass in a dupass
motion on the floor go ahead and
call the road
representative look on
representative of mason yes
representative mirabomoia yes
represented centers
representative torosis yes vice
are casting on yes and chair or
tests yes you have a
do not pass on house bill two
fifty one and they do pass in
house rural development language
cultural for his committee
substitute for house bill to
fifty one.
Thank you madame gentleman thank
you thank you madame chair and
think thank you and for those in
the audience when you have a
committee substitute we have to
we have to do kind of a funky
motion and it's just it's just
the way the procedures are done
so if it's confusing as you are
in good company everybody's
confused and madame characters
like to welcome all the kids to
the house and i'm i'm so glad to
see him here and and watching
what goes on to hopefully one
day they'll take our spots a
week and go on vacation indeed
some of us are more ready to
others thank you they can get to
see why i'm gone from them for
the last thirty days right or
for thirty days of all the fun
i'm having up here yeah thanks
for catching that I haven't
eaten my burrito this morning
welcome representative chat
sealed europe on hospital to
sixty nine.
The
glad to be here this morning I
spent a lot of time in this very
room on education
so
can't like be in and home
madame chair i'm here this
morning to represent the house
bill to sixty nine it's an act
making a pro and appropriation
to the locked local government
division of the department of
finance and administration for
quake ellie to connect construct
a new doctor dance memorial
hospital in two computer and
madame chair I have with me
today
my expert witness former house
of representatives dennis ross
who actually had my very same
district before I had it so.
So he so maybe you might have
seen him here before and
thank you for letting us be here
welcome would you like to say if
you work thank you manager yes I
would I proceed the the time
before the committee I i'm not
just here as a a former
representative i'm actually
currently the vice president of
the the dancie trigger hospital
board of trussees when your
public service minded even
though you leave the position
you still wind up serving the
public and that's kind of what
i've been doing the current
hospital is is over sixty years
old and while the sixty year
old's facility is is quite if
you're staying in a historic
hotel and old sixty six it's not
great if you're in intensive
care you you don't want a boiler
that's korean war era and that
we have that in our hospital we
don't want lead a paint on the
walls when you're trying to
recover you don't want those
kinds of things failing plumbing
systems and so we identified a
number of those issues in our
hospital there's a feasibility
study that was done to say what
can we just renovate the
existing facility and bring it
up to speed up to code and it's
actually more it may be
surprising but it's more cost
effective to build a brand new
facility then it is to try to
retrieve it sixty year old
facility with with feeling
systems so we we have a very
unique approach there's a local
state and federal partnership
that's been proposed the local
community is already approved a
grt of a million dollars a year
to back a fifty fifty loan grant
from the usda so we have a
federal portion is going to
cover about
two thirds of the cost we're
asking we have a local mill let
me that was just renewed by
voters by over three about a
three to one margin in november
that raises about three quarters
of a million dollars annually
for operations but we're asking
for the ten million from the
state as a at a three way
partnership
through this bill I will tell
you in your fire it'll tell you
that the population of you can
carries us over five thousand.
However this hospital serves
about thirty two thousand
patients annually it's
incredible is a regional
healthcare center and in
addition serve about twenty five
percent of our patient
encounters come from my forty
traveling public going by to
carry on I forty you may recall
just a couple of weeks ago we
have a huge no storm there was a
forty three car pile up between
centers and dutiencary they
closed out forty and and all of
the hospitals in that area santa
rosa into carrying out had had a
bulk up and
basically allow for those
additional patients to come in
we were able to serve them but
this facility is in direct of
replacement and so we are humbly
asking for your blessing for
this state request to add to our
local and federal investments
thank you thank you mister thank
you.
The.
Mister stan for questions
to what we're going to go
everybody in the articles in
favor of this build please raise
your hand.
The.
Okay anybody else who in favor.
Anybody I want to speak in favor
this bill good.
And you can carry also
understand steve importance of
having great medical care for
the people that they have in
their communities that area of
eastern new mexico also has a
high number of elderly then
often see need medical
facilities more often than
younger and for all the reasons
stated by representative rush
and representative chat field we
are in full support this bill
thank you.
The.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
registered
healthcare
we've been partnering with
quaker county for forty five
years since nineteen seventy
eight with hospital into
concurry so we're supported of
the efforts to continue that
relationship and also continue
providing necessary health care
not just people in the quake
county but is as representative
russian the people in that
region so we urge your support
on this legislation thank you
thank you next mister hall
mr chair members of committing
art all registered lobbyists for
quite county.
What hasn't been said but
importance of the federal
government is going to come in
and twenty twenty five.
And they have to recertify and
they've already indicated that
the existing facility will not
comply and be able to be
recertified this provides
critical medical care in the
rural area.
And other side no there's a lot
of economic development.
Impacted by this hospital
seventy folks work in this
hospital and each of them have a
child that goes to a school
there and so if we don't.
Replaced this hospital that has
a huge negative impact.
On the two can carry economy so
for many good reasons we
appreciate your support on
building this hospital.
Thank you now we'll go to
members on to order committees
on zoom comments.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is jone dicker person
i'm with the veterans and
military family scarces.
Over one in ten people who live
in quay county or veterans and
not all letterings get their
health care from the va and
their family certainly do not
we find that this is a good bill
to
construct the new hospital in
way county and it will help
support our veterans in times of
medical crisis thank you for
your time.
No okay now we'll go to the
audience anybody against
for not in favor of the bill.
See no hands anybody answer
okay we will go to committee.
You know
thank you mr chair thank you
representatives I have a a quick
question if this does not yet
recertified but twenty twenty
five they sent
what is the nearest medical
facility for people in in quick
county the answer the next the
next.
Basically critical access
hospital is going to wind up
being in clothes which is about
an hour and a half away or a
morilla which is another hour
and a half away there there's
really nothing else in the
region I think mister chair and
and represent about and I think
that's that's huge I mean you
you don't think an hour and a
half is is is a big deal but
when it's critical care and
you're also dealing with one in
ten veterans and i'm in in your
aging populations and and
everything else you know and I
would have a huge and I think
i've just like he said the
seventy positions that this
facility employees that seventy
families out of five thousand in
two come carry that's a huge
dent in so if they can't be
there they would have to go and
up with their family somewhere
else so it is definitely one
hundred percent important that
we keep this facility and get
your branding that would that's
going to be nice
thank you representative next we
have representatives.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative
one.
They didn't that I don't think
was brought out is this is this
money already in the budget
thank you mister mister terribly
with this
what it said which is so.
If the.
You're not standing in in great
support of this bill you know it
all of us in towns.
Lol to compare your tees at any
of these towns you know our
hospitals are
credit you know it they may not
be.
Where you need to be but I can
get you to where you need and
that i've experienced that first
day
will not be
without all of the hospitals
that are in a half the.
Everything more year you know
you will not make it if you
don't have a place to get
a stabilised before you go that
are actually a standard for
support of this legislative
thank you mister thank you
representative and miss chair
one thing that there was kind of
mentioned in passing just a
minute ago but I forty round
right to do so anything that
happens on that freeway the
that's the closest place to get
him stabilized and ship him out
to a trauma center whatever
needs to be done ten term right
there the very important thing
groups and next week got rid of
ten users thank you mister chair
thank you representatives for
ringing the sports I
you know it's it's we're needing
to
uh invest definitely in our
medical care facilities and and
a track doctors the best of our
ability
obviously this is one of those
ways
in in I see that you know it's a
twenty five bit facilities at
what I understand right and so I
I was just looking there's only
one I think everyone's already
stated things are not going to
repeat them but I think one
thing I did find that that would
possibly be important and may
help you if it's hopefully a
friendly amendment is the only
line twenty three it says it was
starts online twenty two but it
says any unexpected expenditure
or unincumbent balance remaining
at the end of fiscal year twenty
twenty five so revert to the
general fund.
Would you consider mister chair
representative
a amendment to straight twenty
twenty five and make it twenty
twenty seven
only because of that
construction the environment
that we're working in today I
mean I think about it I mean
here we are worried twenty
twenty four and so in one year
maybe it'll be encompared maybe
everything will be you know
worked out but what if it's not
and what if it hinders you next
year and then we we've got it
you know thousand bills going
through the through the house in
the senate and you're waiting on
one little deal so that it
doesn't you know affect your
your hospital and I think that's
that's very important it's the
only real concern that I saw I I
know to the budget I mean any
time you can take ten million
dollars in turn it into you know
triple it what white why would
you not do that that's a no
brainer and so I would offer
that amendment mister chair
representative if you would
accept that so thank you mister
chair thank you for really I
would like for my expert
witnessed away in on okay who
are missed chairman and
representatives it's a good
suggestion I will tell you that
a lot of the ground work I mean
not not physical groundwork but
a lot of the the planning
groundwork has been done there's
been a feasibility study done we
have engineering plans in place
the land has been done it it's
already been resolved so we
believe that we're going to be
able to be pretty sub already as
soon as the money is available
but as you say in the
construction industry right now
and and with the getting
contractors to come out to real
communities it can be difficult
if the if the representative is
is so inclined I think more time
is always advisable represented
mischair I would consider that
are friendly amendment
thank you okay so i'd like to
move a week appear yes I would
like to so mister chair
represent i'd like to.
Go to line twenty three on each
b two sixty nine like twenty
three strike the
date twenty twenty five and
replace it with twenty twenty
seven.
Okay do we have a motion
for that emotion by mrmason said
my miss moya would take a look.
Representative lukon represented
mason yes representative mobile
moya yes representative centers
representative to yes by sure
customer yes.
To adopt your amendment thank
you
thank you thank you very much
thank you represent it I think
it's just you know to come carry
is on a forty but it still rule
mexico and to get contractors to
pursue some of our
our communities out in the
middle of nowhere we're
struggling in other communities
to accomplish our hour
construction and and service
needs and so that was the only
real uh you know question that
popped up or concerned that
optup and I thought man we we
should give you that little
extra time you you know we
appreciate in the middle of that
and see man we could use just
one or whatever this this I
think should open at all thank
you mister chair thank you to
also seen a more comments also
want to see rule health care and
ruling mexico is very needed and
thank you very much for bringing
this bill forward thank you can
we have a motion
mister chair I move the due pass
for house bill to sixty nine as
amended i'll second that
duplice
as amended
also cannot.
We have a motion for a due pass
as amended can you take the role
yes
representative mason yes
representative mirable more yeah
yes represent centers
representative to us yes.
And vice yes.
You have a dupass on this bill
as amended thank you thank you
mister chair thank you committee
but I would get home next we
have representative sanchez
okay.
House bill to seventy one
agenda.
Thank you mister terror we're
ready whenever you are.
Go head representative
thank you mister committee
hospital to seventy six and
additional seventy million for
the state's technology and
hansman fund the higher
education department manages the
spending of monies from the
technology enhancement fund by
stature requirement the state
economic development department
please and advisory in the use
of the monies from the fund
the technology enhancement fund
or tef was created in the state
treasury and two thousand three
but it had no appropriations
until twenty three five twenty
three.
The purpose of the founders to
supply it and available stream
of state matching funds for
large federal grant applications
involving calabric of research
proposals and positioning the
tea is also being successful in
maximising new mexico's ability
to draw down available federal
dollars and specific fields for
university research that are
prioritised for further hype
potential intellectual property
workforce and commercial
development in new mexico the
grants supported by the tef
encourage collaboration between
universities federal labs state
agencies.
The private sector and naval
technical university who has
also participating in the tf
grant of our opportunities
currently hospital two contains
an appropriation of twenty five
million for fi twenty five for
the programs that the higher it.
Ten million of that would be
drawn from the general fund
fifty million would be drawn
from the technology enhancement
fund more funding is needed to
be appropriate it to the tf fund
which currently has a balance of
zero.
All currently available to your
phones residing within the head
are in the process of being
committed for select projects
and the remainder of the fiscal
years this is why we are needing
additional funding.
The bill also includes
clarifying clean up language
because the test tef.
Statutes are now twenty years
old and a need of modernization
to us achieve the task at hand.
Firming up a state process where
we can be competitive with
netbearing states who are
applying for many of the same
big federal grant opportunities
as are the higher education
institutions and our partners in
new mexico the spending helps us
be more competitive the bill
also has been referred to each
afc where we will be where we
will determine the exact
appropriation concert with
feedback from the lfc and senate
finance committee several
representatives from the msu new
mexico tech and unem are in the
audience today and are available
to provide public comment in
support of the bill they are
already experiencing tremendous
positive return on investment as
they are never jean tier funds
to capture available fidel
dollars
mister chair members they will
now allow my experts to
introduce themselves appreciate
consideration of the legislation
thank you average and would you
like to introduce you with
we'll start on the side of the
case on going by.
Mr chair david hanson system
vice president for research at
the university of new mexico
mister chair members i'm
national bush I am government
relations director at the
university of new mexico goodbye
mister chairman members
committee marks of other one
director of the mexico counts of
university presidents welcome
guys as anymore
mr
my experts have any more to add
to what I said.
I think it'd be a helpful if you
guys can just discuss the
history of the find a little
more in the the money situation
just to clarify for our members
thank you mr chair members begin
my name is nathan bush i'm with
university of new mexico this
was the statute before you today
that are being slightly amended
to clarify the kind of purpose
and intent and participation in
the fund
those statutes date all the way
back to the year two thousand
three that fund sat dormant
without any funds in it until
two years ago and so the state
to the state's credit to your
credit realized that there were
some aggressive opportunities
being rolled out by the federal
government two years ago
the state invested
over the last two years seventy
five million dollars in this
fund which has gone through the
higher education department and
has now been rolled out as
selected matching grants for
federal.
Grant applications but really
have a huge impact on both kind
of
underserved communities were all
communities this is really
something that endorses and
supports
broad research throughou.
Anyone else who does anything
thank you mister chairman
members of the many
really emphasised that this has
been a game changing
a support for our state and
institutions are state not only
has it really helped us work
together across the state across
the different institutions to
support search deal what efforts
but really giving us a
combinability to compete with
other states and get large
federal dollars here.
Er to do two hour state in a
time when it's a lot of of funny
available so it's been really
important to end and useful in
that case thank you very much
thank you as state that you miss
your chairman members committee
and I just wanted to three
implies what mister bush had
mentioned that this is it
priority within the higher at
unified priorities that includes
the community colleges
comprehensives and the research
institutions is also i'm
compliments to work for any
money that's in house bill too
for community colleges and our
comprehensives for example
western new mexico university
receive funny and that for work
for training paid into this
compliments for the money going
towards research and be able to
match federal funds and we also
want to recognize secretary
right rigorous and agenda and
their support for this fun as
well thank you
mister charles just real credit
card graduate myself the the
university of new mexico I have
my bachelor's masters and
electrical engineering a lot of
our kids from my rural areas all
over the state attend these
three institutions along with
the other ones mentioned in
order to compete with the
university of the across the
country we really need to make
the priority so we have the
latest in the greatest and the
just wanted to enter that and
thank you mister chair thank you
okay we'll go to the audience
now.
Everybody in favor of hospital
to sony please raise your hand.
And zoom.
No sir okay we'll have a
discussion off from the audience
that's in favor anybody want to
speak in favor of this bill.
The smallest research.
We were able to lever that to
seventy point two million
dollars it's about thousand
percent little bit over a
thousand percent return to the
state on their investment.
You make sure technical
increased our research or
probably during that time like.
You know we get total states
this has been a.
And to our researchers but to
the state look a lot of our
projects are played research
projects doing from
sequence treation to development
of new membranes for produce
water in the early areas to
mapping awful.
These projects are going to have
a direct benefit to the mexic.
Thank you but the else could
answer
mister charles community members
rank and get local director of
economic development at the
health science the center
just last year
with two hundred and forty
million dollars a federal
funding for research and if we
look at our all of our research
universities across some was
close to a billion dollars of
federal funding coming into our
state in the technology
enhancement fund has given us
the ability to go after certain
research grass that we wouldn't
have been able to because of the
matching funds that we get from
the state so I hope all of you
guys support this because it's a
great economic development tool
that we use here in our state
thank you so much misconduct.
One of the members of the
committee like.
Thank you anybody else wishing
to speak great man sector.
Education department is now
prioritising economic sectors
that you all have priorities
communities and also the
governor that includes acculture
space water environment health
care I can go on it on a long we
are deploying these funds
rapidly we would like to see
more money into the fine but as
far as this phillies concerned
it is updating language it's
very consequented and needs to
be updated to reflect the work.
Think you manage here okay we'll
go to yard against anybody
against i'll still to seventy
anybody online
now we'll go to committee for
questions.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chair think you
represent it in gentleman
I have a I have lots of students
in in the in the audience right
now and I kinda want to educate
them on on some of the stuff
that this kind of really goes on
because these are all science
students here in fact there's
master students behind you but
but there it takes money to get
money basically and what is is
there certain percentages that
you have to have insecure is is
a dollar for dollars a certain
percentage in order to be able
to access these federal funds
thank you chair think
representative I mean lawyer
yes so we can there's a the
minimum amount of federal
matching to be like over this is
a one match
and what we try to do much much
greater than that we have things
that are getting over twenty to
one return investment for some
opportunities is really been
critical to to get that to get
these funds these funds do only
award we only get actually funds
after we get an award to and
there is actually need to be
work on funding and have letting
to apply for the grants etc
right so that there isn't the
additional and investments that
our institutions put into this
now and it would rose to just
across the state um I have
awarded been awarded other
planning grants that you lies
the matching funds from the
test to build up that sort of
initial meeting and and for and
funding support to go through a
lot much larger grant.
Thank you mister chair and
gentleman
I I think this is a great
opportunity that there is money
on the table and we're at then
giving you the ability to do
that and making your mexico that
innovative state that we know it
is giving you the opportunity
and hopefully these are some of
these students that are coming
to our state institutions will
take part in some of the
research that you guys will be
able to get funded later on
because when i'm reading through
here.
It says that it's it's here to
support research that advances
knowledge and creates new
products in agriculture
biotechnology biomet medicine
energy material science
micro electronics water
resources error space all the
stuff that's new mexico that's
what we need here and we should
be the leaders in this because
that's what we do so i'm i'm so
glad that this will help you
guys access those funds in order
to be able to do it thank you.
Thank you representative that
us.
You know must prepare most of
the the questions that were at
work well actually but they
answered some of my questions
that I had and I appreciate that
I think I think there's no need
to echo some of the some of our
members have to leave to to
another meeting so
wonderful support of this you
know I think and how you can
live funds and it helps her our
education system higher
education think it's great new
my school winds
and united states that you know
like cars were you know we're a
poor state right in in in the
union and so any time we can
leverage these funds it's it's a
no brainer so thank you mister
chair thank you.
Thank you mister mate maybe some
of the questions have been asked
i'm just.
Making sure here miss chair and
sponsor this looks like you
really could feel thank you for
bringing this forward but in the
matching funds that I think
that's what the discussion I
just came into now is.
Is going to go through eighty
d's that correct mister chair.
Thank you mister chair and
representative one
there is a committee process
that meets quarterly that
reviews all applications that go
into egb the higher education
department so there's a
comprehensive review that
involves all the participating
institutions and our partners
including hd economic
development department cell
that's kind of the means by
which the monies are reviewed
and deemed worthy of receiving
this kind of a match if that
makes it yeah completely thank
you and so this would just be an
expenditure of fun mister.
Mister chair representative
thanks for that question also
this is.
In house bill too right now
there are two streams of money
that are being dedicated to this
purpose one is from the general
fund to head the other is from
the existing technology
enhancement fund that this bill
would support and those monies
would also go to et for that
committee driven process so
there's kind of two streams of
money they told a twenty five
million right now in house bill
to as it's currently written
we're looking to increase that
amount if possible thank you
mister appreciate that I think
my my question is that as a
matching funds they're just for
expenditure is that correct
message
yes mister chairman
representative that's correct
they're it therefore direct
expenditure is only in support
of larger opportunities thank
you much I think these matching
funds and what we're doing with
some other things
with matching funds across the
board for it that are in our
budget are really required and
we've seen how much money we do
have can you tell me what what
what federal funds these would
match mister chair.
Mr share representative thank
you for that question so I can
give you a really good example I
also do federal work for the
university of new mexico and
congress right now going back at
least two years they have what's
caught congressionally directed
spending and so these are direct
appropriations they can also
support specific non private
constituent efforts on going to
research and program
opportunities
but with some from caveat though
one of them being for like a
department of energy.
Request for congressionally
directed spending the department
of energy requires these
institutions to put up to kind
of commit a twenty five percent
match to even apply for those
monies so that's just a great
example that congress has
congresses changing you know
they have this new thing called
congressionally directed
spending in order for us to be
competitive in that space we
really need to have this type of
funding to provide that match up
front and have a comment
and represent a blue one and
just like to add to do that if
you've heard a lot in the past
about regional techubs in in
multiple different areas those
only require large matches and
and us feel to bring that money
to the table as is giving us
some really good position to be
windows large awards that are
fifty seventy five hundred and
sixty million dollars right to
go for those they use it mister
chair with the twenty five
million dollars does that give
us a and some of those
sound like their individual
amounts appropriations from the
uh from her congressional
delegates.
Get twenty five million design
does that give us enough or what
would you like us to be at
mister chairman what is the yeah
what is more feasible place to
be I I think is the question
mister chair mr chair
representatively thank you for
the question of a question we
are in this bill i'm asking for
a percent seventy million
dollars and as an example think
about how we we need it many of
grants
may know I need a few hundred
thousand dollars to a few
million dollars in matching but
some of them require tens of
millions of dollars in in may
imagine the potential I think
mister chair this is a really
good place to be in today is
steam day so this bill really
highlights what we're doing for
our state and in in our steam
education plan so thank you for
bringing this forward
representative I think this is
really a lot of work in a lot of
you know.
A lot of that it's very positive
for in for education institution
and I see other support we have
for this and and
I wish we had more to give but
let's see what the senate can do
for you thank you so much they
can suggest thank you very much
I just wanna recover comments I
like to process I see it's
making it broader instead of
state universities too to apply
for these and I like that
there's processes in place that
we can award these grandson
thank you guys for bringing it
forward now we'll go to the for
emotion i'll make a motion to
charge do pass for hb to seventy
second second i'll should be
made by representative also
second way mister mason can we
take the role please represent
of luham yes representative
mason yes representative mirable
moya yes representative sanchez.
Representative to process and
vice custy on yes six zero
representatives you have a
unanimous due pass on house bill
seventy thank you guys.
Lock us out
with that committee adjourned.
The.
