House bill one introduced by
representative gl chasing act
relating to the legislative
branch of government making
appropriations for the expense
of the fifty sixth legislature
second session twenty twenty
four and for other legislative
expenses including the
legislative council service the
legislative finance committee
for legislative education study
committee the senate rules
committee the house chief clerks
office the senate chief clerks
office and other expenses of the
legislature declaring an
emergency house.
House bill wine have been read
twice by total is what a printed
referred to the house
appropriations at finance
committee.
House memorial six interest
introduced by representative and
rose costiano a memorial
declaring january seventeenth
twenty twenty four new mexico
highlands day in the house of
representatives house memorial
six.
House moral six minute twice why
title is that are not printed in
place on the speakers staple.
House memorial seven introduced
by a representatives.
Elizabeth liz thompson.
Do you want to johnson.
Cathleen m keys.
Terra harmul intera luham in
memorial declaring january
seventeenth twenty twenty four
artism day and the house the
representatives house memorial
seven.
How demoral seven have been read
twice by total is ordered not
printed in place on the speakers
stable.
Apologies I forget the numbers.
This was a speaker I have we got
a better order of business
announcements in the slowness
business.
Seen objection is ordered all
right members good afternoon
again thank you for your
patience today with opening the
ceremonies it's always a
beautiful enough in times even
full day uh as we saw today but
that's what makes our country
great it's the ability to
disagree and protest petition
your government even though
sometimes we may not agree fully
with.
The tactics it is an important
exercise in prespitch um so just
a little run of show we've
obviously just introduced house
bill won the feed bill it sought
his way to committee.
Uhm the thing most of us got a
copy of it not too long ago uh
or a recently so for those of
you that are not an hfc please
take the time to look at it uhm.
Before I go to further
announcements or their
announcements from the floor.
Leader lane.
Announcements on the floor.
Okay so before I
before we excuse members of hfc
to go meet
and deal with house bill one and
I do have an announcement on
committees uh we are going to be
removing representative forget
of from the labor committee and
she will now go on to the house
appropriations on finance
committee
and I don't are you here you are
here so you will now move from
labor two house appropriations
committee.
I was asked by one of the
members if they could go have
lunch at this time I think what
i'll do is all research subject
to the color the chair while hfc
meets to deal with house bill
one and then will convene
between leadership to figure out
what time we can come back to
either keep going or or to close
up for the day.
And so for folks who need to go
it please do so
I don't know how long it'll take
it is three thirty let's say
four thirty plan i'm being back
here either two uh to two house
bill one on the floor or to
recess for the evening and we'll
we can talk more about that here
in the next few.
A few minutes
gentlemen from being mister
speaker your house properties in
finance committee will meet a ah
three forty five to consider
house bill one room three o four
house provisions but as
committed meaning at three forty
five in room three zero seven.
With that.
The.
Generally from brilliant.
Mr speaker I moved the house
standard subject to the call of
the chair no objection it is so
ordered.
