Representative and you know you
representative anyone who was
very confused
this is aim motion for adopting
the amendment still pass
representative block.
Florida.
Representative hockey vehicle.
Representative little
representative ream yes then
representative somewhere yes to
adopt the amendment.
And then going back to a
representative or you know.
Man invoice here.
The.
Manager.
Thank you.
I believe I was still I have the
floor I was still debating the
bill i'm sorry thank you manager
thank you representative so III
would definitely just suggest
working with the secretary say
on the time frame cause I don't
want to overburden her office
she also mentioned in the fire I
believe that there would be some
other implications
for her elections staff with
this legislation's way I guess
maybe just suggest.
Seeing what figures he needs
maybe tweaking the appropriation
to accommodate her as well
and then I was also going to ask
madame to represent regarding
the appropriation do we have
this in hbt right now is this
currently being worked in the
budget.
Think you manage your think you
representative.
Okay thank you madame thank you
representative I think that
might be another stepping stone
that you'll have to worry about
if you get to appropriations and
yeah that question asked I i've
been asked their question many
times myself so
madam chair representative thank
you for that a couple key
questions about the actual
makeup of this new entity were
creating
so which stakeholders will be
chosen and how do we choose the
individuals to ensure that they
are on biased and
and are reflective of the great
diversity of our state manager
thank you madame chair and
representative on that will be
part of our upcoming new
amendment.
So
i'm just wondering who are we
directing.
Create this task or this new
entity which department is going
to up.
The.
It.
Okay okay
thank you madame chair and
representative it will be
clarified
further in the amendment but it
is the secretary states.
You made him chairman and think
you representative and is it
correct to say that this would
be an advisory committee he
would have no
real
actual authority to say it that
way but thank you madame chair
and representative it'll be a
task force
and the task force will be
giving guidelines on how they
believe to create together
county.
A redistricting groups.
Thank you term in the county
redistricting thank you manager
thinking representative did
mister mason of anything to add
to that some second his head
yes I met him share
representative block it it you
will have no authority the
implement of their
recommendations account is just
generally issue a report or they
can make recommendations to the
legislature.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you representative so
my huge concern regarding that
is we saw how the crc worked out
you guys did it an amazing job
meeting
talking to folks across new
mexico I was that many of your
meetings for the citizens
redistricting committee but at
the end of the day every single
one of the maps that use
suggested the legislature put
forward was thrown directly in
the trash we we had no input
from you guys when it came to
the actual legislature making
these decisions so I just want
to make sure that when you guys
make your your recommendations
that they are not once again
just thrown directly in the
trash like they were last time
and these counties can just do
whatever they want the next time
we we have redistricting and
sensitive so madame to represent
I guess I would just suggest
more of a closer framework to
end this legislation regarding
the counties to have input and
kind of a buying I suppose from
the counties you're speaking
with so that we know once we do
give these recommendations and
potential legislation comes
forward afterward we can say
that we had close connection
with the individuals in these
districts in these counties and
they did want to work with us I
think that was the huge
disconnect with the crc I didn't
see many legislators attending c
meetings I didn't see many folks
who were the stake holders doing
that so I just want to have a
little more direction on that I
don't know if we had any input
from representative of case or
mister
thank you chair representative
see the purpose of this bills to
legislate
to start the process to be able
to
legislate the redistricting
process within the counties
which is not currently in our
state statutes
got it
ok thank you madame chairman
thank you representative yeah I
would just love to see more of
that collaborative approach I
think that super helpful esp.
Actually when you were going to
counties and we want to hear
from them we want them to have a
buying as well and so madame to
represent one thing I saw on the
f I this released to s j r seven
can you can do we know what that
bill is or if you could tell us
what.
That I think you managed her
son i'll defer to mister
ben share represented block
that that's could it I I don't
see it directly related the
that's
a joint a joint rest any joint
resolution that we create an
independent redistricting
commission I stayed officers and
congression okay thank you
madame chairman thank you
representative and i'm just i'm
just referring to that because
regarding this legislation the
FIR four HB one twenty two
mentions that and so I just
wanted to I appreciate that and
i'll look at the bill I have not
read it i'm not in the senate
thank god
I will manage her thank you
and so
those are the key questions I
had regarding who makes up that
committee
and then madame chairman
representative I want I wonder
are we looking for an outside
contractor to do this task force
work or are we going to try to
keep it in house madame chairman
she representatives of that will
be
clarified at the in the
amendment
okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative I look
forward to seeing this amendment
sounds like a great one and I
appreciate the time today thank
you madame chairman.
Thank you madam chair
and thank you representative for
bringing this bill forward does
is this
limit in th.
Thank you item chair and
representative it is that is not
what this bill is the secretary
state is not stepping and the
secretary status overseen a task
force that will give us
recommendations on how to create
an independent group in each
county to do county wide
redistricting in which members
of that group will not be
individuals who are have a
conflict of interest will buy
the redistricting.
Did this district come that this
bill come forward because of
what happened in the northwest.
This this thank you madame chair
in things n.
And madam chair and
representative did the counties
have a s.
Madame chair representative that
it's a difficult question to ask
no this bill was developed
through nonpartisan
groups in which they did receive
and put from a variety of
interests which include counties
i'm unclear of the specific of
your question okay madam chair
and i'll try to make it a little
more direct how many counties
had in.
I'm manager of representative
i'm not able to answer that
madam chair and representative
don't you think that the county
should have had some input on.
I madam chair I think in
representative I believe I
answered that
thank you madame churn and thank
you represents that that.
Representative and unanimous yes
representative block no
floor leader chassis.
Represented a hockman vehicle
representative little yes
representative ream
representative of the mora no
man and based here yes and
explain
madam chair
yes
the vote is six to three.
Sorry madam chair but I wanted
to clarify there seems to be
some massive confusion around
the fact that this bill is not
about
establishing an independent
redistricting commission at the
county level this bill is a task
force for a study to look at the
issue and figure out how we can
best do this at the local level
and for that reason and with the
insurance of the sponsor that
many of the clarifying questions
in our physical report will be
addressed in an amendment.
I am happy to support it I will
get to see it again and see
those amendments and
appropriate.
Thank you madame chair and my no
vote is because.
Event pertains to the local
level.
People that are take care of our
government at the local level
why want the loca.
Or make in the reco.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
The.
And i'm chairman
madame chairman.
Okay.
Are you.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Good morning.
Yeah.
Different versions.
Very specific.
When I ran through office that
my first time one of my.
Would you.
Now the thrown
senate sitting to my right is.
Mrperiod rick may is the policy
director for the house minority
caucus
to my left one of the cosiners
on this bill mrperiod jared
himbray from martish.
I'll get around one of these
days
is the bus seen to us with the
with the change with
senator now sooner neighborhood
moving out of the house and so.
And tear back to the bill.
When I ran for office one of the
first time one of the things
that was concerning to me was a
real making process with respect
to our separation a government
and how legislation and rules
tended to.
Go apart from each other instead
of diverged come come together
and took me two years but
together the bill the first time
and and I think I got the award
life long reward for having the
most agency responses to a bill
in so I think I had every
department secretary respond to
it last year
with respect to that through
this summer madame chair and
committee we we saw several
different things happen one of
those very specifically worse
with respect to the ped
roammaking on the number of days
we had discussions during the
last legislative session.
The started out with days ended
up with hours for different age
groups for our elementary or mid
school and then our seniors
we came to a consensus at the
end of the day and legislation
was pass one number of hours not
on number of days
the summer during the
rule making process that
converted over on number of days
after there was an agreement
from ped that we would work off
of our.
Eighty nine school districts
opposed the number of days most
of our charter schools in
guaranteed all of a rule areas
that
are have been really successful
many of our school areas rural
areas and very successful for
day school weeks and continue to
rank among the the top across
the state with respect to how
they're doing.
So we continued to look at this
and
we took a different approach
this year with respect to how we
were looking and how we're going
to put this legislation together
to wear
we could come up with a
committee that could review it
there is no veto power over this
there's just a review process
saying okay.
This isn't reviewing every bill
every piece or every rule out
there and
with respect to that how we put
this all together the background
how this compared across the
united states with other.
Legislators how they do
roommaking review this is where
we're at today in in manager
with that I would like to ask
mister made just to go through
the baseline of how we got from
house bill four oh nine in
twenty twenty three.
House bill one twenty four
twenty twenty f.
And.
This we decided to.
Pete legislation.
To preserve the leg.
Rather than letting the
executive branch have an
unfettered approach to making
new loss to the rule making
process this is bills his eye to
provide a process where the
legislature itself can review
and make suggestions to the
executive.
Whether they're need to be
changes to a proposed rules in
terms of.
Is it consistent with statute is
a consistent with legislative
intent is there a potentially a
very high economic cost to the
rule etc it is representative
who just said this there's
nothing in this legislation
there is a veto nothing stops
this is a review proce.
Would suggest creates additional
transparency in addition.
So what we did was we took a
class which represented
pedigrees fell last year we
listened to the comments by the
various agency heads and we made
some significant changes one
change that was made was it is
now a twelve member interim
committee with six republicans
and six democrats each with the
each of the major leaders
of speaker president protember
republican leader in the senate
the republican.
You also need to change that the
rip that representative that
this group would be able to have
staff through the legislative
council service and there is a
two million dollars
appropriation to the bill to
provide for that staff up to
four staffers who be hired and
then any other expenses that
would be related to the uh
interim committee such as
travel expenses
you know any other you know
rental facilities.
So it is so again I would argue
and I think I think both
representatives were argue that
this is no way a partisan issue
this week we are concerned I
think about overreached by the
executive branch no matter who
is the governor and I think this
price.
Provide that process new mexico
is one of nine states in the
nation there has no type of
informal formal review of
regulations and I think what
this such lace is trying to do.
We looked at a number of states
and how they did it and was just
trying to get the process under
way we're not trying to engage
in any battle with the governor
over who's got the
constitutional forty the issue
rules etc and it's basically
again an opportunity for the
legislature as an institution to
have a voice to determine
whether administrative rules are
appropriate.
Thank you madame chair and
as as mister may just described
with respect to this each one of
us as we right a piece of
legislation get a fiscal.
That is not required in rome
making this piece of legislation
would require what that fiscal
impact would report would be not
only statewide that on any
government agency that that that
would happen with or
municipality
whatsoever so worth the rule
that that is decided by this
committee that needs to go
through a review there would be
a fiscal impact report that
would have.
In in the same with respect to
that that fiscal impact report
would apply to business as well
so picker pick a business out
there
and
it is specific to to restaurant.
Retail
that roam making
that roammaking would require a
fiscal impact report as well
with an in and now close with
this I would ask that
representative embrace emerald
be able to respond on the
reason why he sees this bill is
something that's important as
well thank you.
Thank you madame chair and
this is the first time I have
been in this position i've been
on a couple committees and it is
a lot more phone being up there
and so I I would just say in in
my short time here and in
committing meetings I have
heard
interested parties in
legislation.
Were opposed to.
And in the rule making roume I
think that having at just as in
the legislative round having all
stay holders present and
participating in that process is
very important and I think
through
through some of the things that
the have to be provided to the
interim committee that include
you know all other foreseeable
stakeholders
the wood insurer that that
people have a voice at the rule
making table and I think that's
very important to have in our
process thank you madame chair.
Without madam chair which.
The command chair thank you.
And represent kind of group I
was wondering
so what your proposing here is.
Yes yes represent
and eventually specifically.
Is.
C.
State government.
What kind of cost is it.
The.
Madame chairman representative
jc yes to both of those yes
costs of the public yes costs to
government all costs and fire
that comes together that brings
brings a full picture of the
room making into a fact and so
we get to see what that actually
is and i'm chairing
representative chassis with with
respect to this who had the
honor of being able to sit on
house appropriations for the
last couple of sessions and what
I see as each year is we go
through and listen to all the
different departments I think
the week before session starters
started house appropriations
will listen to eighty four
different departments in a week
we get to see their the lsc
request we get to see the
executive request we get to hear
the debate back and forth which
is wonderful to hear and we and
then we have three great
volunteers to go through look at
but as we look madam chair and
representative what we don't get
when we see the
the the detail in the increases
we don't get the detail that
talks about what they're doing
to what some of those increases
are with respond because of the
rules that they wrote the summer
before
and
less you're aware of all the
different rules and and there's
a bunch that are written every
year unless you're aware of
those on house appropriations
you're unable to ask us
questions okay at least two new
ftes specific to
an acting the rule that you guys
just implement it you guys are
going to simple what where's
this coming from and so we don't
get to see that detail unless
you're instantly involved with
whatever department that is or
whatever directors office.
That is couldn't be from the
state land office could it be
from economic development could
be from game and fish unless
you're truly intimately involved
in all the different rules you
don't need assess questions when
I migral one of the goals with
this services that we see that
as a legislative body as it's
being done once again man of
chairman representatives there
is no intent with this bill to
have veto override
with respect to the rule but it
isn't interest for the
legislative legislative body to
have a review of it and say okay
out of the stick with the
internet of maybe that that
years or the previous year's
legislation
so we can look at it and we can
see the cost and sit there and
sell k when a minute this is a
great idea we didn't plan on
these costs when I wrote this
bill and passed the spill
through.
And got it got it chaptered we
didn't expect those costs
that we get to see that now
it's not something as
legislators we ever see
hopefully that answers your
question
thank you madame chair
representative.
The.
Well.
And then there's.
And
would it not be
more efficient at this point to
a simply
try to amend the rule making
process requiring.
Madam chairman and
representative of chasing with
respect to that would that be
the easiest way yes but the book
I read says that it's harder to
get there there's a definition
on taking the easy pass versus
taken the hard path.
With respect to this this is
this requires more diligence on
our departments to do their job
and for us the ability to review
it and so ok was that truly the
interest.
I'm the victim of that and when
I say that I ran a bill last
year for one of our boards and
took it through the house took
it through the senate it was
chaptered
only to find out that the that
very bored the year before had
written roammaking with the
interp of me passing th.
Now we're going back in trying
to pause the implementation of
that rule because of the impact
that has
our electricity electric cut all
of our electrical service
providers the gas companies
power gas told communications
the impact that that peace of
legislation will now have on the
implementation of broadband.
The costs is going to be
astronome
and it's not necessarily a cost
to government when I say that
it's going to increase the costs
of our providers to be able to
do their job
which therefore ultimately comes
out of health how much work in a
year out of our federal
funding with.
This in my opinion is why we
need to have.
Specific information from a
legislative review once again
this review this and intended to
sit there and try and get a veto
out of it which was completely
observed the bill iran and two
thousand and twenty three on
house bill for not.
Representative i'm pretty clear
that you're you want to do this
not that the purpose of s.
And
I I just.
I honestly think that until such
time is.
We really don't.
In a middle that's now.
Service.
Experience with.
The.
To help us with that it is.
A turn isn't attorney and the
other.
And.
Frankly.
Yeah.
Even the.
I guess.
You contemplate and I think you
have went for the legislative
council service too higher.
That.
I am cheered and leader.
In response.
Just want to clarify the fiscal
impact is everybody it's brought
to very bright.
To through.
In the impact would be fiscal
impact the agency would have
provided an essential fire for
any cost over a million dollars.
The interim committee would have
the authority that if they
thought that the impact was
greater than the mil.
If I are provided by the agency
they could request the agency.
Thorough review of the potential
economic.
Again I think and they're only
changed that we're making two
the actual administrative rule
process is the creation of a new
fir.
The legislative over you
requirement in which.
The let's say council service in
advance I could be the rule that
rules then transfer to the staff
and the members of the review
interim review committee the
staff with then review each of
those rules issue right report
to the members of the committee
as to whether they found their
problems or in any issues and
then the members will be able to
use those after driven analysis
to determine if they wanted to
mak.
The members on the on this
review intermove review
committee would have a lot of
additional resources in middle.
It is because of representative
who said agencies typically
issues.
Five hundred administrative
rules.
You know more than one person
could deal with that's why we
suggested for up to four new
staff.
So I I guess they've been very
much mental chapter your
response actually shared it I I
just want to point out
we don't do enough w.
Appropriation.
Yeah.
And.
I can really.
Yeah.
And and that is I think the
legislature has to be a modern.
Yeah.
I see the oversight is.
To the.
In other words you have to sell.
The.
For us to.
We have seen
elsewhere where rule making.
Would you describe the.
Venture.
The membership is a twelve
member.
Uh grew that would be appointed
for a two year term
essentially link.
Six or p.
Three people.
Members of the president
protemits and.
Equally
uh politically divided we tried
to use that as an example.
Which it's excess is always a a
bipartisan
or but non part I guess by parts
of group and we thought that
premiums we also work well in
here to drive a consensus as to
whether a rule did her do not
beat legislative intent whether
the rule was under the statutory
thorty of the entity etc so
again it was designed not to
create a partisan.
Atmosphere it was designed to
create something that the
institution as a whole could
reach a consensus together as to
what.
I think it's if they get your.
I think it's not going to be
hard.
The.
Thank you madame chair many.
Majority leader in by.
That came up in there in the la.
In the explanation of the
members of the committee.
It sounded like the answer we
just got.
There is that this is modeled
often independent commission
ethics commission and how they
function by consensus and
balanced partisanship and
i'm just going to ask this bill
is.
Madam chair so it would actually
call under our legislative rules
and under that managed chair we
don't.
And we had a committees that are
proportional to our chambers and
i'm wondering why madam chair
this.
Proposal steps outside of those
rules but still is intending if
I understand it correctly to
establish a legislative inter.
And you're representative I hope
I enter the crash.
It's not being this twelve
member.
Action after the ethics
commission it's being fashioned
after are ethics committees that
are being developed there are
currently in place in the
legislature in which there is no
participant.
You know portion is equally
created under current
legislative council procedures
where there is that consensus.
You're violating some type of
rule then there has to be that
consensus and that is what we're
trying to do instead of avoiding
a partisan battle of one party
who is of the majority and is
the same party at the governor
we wanted an opportunity for
both parties to work together as
an institution not as a partisan
battle between party so that's
why the idea of a even leading
evenly and even numbered member
body of twelve instead of
thirteen or fi.
Six.
Nine and three
so that was intent switched to
follow with legislature he does
re.
For this.
Anything.
This is something that the
holiday.
Thank you thank you madame chair
and thank you for that
explanation.
Is that.
On
on half of that point
just for some clear.
And I am on the interim ethics
committee and it is the fifteen
member committee and it is
partisan only by a singl.
And.
So I was.
I I was.
Kind of.
The same question written down
and and as it as an interim.
Madame madame chair and and
committee
as we discussed last year
unhappened before nine my
interest was this bill has never
been.
I don't care who sits in the.
It doesn't matter.
The rule should I see this as
well as a legislative overs.
If it doesn't meet stack.
It should be review
and we should have a a an
opportunity to at least have the
debate
I i've had the opportunity to
listen to representative chase
with respect to romantian that
comes from court and
corrections.
I don't get those notices
it has the time I don't get him
for the committee so they s.
I need to because.
You have an example with
representative.
Yeah.
For a number of years from the
senate.
About the make up of the
committee
manager
to repres.
But but my colleagues comments
were specific to with respect to
the ethics commission that it
was in a comp.
Because it's a fifteen member.
Vote.
The because we we we tailored it
after what we all understood the
and r.
Clearly I need to learn.
Just to chair sorry really quick
just to confirms that they.
Thank you madame chair well that
was
more involved
thank you for the time that is
what I appreciate.
I would like to look at page
four lines.
Where we're talking about cars
manager looking into the cost of
things is the new century part
of.
And I think
what we're asking for
particularly in page six nine
three thirty where the changes
in the room act.
I think that's where the change
was likely to be most.
Um requiring that analysis of
costs however matter.
I'm going to pastimate here that
an fire would not have captured
the incident.
That a response are used as an
extent fires analyze the c.
That's what we are trained to do
that's what we see in the
legislature and if the cost is
to say health providers or a
broadband providers if it's
gonna make that kind of change
it would not necessarily come up
in an fire as we currently
rip her to them so we might need
to
look at what we're really asking
for and what change we need
there
and that's not necessarily a
question that's a comment of the
sponsor about
clarifying what information we
want made public before public
comment on walls
with respect.
I don't know about him chair of
the sponsor wants to reply
and i'm chairman asked that my
our policy director answer the
piece of this but with respect
to that
just.
Propose that everybody in here's
listen.
The department whether they were
department of econom.
Talked about the economic.
We're able to give the outcome.
Or.
And so they talk about.
So it's not lack of ability and
a chair and they s.
Ability to do that analysis.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Identifying.
It's a pretty broad universe of.
Under the current rule.
For any agency to provide
analysi.
This is a obviously.
Yeah if I could just briefly.
And in this since it's since
we're talking a l.
A question that.
Earlier the c.
And I think what this will help
with while it's sort of there.
Many times.
Process and discrepan.
Exactly mesh right or they may
be contra.
And I think that that this
process could help alleviate
some of those losses.
Thank you
thank you madame chair and thank
you pay m.
Um I appreciate that I think we
have managed her on page six the
agency producing the FIR.
And page seven eight it's not
clear to me because.
Section it is in the state rules
act I take that back so just to
clarify page seven.
Definition of any fiscal impact
report is in the rules making
act we expect it to be pro.
I think.
Madame chair we already have
much of this power.
We have the legislative
authority to do.
Almost everything proposed in
this bill to review a rule and
you make a recommendation to the
agency to make this statement
publicly
to the agency or to the world
about how this rule does not
follow the intention of the
legislation we sponsor or we
vote it for
this proposal this interim
committee as clearly stated it
has to be does not have veto
power does not have teeth or
consequences so the ability to
make those recommendations and
make those statements already
excess and I think we're
watching it lay out in some of
the current rules that response
are referred to regarding
perhaps these will days.
As an example.
So I don't
see that this bill madame chair
will necessarily.
Improve.
I think.
The modernization of our.
That we have staff and we have
time to fall through on the
bills.
Rules are enacted from them and
we can respond to those in this
manner with public
recommendations and statements.
It's gonna take modernizing our
legislative structure
it's not going to take another
internet committee.
Thank you manager
chairman response.
With respect to that I do
appreciate the last year's c.
About last year the reason why
this
is.
Moving it.
Our state legislature.
Probably inappropriate so
with respect to that
this process.
To putting the pro.
One of the concerns madame chair
was that.
We reference colorado this isn't
going back into.
That's a bad thing.
And a heads.
We put there is a difference
between being able to make
public comment.
Yeah.
Depending on the outcome of that
providing the detailed response.
Accountable
and chairman vice chair
committee members with
respective.
This puts us.
But the pussle.
To be able to provide the
details.
What's our agencies and our
directors are notice.
Public statement from represe.
No I
think that uh the example that
they use.
We're going to.
But.
Part of the duty of.
State.
You know again it's
recommendations not.
Presented on you know.
Representative block yes.
Yeah.
No.
Yes.
Here
you know this is the first
committee that we've heard this
bill and and I think that that
had an extremely interesting
discussion about what the
possibilities could be for
oversight or a change in model
of this way while I think some
of it may be redundant or may
not be as useful is is other
processes we have my hope is
that after a discussion today we
can have various parties come
together and buy a partisan
level and talk about those ideas
that our new that could be
utilised to him better the
process while also keeping the
process that we have so that we
don't completely up in the.
Cause more harm than is meant
but I voted yesterday because
they do think you have your
unders.
To start having.
Thank you
got two more votes to share the
window.
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well.
