The committee report for have
seen house bill one we will take
it up in the morning uh when we
reconvene on third reading on
the floor.
Uhm so after we do the committee
report we will do a little bit
of a bill introduction and then
will adjourn for the evening or
will recess a stand corrected
for the evening I guess we could
adjourn for the rest of the time
frade and slip.
You're later from brilliant this
year speaker i'm only going to
be that order of business
community reports chechen it is
so ordered chairman from doing
yet.
Mr speaker you're appropriations
and finance committee to him has
been referred house bill one has
had it on a consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
and nathan small chair the
community report.
We are missing speaker of the
federal committee reporting
house appropriations of finance
committee.
We're on adoption all the
committee report for house bill
one.
All those in favor.
Seen if I was in a.
Ozibosni the eyes have it would
reproduct it
you're laid from berlio.
This would speaker I will go to
that business introduction of
legislation and objection it is
so ordered.
The.
House fill three interdues by
representative hochman vehicle.
Clerk to read.
House built three introduced by
representative hochman vehicle
and act making general
appropriations for the
operations of the department of
transportation.
House built three introduced by
representative hochman vihill.
Has will three have been retired
by a title is deemed to remain
pursuing to article four section
five b one and it is referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill for interdeers by
representative garrett and act
relating to public works
requiring contributions to a
printers and training programs
or to the public works
apprentice and training fund for
all public works construction
projects conforming references
to the work for a solutions
department throughout the public
works apprentice and training
act house still four introduced
by representative gear it has
been four hundred minute twise
by title is them not not remain
pursuing torticle force section
five.
Not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill five introduced by
representative garrett.
An act relating to the workforce
development creating the work
force development and a princess
ship trust fund making annual
transfers from the trust fund to
the public works apprentice and
training fund and annual
appropriations to the workforce
solutions department for the
purposes of the apprenticeship
assistance act requiring that a
prison printership programs have
no unresolved complaints or
violations of the public works
minimum wage act or the
construction industry's
licensing act before receiving
funds pursuant to the
apprenticeship assistant act and
the public works are printers
and training act clarifying that
the work for solutions
department administers the
public works a printers and
training act and your
printership assistance act
making an appropriation.
House bill five introduced by
representative garrett house
bill five have been retwised by
title is deemed german pursuing
to article force section five b
one.
And referred to the house labor
veterans military affairs
committee then house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House fill seven interdeese by
representative of zipanski and
act relating to taxation
eliminating an upcoming decrease
in an distribute distribution to
the health care affordability of
fund.
How spill seven introduced by
representative of the pansky has
will serve and have been
retwised by title is deemed your
main pursuing to article four
section five b one referred to
the house health in human
services committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
The.
House bill eight introduced by
representative cates.
An act relating to government
conduct declaring the public
policy of the state regarding
conduct of current and former
legislators and public officers
and employees clarifying and
codifying provisions of the
governmental conduct act
prescribing and increasing
penalties house bill eight
introduced by representative
cates house relate have
minorites wise by title is order
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
The.
House bill twenty one introduced
by representative garrett and
act relating to charter schools
requiring the chartering
authority to provide an
oversight and expenditure plan
for the money retained from a
charter school state
equalization guarantee
distribution requiring reports
house built twenty one
introduced by representative of
garrett house will twenty one
hundred million twelve by title
is that or not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill twenty two introduced
by representative garrett.
For the legislative education
study committee and act relating
to public education creating the
school administrator preparation
program requirements act
requiring school administration
preparation programs offered by
post secondary educational
institutions or other approved
providers to meet national and
state standard education
requirements specifying
qualifications and requirements
for school administrative
clinical experiences as part of
a school administrator
preparation preparation program
providing rule making authority
to the public education
department creating the school
leadership institute within the
public education department
providing requirements for level
three b license share for school
administrators changing the
minimum salary amount of an
alternative level three b
license to school principle or
assistant school principle
repealing the school leadership
institution within the higher
education department making an
appropriation house bill twenty
two introduced by representative
garrett husband twenty two I
haven't been retwised by title
is ordered not printed in
referred to the house rules
committee.
The.
Has.
The.
Yeah.
The.
This.
House bill twenty four
introduced by representative
cates and act relating to
property requiring that at least
fifty five percent of units of
condominiums created on or after
july first two thousand twenty
four are owner operate owner
occupied requiring that at least
thirty five percent of the
members of the governing body of
associations that manage a
condominium created honor after
july first two thousand twenty
four own and occupied units
within that condominium house
filled twenty four introduced by
representative cates has been
twenty four have been retwised
by title is ordered not printing
reference to the house rules
committee.
House bill twenty five
introduced by representative
cates and act relating to human
rates making housing
discrimination based on a
renters or buyers source of
income and all our unlawful
discriminatory practice pursuant
to the human rights act house
bill twenty five introduced by
representative cates
has been twenty five have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill twenty six introduced
by representative cates and act
making an appropriation to the
health care authority department
to increase the recommended
limit on environmental
modification services for
eligible medicaid recipients
house bill twenty sixth
introduced by representative
cates as will twenty six seven
minutes wise by title is deemed
remain pursuing to article four
section five b one.
And is referred to the house
health and human services
committee then house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill twenty seven
introduced by representatives
garrett and chandler and act
relating to firearms amending
the extreme risk firearm
protection order act allowing
health care professionals and
law enforcement officers to
request petitions for extreme
risk firearm protection orders
providing an expedited process
for temporary orders to be
issued at all times requiring
immediate relinquishment of
firearms upon service of an
order allowing law enforcement
agencies to destroy a cell or
transfer unclaimed firearms
making conforming amendments
house bill twenty seven
introduced by representatives
garrett and chandler as well
twenty seven have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill twenty eight
introduced by representatives
garritt and senator rodriguez.
And actually relating to finance
authorising the new mexico
finance authority to make loans
for public projects from the
public project revolving fund
declaring an emergency house
built twenty eight introduced by
representative garrett and
senator rodriguez has been
twenty eight haven't been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill twenty nine
introduced by representative
garrett and senator rodriguez.
An act making appropriations
from the public project
revolving funds to the drinking
water state revolving loan fund
local government planning fund
and cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund house bill
twenty nine introduced by
representative of gerrit and
senator rodriguez house bill
twenty nine have a minute twice
by title is seemed remain
pursuing to article four section
five b one of the constitution
and refer to the house
government election in in the
affairs committee events the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty introduced by
representative saraniana and act
relating to natural resources
prohibiting certain uses of
fresh water and oil and gas
operations requiring an annual
water use report alphabetizing
definitions and adding
definitions for fresh water
recycled produce water treated
produce water and water water
pollution to the oil and gas
act.
House bill thirty introduced by
representative saraniana house
bill thirty of minutes wise by a
title is order not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill thirty one introduced
by representatives on any owner
and act relating to natural
resources providing penalties
for the spill or earliest of oil
produced water or other
nondomestic liquid wastes
directing the oil conservation
division of the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to adopt rules relating to fresh
water produce water and
nondomestic liquid wastes that
are protective of public health
worker safety and natural
resources requiring tracking a
produced water alphabetizing
definitions and adding
definitions for fresh water
recycled produce water treated
produce water and water product
water police pollution to the
oil and gas act making an
appropriation house bill thirty
one introduced by representative
saranana house will thirty one
have been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
House bill thirty two introduced
by representative saraniana.
And actual relating to the
environment alphabetizing the
definitions of of an adding
definitions for children's
health protection zone operator
and score to the oil and gas
act.
Restricting oil and gas
operations and children's health
protection zones requiring the
session of oil and gas
operations and children's health
protection zones after january
first two thousand twenty eight.
Requiring oil and gas operators
to create a protection zone
inventory and map requiring oil
and gas operators located in the
children's health protection
zone to develop an implement a
leak response and detection plan
and alarm response protocol and
conduct water quality simpling
and testing providing penalties
house bill thirty two introduced
by representative saranian
husband thirty two have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill thirty three
introduced by representative
hernin and after relating to
prescription drugs in acting the
prescription drug price
transparency act to increase
transparency across the
prescription drug supply chain
requiring prescription drug
manufacturers pharmacy services
administrative organizations
health insurers and pharmacy
benefits managers to report
prescription drug price trends
to the superintendent of
insurance requiring the
superintendent of insurance to
collect and publicly report
aggregate information a
prescription drug price
transprescribing civil penalties
making an appropriation house
bill thirty three in it is for
representative here as well
thirty three have minute twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
committee.
House fill thirty four
introduced by representative
hernin and act making an
appropriation to the health care
authority department for a study
that identifies and evaluates
the merits of strategies for
creating a state run long term
residential rehabilitation
facility that treats individuals
with substance use disorder
house built thirty four
interdeese by representative of
herndon as well thirty four have
been rich was by total is in
german pursuing torticle four
section five b one of the
constitution and referred to the
house health and human services
committee there's ours
appropriations and finance
committee.
House thirty five introduced by
representative of hernin.
An act making an appropriation
to the board of regions of the
university of new mexico to
support the communities to
careers programs at the
university of new mexico health
sciences centers office for
diversity equity and inclusion
house bill thirty five internet
by representative of hernin.
Has bill thirty five have been
read twice by title is deemed
your main pursuit to article for
section five b one of the
constitution and referred to the
house health and human services
committee there's house
appropriations and finance
community.
House fill thirty six introduced
by representative hernin.
An act relating to behavioral
health creating a lot.
House filled thirty six
interdeese by representative
hernin and act relating to
behavioral health creating the
long term residential
rehabilitation center to provide
substance used treatment to
people who are addicted to drugs
and alcohol making an
appropriation to the purchasing
division of the general services
department to purchase a
facility that will become the
long term residential
rehabilitation center house
built thirty six interviews by
representative handed as well
thirty six amendment twice by
title.
Is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
The.
The.
Jumping from the yana
mr speaker and move the next
sort of business announcements
and missile in this business and
objection it is so ordered
members that will conclude our
business for two nights
we will reconvene on the floor
tomorrow.
At eleven o'clock in the morning
to do third reading on house
bill one.
After tomorrow you can expect
committees to begin to meet to
do their work
and for those new members you
should expect to be
I think probably busy read off
the bat given that it is a
thirty day session.
Any other announcements.
Yeah i've got a few more
announcements to make
representative.
I can't see that for a percent
of himbury am I pronouncing the
name right hambury.
Okay so we've got a few
committee changes given the
musical chairs that we've been
playing over the last time ten
months including a couple of new
members.
Uh representative hemry.
Will replace the replaceable
representative neighborhoods on
both the house.
Judiciary committee as well as
house energy environment in
natural resources committee.
He will also be appointed to the
house rules committee.
Leader land at his request will
come off the rules committee.
Representative scott
will now be the new ranking
member of the house energy
environment and natural
resources committee.
As a point it earlier
representative forget all I is
now a member of the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Representative by the horn.
You will go out to the house
education committee as well as
the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee.
And representatives gavina in
lata
you request we are playing
musical chairs or representative
latter will now come off of
agriculture as a guess and what
are resources and move to
transportation proper works in
capital improvements and
representative care now will
move from that committee
transportation probably works on
capital improvements to the
agriculture essentials and water
resources this committee.
Clear as my.
Rate.
Get a thumbs up from set of
harper and one from blocking one
from vincent and one from
johnson perfect.
Any other announcements the
general lady from mckinney's
unhonda representative johnson
thank you mr speaker state
government elections and indian
affairs will have a
organizational meeting tomorrow
morning at nine in room three or
five thank you will there be
breakfast.
They're there will be breakfast
if you bring your own perfect
the generated from earlier
percent of thompson speaker I
just want to let you all know
that tomorrow was artism day in
the capital stop you if you were
not like me and remembered to
bring your puzzle peace stuff
please wear it and they will be
giving us goods and i'm not sure
about the schedule but watch for
it because artism day is always
a big deal.
Thank you mister speaker
excellent thank you again lady
generally from los alamo center
fair and towers thank you mr
speaker I just one house
judiciary members know that
we'll have a brief
organizational meeting at one
thirty two my room mr speaker in
room.
Three o nine thank you just
destiny gentle.
Any other announcements the
gentleman from donyana thank you
mister speaker your house
appropriations of finance
committee will meet in room
three o four at one thirty pm
tomorrow.
Members signal and it isn't
there always food in that
committee.
Mister speaker there there are
pockets of food scattered
throughout the committee.
Gentlemen what room are you
meeting tomorrow
mister speaker room three or
four three seven sir that's what
I meant the same mister speaker
three o seven.
I think there was a third time
today but okay
thank you any other
announcements.
Key members are thank you for a
wonderful first day again very
eventful uhm very packed action
pact but glad in honor to be
under journey with all of you be
safe tonight and joined dinner
and we will see you tomorrow joe
leave from brilliant mr speaker
on the house standard message
until eleven am tomorrow.
The house.
Is there missing me up the house
for several reasons until eleven
o'clock tomorrow wednesday.
