Representative.
Representative from.
Representative ferrari.
Represent fro is.
Representative figure out
where I send the representative
figure out it is present there
representatives.
Representative guy goes in here
representatives is here
representative harry garcia
you used to but I can stop an
old
represent garcia's present.
Representative again
I said represent me get garcias
percent there
representative of garrett here
representative is here.
Representative represent that
they would only establish
anything representative good
established send them.
Representative
representative harper is here
representative even and this
representative none this is here
representative heard in place
and day representative a hernine
is present them.
Representative editor
representative editor is here
representative hockman we hill.
Present representative maybe
hill is present representative
hotel meal.
Here representative hotel meal
is here representative johnson
yet a present representative
johnson is perha.
Representative.
Here representative johns is
here representative lane.
I'm here represent a lane is
here representative latter.
Your representative is here
representative lender my court
no monkey market representative
days here represent lentay is
here.
Representative little
representative little is here
represent little is here
representative lord represent
orders in the house and here
representative lord is in the
house.
Representative one present
representation is presents
representative lenstrum
represent of lunchton is here
represent lines is here
representative madrid
represent madrid is here
representative allen martinez
here represent alan martinez is
here representative mason here
representative is here
representing matthews
representative of math users
happy to be here
my present math uses happy to be
here
represented and macqueen you're
representing the queen is here
representative mid about more
representative me that almost
present representative where is
present representative montoya.
But you're so I keep.
Represent my entire star key.
Representative or test
representative or tesses here
represent our testers here
represent a pedagrill
representative peter group is
here representative reap
president representative reeb is
present representative ream
hereman representative ream is
here representative andrea
romero what's a mere
representative of under a romero
is here.
Representative g and dress
rumoural here representative do
you underestimate is here
representative robert cabaro.
Representative at th.
Is that present there.
Represent rubio here represent
rubility here
representative sanchez.
Representative sanchez is here
representative sarniner
represents staring on it is here
representative scott.
Representative scott is here
representative serato represents
the rato is here a
representative small
representative small is here
representative of sapansky here
representatives the pounds get
is here representative teraces
your representatives as is here
representative thompson i'm
thrilled to be here represent
thomson is thrilled to be here
represent towns and i'm here
represent towns and is here
representative vincent here
representative vincent is here.
Representative
represents the modern is
present.
Um.
I am here speaker martinez is
here.
The.
The.
The house will now come to order
mr speaker.
Your leader familiar mr speaker
that
I asked me none of us consent
that the members of the house of
representatives elected or
appointed to serve in the first
session of the fifty sixth
legislature constitute the house
of representatives for the
second regular section session
until such time as the house
ascertains the status of any
vacancies there's objection it
is so ordered.
Mr speaker
the chair recognizes it was so
chassis.
I asked me in animals concerned
that the officers of the house
of representatives for the first
session of the fifty six
legislature be designated the
officers of the second regular
session if there's an objection
it is so ordered
mr speaker the chair recognises
representative chasis being
animals concerned that the house
of representatives proceed
subject to revision under the
rules adopted by the first
session of the fifty sixth
legislature if there's objection
it is so ordered.
I asked me now I was consent
that we proceed to receive the
commissions of a appointment of
jailed hungry who has been
appointed to serve as a member
of this house to represent
charges county district fifty
nine and christina parahone who
has been appointed to serve as a
member in this house to
represent berlin panalia cardi
district twenty five if there's
objection it is so ordered.
The appointments of jerry
hambury increasing up at a home
request that the nearly
appointed members of the house
representatives please rise for
the purpose of taking the old of
office.
Raise your red hand and repeat
after me.
I do sell only swear.
You can use your mikes if you'd
like.
And press the bone and hold it
and solemnly swear
but I will support the
constitution of the united
states
of the united states that I will
support the constitution of the
united states and the
constitution in loss of the
state of new mexico and the
constitution and laws of the
state of new mexico that I will
true fate that I will true faith
in allegiance bear to the same
and alleging spare to the same
and defend them against all
enemies whatsoever and them
against all enemies whatsoever
and that I will faithfully and
impartially discharge the duties
of my office
partially district impartial
paper discharge the duties of my
office as a member of the house
of representatives as a member
of the house of representative
according to the best of my
abilities according to the best
of my abilities so I helped me
god so helped me got.
Please remain standing well the
chief clear get administers the
other of ethical conduct.
Please reserve a hand and repeat
after me
I representative
I representative himbry.
Duly appointed member do the
appointed member of the house a
representative of the house of
representatives from district
from district fifty nine.
Do you hear by recognize you
here by recognize their
irrefutable principle you're
reputable principle.
That a public office that a
public office is a public trust
is a public trust and do
solemnly swear that and do
solemnly swear that I shall
faithfully support I shall
faithfully support the united
states constitution united
states constitution.
And the constitution of the
state in new mexico and the
constitution of the state of the
mexico.
I shall discharge I sell
discharge with integrity and
ethically with integrity and at
the green ethically the high
responsibilities
responsibilities placed upon me
placed the party by the
constitution at the state in
mexico and the constitution of
the state of new mexico and the
voters of my district and the
voters.
I shall abide by the spirit I
sell abide by the speaker as
well as the letter as well as
the letter of those rules of
those rules pertaining to
ethical conduct pertaining to
ethical conduct.
I shall not use my office.
I shall not use my offers for
personal gain for personal gain.
And shall scrupulously avoid and
fell scrupulously avoid any
active in propriety any act of
improved priorities.
Or any at or any act which gives
the appearance of in propriety
of
improving.
Congratulations welcome to the
house.
Mr speaker.
Yeah.
Jalady one second
the house will come to order
sorry mr speaker mister speaker.
Jelly billion.
I moved that the rules be
suspended to allow the seating
of guests in the chamber.
There's objection it is ordered.
Where before we get started on
more of today's proceedings
folks I wanted to
just say thank you well first of
all good afternoon to all of you
happy new year uhm I want to say
thank you to our mighty at you
this morning the you or miggles
and will make you could please
even big round of a plus.
Also to our color guide from
public academic american region
post one sixteen we have more
thomson sergeant US army william
estevan junior corporal US army
normal are going sergeant US
army ralph by diano chaplain us
army.
Lloyd totalita sergeant US army
carl more insult specialist us
army and dennis pennypay
sergeant us army thank you very
much for joining us today.
The.
We also have a couple of groups
of interpreters here with us in
today's proceedings from the new
mexico school for the death we
have the anna we said new mexico
school for the death principle
and students from the new
mexican school for the death
nikol garcia brody killer in the
anna michelle has been more more
high which field asher rayers my
car got the address and
danielleman daughter
are their interpreters in the
room today or santana chavis and
maria garcia from rgc access
interpreting service in
albuquerque new mexico round to
a plus for them.
National anthem that beautiful
redition was by rational rose
and albequirky vocalists thank
you.
Yeah.
And the implication courtesy of
the law is new years the ceo of
catholic charities thank you for
joining us today.
The.
I hope nobody meets this but if
you do there is an empty
upstairs or doctor of the day up
on the liberty level of the
building.
French car leagues it is now my
honor to call to order the
second session of the fifty six
legislature i'd like to welcome
all of you members many of your
familiar faces and also a few
new ones.
To all of her honoured guest
friends and family and members
of the public who are joining us
virtually or in person
thank you all for being here for
this exciting day and think you
also.
To all who are making this day
memorable.
Special thanks to my family
diana money selling coming or
you are my rock in my
inspiration to are the families
of all my representatives thank
you for sharing your loved ones
with us your supporting your
sacrifices are appreciated and
allow us to do the people's work
big round of a plus to our
families please.
I also want to see it's a very
special think you to our
leadership teams here in the
house started with majority
florida little gill chase
majority whiprint as a pansky or
majority caucasure I wonder or
minority leader right or
minority whip jim thousand and I
minority caucus chair gill
armstrong thank you all and I
look forward to working with
your session
to a chief click these are these
more curtain thank you for
keeping the train running on
time madame clirk into all of
your staff as well as shaggle
upstairs as well as their ex-
legislative agencies thank you
for all your view all of your
work thank you for coming back
to work this session for all of
you who come and work every
session uh including our
sergeant arms we appreciate your
service to the people avenue
mexico.
Folks I don't have to tell you
how important of a moment it is
in new mexico's history you all
know that.
We are once again blessed with
record revenues we are blessed
with the opportunity and the
responsibility to invest these
funds wisely and in ways that
make a meaningful difference for
this generation and the next.
The session we have the
opportunity to change the course
of our history.
But this fee canada should not
be achieved in sailors.
My door will remain open to
anyone in everyone who wants to
make me mexico a better place to
live.
No special clouder connections
needed.
We truly mean that our door is
always open to all of you.
Because my truth and our shared
truth is this the round house is
the people's house you not only
have a right but you have a
responsibility to make your
voice has heard.
And we need to hear from you are
considerate the public.
We need to hear about your
experiences we need to hear
about your ideas to craft the
most meaningful impact for
solutions to the problems.
That we face.
This opened or also applies to
my fellow representatives from
every side of the political
aisle and from every ideological
spectrum.
There's so much more than unites
us than devices.
Or are values family community
hard work equality our goals
protecting what makes me mexico
so special and moving our state
forward we can all agree on
those basic concepts.
I'm incredibly proud of the
civil respectful culture that we
built in the house and i'm
committed to continuing to build
upon that over the next thirty
days.
Let all remember it is okay to
disagree.
But we don't have to be
disagreeable.
New mexicans are counting on us
to work together to deliver for
their families.
Today and tomorrow.
Electronically believe that if
we work together with our share
goals and values in mind we can
make it happen.
Folks we have a busy fast
inferior thirty days ahead of us
and I know it's not always going
to be easy
but it will be well worth it.
For all that will be able to
deliver for the state and for
the people of the state.
I look forward to working with
all of the members of this house
our house the people's house as
well as the governor and our
colleagues in the senate and
every day new mexicans like the
folks who showed up here today.
To make this a better place
from.
I am honoured to once again
serve as your speaker of the
house and I look forward to the
work I had let's get to work
folks are atlantic.
At this time i'd like to ask
members to come forward in sign
the official roster at the
clerks desk.
The house will come to order mr
speaker the chair recognizes
representatives of you ask
unanimous concern that the
speaker appoint a committee to
notify the governor that the
house of representatives has
organized and it is ready for
business of the second session
of the fifty sixth legislature
there's objection the chair will
appoint representatives johnson
but a home and man this to
notify the governor that the
house are representatives has
organized and is ready for the
business of the second session
of the fifty six legislature
speaker the chair recognizes
representative sapansky I asked
unanimous consent that the
speaker appointed committee to
notify the senate that the house
of representatives has organized
and is ready for the business of
the second session of the fifty
six legislature and at the same
time invite the lieutenant
governor the honourable how we
moralis and the honourable
members of the senate to meet in
joint session with the house in
this chamber to hear a message
from the honourable michelle lou
grisham governor of new mexico
if there's an objection the
chair will appoint
representatives gayegos hugment
behill and harper to inform the
senate that the house is doing
the organism and ready for the
business of the second session
of the fifty six legislature in
at the same time to invite the
lieutenant governor and the
honourable members of the senate
to meet in joint session with
the house to hear a message from
the island of home in should
congression governor of new
mexico.
Mister speaker that she
recognizes representative
chasing this a speaker I moved
that the house standing recess
subject to the call of the chair
in that the rules be suspended
to allow the seating of gas in
the chamber during the joint
session it has been moved that
we stand and reserve subject to
the call of the chair and that
the rules be suspended to allow
the sitting of guests in the
chamber during the joint session
mister speaker mister speaker.
So you know
members of the senate or
present.
Thank you sergeant arms
mister speaker
hold on hold on.
Who is this gentleman that
speaks to us
a former representative but
proud representative of this
body served
we have been selected to advise
the house that the senate is
organized and is ready to do the
business of the fifty six
legislature
was a sergeant hours please
escort
the honorable how immoralism and
members of the senate.
Well they're not worth us but
but we are organized and ready
to go
tell her we're ready to go go
get him senator
thank you mister speaker all
right at the house we'll see the
recess subject to the call of
the chair so no go too far and
for the new members do not go
