Roll call is now closed. We do
have a quorum.
Good morning members. Welcome to
the House.
Thank you for K. We will begin
our day Presented to us by
From the warmth from the fire
from the light from the sun, the
air that we breathe the food
that was given to us.
The guidance from the start
today blessed us who have
traveled as we all continue to
walk in beauty as we watch our
leaders show US future.
That we learned that we can do
during this lifetime observing
our leaders so that one day we
can share and give back to the
community and the people.
Also so we can all work hard as
one
That we take our teachings from
our elders and leaders so that
our language, including
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Please remain
standing for the presentation of
the colors by Gallup High
School Junior ROTC.
The general lady from McKinley
in San Juan, representative
lunchroom for the Pledge of
Allegiance.
I pledge
Body. We are on a motion to
suspend the rules to allow
guests in the chamber saying no
objection. So
Good morning.
Tribal leaders on number all
honorable members of the House
and gas.
Asian I had
Well today. Welcome to our young
people.
Our beautiful people who just
served as color guard.
Or elders in the audience and
the gallery who travel aeration
of American Indian Day.
I would like to mention a few
honorable men of state
government.
Before there was a state of New
Mexico. This was all indigenous
lands.
It has been 76 years that Native
Americans legally won the right
to vote.
The New Mexico Legislature in
1953.
The Honorable Tony and Naya
articulated to guide New Mexico
State tribal relations.
In 2000 elevated the office of
almost 31 years ago, the
Legislature created and provided
for the opportunity for our two
We have come a long way.
But we have a long way to go to
address a long history of
inequities.
We thank our tribal leaders
today.
Irritants as the first people
preserving our languages. Think
my native caucus for being our
big brother?
Representative Lee
Thank you. Also to in the end,
the staff and the
With that ladies and
Now The general lady from Bruno
Leo.
Madam Speaker. I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Seeing no objections, seeing
seeing no objection so ordered.
I would like to begin with
introductions of guests on the
rostrum.
Av Janelle Robo governor of
Wallachia.
Lieutenant Governor Mathews.
This narrows
Of Santa Clara.
Lieutenant Governor Rivera of
Santa Clara.
Governor Ben Sheehy.
Pueblo of Zia.
President.
Welsh Padilla muscular Apache.
Governor Fred Romero house Pablo
Pueblo.
Vice president of the Navajo
Nation. Rochelle Montoya, Our
treasurer, Laura Montoya.
Now the whole Nation Council
delegate crystalline curly.
Chairman Gilardi Ikaria.
Felix Chavez governor and Mrs
Chavez.
Last but not least, my mom.
Maria Arviso Johnson.
And
My auntie Lucy Basanti and
sitting on the floor. My little
sister Harriet.
Johnson.
And my sisters, Sharon tally
Before I continue to introduce
my guests. I'd like to yield the
floor to the representative Re
Arriba representative letter
guests.
Madam Speaker. Good morning.
Good morning guests. Good
morning, everybody else Happy
Indigenous Peoples Day or Native
American Day or whatever. You
wanna call it what you put a
beautiful day to be here in
Santa Fe.
I have a number of guests with
me today, majority of them from
the public of Sandia. And how
honored I am to be a member of
Sandia and see people that I
know that I grew up with that. I
know as family and his friends
here with us this afternoon.
First, I want to reintroduce our
governor from the problem of
Sandia, Mr Felix Chavez.
The governor, the government
from Sandia Pueblo is a lifetime
member of the Pablo.
Yes, served as lieutenant
governor and has now been
ascended to the traditional role
of governor for are the the Year
2024. We want to welcome as
well. My cousin, his wife won
the Chavez thank you for joining
us as well.
Allow me to introduce some
really influential friends of
mine that have taken on the road
to be our educational stewards
for our language in our
community. We all know that
language is one of the most
precious and valuable things as
native people and these
individuals have have taken it
upon themselves to leave their
jobs to then just learn our team
will language.
And I want to introduce them one
by one. If I can. The first will
be Tata, Jeremy Tesla guy.
The next one will be Angelo
Paisano.
The next one will be Rachel
Tesla Chi.
Next. We have Emilio Torres.
Next. We have Cindy Ha Romeo.
And then we and so again as
mentioned before these folks,
they left their jobs.
In order to learn our language
just so that they can understand
it and pass it down to our
Children and you'll see up in
the gallery and I'll ask the
speaker here in a minute to
introduce those in the in the
gallery, but, uh what a
commitment that is, and it has
to be, and that's the commitment
that we have to make as
indigenous people if we intend
to retain our identity, So as we
move forward, we also have
parents that were able to come
from the Pueblo Sandia. We have
Denise Aragon.
Okay?
As well as Marty Ella Martinez,
her granddaughter. We have the
educational director from the
Pueblo Sandia, Dr Beatriz
Pacheco.
Welcome.
Not from the public, Sandy, but
I also want to recognize and
introduce will be Governor Ben
she Hey from Zia Pueblo, who is
also again on the Russian
governor say it's an honor to
have you here with us. He is an
army veteran from Desert Storm
and a lifelong member from Zia
Pueblo. Thank you for your
service.
Then we also I would like to
recognize Lieutenant Governor
Delbert Pino, who is also from
Zia. Pueblo Lieutenant governor
again is a lifelong member of
the Pueblo. And it's an honor to
have you here with us again.
Lieutenant Governor Thank you
for making time to be with us.
And of course, those sitting
next to me. Um, this is a This
is a introduction to my boy.
Here's a covid kid. He was born
and he watched us do a lot of
virtual stuff, and we finally
felt safe enough to bring him
here and join us all in this
chamber. But before I introduce
him, I want to introduce my
lovely wife, Cassandra Lenti.
My son Mostyn.
And then finally, my son
Eastern.
And then when appropriate, madam
Madam Speaker, if you can, if
you can recognize those folks
that came from the problem of
Sandia kindergarten program
there, the parents and the
teachers. I would appreciate
that. But before we get there if
I can have a short moment to
reflect on today
Florida, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. And so
as we gather here again today
for another, which will be now
my eighth American Indian Day in
the House of Representatives or
in the Legislature. I have to
say once again, what an honor.
It is to be one of very few
Native American legislators to
serve in this
In this beautiful institution.
One that I know that as
legislators all across our state
each and every single one of you
leaves your family, your friends
your work everything behind to
come up here and fight for
what's right for your respective
communities.
I respect that. I respect that
immensely.
The same will go then in terms
of how we reflect on those
native legislators that leave
their homes, family and
everything else that all of us
leave behind to come here and
fight for our respective
communities.
And I'm reminded that once again
we have not come to a point
where we can say that those most
disenfranchised in this
community most most living under
the stigma of governmental
oppression for 203 100 years.
Today. We have a lot of ketchup
to do as native legislators.
Today we have a number of
initiatives on the table so that
we can make sure
That we stand up to what our
ancestors left to us.
Their hopes and dreams that they
left to us those that vote us
into office and what they expect
from us and those again.
Like easternmost and everyone
else that perhaps in the gallery
and even those that yet to be
born what they will want from
us.
But I'm reminded that in some
and some native American stories
that there's an the notion of
seven generations
And
As presently were considered the
seventh generation. We're right
in the middle that how lucky
might somebody be?
To know their great
grandparents.
Their grandparents and their
parents.
In the middle.
And how lucky is someone to
know?
Your child.
The great grant their
grandchild and then they're
great grandchild.
That's the beauty of this
institution that we can come
together, collectively fight
collectively debate and argue
collectively under one notion
that we do this not for
ourselves.
Perhaps in the seventh
generation, but we do this for
those.
Three generations that came
before us.
Keeping in mind that we have to
fight for those three
generations coming after us.
And with that, madam speaker, it
is under that notion that we
come today under Native American
Day here in the Legislature that
I have to be reminded that
When we're here.
Let's do work when we're here.
Let's be friends when we're
here. Yes, let's argue and
debate.
Friendly.
But when we're here, let's never
forget those we leave behind at
home.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, representative.
In the gallery below Sandia
Student and guests. Welcome to
the House. We are so glad you
are here.
And now the general lady from
Bruno Leo representative Little
Thank you, madam. Madam Speaker.
We just got about of our
committee this morning.
Thank you. Welcome. All thank
you for the opportunity today I
let's see. Let me house district
68, which is located in
northwest Albuquerque.
In my district. I am so honored
Our Albuquerque.
Who come to live, and I am so
happy that the Venus when I
crossed their path
This morning. Introduce my
guests President Sonia Newton,
who is the vice practice.
My second guess is Caden Toledo.
From Hamas and to Suki pueblos.
He is a sophomore at Sandia High
School.
And like many of my
Guidance from my husband,
Joseph, Little from Mescalero
Apache.
We were to be joined by the
Pueblo of actor.
As well as
Well.
Welcome to the house and there
are the brave ones still here. I
also said Bring greetings from
my governor of the Pueblo San
Felipe, who is unable to attend
because there is a feast day,
going on one of the wonderful
Pueblo feast days today,
Candelaria as day
So if I may
Um
I would also I am so bad that my
colleagues desks, you will find
a gift.
Um
To, uh
From that has been generously
provided the oven bread and
pueblo cookies that were
generously provided by New
Mexico. Native vote a wonderful
orgasm. Well, so we think them
for baking and staying up and
thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate the time.
Thank you, representative.
The gentleman from all those
counties, representative Garcia.
You, Madam Speaker.
I have been in the have been a
representative of Languid River
the length for eight years.
You know, and I have. This is my
eighth time around for this. And
with all these people, and you
know they need to be recognized
for many reasons and what ladies
and gentlemen, what we need to
keep in mind is we're all equal.
They're not no less animal
house. We're in this state.
We are all made equally, and we
should
Crete, each other equally with
respect and dignity, And with
that being said, Madam, can I
I'd like to introduce one of my
guests impossible.
Madam Speaker, I would like to
introduce our first lieutenant
governor Windell.
Window channel from the Pueblo
that from Pueblo of a coma. He's
in the roster, but I think madam
chair
But
Within closing, madam material,
and like I said, We really,
really need to look at all
people and treat them equally.
Respect and dignity for
everybody. Thank you, Manager,
Madam Speaker.
Thank you, representative The
General Lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just
also want to introduce my
guests. The illustrious genetic
Lieutenant Governor Jaime via
Real and Treasurer Shirley Cat,
NAC.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, Representative. Now
we'll go to the general lady
from Bernalillo County
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
It is my pleasure to introduce
my guest today. She is son last
to Jim Martin.
She is a native. She is a never
home Modoc woman enrolled in the
Navajo nation. She is sleeping
Rock clan and her maternal
grandmother area Salt clan. She
was raised on and lives on the
Navajo Reservation in Tola Key
New Mexico.
I'm proud to announce that she
is also the president of the
Indigenous Women's Resource
Council in Gallup. In addition,
I want you to know that she is a
legislative staff assisted with
the opposite of the speaker of
the Navajo Nation Council, she
volunteers her time to advocate
for indigenous women and human
rights issues impacting Native
Americans. It's important for
you to know, and everybody said
that some lattice nickname is so
Sunshine and she is a food
grower, a social entrepreneur
and mother of four daughters
tomorrow, Madam speaker right
here in the capital will be
indigenous Women's day. Please
welcome sunlight. Sad. Jim
Martin.
Thank you, representative. Now
we will go to the General Lady
from towels. Representative
Ortiz. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Um, I am honored to present my
guests today. First we have Sean
Duran, who is the chief
operating officer at task.
Pueblo, please welcome, Sean.
Thank you.
Crisp and Kenny is the engineer
task. Pablo
And Celeste is let us Celeste
Lucero is from Isleta Pueblo and
is a proud Lobo.
Please. Welcome, Celeste. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, representative. My
good friend. Before we move
along the agenda, I would like
to continue to introduce my
guests.
Ladies and gentlemen, George
Toth from
Little water.
And those, uh, Chapters Council.
Andy, Nas Council delegate
representing Crystal 45 INTs
Redlegs Casey Ellen Johnson,
Council delegate.
Danny Simpson Council delegate
Senti Lake Valley Standing rock.
Ricky Nas, representing the
chapters of new Come San Juan
County.
Shauna and claw, representing
the chapter of Kinley.
Council delegate, Eugenia
Charles Newton.
Council delegate Nathan Nota.
Council delegates, Stephen
Arvizo.
Council delegate Amber Karate.
Council delegate Norman Begay.
And our good friend Kyle Tom are
famous.
Bilingual rate rodeo announced.
Danielle, Notre McKinley County
commissioner.
Jonathan Perry is sent each
chapter president.
And we are so thankful to have
present with us for several
days. Students from Navajo
Preparatory School
Board member, Dr Tony King.
Their board President Anderson,
John Yazigi, junior and our
Shannon, I
The gentleman from San Juan
County.
I can't have said Asia.
I would also like to recognize
several members.
That are visiting from our great
Navajo nation.
They are in leadership
capacities and various, uh,
various capacities and I
I don't think you would be right
to overlook them as well as our
elected leaders. They are the
leaders in their own homes or in
their own communities. So with
that I would like to have the
delegation from the Navajo
Nation. Anybody that is
representing the Navajo nation
to please stand to get
recognized.
Madam Chair or Madam speaker.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Also
at this time I have a shadow
with me today.
She is Delta Yossi.
He is a Navajo nation tribal
member from the attack on
community.
She is an in Mexico Highlands
University student.
No littering.
For a master's in social work
and a master in business
administration expecting to
complete her studies in May of
2025.
And in Mexico Highlands
University Legislative
Fellowship provides an
opportunity to apply academic
education to actual legislative
experiences.
And something and professional
and community growth.
Members of the House, Miss
Delta, Yossi.
Additionally, Madam Speaker
I wish to
Comment on
Indigenous state today as my
brother representative Lenti
alluded to We represent all
people.
Native culture. We talk about
the five fingered being
We are all five fingered being
Represent New Mexico.
We do not distinguish one
another as a Republican or a
Democrat.
We identify one another as five
fingered being and we respect
one another, and I think we need
to be reminded that we all work
for the betterment of New
Mexico, not just district for
not just district this and that.
We are working for the benefit
of all New Mexico. All people
that have that relate to being a
five fingered being Thank you,
Madam Chair or Madam speaker.
At this time, I would like to
acknowledge students in the
gallery, Crown Point elementary
school students and staff.
Please stand and be recognized.
Welcome to the house and we are
so proud of you.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Madam speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that
house Memorial 48 be removed
from the speaker's table and
made the next order of business.
Seeing no objection. It is so
ordered.
Madam Speaker, would you get me
to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Memorial 48 has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. Gentlemen, please
explain the memorial.
Madam speaker.
Could you have the clerk? Please
read the memorial to read.
Sedatives, Johnson, Little
Allison and lint.
A memorial declaring February
2nd 2024 American Indian Day.
Whereas New Mexico is home to 23
sovereign Native American
nations, tribes and pueblos
whose peoples are citizens of
both New Mexico and their
sovereign nation. And whereas
decades ago the state of New
Mexico in its wisdom set apart a
day each year to be known as
American Indian Day in
recognition of the many
contributions of Native
Americans to the economic and
And whereas the Legislature
takes great care to reckon,
whereas
Contemporary life in New Mexico
is deeply enriched by the
cultural, artistic, economic,
social, religious and political
and whereas Native American
state and overcome great and
whereas the experiences of
Native Americans in numeric and
are worthy of great esteem
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico. That
February 2nd 2000 Hurricane
Indian Day in the House of Real
48, introduced by Rep.
Is their debate on the memorial.
Speaker.
Martinez.
Thank you, General lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker and Well, did
you yield to Mr Speaker? Thank
you, gentlemen. And Madam
Speaker. I rise in support of
this memorial. This is a special
day for this legislature. It is
a special day for New Mexico.
The only state in the union
where we recognize and value and
respect and lift up.
This tribal sovereign to
sovereign relationship that we
have.
Ever since I can remember
walking the halls of this
building.
Um, it has always been very
evident to me.
The land where we stand on the
land that we live on in the
spirit that guides us from time
immemorial to now.
Myself being a migrant, Madam
speaker and gentlemen, my family
being migrants to this land.
Um, very recent compared to you
very recent. Compared to you 30
years, Max.
It is truly an honor to have
been able to build a life to
have been able to
Um, to to see my grandparents
pass and now to be raising my
Children here on on your land,
and it is with the utmost
respect, love and admiration
that I rise in support of this
memorial and that I rise in
support of this day. Um, and
let's face it, It shouldn't just
be this day. It should be every
day.
And that is my commitment to
you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, seeing no further
debate that General lady from
San Juan McKinley representative
Lundstrom. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield I yield to the general
lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I also rise
today and supportive House
Memorial 48.
For the last 20. Plus years I've
had the pleasure and the honor
of representing a predominantly
native district. I represent Red
Rock 12, Red Springs. Red Lake
Defiance, Mexican Springs and
Rock Springs chapter.
And prior to the last
redistricting. I had so nasty
and crystal and even prior to
that, so in the time that I've
served, Madame speaker in
gentlemen
I've always been a native
representative.
And it is let's clap
so I am very, very familiar with
the native issues have been from
my part of the state.
I understand what the struggles
have been from my part of the
state.
And I'm just very, very honored,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen that
the people have had enough
confidence to keep sending me
back.
So I can make sure that their
voices are heard out of House
District nine. And Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I want to thank
you for bringing this memorial
forward and I want to thank the
Native American Caucus for all
of your work.
You guys do a good job and
You know, I'm here to help you
on any of your bills. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, representative.
The general lady from the Lancia
representative.
Maribel Moya.
Thank you, Madam Speaker Will
the gentles a gentleman yield I
yield
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too
want to rise and appreciation of
this day and I and and I agree
with Mr Speaker that it should
be every day. So much of New
Mexico's history and culture.
Me I'm mostly Hispanic, but I am
part Navajo distantly way back
there. But, uh, but very proud
of that, But so much of New
Mexico's history is interwoven.
With native culture and and you
were the first history and then
and then the rest of it, So
there's there's It's an in a way
that we can't separate. The two
new Mexico is native culture, Um
and and that's that's what's so
brilliant about about the state
We have so many different all
the different tribes and nations
and pueblos.
That that have a unity and a
difference all at the same and
you and we should celebrate
those differences and celebrate
those unities. And and so I
definitely wanted to stand
today. While my district doesn't
have any pueblos or nations in
it. I have lots of constituents
and very close friends that I do
represent. That should be
honored in. Um today. Thank you.
Thank you.
And now my good friend and
neighbor representative from
Cibola. McKinley representative
Alkon. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
It is an honor to see you up
there in that chair. Uh,
That was speaker.
I am one of those people that
represent a lot of big part of
my district is Native American.
And again like I told you
yesterday everybody knows knows
why the problem that I represent
Zuni. Everybody knows why it is
the best problem in the world. I
explained that to you yesterday,
Okay, so everybody knows that
because representative Eliseo
and Corn represents the level
Azumi that makes it the best
pueblo in the world. So don't
anybody forget that?
Mr Madam Speaker and members of
the house. I am honored that,
uh, the native Americans not
only support me, they honor me
by allowing me to serve them as
their representative here in the
state of New Mexico speaker,
Gentlemen, I thank you for
bringing the memorial up.
And honestly, like someone else,
earlier said every day should be
Native American Day in the state
of New Mexico. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you. The
gentleman from Lincoln and or
terror, Otero.
Thank you, Madam Speaker as a
gentleman yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Otero.
Thank you, gentlemen. I also to
stand and and rise for the house
Memorial 48.
As I am fortunate enough to get
to
Represent Mescalero.
And
I was. I was pretty much raised
in rid also as a young man and
my wife was raised and we've
always been good friends with
Mescalero.
And I appreciate the five
finger.
Being because that's the way it
should be.
And I look forward to making
good things happen.
With Mescalero.
And I'm really happy with our
new president or a Padilla.
And our vice president, right
behind me, Mr. Duffy, and, uh, I
think we're gonna make some good
things happen.
Thank you.
Next we'll go to the
representative from San Juan,
representative Duncan
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well,
my friend yield
I yielded my friend and neighbor
from San Juan.
Thanks, sir. I rise in support
of this as well. I had the
pleasure of going to school in a
school that most of the kids
were indigenous. I have great
friendships there with my
friends. Our lives have been
richly blessed people that we
surround ourselves Swiss. So I
thank you for that, Um, I've got
good friends that are sitting
behind.
Opinion or no as well.
Thank you for this. Uh, this
Thank you.
And now the general lady from
Berna. Leo, representative Tom I
was hoping to catch Does the
gentleman yield was gentle lady
I was hoping to catch the Crown
point elementary kids to tell
them that they could be here,
representative.
Madam speaker is from Crown
Point. I'm from Crown Point and
Ronaldo War. Ito Tome who is an
AP around point Day in the
Legislature, But crown point is
well rep represented
representative
General Lady from Berna, Leo,
representative Marengo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
it's really a delightful to see
a sitting up there.
Um, will the gentleman yield my
neighbor?
I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you so much. I just stand
and support of this memorial.
Madam speaker and members. I
have to tell you a very quick
little story. When I was a kid,
my parents owned a jewelry store
Native American jewelry and
Espanola.
And so I grew up making jewelry
and appreciate appreciating
native art. Um, and one of the
things that I remember when I
was a kid, was we my father
would buy, um, plate silver and
we would trade with all the
blows and the governors would
come and visit my dad when he
was alive.
And we had a really great
relationship with a lot of the
pueblos and um in the state of
New Mexico.
What I, um most dearly is that
they would invite us to their
feast days and that was just so
wonderful to be able to attend
the feast days and grow up with
that. Um, Espanola, as you all
know, is surrounded by Pueblo
San Juan Pueblo, Santa Clara
Pueblo, Taos, Pueblo.
And even part of my my heritage.
To my own was at one time a
pueblo. So I am honored to be
standing here today. Madam
Chair, Madam speaker and talk
about some of the things that I
remember in my childhood and
some of the people that I met
along the way because they
brought the rich heritage to New
Mexico that
Intertwined with our Hispanic
culture. Thank you.
Thank you.
The gentleman from San Juan
representative Montoya.
Thank you. Madam Speaker Does
the gentleman and my friend from
San Juan County yield
I yield to my friend and my
neighbor from San Juan.
Madam Speaker. I rise in
support. I'm glad that we do
this every year. Anyone who
comes to New Mexico
Hmm. That misses the opportunity
to visit. Um, Indian lands.
Native
Uh,
Reservations in pueblos in New
Mexico are really missing. I
appreciate, uh, in the world
today, there are some. There's
so much effort intertwined
cultures as even our pledge of
New Mexico believe we better
each other.
And I have appreciated Madam
I know more about the native
culture represented district
that's mostly native. I
represent a household that's
Special day, So thank you. Thank
you, Representative. And now
The general lady from Brenna
Leo.
Representative.
You may introduce your guests,
please.
For helping me. It's my first
have some very important guests.
So diesel date Ho.
She told he he She is the
coordinator of the Donetsk with
me. Today is also Esther Yazzie
Lewis. She is the protector of
earth, air, water and universe,
and she is also a member of the
DNA center of research and
evaluation. She's a translator.
With me is also Beverly Maxwell.
Who is from Shiprock, New
Mexico, A mother of three boys,
a U. S. Marine veteran of Desert
Shield, Madam Chair. She also
had thank you, representative.
We'd like to recognize Beverly
Maxwell's son, Jacob Alex, her
daughter in law to lossy, and
there's six month old baby
Tiana, Blah.
Madam speaker.
Thank you. Is there further
debate
Seeing no further debate. The
gentleman the club
Madam Speaker. I move that house
Memorial 48 do now pass and I
ask unanimous, Unanimous consent
of the rule has been called an
all members present voted in the
motion to show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative, seeing no
objection.
It is so ordered.
We are now we are now on final
passage of House Memorial 48.
The vote is open.
The boat is now closed.
By a vote of 70 in the
affirmative house memorial has
has
Thank you.
Colleagues and everyone in the
audience. All of our guests are
tribal leaders are honorable
guests. Thank you to my mom. My
auntie my sisters, my family for
making it possible for me and
for all of us, our families back
home to do this work our fire
keepers.
Please have a blessed day. And
once again thank you so much.
And representative Herrera.
Madam Speaker, I rise to
introduce a guest. This is
Lauren Bonelli. She's from
Shiprock. More importantly,
she's a member of the Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission
and in that capacity, she has
done the redistricting in this
for the Navajo nation in the
states of Utah.
Arizona and New Mexico. That is
no small task. And I'd like to
have her standing. I'd like that
Members before we continue. Can
we have another round of
applause to for our Native
American delegation and for
Madam Speaker Wanda Johnson?
Generally from Burnley. Mr
Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation. Objection. It is
so ordered Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. Point order. We still
have my memorial, please.
That's exactly what we're doing.
Thank you. Sorry I jumped in 49,
introduced by representative
Lord in Memorial recognizing the
2/100 anniversary of the new
estrus, Senora de coloreds
Catholic parish in Monday's
memorial 49 introduced but
memorial 49 have been raped
twice by Tom Lasorda not printed
and placed on the speaker's
table.
Remember, Leo represented Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order, business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Objection. It is ordered the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Torrance, Representative Lord
with an announcement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
apologize to jumping ahead. I
was like, No, you got to get to
this memorial. It's very
important.
Um, Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that
How spend more than 49 be
removed from the speaker's table
and made the next order of
business. Objection. It is so
ordered direct.
Go ahead. Mr. Speaker, would you
get me to that point I
absolutely will generate the Let
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house more 49 on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the memorial. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I appreciate that.
So today is directed NYSE on the
West Coast Senora de Dolores
Catholic Church that was erected
in the community. Manzano
beginning in 1824.
And recognize the church played
an important role in the
establishment of the Manzano
land. Grant Merced, which was
established December 24th 1829.
But more importantly, what I
want to say about this is that
I now have five land grants and
my district.
And I originally had
Carney. Well, now I have chili
Torian, TDK and Manzano.
The most important of all. This
is that when I acquired the land
grants in my district, I
immediately got into the interim
Committee for land grants and
thank you, too. Thank you,
Representative Test for all and
you and senator her mail for
being so gracious. We have the
best interim committee and I
will fight people over that one.
We are completely nonpartisan,
and we just care about the needs
and the wants of the people, and
it's great to have that intimate
contact where we can talk to
everyone and find out what their
needs are, um, for their
particular area, and I will also
fight you over. They have the
best food that I've ever had in
my life, and they feed us very
well. So if you're in that
committee, you will know how
amazing the food is. How
wonderful the people are.
And if you have not been out
there, I highly recommend that
you do.
We do have and also, um, today
we have
There's Treaty Day in the
Rotunda. If you want to go
listen to great music by the
minute they whipped out that
according I'm like I'm not
leaving. I'm going to stay. I
did get to say some of that. So,
um, also to let you know we have
a few people that couldn't be
here. We have the president of
Chile one Sanchez's downstairs
to seek Andrew guitarist and we
have with Carney. Well, JJ Heron
past President Moistures
Gonzalez, Valerie Titus Garcia
and I wasn't trying to supersede
you with announcements because
you have a whole slew of people
over here, Mr.
Speaker that you get to
introduce from me.
But I just hope that now having
your district that I can truly
represent you and make sure that
I'm entrusting me with that, and
with that, Mr Speaker
Um
Mr Speaker with the clerk.
Please read the memorial.
Certainly cleared to read the
state of New Mexico recognizes
the 2/100 anniversary of the No
esta senora. They Delores
Catholic Parish.
Whereas 2023 marked the 2/100
Westra Siniora Delores Catholic
Parish in Manzano, New Mexico.
And whereas native people lived
in the standard, whereas the
area is the site, which included
the three missions of abo
quarry, and whereas Hispanic
settlers have used the Estancia
Valley for grazing livestock
since 1703
And whereas settlement of the
area began in the 18 hundreds
when residents of the county
petitioned the Spanish and
Mexican governments for land
grants in the area.
And whereas new estrus in Europe
they Delores Catholic Church was
erected in the community of
Manzano, beginning in 1824.
And whereas the church played an
important role in the
establishment of the Manzano
land, Grant Merced
Which was granted 29
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico. That
new Estrosi Senora de Dolor
signed and sealed at the
Capitol.
Is the debate on House Memorial
49.
The gentleman from current
debacle Guadalupe Roosevelt and
San Miguel representative Samora
Thank you, Mr. Absolutely.
Thank you, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, members of the house
and friends Manzano area in
Torrance County.
My family goes back for
generations is a
Proud.
I have been to chair guys coming
to your house. And you have a
great letter. Thank you.
Gentlemen. There's for the
debate. The gentle lady from
Towers representative Ortez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, With the
generally from Britain, Leo and
Torrance, please yield.
Yes, I will.
General lady.
For the debate on the memorial
generated from Violencia
representative Mirabel Moya.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield I absolutely
will.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted
to rise in support of this
memorial because of one. I truly
appreciate the
Culture that all of our land
grants, um protect.
Um and and and that is what I
got to being in on the Land
Grant Committee and being able
to visit all these places.
Unfortunately, Manzano was the
only place that I didn't get to
visit and I and believe me, if
there's a chance again, I will
not pass it up. But but but
that's that's what they're
doing. They're preserving their
culture, their preserving their
lands and their passing it on to
the next generation, and we have
lots of them here.
Um, one of the wonderful things
that I realized when I walked in
today as I'm related to a lot of
the ones that are sitting right
here. So, um, so it's amazing
because my family is huge and
and and it goes through across
the history all over in New
Mexico. Thank you. Welcome and I
celebrate with you. Thank you,
gentle lady. There's further
from Ben Ali, your
representative Garcia tomorrow,
speaker.
The general lady from Bernard
Leong Torrance. Yield.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Speaker General
Lady from Burnley and Torrance.
I applied you, Mr. Marsh,
Speaker General Lady from
Torrance and Burnley, Ill.
But really stepping up.
In a land grant interim
committee.
And the reason I say that as
tomorrow speaker is that we lost
them Incredible.
Republican representation on the
land Grant interim committee.
By the by the name of Jimmy
Hall.
Yeah. Uh, he, uh
He was a champion.
Berlin grants
And there is a big void within
our Republican neighbors.
Across the aisle when when Jimmy
lost his horns.
And, uh,
And that's why I applaud your
efforts.
Because you have some big shoes
to fill.
In that language and interim
committee.
With the likes of Jimmy Hall.
Ah, kind of leaving this
chamber.
And, uh and you've done a
commendable job.
I really have to
Kind of
Recognize you for that s
tomorrow speaker and generated
from terms.
And Bernard Leo.
And I do want to say that, you
know.
The hunter.
From Montesano.
Kind of jumped the gun with with
the building of the church.
Esteve are speaker, uh, prior to
the founding of the language
rant.
Because tomorrow speaker the
foundation of a language rant
was the creation of three
institutions.
The church.
The religious setting. It could
have been a more Allah if there
wasn't a church.
Uh, um Dia seca system.
Speaker.
And the governing body of the
land grant.
Those are the three
governmental. The three
Institutional pillars of
The creation of a land grant.
The second in that start in
isolation. That's a second were
component part of the creation
of a land grant.
And that's the history of the
origin.
Of the acerca system.
And so when you mentioned that
the church was built in 1824,
and then there was established
in 1829 saying, Wow, you know,
God took presidents on this one
instead of the settlers, you
know, by forming the church, but
that's okay. Mr Speaker, because
there's have been some
incredible individuals that come
from Monsanto Land Red.
Speaker and
And I really applaud. Uh
An air. I forget the name of the
air.
But he or she known as maybe it
was a guy s tomorrow speaker put
together this incredible
historical book on Manzano.
And, uh and I had the honor of
reading that book by one of my
constituents has passed away.
And her name was Bessie
Casillas.
And she had she originated from
Manzano.
So again, estimated speaker
Generated from Burnley on
torrents and from Manzano.
On the 200 anniversary of your
institution.
And, uh,
I prayed that that institution
continues.
To build membership.
And feel the community with the
love of the holy Spirit for
number 200 years.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Seeing no further debate.
The gentle Mr Speaker. If I
could say something just
briefly.
Ah!
I don't get super emotional
other than usually angry, but,
uh, the representative, I'm
sorry. Yeah, the represent the
gentleman over there from
finally almost brought me to
tears. So thank you for that. I
got very big boots and I, Mr
Speaker.
I moved it. House Memorial 49 do
not pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
records show that the role has
been called, and all members
present voted in the
affirmative. All members of the
house president and voting in
the affirmative, see no
objection. It is ordered. We are
now final passage of House
Memorial 49. The vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of
Seven in the affirmative zero in
the negative House Memorial. 49
has early past his house.
Congratulations. Give
adversaries
The gentleman from Colfax Curie
Harding Quay, San Miguel and
Union Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Good
morning. Good afternoon. Good
afternoon.
Mr Speaker. I also have some
guests to introduce in the first
one that I would like to
introduce as my wife. And what
is her name, sir?
Thank you.
Jill, Jack and Jill. I thought
you knew I did. But the rest of
the body might not welcome to
the house. Jill. So good to see
you.
Yeah.
We have. There's a book, Jack
and you
I've heard about it. So Mr
Speaker also have with me, Mr
Raby Hill, the mayor of
Mosquito.
Welcome to the House, Mr Mayor.
John Brown, the superintendent
of schools that mosquito welcome
to the House superintendent.
And Barbara Milton to cook at
the schools and mosquito.
Alright, Welcome to the house.
She's the one we need to know
for sure, the one so, Mr Speaker
in these small rural remote
communities when tragedy strikes
or when a serious situation
Strikes. We all have to kind of
stick together a while back that
happened. We had a terrible
blizzard and everybody from
Colorado headed to Texas.
I was stuck in mascara when
everybody from Texas headed to
Colorado was stuck in Mascaro,
and it was the snow was high,
and it was but way far below
zero temperatures. And, uh so
Jonah, The superintendent,
opened the school. So these
people are Barbara June
Volunteer Mountain volunteered
to come over and cook for those
folks.
Keep them from starving to death
and are
And our mayor went out and they
were actually cars off in the
bar. Ditch part didn't know
where to go, Uh, possibly run
out of gas. There's there's and
so got these people in where
it's safe and warm.
And we all work together to
To help them stay safe and not
not freeze to death.
And and Mr Speaker. I have a
certificate to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of Barbara Melton.
Whereas Barbara Milton is a
native of Mascaro and a member
of the Mascaro high School class
of 19 60,010 Barbara began her
employment also served as a
member of the Mascaro City
Council and as mayor pro tempore
until December. 2 firmware is on
January 8th 2024, a major winter
storm created white out
conditions and impassable roads.
Throughout northern New Mexico
and as a result, dozens of
motorists were stranded in or
near Mascaro.
And whereas Jonah Brune, the
superintendent of the mascara
municipal school district,
opened the Musk Arrow Municipal
School to serve as a shelter,
and mayor, Victor Ray v. Hill
directed stranded motorists at
the school.
And we're as Jonah asked Barbara
if she would travelers.
And whereas Barbara opened the
school cafeteria and cooked
dinner that night and breakfast
and lunch the next day for
approximately 90 stranded
travelers who spent the night at
the school. And whereas
Barbara's selfless service
reflects the community spirit of
Mascaro, a little community with
a big heart that can be counted
on to come together to help
others.
Now, therefore be it resolved to
Mexico that recognition be given
to Barbara Milton. Ordinary
meals and hospitality she
provided to stranded travelers
during the blizzard of January
8th 2024 signed and sailed at
the capital in the city.
Thank you must ghetto and to all
of your leadership for
For all of your work, especially
to your point. Gentlemen, in the
light of
Natural disaster tragedy. These
small towns really come together
and really, really pull. Um,
prove fourth. So thank you for
that. And thank you for bringing
this week it back to you,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you for allowing
me to honor these folks today.
Thank you and welcome once again
to your House of
representatives.
Really good to see you, Jill.
Gentlemen from Catron. Hidalgo.
Luna. Um, apologies capturing
granted. Al Gore presented
Terrazas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
When I started this when I
started this
Mr Speaker. I have two special
guests here.
Ah, there are our district
judges Jim Foyer and Tom Stewart
from the sixth Judicial
District.
In southwest New Mexico, which
is Grant Luna and Hidalgo
County.
And so
I'd like to introduce some stand
up. Mr Judges, please. One of
both of these, gentlemen, one of
these gentlemen is a son.
Of the famous
Tom Foy, who held the seat that
I have now.
For 32 years.
And and so I'm glad that he came
in here. Isn't that amazing? 32
years he held that office of
District 39. That's that's
impressive. And so his son is
here. And actually Judge
Stewart.
Uh,
Grows, his nephew served as his
legislative assistant up here
now that both district judges,
so I just want to welcome to the
house representatives. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Welcome to the house.
The Lady from earlier
representative Bachmann be Hill.
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
And thanks to everybody for one
of the most special days in the
Legislature, Um it never ceases
to amaze me How much love we
have for all of our cultures and
communities here in New Mexico,
and each time it gets better
couple of things I first went to
introduce my unemployed tickle
science intern Jessica.
I'm so sorry, Jessica. I do not
have your your background that,
but I remember that you're super
smart. You like board games
strategy games and for some
reason, you really like hanging
out with me Because this is the
second year that you've been
with my office, so it's been
wonderful. Thanks for being
here. Also, Mr Speaker on
everybody's desk, You should see
a biscuit Cheeto from Selena's
Biscuit Cheetos.
Great. I mean, I think it's the
best best could cheat Biscuit
shooter on the state. I know
people will fight me over that.
I still don't care They are and
they are located in house
district 15. So please enjoy it.
And thanks so much.
You haven't had my mom's disco
Cheetos, so we'll bring you some
later.
Lady from earlier was able to
go.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members I would like to
introduce first of all our
honorable New Mexico State
treasure Laura Montoya and I
would ask that she would stand,
please. Laura Montoya was sworn
into office on January 1st 2023
as the first female New Mexico
state treasure and the first
Latina in the country's history.
Laura was born and raised and
educated in northern New Mexico,
and I believe is the Highlands
graduate.
And she has made us proud. She
has also served in the
capacities of, um
Mm hmm.
Sandoval County Treasure. And
with Laura today, Mr Speaker, I
would like to introduce her
guests. Um And if you guys would
stand, please, um I would like
to introduce Michael Plant and
Cole, his son, who was a
sophomore at you and M. He is 19
years old has a 4.1 GPA all
honors.
Getting a degree in in business
and going to law school. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Appreciate
that. You welcome these guests.
Welcome to the house.
And dedication.
All states should hated the
musical prowess in January 13th,
the event group.
Is a testament to the hard work
and reflecting the positive
impact.
The robust music education
Alright, we've got Daniel
Gonzales. Campos come in human
is Preston Johnson, Faldo,
Javier and the band director
Danny Allen. Welcome to the
House.
Lady from earlier presented,
Turned in or figure out. Take
your pick.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I would
like to introduce a U. N. M
senior political science major
with minors and philosophy and
entrepreneurship. My shadow For
today, Mason Grubacic.
Welcome to the House, Mason and
Mr Speaker. If I may 59 years
ago today, the love of my life
was born and I wish him a happy
birthday. Thank you. Birthday to
Mr Figg all the way from the
house.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
presented Lane.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I have to
want to introduce my shadow this
morning. It is. Her name is
Brianna Rourke.
Brianna is a sophomore at U. N.
M. She was born in Southern
California, but we're converting
her to a new Mexican Now. I hope
She's studying policies. I, um
She has this crazy idea of going
to law school, which I've tried
to talk her out of going.
But she is well on the path is
and I want to mention a couple
interesting things about Briana.
My conversation with her one is
she, uh, she goes to school full
time. She's a part of the story,
and she works part time and I
think those are all admiral call
qualities that take on those
many responsibilities. So kudos
to her for that.
And the other interesting thing,
Mr Speaker, and maybe I
shouldn't say this part out
loud. But Brianna disclosed to
me that she is, in fact, a
Democrat. And and I actually I
mentioned that because to me
that garners a lot of respect,
frankly.
Because she chose to come to my
office and she chose to want to
shadow Republican even though
she's a registered Democrat, and
I love that perspective of
wanting to understand how
somebody thinks and views
things, even if maybe you don't
understand them, and I think we
need more of that in our
society, and so I applaud her
for that as well.
Welcome to the House.
The name of February, Leo
presented every 100. Thank you,
Mr Speaker and Mr Speaker on the
desk of everyone here in the
house, there is a special gift
from the Dental Hygienists
Association there. If you look
inside, you'll see some special
items that will help make sure
that your dental hygiene is up
to par. Dental hygienist
volunteer many hours to serve
the underserved and special
needs population and community
projects statewide.
The New Mexico Dental High Just
Hygienist Association,
volunteers and participates in
the missions of mercy held
throughout the state and Mr
Speaker Today in the capital is
New Mexico dental hygienist
date, although they had to leave
to go back to school, I do,
which is to recognize the fact
that they were here.
And the dental hygienist, always
able to help us.
Thank you. Generally welcome to
the house to all the dental
hygienist.
Gentlemen from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Yes, on the floor.
General from Sandoval,
representative Hernandez. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um, I wanted to
recognize these, Um students
behind me. We have a Saleen
Martinez research Guadeloupe who
are shadowing me today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Welcome
to the House Lady from Britain.
Leo. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
have a point of Thank you, Mr
Speaker. So yesterday on the
floor in the debate of house
Bill 1101. I feel that my
character was attempted to be in
Pune by implying that I had
gamed the system or done
something untoward in the bill
on the firefighters.
By saying that I had an
appropriation and stripped it so
that it could be major main.
That is far from the truth on so
many levels. First off, we had a
message.
And second off in in the
attorney general's opinion,
66-08 from 1966, it says.
An appropriation bill is one
which has a has as its primary
and specific aim the setting a
part of a certain sum of public
money for a specified purpose
simply because of Bill carries
an appropriation as an incident
to the general legislation
contained there in does not
convert the measure into an
appropriation bill, so I just
wanted to educate my colleagues
that merely slapping an
appropriation on the bill does
not make it German.
And in I as I said, I do have a
I did have a message and
That upset me a little bit.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady.
Gentle lady from Ben Ali from
Santa Fe. Representatives of
Penske.
Figure in movie go to that Order
of Business Committee reports
objection so ordered.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee tomb has been referred
House Memorial 20 reports in
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted Jeon
dress for wheelchair. Mr.
Speaker. I move adoption of the
committee report adoption of a
favorite committee report and
House Memorial House Memorial
29. All those in favor signify
by saying nine.
Oppose name. The committee
report adopted speaker your
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs Committee tomb has been
referred House Bill 236 has had
it under consideration. Reports
with recommendations at it Do
not pass, but that House labor
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 236 do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Ellis Celia Alkon
chair.
Speaker, not the report. We are
an adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house Bill
236. But a favorable committee
report on House Labor Veterans
Military Affairs Committee
substitute for house Bill 236
all those in favor of what they
say now.
Proposed name committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your Labor Veterans
and military affairs Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 260. Frazier. Reports with
recommendations do pass and then
referred to the Taxation Revenue
Committee respectfully submitted
and sailed Yarkon share.
Speaker.
Report.
Adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
260 for all those in favor of
unified by saying I
Supposed name community reported
after
Mr Speaker, your consumer and
Public affairs committee to has
been referred. House Bill has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the Education
Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari
chair removed adoption adoption
of a favorable committee report
on Husband 123 dozen papers,
nine.
Whose name the eyes of a
committee report adopted Mr
Speaker, your Consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 239.
Has had it under consideration.
Report, Same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House consumer and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 239 do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
to Angie. Ferrari chair. Mr
Speaker moved often adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
on House Bill 239. But a
favorable committee report on
House Committee House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house about 239
All those in favor, say nine
opposed name.
Have a committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 282 has
had an under consideration
reports. Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to Andrea. Ferrari
chair. Mr Speaker. Move adoption
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house Bill 282 old doesn't
favors And if I was sane, I
Opposed. Nay, the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to miss
been referred. House Bill five.
Has had it under consideration,
reports saying that the
recommendation that it do not
pass
But the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill five do pass as
amended. Respectfully submitted
Nathan Small chair.
Move adoption
We're an adoption when I'm
Federal Committee report on
House Bill five, but a favorable
committee reported House
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for House
Bill five. All those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Proposed name. Yes Subcommittee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 33 has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations at
it Do not pass, but the House
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for house
Bill 33 do pass as amended.
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair.
Move adoption adoption of an
unfavorable committee reporting
hospital 33, but a favorable
committee report on the House
Appropriations of Finance
Committee substitute for hours
about 33. All those in favor
signify by saying Aye opposed
NAY, the committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee tomb has
been referred House Bill 88 has
had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair
adoption adoption of a of a
favorable committee report on
house Bill 88 all those in
favor.
Opposed. Nay, yes Report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance committee to has
been referred House Bill 91.
Has had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in hospital 91.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Opposed. Nay Islamic report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Has been referred House Bill 98.
Has added under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Adoption adoption of a federal
committee report on house Bill
98. All those in favor signify
by saying Aye. Supposed name yes
community adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to miss
been referred hospital 177.
Has had it under consideration,
reports Seamus recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair.
Adoption adoption of a federal
committee report in house but
177 all those in favor, say Aye,
a committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance committee to has
been referred House Bill 193 as
amended.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Move. Adoption adoption of a
federal committee reporting has
been 193 as amended all those in
favors and if I was and I
Opposed. NAY, the committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 19.
Has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted the Wanda Johnson
chair.
Move adoption
We are an adoption of a favorite
committee report in house Bill
19 all those in favor of the
Bible saying I
Opposed? Nay, the committee
adopted
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb has been
referred. House Memorial five
has had it under consideration
reports. Same with
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want to Johnson chair?
Moving the option in adoption of
a favorable committee report on
House Memorial five. All those
papers and if I by saying, I
Hey, the committee report
adopted Mr Speaker. Your
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee tomb has been
referred hospital Morial 17 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want to Johnson chair?
Move it adoption adoption of a
favorite committee reporting has
memorial 17. All those in favor
signify by saying Aye
report adopted
Mr Speaker, Health and Human
Services Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 185.
Has had it under consideration.
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do not
put that House Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill 185 do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Time Mr
Speaker. Move adoption adoption
of a Federal committee report on
House Bill 203. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye,
Apologies were an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 185.
But a favorable committee report
on House Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house Bill 185 all those in
favor of any five per se ni
Hosni. The committee report
adopted Mr Speaker Your Health
and Human Services Committee
tomb has been referred House
Bill 203 has added under
consideration reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then refer to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson share move
adoption adoption of a Federal
committee report on House Bill
203.
All those in favor of privacy,
and I
Those opposed nay report adopted
The lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker Now being 1159 am I
move? We adjourn until 1201 pm
The house will come to order.
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
If there is an objection, it is
so ordered Mr Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and that the
records show that the journal
has been read in full and
approved subject to revision and
approval by the rules in Order
of Business committee. If
there's no objection, it is
ordered from polio.
The Lady from radio.
Speaker. I move to go to that
order, business announcements
and miscellaneous business is
ordered members. I failed to
read some names out during an
introduction earlier in there,
unfortunately gone, but
hopefully they're listening. Um,
this is La Merced, Manzano and
I'm going to read some names
here and we can give them a big
round of applause so they can
hear us all the way up to the
rotunda.
We have a sinking Donna Leonora
Romero, Marcos Romero, Gloria
Samora.
Angela Nunez. Malia can Tana
Isaiah New Year's
Veronica Lopez, James Lopez
Lopez.
And Corinna Padilla Ortiz, and I
hope that they failed very much
welcomed in this house of
representatives. Let's give them
a big round of plus.
Announcements before we begin,
gentlemen from San Juan.
All right, young lady from
Virgilio, Mr Speaker. I move to
go to that order of business.
Third reading of legislation.
Objection. It is ordered.
Members is good item number five
generated from Santa Fe.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that the
record reflect that all action
necessary, replacing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house. But 129 on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentle lady
to explain that stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Otero, representative
Block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker With the
kind general lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. I will yield Mr
Speaker.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. I appreciate
it. You were going speedy,
Speedy. Quick. I almost didn't
have time to press my button. So
thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, you know, I know we spoke
about the bill in Committee and
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I'm
wondering if there were any
changes made in the committee
following. I believe it was
CPAC. Mr. Speaker generally were
there any amendments in that
committee?
Mr Speaker, General, um, the
changes were the firearm and
immediate fat in the bill, and
we also clarified transfer
firearm between
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady That helps me out a
lot. So those are the two
changes made in judiciary. But
But they were not in the version
that I saw in CPAC. Correct.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General. Lady. I
apologize. I'm working off the
previous copy that I wrote up on
Ncpac. So if I ask you a
question about the amended bill,
I'll try to keep the immediate
family member part and then the
The family.
Transfer part in mind. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
So we were speaking about the
business days of the bill
regarding
The bill that says business days
For the 14 days, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Did we do anything Do we talk
about in judiciary? What a
business day is because I know
mr Speaker generated. My concern
was regarding the like, Let's
just say someone that's open
seven days a week if they sell
firearms.
Would they be covered under this
with a business? Stay
definition, Mr. Speaker, Tunnel
lady, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, So
we also clarified that it's a
calendar day. Um, perhaps we can
get you a cop.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, that
helps. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady with the current billets
calendar day, So is it just 14
days? Still is that the same
number? We went with Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, we follow the federal
rules of civil procedure, which
is calendar day, which means if
there's a Holiday Inn between it
follows Standard Calendar Day
procedure. Yes.
Perfect. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And thank you, General Lady, so
that'll account for federal
holidays and I think that's a
good to bring up there. Mr
Speaker, General lady, so I will
continue on the bill here.
Regarding
The
Crimes that this would
Create with noncompliance. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, would
there be any penalties for
Let's just say if I if I only
waited 13 days
To give my firearm to the
person. I'm selling it to
through an F F l
What would the penalties be for
that individual? Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'll point you to
page to the unlawful sale of a
firearm before, um, essentially
would be a misdemeanor.
Um, And so what we would like to
do is essentially
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, and if I'm remembering
correctly and misdemeanor
Is is that six months?
Penalty maximum, Mr. Speaker
generally, What is the like The
time served? What would that be
a year, Mr. Speaker Fine of
$1000 again. That's based on the
finder of fact, to determine
what the penalty Okay. Thank
you, Mr Speaker in General lady,
I'm just trying to understand if
I was not in compliance with
this and I was sentenced.
I'm just getting I'm asking the
sentencing guidelines. What is
the current statute from
misdemeanor requires it six
months to a year, Mr. Speaker?
What's the maximum? Gentlemen? I
just answered that it could be
up to a year could be able to
$1000 fine.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally so up to a year got
it. That's what I That's what
I'm trying to figure out here.
Okay? I appreciate it, Mr
Speaker.
Gentle lady.
So
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I'm
looking at the scope of the
federal instant background check
for purchasing the firearm. So,
Mr Speaker, General Lady
Will this create an additional
state?
Background check.
For the sale of a firearm since
we are now trying to be in
compliance with the 14 days, Mr
Speaker, General lady, Or would
this merely be once I passed my
next background check than 14
calendar days. I would then be
able to obtain the firearm. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker into
the lady. I appreciate that. So
Then my next question is
regarding the actual sale.
Of the firearms. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady if I was going to
sell my firearm through an F F l
And I wanted to
Go through. Let's just say my
friend in town who was an F F L
Mr Speaker, General Lady when I
make that transaction, would I
then be able to hold would I be
the one holding onto the firearm
for 14 days myself, Mr Speaker,
Or would I be transferring that
to the F F l, who is performing
the background check and upon
receipt of that clearance, Mr
Speaker, General Lady 14 days
following
With Davin, Give the firearm to
the person I'm selling it to, or
would I still have to be in
control?
And keep the firearm myself
until that 14 days lapses. Mr
Speaker, Generator speaker in
any transaction between buyer
and seller, you have to wait 14
days.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. So when so I guess the
question that I asked. I don't
believe I
I got what I was looking for Mr
Speaker Generating
So if I'm selling a firearm
that's personal, personal
firearm from myself.
To a friend of mine and I'm
going through the
The next background check to
have that completed sale.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, do I
have to hold to the firearm
myself? Or can I give it to the
F F l and the f F l then holds
on to it for 14 days until the
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Generally
so
If it was me selling the firm, I
would keep it for 14 days. It
wouldn't be the F F l Mr
Speaker, General Lady. That's
what I'm understanding. I
believe yes or no? Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady. I appreciate
that. So, Mr Speaker Generating
How are transfers, then going to
Apply for
One FF l selling a firearm to
another F F l Mr Speaker,
General Lady since they're both
federally licensed, would they
not have to go through the 14
Day waiting period? Or would
they still need to comply with
14 days before an F F l sells a
firearm to another F F l like a
buyer versus you know, let's
just say manufacturers selling
to a buyer. For example, Mr
Speaker generally, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, you have come up with
numerous hypothetic.
Cols Any seller.
Any seller selling a firearm.
Has to wait the prohibited
waiting period of 14 days before
transferring that weapon to a
buyer. Whether they're an F F l
whether they're person, um, that
any person that covers I think
every hypothetical Thank you, Mr
Speaker in General lady and I
appreciate the answers. You
know, I've given you two
hypothetical. So far. I
apologize. If that's too
onerous. I will continue to try
to make it as quick as possible.
Here, Mr Speaker.
To the lady.
The two that I that I gave that
were very basic, I think,
hopefully cover the scope of the
legislation, and I hope that
they help the body understand a
little more about house Bill
129. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
I'm going to continue onward
here and talk about exemptions
for family members. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
I won't reference what we talked
about in committee since we
can't for the rules. But Mr
Speaker, General Lady with the
New Amendment.
Who is now going to be listed as
immediate family.
Mr Speaker. General Lady Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, the list is
on page three lines 18 through.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. I appreciate
That So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, it would it would pretty
much be
I believe the and the third
degree
Is that the same language that
we're looking at? Or did we?
Add that Mr Speaker, generally,
I'm actually going to pull up
the brand new document on my
computer so I can follow along
with you.
Mr Speaker generated, But if you
don't mind reading that to me, I
would appreciate it. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen were prohibited from
reading on the floor. Um, thank
you, Mr Speaker. Generally, I
believe the rules state that we
can read on the floor. It just
cannot be a large paragraph, for
example, I'm happy to find you
that rule.
Mr Speaker, General lady, But
I'm just going to try to find
the bill here and I appreciate
your candor in this I truly do.
Mr Speaker General waiting while
I'm looking for that.
I do have the F A R in front of
me. Which is nice that I do, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Um it's been
requested that
It's been requested that members
be able to remove their coats.
Um, actually requested that one
member be able to know his girl.
But I'm assuming that applies to
all of us. Sorry.
You can remove your
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and
I appreciate it. So you know, I
think I think it's It's a good
vibe in here today, Mr Speaker,
Because I have my lucky Smokey
bear pain today. The one I
forgot that. Do you have my
official pen? I need to get you
one. Mr. Speaker. I believe I
have the one from your
predecessor. I don't think I
have yours. But I would love
that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you generating and I think
that's great. I think it's a
great to have the candor in the
body. So, Mr Speaker Generating
Do we know what the cost would
be to administer this through
the new provisions in your bill?
Do we know what the cost would
be to the state regarding? Let's
just say in incarceration costs
and then Mr Speaker, General
Lady, could you just tell me
what you've heard regarding the
costs of HB 129? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, we don't foresee any
fiscal impact, generally
considering that the
Um do anything more. Alright.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generating and I believe we
mentioned earlier, though, that
there would be a misdemeanor
offense if you do not comply
with the 14 days. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, would it
be accurate to say that this
could potentially increase
incarceration costs if
individuals are prosecuted under
this new statute if adopted
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that
answer because I think that's an
important for the body to
understand, and many of the
members in the body do not like
increasing incarceration costs,
especially in the committee. We
sit on. I know that. That's a
huge thing for folks. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I would
just make sure that everyone
knows that that is exactly what
is happening.
Under this provision in the
bill, Mr Speaker, General Lady
So Mr Speaker, generally in my
next question is regarding state
and federal coordination.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I'm wondering how old this state
and federal agencies share
information and coordinate
enforcement of this legislation
if adopted, if any, Mr Speaker
General Lady Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, we don't anticipate
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. I'm
glad to hear that because I
definitely would want to hear
from our federal partners. I'm
so sorry, Madam Speaker.
Mr Speaker. I was looking down
at my page for a good long time.
I don't know how long you've
been here, Miss Madam Speaker,
but
Thank you for that. Madam
Speaker, General Lady.
So
My next question here is so we
talked about federal
Next. I want to talk about
The cross state sales. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Do we
currently have any rules or laws
promulgated in the state of New
Mexico for for sales to let's
just say if I was selling a
firearm to someone who lived in
Texas?
With with that person from
Texas.
Then need to abide by this 14
day, even though the state of
Texas doesn't have a waiting
period, Mr Speaker, General Lady
Miss Madam Speaker, Gentlemen.
Any transaction between a buyer
and seller whether you're from
the state of Texas If you're
purchasing a firearm in New
Mexico, you would be subject.
That is what waiting, period. So
yes, they Madam speaker,
gentlemen.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Madam
Speaker and General Lady. I
appreciate that because I have a
lot of friends who live in like
a passive, for example, and I
live in Alamogordo. And if I was
to sell them the firearm, I
would do the transaction in
Alamogordo with an F F l and
then 14 days later, I just have
them drive back up.
And and do that. So, Mr Speaker,
General lady that does help me
and I appreciate that answer.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
How How does this
Does this work with online
sales?
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So, for example.
I buy a gun from? Let's just say
Sportsman's, which I actually
just bought a gun last last
December from Sportsman's
Online during the Black Friday
sale, Mr Speaker, General Lady
so
Mr Speaker, general eating
We're talking about the point of
sale. I I bought the firearm. I
paid for it online unless you
say December
20
Let's just say November
25th
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, if
I go to pick up my firearm on
November 30th from Sportsman's
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Would it that day that I picked
up the firearm and do the the
NICS background check be the day
that we start counting 14 days,
or could it be the day that I I
put my credit card on file? I
actually purchased the firearm.
Earlier online. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm trying to
understand what day is the first
day of the 14 Day. I'm speaker.
Gentlemen, the transaction ng so
that would be when the period so
whether that transaction is
online. Whether that transaction
is in person you would
Got it. Okay. Thank you, Madam
Speaker in General Lady. So the
transaction that we're talking
about?
Can you point to me in the bill
where we have a definition of
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, so not
waiting period is about
Miss Madam Speaker building on
current law Regardless
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
So, Yeah, I see that on page
one.
Mr Speaker, General Lady and it
says
In
In addition to the crime created
in section
30-7 required waiting period for
14 calendar days shall be
required for this sail of a
firearm and the transfer of the
farm to the buyer. So, Mr
Speaker Generating, we talked
about sale and transfer
So, Mr Speaker, Generating the
transfer, I'm I would believe
would be
14 days following the sale.
But I don't see like a
definition in the bill for the
actual
Sale. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady Madam Speaker. I'm so
sorry, Madam Speaker. I
apologize. Madam Speaker General
Lady.
Keep on looking down at my paper
and assuming the the other
speaker will be there.
So, Madam Speaker, General Lady.
Um
So, like the sale of the
firearm, I just want to be
crystal clear. The sale could be
the day that I go into
Sportsman's to buy the gun with
my credit card and get my Knicks
at the same time or it could be
the time that I pre ordered the
firearm for pickup.
To pick it up later, Mr Speaker.
Generally it would be either Or
is that correct? Mr Speaker
General, aiding the statue
proceeding this the dish added
to law clarifies what the
definition of sailors which
requires a background, um, means
the delivery or passing of
ownership, possession or control
of a firearm for but does not
include temporary possession or
control of a firearm provided
To a customer by the proprietor
of a large seating this section
that we would be adding, which
is just a waiting period. Um
Needed to be conducted were just
merely adding the layer that you
would not be able to receive a
firearm without a verified
background check. Thank you,
Miss Madam Speaker and General
lady and I appreciate that, and
I'm glad that we have the
statute. I apologize. I'm not.
I'm not an attorney. So you are
and congratulations on passing
the bar last year. I'm really
excited about that.
Madam Speaker, General lady So
I'm glad we have the case Law
there, But I just got a text
message here from an F F l that
I know. Madam Speaker general
waiting, And in essence, the
text message reads that
Um, the seller does not retain
the gun during the transaction,
but the second the F F l puts it
in his log. It becomes his
temporary property. So Madam
speaker general leading I'm just
I'm just wondering then.
Would the f F l then be liable
if he has to put it in his log.
If I'm still holding onto the
firearm before the transaction
is completed, Madam speaker the
background check process is
fairly is quite clear in federal
law about how that's meant to
warn Leon background checks, in
which case the federal firearms
dealer knows precisely that they
have, um, essentially in this is
in federal law.
Um
During the doing with that, Uh,
fire doesn't prohibit state law
from being the transaction
itself is not complete. The
licensee shallowness initiate a
new background check prior to
the completion of a transfer, so
on back on balance with the
background checks they're
already having to to hold a
fire.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady That helps me a
little bit. So, Madam Speaker
generally knee, So if I'm
understanding at the F F l they
put it in their log and we wait
the 14 days and there's a
maximum of 30 for holding on to
to the transaction or what? Or
whatever we would call it, Madam
Speaker, General Lady so
If I'm holding under the
firearm.
And let's just say I get robbed
and someone steals the firearm
from me before the 14 days goes
by, but the f F l still has it
in their log.
Madam Speaker, General lady. I'm
just wondering what recourse
does the F f l do Do they have
to file this?
As stolen because they're not
the ones that physically have
the firearm. Right? I am.
But if it's stolen
Madam speaker, general Lady.
Then.
How do we ensure that the F F L
is not the one that's going to
be
Targeted if there is some kind
of investigation or something
regarding that stolen firearm,
Madam Speaker General Lady Madam
Speaker. Gentlemen, we don't
contemplate stolen firearms and
thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady will I think that's
a big big thing that I would
like to see in the legislation
regarding
The 14 days were requiring 14
days, but we're saying we don't
contemplate theft.
And so madam speaker, general
lady of if Let's just say a
horrendous crime has created
While that while that firearm
was stolen, I just want to know
who is liable under that. So,
Madam Speaker, General lady, I'm
sure I'll get the same answer.
It's not in the bill. Keep it to
the bill. But Madam speaker
generally that's a huge concern.
I have, and I will continue to
question that during this debate
with my fellow colleagues also
asking questions. Madam Speaker
General lady so
How does this new piece of
legislation Madam Speaker
General Lady fall into the
current state statutes that
we've passed, such as universal
background checks?
How would this mess with those
Madam Speaker General Lady?
Madam speaker, Gentlemen. Thank
you for the question. One of the
impetus is for the in particular
is that there is a loophole
currently within our background
Check law that states after
three days if you haven't
received a verified background
check from the Knicks, Um
Program, the federal program,
the federal background check
program. Um, that s F l can hand
over that firearm without that
background check, And that's
precisely why we are creating
this waiting period and closing
that loophole to ensure that
those who have not had a
verified background check in our
state are subject to enforcement
that the FBI and others who are
looking at that transaction.
Can have a flag raised on a
person who might be illegally
purchasing a firearm. And so the
F F LS aren't just handing those
weapons over when they haven't
received a verified background
check. So again, that person
anyone who would be purchasing a
firearm would be subject to a
background check and also that
waiting period to ensure that,
um
The the approximately 10% of
transactions that are happening,
um in the state would be subject
to that that time in order to
know for sure that that person
had a clean background check and
should be should be allowed to
purchase a firearm. So we're
closing. All right. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and General Lady
And I thank you for that answer.
So we're talking about three
days, which is current law right
And that's a maximum
To wait if it gets kicked back,
So Madam speaker generally visit
this increases it to 14.
Calendar days. But Madam Speaker
General Lady I'm I appreciate
that and I will continue on my
questions here. But I'm
wondering. I see that we have an
exemption for law enforcement.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, Do
we have an exemption for like an
active duty military?
Individual who was off duty. For
example, Madam Speaker, General
Lady.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, the only exemption we do
have is for immediate family
members and for law enforcement
And one of the reasons for not
have their gentlemen is what
we're trying to do here, too.
To essentially address the
suicide rates in our state. Um,
you have heard at length in
previous committees, but I'd
like to share with the body
here, Madame Speaker Gentleman
that with a mandatory waiting
period, essentially, this will
help decree with the waiting
period. They had 17% fewer
firearms firearms homicides per
year.
So the more people we exempt
from this law, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, potential Selves or
others, And this is why this
critical waiting period is
important and including our
active military veterans,
etcetera, who are unfortunately
could do harm to themselves or
others. That's why they're not
exempted.
Okay, Madam speaker Generating,
so I guess I'm kind of confused
with the impetus like I I don't
want to assume Madam speaker
generally that every active duty
member
Has some kind of
P. T S d Madam Speaker, General
lady, I don't want to be
assuming that of a population in
the state.
So, Madam speaker general
leading. I'm guessing then
regarding law enforcement.
Since they are current law
enforcement. Will they be able
to purchase a firearm since they
have taken firearms safety
classes through their training?
Madam Speaker General Lady Why
would they be allowed them to
purchase a firearm if they were
off duty? Madam Speaker, General
Lady
Madam speaker, gentlemen, and I
apologize to the body because I
probably miss. I did Miss
Speaker. Gentlemen, There is no
other exemption. I think I was
jumbling were three and five
about, um, the request of law
enforcement at law enforcement
Agency, But nevertheless, Madam
Speaker, Gentlemen, there are
Got it. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, General Lady
for that clarification. I
appreciate that.
And Yeah, I'm seeing Page three.
I was wondering where where is
that exemption, But it's not
there. So, Madam Speaker,
General lady, thank you for
that.
And so I see. Madam Speaker
General Lady.
This.
Definition we have on Page three
of firearms.
Madam speaker, general Lady.
I know that there are so many
different kinds of
Of eight to use the word
weapons. I don't like to use the
word weapons. But Madam Speaker
General Lady, There are a lot of
other kind of things that we
could contemplate. Let's just
say someone was harming
themselves or others. Madam
Speaker, General Lady
Uh, is this firearm definition
pulled from like a federal
statute? Where do we Where did
we obtain this definition to be
all inclusive.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
lady, So we're repeating what
the law says.
But we added Madam Speaker
designated to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosion
the frame or receiver of any
such weapon or any firearm,
muffler or muffler, master of
firearm silencer and includes a
handgun rifle shotgun but shall
not include antique firearm as
designed in U. S. C.
Section 921 So Madam speaker
Generating so currently in the
state statutes, does it have
that exclusion for an antique
firearm? And would that antique
firearm have to not be operable?
Madam Speaker? This is current
New Mexico law. That definition
has not been altered.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
Lady Night I would not dare to
accuse you of altering the
definition. Madam Speaker,
General Lady I just wanted to
understand.
What that is and where that came
from. So I will continue to to
find that Madam Speaker, General
lady, So I'm going to continue
onward here and I'm going to
look at the agency analysis. Mr
Madam Speaker, General Lady and
according to the Attorney
General's office, I believe
Madam Speaker, General Lady,
they might have had some
concerns regarding the
Administration of this
Madam speaker, General lady, it
says here on page
I don't think they're numbered.
It's the third page of the
Agency analysis from the
Department of Justice, formerly
the Attorney general's office of
the student in Mexico. It says
the laws criminalizing activity
related to firearms often raise
questions of continent
constitutionality. Under the
Second Amendment, Madam Speaker,
General Lady and it talks about
a 10 Day waiting period being
upheld.
Madam Speaker, General lady, I'm
wondering, Do we understand if
this new definition we're
creating with 14 calendar Days
has has been tested and other
states that may have these 14
day waiting periods. And if so,
Mm.
Public safety's general with,
Two states have closed. This
background checks loophole,
which is what our bill is
seeking to do. Um and I know in
the different laws that I can
recall 30 Day waiting period
currently for firearms, um, that
are handguns admission as a
state Hawaii had add to that
list. Um
We're also Colorado has a three
day waiting period three days,
Illinois has a three day waiting
period. So on and so forth,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen. Um
that's what we're we know that
this is a very common, um, law
that has been helped helping
again reduced suicide and
homicide rates nationally, and
that's why we're here today.
Madam Speaker.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady and thank you for
bringing up the states. I had no
idea that Minnesota's was a
month waiting period. Madam
Speaker.
General lady. Uh,
Madam speaker.
Generating
Sorry, gentlemen. Can you repeat
your just want to make sure that
Grow on the same page here.
Madame speaker Generating before
I ask my question, I don't want
to have to repeat it, Madam
Speaker. Generally, I just I'm
wondering. We're going
Minnesota's 30 days.
How How has this one been
implemented in Minnesota?
And Madam Speaker General Lady
isn't as broad as ours because I
believe you said handguns and
then assault weapons. Madam
Speaker General Lady does
there's have a carve out
For any other firearms. Madam
speaker generally, Madam
speaker, Gentlemen, while I'm
not an expert on Minnesota law,
this law was enacted in August
of last year. Um, and again, it
pertains to all right. Thank
you, Madam Speaker and General
Lady. I appreciate that, And I
think that's interesting, too.
To see it's a fairly new law.
Madam Speaker, General lady, So
I'm guessing there's probably
been legal challenges to that
law. And I would be interested
to see what those what comes of
those Madam speaker. General
Lady regarding Hawaii's I'll
just focus on theirs because
they are closest to what we're
proposing today. I would assume
because they both are 14 days
and our bill Here is 14 days.
Madam Speaker, General lady, So
I know that we that in the in
the analysis from the age it
talks about the 10 Day waiting
period. But Madam speaker
generally have we had any lower
court decisions or any
litigation regarding 14 days in
Hawaii that could potentially
help us see a potential
trajectory for litigation that
could come in the state of New
Mexico. Madam Speaker Generating
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, to my
knowledge, the Hawaii law has
not been challenged, and
therefore we don't have any case
law regarding that.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General Lady. That helps me a
lot. That's interesting.
I'm sure there will be one
person who filed a lawsuit. You
know these days, Madam Speaker,
General lady, but that's that's
very interesting to hear. So
Madam speaker generally
regarding the background checks,
I I got a message from an F F.
Ellen Moriarty and that F F L.
Madam Speaker, General Lady,
They do a lot of background
checks with people who may have
similar last names to other
people like
Joe Smith or or Joe Vasquez or
whatever the last name Maybe
Madam Speaker, General lady, And
so I'm wondering Madam Speaker,
General Lady, uh,
Let's just say you always get
kicked back on an F F l check
because you have such a similar
last name to somebody else.
Madame Speaker, General Lady.
And that gets kicked back.
So Madam speaker general eating
once that is approved by the F F
L
Would it start with the day that
it is approved or the start the
start of the annex?
Background check for someone
who's in that scenario, where
they have a similar last name.
To somebody else. Madame
speaker, Gentle lady Hope
hopefully that was a clear
question. I apologize. There was
a lot to unpack. Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen again, not to say the
same thing again. Um, the
Transaction is when the period
starts. So when you fill out
that form or that firearm that
is when the transaction starts
again, the sale is already in
the in step, in which case that
is when the transaction would
begin.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
in general lady and then I know
that in in the same F F l They
reached out to me and talked
about they have a lot of people
or women. Specifically, Madam
Speaker, General lady who are
coming in because they may be in
a domestic violence situation.
Madam Speaker, General Lady.
And they may need protection
from Let's just say an ex who's
breaking the restraining order
or something, Madam Speaker
General lady and they need
protection now.
So, Madam Speaker, General lady,
I'm wondering, Did we
contemplate those kinds of
scenarios when crafting the
legislation that does not have a
carve out for people in domestic
violence situations that need
immediate bodily protection?
Madam Speaker to the Lady.
Madam speaker, gentlemen. Yes,
we did.
Okay, Madam Speaker, General
lady and I'm glad we
contemplated that. Why is it
that that
Potential carve out did not make
it into the final version of the
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, we did
not feel the data that we have
about suicide in our state and
the other prevented
Okay. Madam Speaker, General
Lady? Well, I would certainly
want to know what those
preventative measures can be.
And I know it's out of the scope
of the bill. So I'm not going to
ask you because I know what
answer will get Madam Speaker,
General lady, But I do want to
make sure that people in these
domestic violence scenarios can
get the help. They need and can
get protection because I know
Madam Speaker to the lady Like
for me. I have a couple of
people who are who have two
stalkers.
Right now, Madam Speaker,
General Lady and
I I don't feel necessarily safe,
many places. Madam Speaker,
General lady, which is why
whenever I come up to Santa Fe,
I hate to hate to disclose this,
but I maybe
Having a firearm at home when
I'm not at the floor at the
Capitol, because I need
protection for myself, Madam
Speaker General lady and I would
just feel that that would be
scary for an average new Mexican
Who needs to protect themselves,
and it feels like they have
immediate danger, potentially
from this stalker or this ex
wife or ex husband or ex
boyfriend or girlfriend. Madam
Speaker, General Lady. I just
feel like that's a huge hole in
the bill, because if I have to
wait 14 days to just get a gun
to protect myself, Madam speaker
generally just let's just say a
pistol.
Just a don't know what revolver
Six shooter revolver. Madam
speaker, Gentle lady, the basic
firearm.
Madam Speaker, General lady. Why
would I just don't see why we
wouldn't put a carve out for
people who are in desperate
need.
And you just opine on that Madam
Speaker, General lady and why we
did not further contemplate that
scenario.
Madam speaker, gentlemen because
they period
They have had 17% fewer firearm.
We look at
Holistic. When we look at the
data, Madame speakers right now
are suggesting for, um, the body
today is what we know will work.
Okay, Madam Speaker general
leading since you brought up the
data, would it be
Prudent or proper for me to
request the
Place where we found that data,
so I can also reference it.
Madam Speaker. Gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes,
there is handgun waiting
periods, reduce gun deaths and
it's by Penis. I don't know if
you know what's
Madam Speaker generally. Could
you please repeat that for me?
I apologize.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen, the
title of the Researches handgun
waiting periods. Reduce gun
deaths. Um, journal is people.
The National Academy of Sciences
of the United States. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and generally
could you I apologize. I'm going
to ask you another question.
Could you please tell me the
authors of the study just so I
can find the correct one. Madam
Speaker, General lady such as Dr
or whoever the individuals who
peer reviewed it. Madam Speaker
generating
Madam speaker. Generally, I
would request the year of that
study as well, just so that we
are finding the same
information. Madam Speaker
generating
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, this
was conducted in produced on
October 16th 2020 2017. The
authors were Michael Luca
Deepak, My Lord to Christopher
and Christopher Paul, Queen and
again this with the Proceedings
of the National Academy.
No, I object, Madam Speaker? No,
Just kidding. Of course, please.
Madam Speaker, General lady.
Thank you for that one of my
colleague is going to look for
that study and look for that.
Madam Speaker, General lady, So
I'm very curious, though. Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. We talked
about this as the 2017 study,
and we talked about Minnesota's
just going into effect.
I believe you said August of
last year, Madam Speaker,
General Lady, Can you tell me
when Hawaii's went into effect?
Madam Speaker And was it
included in this study that
we're saying? There's efficacy
with these waiting periods.
Madam Speaker, Tenant lady
without Googling it, Madam
Speaker. I can't tell you that.
Speaker generally, I would
contend it's worth a Google. Let
me find it, Madam Speaker,
General Lady Speaker
Generally.
Pretty much my question is was
this data that was used in the
study?
Including 14 Day waiting periods
as well as 10 and three day
waiting periods. Madam
Gentlemen, is my expert just
like very likely that the data
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and General Lady and I don't
know that I would not want to
speak for the Hawaii
Legislature. But I will believe
that Madame Speaker, General
Lady, I just I'm just curious
because we're using these
statistics and saying this is a
informed choice to put this
forward.
But Madam Speaker, General Lady,
we're not specifically keeping
The data to what would actually
affect New Mexico. Some Madam
speaker, general Lady, I'm not
saying we need a 14 Day waiting
Period control group and a non
controlled group in the state.
But Madam Speaker, General Lady
I do want to see 14 day waiting
periods and their efficacy in
other states. So Madam speaker
General lady other than the
Penis study that you provided to
us that was done.
I believe what
56 at least seven years ago.
Madam Speaker General Lady. It's
hard to do math today. I
apologize. But Madam Speaker
general waiting. Do we have any
data from Hawaii of the efficacy
of their 14 day waiting period
since New Mexico would indeed be
enacting something very similar
to that state Beaker gentleman
While we don't have the data
from Hawaii since we're in the
New Mexico House today.
On an average year 492 people
and in that scene those same
years since 2012 Madam speaker
Gentleman, New Mexico has had an
80 prate.
And so when we look at the data
and what it is, we're seeking to
do today. Madam Speaker.
Gentlemen, we're trying to
reduce gun deaths in New Mexico.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker
And then the lady and I, My
colleague gave me a piece of
paper while you were talking.
Can you tell me
What? What The timeline was in
New Mexico's data, because I
know we just talked about how we
want to legislate to New Mexico.
Madam Speaker General Lady, Can
you tell me the dates of those
stats were gun violence
increased again? Madam Speaker.
Generally, I just need a year.
Madam Speaker, Gentlemen, So the
we have the sixth highest rate
of gun deaths. E.
Madam speaker. Gentlemen, that's
23.4 deaths per 100,000 people.
Madam speaker had a 39%
increase. Um, excuse me, 80%
increase in New Mexico while the
rest of the nation how to 39%
increase, So we are at Hillman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, General lady. So I
thank you for those statistics,
But I would caution. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, I didn't
see what what dates like I would
like to see a bar chart of like
2012 2013 2014 2015 Because
Madame speaker, General lady as
we all know, across the board
across the entire United States,
the covid pandemic.
Really created a
An increase in domestic violence
and violence in general, Madam
Speaker General Lady and I would
like to know if the large
increase was an outlier,
potentially with like the year
2022 2021 because that was the
heat of the pandemic. Madam
Speaker, General Lady, Do we
know those statistics? From
what? I was just referenced and
also, I would love to see a
citation on that. Who? Who did
that study so I can look it up
myself. Madam Speaker to the
Lady.
Madam speaker, Gentlemen. So our
New Mexico Department of Health
puts out an and shot victims
presenting. I believe that it
was it was in one of my
analyses. Certainly I'd love to
share that work about the 87 by
armed death weight rate between
20 so their their data goes back
beyond even the previous
And Madam Chair. Madam speaker,
Gentlemen.
We went from seventh in the
highest nationwide, Um
Firearm death rate in 1999 to
the third highest and so on the
bar chart that you can imagine
Madam Speaker John basically
went down. Um, the latter when
it came to being able to prevent
these gun deaths and certainly
had an 80% 87%. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and General Lady. So
this Penis study I believe
It took into effect. Many
different factors as well as
just the gun violence. Right,
Madam Speaker, General Lady it
took into account.
Madam speaker. Let me just look
real quick. Madam Speaker, Madam
Speaker. Generally, I apologize.
So the study that I'm looking at
from the Penis. It doesn't have
a correlation between these and
gun violence reduction, Madam
Speaker, General Lady, it says
it could reduce gun violence,
but it does not account for
approved mental health.
Offerings. Madam Speaker,
general lady or alcohol
consumption or any kind of other
factor. Madam Speaker General
Lady So
I'm just wondering Madam Speaker
General Lady in the state with
the state statistics we have
from the Department of Health.
Did they take into account the
dual use of drugs any kind of
alcohol or any other kind of
narcotic?
With
The violence that was occurring
in the state of New Mexico with
guns or any other kind of
Tool. Madam speaker, gentle
lady.
And continue to talk about
reports that have been
promulgated nationally and
within the state the substance
in closing the loophole on those
who don't receive a verified
background. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and General Ladies. So
the problem I'm having here with
this legislation and the data
that we're using as cover for
passing the legislation, Madam
Speaker
General lady is I don't see any
direct effects that take into
account. Madam Speaker, General
Lady places like California or
places like Illinois that do
indeed have these
Regulations and also, what are
they investing in behavioral
health, mental health, drug use
drug abuse, alcohol and all
these other substance abuse
disorders. Madam Speaker General
Lady, are they taking that into
account as well? Because Madame
Speaker General Lady if we're
looking for a correlation
between one to another.
Are we then? Also looking at
what they're doing right and
wrong regarding behavioral
health and behavioral health
crisis we have in the state of
New Mexico and across the
nation, Madam Speaker, General
Lady
I I Madam Speaker. General Lady.
I'm sorry. My question is quite
lengthy. I will. I will ask the
question again. Madam Speaker,
General Lady, we're talking
about the statistics were
looking at two used to say that
this is
This works.
There's efficacy to this.
Madam speaker generally did
those statistics that we're
referencing in any way include
the investments in behavioral
health, mental health, drug use,
drug abuse and alcoholism in
those
Different studies that were
referencing Madam chairman,
representative, Madam Speaker,
representative.
Madam Speaker, General lady.
Well, then I guess I can't trust
the efficacy of the data
independently verifying it
because I don't know if what
what they put in
You know, it's great that
there's a study that someone
Funds. But if I don't know what
the variables are that go into
the study. How do I know the
Results.
Are indeed going to work out and
truly are real results. Madam
Speaker General lady and I would
also like to understand the
community violence intervention
programs in these states.
I just want to know what kinds
of programs there are in
California in Illinois in
Hawaii that could help us aid
and seeing whether they truly
are helpful in looking at the
data that we're all trying to
reference, Madam Speaker General
Lady do we know if they if they
took into account the community
violence, intervention programs
and those states with this
gentleman? I'd like to stay on
the substance of the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
General Lady. I would, too, But
you brought up a study and I
just want to make sure that we
independently verify it to
ensure that it is indeed
relevant to the veracity of the
bill. Madam Speaker, General
Lady I will continue, though,
because I want to put out a
statistic of my own that I'm
looking at Madame Speaker,
General Lady and it says between
500,003 million times.
Firearms have been used to save
lives per year. So Madam speaker
general Lady
I want to make clear that in the
state of New Mexico, we believe
that firearm owners should be
protected under the law, instead
of access to those firearms,
whether they want to buy them
today by them tomorrow or buy
them a week from now, Madam
Speaker, General lady and I just
don't really see the necessity.
Putting forward an arbitrary
number 14 days for waiting
period because Madame Speaker
general Lady
There are many cases as I as I
referenced earlier, where folks
need to have these firearms to
protect themselves. Folks need
them in rural areas of the state
where they need protection on
their ranches or their houses
because it takes a real long
time. Madam Speaker General Lady
for police officers to arrive in
time So Madam Speaker general
Lady
I appreciate the answers today.
I'm going to continue looking at
the data.
But I do want to just leave new
Mexicans with the message that
At least for me. This bill is
hard to swallow, because I don't
see that 14 Day waiting period
is the way to go with this
legislation. Madam Speaker,
General Lady, we already have to
go through the next background
check. We already have to be
approved. I don't see why if I
pass the background check and I
am clear to purchase the firearm
that I then have to be burdened.
With a 14 day waiting period,
especially madam speaker because
where I live in rural New
Mexico, and I want to go
purchase a gun at Sportsman's in
Las Cruces, Madam Speaker, I
have to take two different trips
to go to that f F l to purchase
the firearm and it is indeed a
defacto tax on the poorest, most
rural new Mexicans in the state
of New Mexico.
Because 14 days that's a lot of
time. That's money. You know, I
I don't have time. A lot of the
time to say Oh, let's take a
trip to Las Cruces and used the
entire day to go down there and
drive back. Madam Speaker
General Lady So
Those are the reasons that I
just find this this bill not to
be very well thought out,
especially regarding Noah.
Loopholes for the gentleman and
general women who serve our
communities. Madam Speaker
General Lady in and first
responders, police officers,
military folks who have training
and potential to save lives.
Madam Speaker, General Lady,
This is a burden on those
people. This is the burden on
rural new Mexicans and is that
it is a tax on the poorest new
Mexicans in the state. Madam
Speaker, General lady and I will
just leave it at that. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Have the gentleman from Braulio
representative.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
There's a general lady. Yield. I
yield to my friend from Bernie
Leo.
Thank you, General lady. I would
like to offer an amendment to
your house Bill.
And if we could have that
The gentleman is operative
Amendment because the second
Okay. It looks like most of the
members have a copy of the
amendment now, gentlemen, can
you please
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Okay, gentlemen, please explain
it. Please read out the two to
number and then gentlemen to
explain your amendment.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. The
number is 227899.
0.1
Gentlemen to explain your
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I'm
inclined to support a waiting
period. It is the length of time
that has concerned me And so I
offer this amendment, which
reduces the time from 14.
Aged to seven days. Madam chair
debate on the amendment, Madam.
Very well is their debate on the
amendment.
Uh, representative
Brendan, Lantern Lady generally
from Burnley and Torrance, the
Lord.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Um, shoot the gentleman from
Bernardino County. I don't have
my list yield.
I yield to the General League.
Okay, so I want to make sure
they have the straight
So we started with a 14 day.
That I debated ad nauseam.
That there was no scientific
evidence for it.
And that it was a random date
picked
I then read the journal article.
That doesn't take into consider
any exterior.
And we had stated originally.
That 14 days was the magical
number.
That is going to stop.
Murders and suicides and crime.
But now we just suddenly decided
at seven. How did how did we
come up with seven from 14? And
can you reference the data and
why we suddenly
Madam speaker. I did not come up
with a 14 day number.
I am trying to reduce the number
and meet the same goal of trying
to reduce particularly suicide
deaths by firearm.
By giving someone a space of
time to consider their actions.
Or maybe Madam speaker and
representative
So first we had a magical number
of 14 with no data.
Now we have a date of seven with
no data.
Where did you come up with seven
days?
Madam speaker is cutting in half
14 to 7.
Again. I don't know that I would
characterize any date on any
legislation is magical.
I think it is logical at least
to provide a space of time to
accomplish, Madam chair and
representative. We had just
heard. I've heard this in
committee and now on the floor,
where it said data supports 14
days.
That's what I just heard over
and over again.
I looked at the study, it's a
should would could one study
Journal articles get torn apart
all the time to show that they
have false information in them.
I know I took enough statistics
and study the scientific method
to understand how this works.
What I'm saying is where did you
come up with seven days If we
were supposed to be doing this
on data, whereas now your data
for the seven days
Madam speaker. I think that was
asked an answer, Okay?
So
Got me, madam. I'm just making
sure Still Madam Speaker, not Mr
Speaker.
So what? I'm understanding.
Then, As you're saying, you're
it has no scientific validity.
But you just picked seven days
had. How did you pick seven?
Where did you come up with seven
versus three vs two vs 30 versus
90 versus a year Where did you
come up with the number seven.
Madam Speaker, I I think I
answered that. But I'm going to
go ahead and take another stab
at it.
It is simply creating a space of
time.
When it comes to psychology
around
People wanting to harm
themselves. The
Reasons are buried.
The time might be different from
individual to individual.
There is no specificity to it.
It is simply creating a space of
time.
Well, Madam chair and and
representative. I have a degree
in psychology. So could you
explain the psychology of the
seven day waiting? Period? Madam
Speaker. I am nice psychologist,
and I will not attempt that.
Okay?
So, Madam Chair representative.
What I'm hearing is we just
picked another random time
period.
The issue I have with all of
this.
Is that the problem when you do
Scientific research.
Even data collection.
You're supposed to go into it
supposed to with an open mind.
I think I have a hypothesis. I'm
gonna do a bunch of data and I'm
gonna try to prove to you that
my hypothesis probably not.
It's you're not trying to prove
it. You're just saying this
chances that it's probably not
not true.
So you move forward with that
open mind. The problem is when
you go into studies, and this is
on either side,
When you have an agenda.
Then you're going to try to look
for the results that you want.
So I go into these studies,
which I love. I'm totally a
journal nerd.
And I go into this. I see shades
and I see Woods and I see Kurds
and zero correlation.
Because otherwise I could say
you're more likely to drown
after eating ice cream in the
summer.
What has nothing to do with the
ice cream? That's not the
correlation.
It's just that you're eating
more ice cream during the
summertime.
So there's no correlation looks
at this and and doesn't say
these states also did a behavior
health component. These states
also did try to do crime
reduction. They took into
account that they try to lower
alcoholism and everything else
this study to me. I'm just gonna
say this total bogus
So we're basing 14 days off a
bogus now we're dating seven
days off of
A magical number that we think
will help.
But the interesting thing and
I'm gonna try to say these words
correctly, and hopefully they
will I read a the United States
Court of Appeals.
Silver vs Harris
And guess what it shows.
The data data shows.
That a cooling off period and
waiting print has zero effect on
crime.
That's what it has. And I will
gladly handle this. You can read
it and read all the reference
also says that there is no study
that a firearm waiting period
has any effect zero effect.
So knowing that from this study
is bogus, and then I have this
actual document right here for
the United States Court of
Appeals. Explain to me if all
the data says it's there is no
cooling off period that has
anything significant change.
Explain to me why we should wait
seven days to get our second
Amendment. Right? Madam Speaker.
I've not read that.
Madam Chair representative. My
point is
If you're gonna
This is my frustration since
I've got up here in the few want
to do something, and you want to
do a bill that is right in New
Mexico.
You take
A giant population. You look at
it from all sides, different
angles, different locations,
different populations, and you
show that in that data that was
done fairly that the vast
majority of people want these
bills. The other thing that you
can do is you can do men
analysis or you can actually go
out and talk to your
constituents. And you know what?
I just talked a whole bunch of
moderate Democrat Hispanics. And
guess what? They're ferial at
these gun bills. Absolutely
furious.
So I guess what I'm trying to
figure out
Madam speaker and
Represents.
With everything that is going
into these gun bills during the
budget session.
They have little to no effect on
crime.
Little to affect on suicide,
which, by the way, it's
horrifying that I found out that
the leading cause for Native
Americans for their suicide is
asphyxiation has nothing do with
firearms.
I guess I'm gonna ask you this
question about this amendment to
try to stay on, Can you?
Show me anything.
To show the difference between
14 and seven. Is that half the
deaths? I mean, what is this
number showing me to you?
Madam speaker before I answer
that.
I would recommend that we not
enter race into our dialogue or
our debates, whether they're
Hispanic or Native American per
se.
As to polling and things that
are again unscientific,
anecdotal at best.
That being said.
It is simply
My effort.
To try to meet a goal.
Reducing potentially suicidal or
other gun violence deaths.
By creating a span of time so
that someone can think about it.
Madam chair.
And representative
I think in this state we are
very multi. And I think that
people's views and especially
think that Hispanic moderate
Democrats should have a voice at
this table.
So I'll speak for them for at
least the ones who have talked
to me about it.
On this 14 day, going to seven
day going to whatever day.
It's going to penalize people
like me.
A survivor of domestic violence
with a stalker.
I can't imagine the change of
the date.
Means nothing except horrifying
cases.
I just read a case in New
Jersey. There was a woman that
he was Carol Boeing may have got
her name wrong.
She had a boyfriend that was
stalking her. Do you know what
he did while she was waiting to
try to get a gun?
He hacked her up. He hacked her
up and killed her.
Making US women weight is so
unfair.
The level of unfairness is
unbelievable for us who need
some way to defend ourselves.
This is so unbelievable that
You're gonna make us wait. 14
days, seven days, whatever days
that it is to get a firearm to
defend ourselves. This woman was
hacked up in. It's on the video
because she got cameras to try
to protect herself. Guess what?
She had to wait a long waiting
period She was murdered.
There was
There was also there's also a
case yesterday there was a
gentleman and mental health
issues. He had a red flag.
Guess what? It didn't do A damn
darn thing. Sorry, madam.
Speaker and didn't do a darn
thing because he still had 10
firearms.
He didn't have to wait. He ended
up killing himself.
That would not have saved him.
The crux of all this is for
God's sake, people. We need
mental health more than we need
anything else. You can't go in
and make these things a punished
legal gun owners over and over
and over again.
I'm getting quite sick of it
because we are 99.9985% of
people. Farms who don't do a
damn thing wrong with our
firearms. But you keep coming
for us and never the criminals.
And with that I'm done.
This further debate on the
amendment. Gentle lady from
Bern. Leo represents. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Does the gentleman
from uh
South Belly Burnley. You yield,
Madam Speaker. I
To the general lady from earlier
county.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and gentlemen,
Thank you for bringing this. Um,
I had a hard time actually
supporting 14 days for some of
the reasons mentioned.
But the reason I support the
seven day really comes from the
FBI.
And, um, is it correct? I
understand that currently
Federally licensed firearms
dealers have to conduct
A background check.
Through the FBI's
And I finally have the full
Words for the national instant
Criminal background Check
system, and I see us is that
correct?
In three days. BUSINESS days.
Madam Speaker That's correct.
And what interested me?
And why I'm so supportive of
this is I've been studying the
background check periods ever
since.
The shooting.
In South Carolina when the young
man killed nine black
churchgoers.
And the background check wasn't
completed. If it had been, it
would have flagged. Um
A drug arrest and he would have
been able to buy a gun. So
that's why I think seven days
gives the FBI more time.
I understand that, um
In 2015. I looked it up 74% of
the background checks Did you
know took longer than three
days.
And Madam chair and gentlemen.
In 2018. It was reduced by 1%
was 73%.
So
They can proceed by default to
sell the gun.
Madam speaker.
If it doesn't happen in three
days.
Um, I understand Madam Speaker
and kind gentleman that the FBI
itself
Suggested extending the three
day window.
To improve thoroughness of
background checks.
And to prevent sales.
To potentially disqualified
buyers that would not have been
identified.
Otherwise. Have you heard about
that?
Better. Oh, Mr Speaker, I Mr
Speaker.
General lady. I had not heard
that Mr Speaker and Children
that that's why I really stand
in support.
I think that
Well.
Our firearms owners.
Who are well adjusted and don't
have crimes in their background.
I salute that and I don't think
any of them are really going to
mind the fact that we want to
make sure
That people who shouldn't
By fire arms and who can only be
identified by a thorough
Accurate background check.
Have that time that the FBI has
identified as being important,
So, Mr Speaker and Kind
gentleman, I stand in support.
Of what I think is a very, very
thoughtful amendment that
reduces the days from 14.
But acknowledges
What our national
Law enforcement Agency has
Flagged as a very vital step to
take. So thank you for this
amendment, and I yield the floor
to you for the debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Ben Ali, your representative
Ream.
Um, Mr Speaker with my good
friend from burning Leo yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield to my good
friend from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker and members of the
body. What I wanted to highlight
is suicide, and that's based on
my lawn for another.
I want to look at the incident
that occurred yesterday in
Albuquerque.
So in October, we had a
gentleman who was having mental
issues.
The he was red flag yesterday
afternoon, he contacted police.
He wanted to commit suicide
fronted, the police pointed a
gun they shot at him. He drove
away in his truck, fired another
round, and it's unknown whether
he killed himself or the police.
The
The problem is and I don't want
to hold my debate on the days
until we get back on the bill.
And whether it's seven days or
14. There are constitutional
issue. Those are the ones I want
to address on the bill.
But
On a statement that's been made
what I'd like to point out that
on all
Federal farm that it wouldn't
beyond, Um for two or three
days.
Only 0.014%.
Were later determined they
shouldn't have.
And in that case, 80 F goes out
and collects that fire.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, from
Braulio. I appreciate you trying
to make this bill better.
The only way it could be better
as we go to page one, line one
and delete everything through
Page three.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
If I might, I might add.
I appreciate the gentleman's
experience knowledge. I'm
familiar with it I generally
appreciated allowed. Is that
with all our laws, whether their
seatbelt or otherwise there's
no no way that everyone will
follow. And if it does that, Mr
Speaker, I'm good.
Rather spread debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Bernardino representative Dixon
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker. I cannot tell you
the number of states
specifically
But I'm sure that the the bill
drafter can
Here. Um and is the one state
that has Mr Speaker and I'm
guessing you don't know. But
let's just check how many states
have it generally? What I can
tell you is that it varies that
much. I can tell you, but it
does indeed. Very, um so at my
candy waiting periods, those
California the District of
Columbia, a state of Washington
is Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
And is some of the research that
is out there sort of the body of
evidence sort of, regardless of
There are also folks
They may planet.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. There is,
however, a lot of evidence that
proves
That suicide survivors, um,
contemplated their actions for
only a brief period of time off
that
Is violence, violence against
others, Uh, studied in another
of the factors that incite
violence against violence
against others, such as anger,
and if we know
That some of the factors are
speaker, Gentlemen.
Would a seven day waiting period
pressure or, you know a lot is
that is that affect Mr Speaker?
Gentle lady. Absolutely. You
know, one of the things we can
argue about Saul David. Here's
the reality, creating a space of
time to give somebody a little
bit more if when we follow
impulse, and we have access to
something immediately.
Particularly something that's
thank you gentlemen. Um, I, um
you know, like many of my
colleagues have received
Hundreds, if not thousands, and
you know for For many of my
colleagues, you may already know
this. But, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I don't know if
you're aware, but, um
I
I'm an expert. I have assembled
a gun policy group of
constituents to really provide
me with counsel.
Um, on these matters.
And so over. The last topic has
come up, and so
What I wanted to highlight
because I know that you know
many of our colleagues are also
receiving speaker and gentlemen,
because I think it's helpful.
Um for, um So, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um, one of my
constituents, said
He had quote. No problem with
this and was quote ambivalent on
waiting periods, but supports
your gentlemen. Um, you know, I
represent a very bipartisan
affiliated with different
political party than I am,
gentlemen.
Another of my constituents.
Who is an avid
Abbott.
You know, after a lot of
deliberation and thought on the
various proposals
Did say that
He can tolerate this bill, same
constituent noted Devil
But is inclined to think the
sponsors of House Bill 129 and
pulled the 14 day waiting.
And
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
that that is a you know, I am
sharing the sentiments of my
constituents. Um I appreciate
the 14 days as the end of one
spectrum of the waiting period.
But having and walked through
this process with is a much more
reasonable timeframe for what
we're trying to achieve.
And, um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I would just like to conclude in
my thoughts with regard to your
amendment that
I see your amendment as delaying
What is the right?
Uh, of
Our constituents. It is not a
denial.
It is.
As some of my colleagues have
talked about having to drive
from, but as a representative,
that I am comfortable with if it
saves lives, So thank you. Mr
Speaker, proposing this
amendment, I appreciate it on
the amendment. The gentleman
from Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Almost 10 years ago.
I joined this regal body.
In an effort to
Represent.
I have left them today and
And if we were going to impose a
period
Maybe.
Maybe we're the ones
That are reacting
Maybe we're the ones
That for some reason.
Have decided that criminals
Are going to pay attention to
this law.
They don't pay attention to any
of the rest of them.
But
They're going to pay attention
to this one.
I have heard.
Hey.
Along the bed and then I have
watched the body.
Moved to seven days and Mr
Speaker
It is in an effort and I believe
to move some that were not
Good with 14 days.
Maybe that passed this gun bill
was seven days.
But Mr Speaker
The fact remains.
There are many more concern in
your district.
That care about and their sons
And their grandchildren.
And they think they deserve the
right not in two weeks.
Not in a week.
And so
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
not gonna go on and on about
this, but I would just tell the
body
We have to be factual.
And we have to understand.
That our job is not to push.
A political agenda.
Overwhelmingly agree their
rights as a law abiding citizen.
A person who accept and goes to
work every day who loves their
wife and their Children. They
have the right to go.
Two and by
The car of their choice.
The gun of their choice.
The clothes of their Children,
Elice law abiding
Deserve right and we're missing
the boat.
As a body.
And
Although
Your movement hairs.
Rights away from law basis
citizens. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen debate on the
amendment. The gentlemen from
San Miguel.
The Colfax more of a river in
dolls, representative Sanches
Brothers from Burka yield.
Mr Speaker, I yield to my good
friend and brother.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just
have a couple questions rather
14 or seventies? Uh,
I just have a few questions. Uh,
whether I want to ask my
brother Where do you think
hunters ranchers, farmers
growing number? Where do you
think they buy their guns?
Mr Speaker. I'm going to have to
have you enlighten me.
Mr Speaker, brother, Uh, we
usually go to a sportsman's
warehouse or we go to Cabela's
in Albuquerque.
And Mr Speaker.
I want to ask my brother whether
it's for
How do you think this would
impact people who have to drive
to plus
To to go get a gun if they pass
a background check. But then
now, if
This is instant, Mr Speaker.
Ah, gentlemen.
Friend. I'm the first to
recognize that this is an
inconvenient
But we have the same time have
to understand is the body that
we create an awful lot of laws
that are inconvenient.
And I will tell you that.
While it's an inconvenience.
It would be a lot more
convenient. Mr Speaker if we
could just have a kiosk out
there in front of the roundhouse
that just sold guns and rifles
and bullets that'd be really
convenient.
If you like guns an awful lot,
Mr Speaker.
So, gentlemen.
It is an inconvenience, but if
it saves a life of one impulsive
young person who broke up with
their girlfriend, which I'm not
making that up, that actually
happened. There was a young man
broke up his girlfriend.
Bought a gun and committed
suicide and this was in a rural
town by the way.
So, yes, General, meridians and
inconvenient but at the same
time
Sometimes an inconvenience is
worth saving a life.
And Mr Speaker. I just want to
mention, uh
I've gotten people from the
pueblos nortenos people from the
rural areas, calling me like
crazy. Just
Ah, opposing these. And, uh, I
want to apologize to my brother
20 people on the board and I'm
not gonna get to comment if I
don't comment for the amendments
such sorry, But I just had to
say my piece. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
There's for the debate. The
gentleman from
Catherine granted Algo
representative. The Lhasa's
Thank You, Mr. Speaker with the
gentleman. Please yield from
Brownsville.
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
You know, First of all I want to
say, you know, I think there's a
lot of people that are trying to
do the right thing. And you're
trying to find a way to to
reduce to save a life and I
understand and I understand.
As a funeral director as a
person that works.
With
People that have passed away and
it worked with in this industry.
I can tell you that when plea
They have They have that.
One day That is a that they well
In that day, they decided
whether it's with a gun with its
another in another means.
Driving in front of a train
walking out in front of a car
truck.
Hanging themselves when
And
You know, I comment all of you
know that my district is blue,
predominantly blue.
I'm in this seat because of
them.
And it represents what New
Mexico really is.
And I'm gonna tell you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
I have been stopped at the
airport when I went home.
And keep these. These
Democrats.
Who votes straight Democrat are
coming to me.
And making sure that I'm not
going to that. They do not
absolutely do not want to give
one inch of their liberty.
And so I'm telling you in my
district, which again represents
what New Mexico is.
Is what I'm I haven't had one
person called my office and tell
me they're supporting this.
This is this is not going to
work if we want to save lives.
I have an army report here, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
I've been talking to the medical
examiner's office.
And the human trafficking
August. We have had 187 deaths
just from coming across.
If we want to make an impact,
it's it's going to be in a
different way. But this is not
in by removing people's
liberties. Good law abiding
citizens away. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from Burnley or
representative figure or
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will my
general the gentleman in my
colleague yield
Mr Speaker. I yield a general
lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Most of this
body knows that I work with
teenagers and teach high
schoolers. So that is the lens
through which I am asking these
questions.
And as been has been spoken of
much this afternoon is the issue
of suicide.
And Mr Speaker and Gentleman.
Your
Change.
Seems to be in line.
With our constant training as
teachers.
About suicide.
It is.
A major cause of loss, not just
among high school age, but among
young folks.
And so we are taught every year.
We have to repeat this training
over and over again. What are
our responsibilities, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen?
With respect to students who are
suicidal.
And what we are drilled on over
and over again.
Is the fact that
It's a temporary ideation.
It can repeat, but in the moment
That we have any suspicion.
That a student or a young person
is suicidal.
Rule number one. You cannot
leave them alone.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
this
Essential idea that you have to
separate
Someone who is in a suicidal
frame of mind.
That temporary, highly emotional
frame of mind. You have to
separate them from any means.
Taking action.
Is the goal.
That is how we are trained.
And with that in mind this idea
that you separate
A potentially suicidal person
from lethal weapon makes sense.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do you
know the
And I hate
I hate to use this word.
The success rate.
For suicide with firearms. Mr
Speaker. I wasn't sure if that
was the question. General radio.
You have to educate me as well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It's part of our
training to its 90% 90% of the
time.
Again.
It.
Makes me ill to use the term but
90% of the time suicide is
successful with the firearm.
For other methods of suicide
average together. It's about 4%.
That difference is enormous, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
There are
In our training quote.
From the American Academy of
Pediatrics from the American
Foundation against Suicide.
That indicate, over and over
again this dangerous period of
time.
Is where we can make a
difference.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Can you explain again?
Why seven versus 14 matters.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
appreciate that question because
Um
It's really about creating a
space of time so that someone
that might have the impulse to
commit suicide with a quick and
easy method would have some time
to think about it. In addition
to that, clearly, it creates a
space of time. So it's pretty
straightforward. There's no
science to this is just trying
to create a bit of logic. Bit of
reasonableness.
Create a little bit, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that answer, because
if in my training
We are taught that this is a
temporary but crucial moment.
Then 14 days to me seems long.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, seven
days
Is shorter, more reasonable,
more appropriate to a temporary
Frame of mind.
And again, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I am coming at this
from the lens of present,
prevent among our young folks.
And this is particularly
pertinent to me.
Be because in my last AP Spanish
class
I asked my students
Right?
Their linguistic purpose was to
use the five senses.
Sound sight smell taste hearing.
In a descriptive moment.
And 60%, Mr. Speaker of the
students in my class.
Wrote about the sound.
And the smell.
And the site.
Of someone in their family
committing suicide.
That is how prevalent it is.
Among our young people today, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
I fully support your amendment.
I think it is an appropriate
balance.
Between, uh
Waiting period. That is longer,
perhaps than a temporary
dangerous state of mind.
But it's still addresses.
That need
To protect
From something that is killing
young people across this state.
So thank you gentlemen for
bringing this amendment. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Really bad on
the amendment. The gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Lean
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Benaglio yield Mr
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen
from Bruno Leo.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Berlin. Leo, the way I have
understood the rationale for
this amendment. It seems like
the main impetus here is to try
to reduce the amount of
suicides. Mr Speaker, That is
one component. Yes.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, from
General, Can you share me? What
are the other components, then?
It could be someone
contemplating murder for any
variety of reasons. Um, any
number of situations that will
require someone's impulsiveness
around a firearm.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Benaglio, So maybe it's better
to to phrase our debate in the
in the context of the impetus is
to try to prevent
What is otherwise preventable
death. Is that a fair
assessment?
I think that it Mr. Speaker, I
think that it is one.
Element of many potential ways
to reduce that.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
brainless I'm just trying to
understand the rationale When
you say that's one of many
components are saying there's
other components besides
preventing death, or you saying
that's one way to prevent death.
Mr Speaker. I will reiterate to
the gentleman that
Uh, we are looking to create a
space of time.
That will allow someone to think
about it. Maybe get help, if
necessary.
Ah, any number of factors that
might occur, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you.
Ms Speaker, gentlemen, and I
appreciate that because I think
that's
That that tees it up perfectly
because we want to create a
space of time.
That's the phrase
And I hear a lot of times in
committee this phrase and it's
It's actually one of my personal
pet peeve. Somebody says thank
you, representative for bringing
this bill.
And I don't ever say it.
But I want to say, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, from Burnley, I
really do appreciate you
bringing this floor amendment.
I really do.
And the reason why
Is that highlights the
arbitrariness of the number that
we just picked
So if the thought processes I
want to cut down on suicides, I
want to eliminate that number.
Do you realize we are now
cutting in half?
The number of days if the
rationale is
This bill is all about saving
new Mexicans lives who are in
the heat of the moment.
Making a bad decision. We now
have a friendly floor amendment.
That cut the number in half.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, from
Bernie Liu, I find it a little
hard to believe.
The underlying rationale if it's
truly a temporary ideation
If it's an impulsive decision.
Why does the amendment not go to
30 Days? 60 days?
365 days or 366 were in a leap
year, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
burning well
Mr Speaker. It's It's my hope
that in doing this, we are
creating a point where there's
somewhat reasonable because as I
stated earlier, unfortunately,
we find a lot of laws
inconvenient.
Its hopes to accomplish the two
things that I spoke to earlier
one is to create a bit of space
of time.
And the others do not be overly
inconvenient.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
burning Leo. It seems like
really, what we're engaging in
is a balancing
Act between
Liberties and trying to stop
somebody from being impulsive.
Is that what you're saying?
Mr Speaker.
Much of what we do here.
And across our country is not
based always on science. It's
based on trying to do the right
thing, trying to meet a number
of goals at the same time.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from Berna
Leo. It's an interesting way to
put it that we don't
Make this based on science.
And we're talking about
preventing deaths and and sort
of the brain chemistry that was
brought up earlier.
And we are talking about
constitutional liberties.
If, and I did hear it spoken
earlier that sometimes their
convenience is worth saving a
life so again.
Why are we cutting the time
frame in half?
If the underlying truth that
we're asserting justifies a yes
vote on this bill.
Why are we cutting that number
in half?
Mr Speaker. I think it's been
asked and answered.
Well, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Berna, Leo. I understand. It's
probably an uncomfortable
answer. And so I don't blame you
for
For claiming
You know that defense but really
in this, I think, Tees it up.
What? We're really, really
actually talking about here this
morning.
It's not 14. It's not seven.
It's not suicide.
Really? What this bill comes
down to is
We're acknowledging as a body.
That currently the number that's
associated with your ability to
purchase a firearm.
Is the Fed's giving you the
green light on a background
check. That's currently the
number so that could be instant.
That could be five days. It
could be a month it could be
never
And what we're saying is, we
don't like that number.
We're gonna pick another number.
We don't know what that number
should be. But we're going to
pick one. And now we've cut in
half. So it went from 14, which
seemed arbitrary.
And now we've cut it in half,
down to seven and somehow that
magically creates a beautiful
balance. But again if the
underlying rationale is
Sometimes inconveniences worth
saving a life. I don't see why
we would dare cut it in half. So
thank you. Mr Speaker made the
gentle lady from Benaglio
Representative Hochman. Be hell
and the amendment. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Does my good friend
from Benaglio yield Mr Speaker,
I yield to the General Lady and
my friend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. We've talked a lot
about science and, um, on the
other side of it common sense.
I want to talk a little bit
about what's called the
Charleston Loophole.
Which in federal law
Allows somebody
To get to possess a firearm they
have purchased
If they have not passed a
federal background check within
three days.
So yes, there is a legal reason.
For this bill.
And there is a common sense
reason for this bill.
This bill is to create time and
space.
To allow human beings who are
naturally impulsive.
To think through decisions.
That may have a terrible end.
My father, who was a
psychiatrist used to say to me
all the time.
That suicide is a permanent
solution to a temporary problem.
And I think he was right, Mr
Speaker.
And on bills like this. I don't
know why I always find myself
being the one to share.
The really hard and sad stories.
I find myself here again.
I hope I don't have to do it a
third time.
But I'm gonna tell a story that
will illustrate perfectly. Why
creating time and space.
Between a firearm purchase and
possession of a firearm is
incredibly important.
And saves lives.
I had a friend in college, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Who was
Taking a semester.
And another state.
She received news.
But her boyfriend
Had been killed in a car crash.
She immediately hung up the
phone.
Went to the nearest gun store
she could find.
Bought a handgun.
Put it in her mouth and killed
her. But it turns out it gets
worse.
That friend of mine happened to
have a boyfriend with a very
common name.
When
They went to identify the body
of my friend's boyfriend. It
turns out that's not who he was,
was not my I don't care if it's
14 days.
I don't care if it's seven days.
What I care about.
Is that it? Forces time and
space.
We're not talking about buying
groceries here.
We're talking about buying guns.
We're talking about buying
lethal weapons that have the
ability to create a permanent
solution.
What could be a temporary This
is common sense.
Regulation.
This.
Sometimes in politics, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
We work across the aisle, we try
and create pieces of legislation
that become more palatable.
Or make more sense or make other
members of this body feel more
comfortable.
And I think if we continue to
try and find a science based
solution, whether or not it's 14
days or seven days or 24 hours,
or whatever it is, we're going
to be stuck arguing this bill
until the end of time.
So we gotta look back. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen to the
purpose.
Of this legislation.
The purpose of this bill.
Is to create time and space.
If you feel that that is an if
that
Creates a problem with your
personal liberties. I can
understand that.
But at the same time as
legislators.
We also have a responsibility to
contemplate the safety.
Of the constituents that voted
us here.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
So I support I think that your
amendment is an attempt.
To make this more palatable.
An attempt to make this continue
to make this a common sense
piece of legislation, but it
also looks to close that
loophole in federal law.
If you are a true proponent
Fire weapons and you are a law
abiding citizen.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, and I
have talked to many constituents
in my district who feel this way
You should have no problem.
Requiring a background check.
As to whether or not you can
purchase a lethal weapon that
could take your life.
Or take someone else's.
It is about saving lives. It's
about closing a loophole in the
law.
I know took the life of one
birth.
And so I support your amendment
and I thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, General lady
Gentlemen from Lee Reserve,
Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does my
friend and colleague from
burning will yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to my
friend.
Mr Speaker. There's a saying and
Spanish and I wish my Spanish
was good enough to say it.
Is even the
Right thing that looks wrong. I
have heard of time and time
again just in the last
But it's funny. Anybody can want
to write a white paper.
The second day of our session.
We? We rented the place here in
town and a good sub in a good
area.
And we had a stalker between two
of our window and bought a
security system. I didn't have
to have a seven day waiting
period.
There's no difference between
trust me. There's plenty of
guns. The chief of police in
Santa Fe, no.
In my vehicles and everything
else.
So
This truly isn't about that.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I have
Three different guns that I
carry for and they value it.
They range in value.
But you know what? The
difference Mr Speaker and
gentlemen between
The prices of those guns.
Today.
What the price of that gun would
be to me worth in 14 days.
Everything but $50 of it because
I can still go, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen to East Central and by
that same gun for 50 bucks with
no checklist. There's no waiting
period with nothing this law
This piece of legislation
changes in no way
What people will do.
There are law abiding citizens
out there. It's like a locked
door.
Keeps me honest people, honest
right?
Yeah.
Isn't that kind of
And I'd statement
So with respect to that
We've talked about suicide.
We've talked about youth. We've
talked about again to begin
with.
This bill doesn't affect that.
So the only way they have it is
illegally. Even if they take it
from their parents. It's
illegal. We've already made the
decision that 1/5 grader Mr
Speaker and gentlemen can make a
choice. A lifelong choice.
In the way that they
This is just another step of
yours.
You take it.
They don't support the bill. I
don't support this legislation.
I can give you just as many or
to the people and it's that
multitude.
So
With respect to that.
I have one concealed carry gun
that I paid 400, gentlemen, how
this piece of legislation. Mr
Speaker, you
Gentlemen, you spoken awful lot.
I lost that question. You
restate that question for me.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, clear
and simple. Have a $450
concealed carry.
Right now, the one that just to
be clear. Okay, um
You're welcome to come. Search
me. You might not like the
result, but that's okay but
seriously.
With this piece of legislation.
What stops me from going and
buying the same if this passes
On East Central
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this this
amendment
And I believe the core of this
bill, and I'm not going to speak
to the bill itself.
It is not intended to do what
you're
Suggesting although I'm curious.
I'd like to see you try to buy
that gun for 50 bucks on central
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
sorry I didn't catch what you
said.
Mr Speaker. This this amendment
and the bill as I believe, and
I'm not going to speak to the
bill.
Is not an effort to curb that
particular aspect of an illegal
activity.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, why
would we curb the activity of
the law abiding citizen?
Mr Speaker.
There are law abiding citizens
that are contemplating their
like taking their lives on the
moment on the spur of the
moment, and it's my hope,
particularly around young people
that are of legal age to be able
to have them. Think about it a
little bit more.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, do
you recall a bill that we had on
assisted suicide? Not too many
years ago.
Mr Speaker. I'm fairly new. I
don't
I'm sorry. Can you repeat that?
Mr Speaker. I'm fairly new. I
don't recall that.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we had
a bill on assisted suicide where
me and my colleagues on my side
of the aisle. Try to extend that
period before it happened.
And it was too important to
ensure that that person could
have that suicide at the moment
that they wanted it.
Help me, Mr Speaker and Mr
Speaker. I'm not an expert in
that area, but just personally.
I feel that by the time of
person is ill enough.
And sick enough that they are in
a situation they will not
recover.
That I don't think that it's a
spur of the moment idea to want
to end your life in that type of
suffering.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would propose to you that it
wouldn't have spur of the moment
idea.
For the person that chose to go
buy a gun and do the same thing.
It wasn't
For the moment, I will tell you
very, very clearly in my
perspective.
You can go to a multitude of
store sporting goods stores or
whatever.
No waiting period to buy a nice
you can do the same thing right
there.
A weapon is a weapon. We're
choosing us not solve the
problem. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, this is not good
legislation. It's not well
thought out. I do appreciate
your amendment.
But with that
I can see no further debate on
the amendment.
Um, we have
Generally from Bern, Leo.
Speaker. You speaking to me? No.
I will go ahead and close before
we get to vote on the amendment,
Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I thought you were talking to
somebody behind me.
I apologize for that. I move
approval of
I move adoption.
We are on adoption of House
floor Amendment number one to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 129.
Um, a roll call has been
requested in the Roco has been
granted.
He voted yes in the amendment
would have been adopted.
A vote of knowing we're back in
the amendment.
Boats about to close.
The voters are closed by one of
35 in the affirmative 34 in the
negative House floor amendment
number one to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 129.
Has been adopted from Burnley.
Yo, you still have the floor?
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I want to
thank my colleagues that voted
for that. This is about
reasonableness. It's about
common sense and hopefully
preventing someone's life. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen. There is further
debate. Two gentlemen from
The gentleman from earlier
percentage of ream his next
summer list.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general Lady from Santa Fe Yield
yield, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
from Santa Fe. Let's begin.
With the Heller decision in
Heller verse, one of the
Questions in that was
Ah!
Washington, D C required the
person who had the firearm had a
permit to have a firearm.
That that firearm had to be
inoperable or have a lock on
that firearm.
And the Supreme Court reviewed
that specific point.
Transaction between a buyer and
seller. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and General ladies, So
let me educate the body since we
don't want to talk about the
constitution on this
legislation.
That decision was the weapon had
to be immediately available.
For self
And I want you to think of that
now in a seven day period.
And I would also direct the body
to look at the IR and the
attorney general was already
weighed in that this is probably
going to end up
In a constitutional fight, but
let's go ahead and move on.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
from Santa Fe Last week, the
federal court
Ah lifted the ban that our
governor had over parts.
She left in place the ban over
schools because we already have
a law for that.
The point being as
That a person has a right to
defend themselves immediately.
And several different places.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Let's
go over to Page two.
Wine seven.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General ladies, so we go over to
Page seven, and we look at
cellar.
Online seven.
And, um
What happens?
If
The seller. Well, let's talk
about the mechanics of this for
a moment.
So
If
I wanted to sell a firearm to
you.
What is the process? I have to
go through.
Mr Speaker. Gentleman, the
processes we first have to go
get a federal background check
in the state of under that time
period, a background check that
came back valid. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um, hopefully within
that seven day period, I would
have too if I would if you were
selling the firearm to me, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, you would
have to keep that firearm.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Let's let's break down this
process a little bit slower, So
I want to sell you a firearm.
I go to the gun dealer.
Do I give the gun dealer the
firearm or do I keep Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, if you are the seller
You would keep the fun. Mr
Speaker, General Lady that does
not
Comport to the federal law.
Buy a T F records. What I have
to do is give that gun to the
licensed firearm dealer.
He has to enter it into his
books.
That he now has it.
And then
He can. Well, let me ask you is
that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So my understanding
after we go for the back the way
federal law works check in
accordance with current law
should not extra days from the
date that the, um background
check was initially contacted if
the transaction hasn't been
completed within 30 days.
Than the licensee. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, however, if a state
imposes or waiting period on the
firearm transactions, as I
understand with federal law,
whether or not that firearm
needs to stay with that trans
actor with the federal firearm
transaction, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen is is essentially not
The transaction could continue
without it higher. Uh, Federal
firearms license. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and General Lady. It's
my understanding they had to put
it into their books upon the
federal license, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, so my understanding
and reading of federal law and
conferring with my experts that
if you were the buyer seller
transaction
Whether or not you're a federal
firearms dealer, the background
check based on this law would
have to have come back within
seven days. Otherwise, you can't
sell that fire. Mr. Speaker in
General Lady from Santa Fe, so
Let's let's move on to the
actual background. So the F F L
makes the background now by New
Mexico law. He has to wait seven
days. What happens if you're
approved immediately?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Under
this law, you would still have
to wait a seven day period. Um,
whether or not that came back
instantly. You would still wrote
me the required seven days, Mr
Speaker and General Lady from
Santa Fe. What's now take
That the person
What? Let's assume that at seven
have an approved background.
What happens then?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. The bill
makes clear that the seller
shall not till that background
check is completed. Therefore,
if it's not completing
And Mr Speaker and General Lady.
At the end of those seven days.
Let's assume when he gave it to
the firearm. The license fire Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, this is
about buyers and sellers. So can
you clarify Mr Speaker and
General lady, So I sell you a
firearm?
And let's assume that at the end
of the seven days whatever
You are reaching out. The
firearm is with it's on the
books at
How does he gentleman
contemplating your hypothetical?
That would be the federal
firearms dealer? Mr Speaker and
General Lady, doesn't he now
have to do background on me to
make sure I can go ahead and
possessed the firearm.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you would
have to clear we're actually
transacting with that to
purchase a firearm.
So, Mr Speaker and General lady
now we've got if you will 14
days
Ah, that I don't have my prop
Ellen, and that's
That's what you're explaining
here.
If I now am cleared and get the
firearm back.
Is that correct?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I looking
The bill that we are proposing
to seeking to sell a firearm,
whether it be to a federal
firearms dealer or an individual
been, you would have to wait the
wreck. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
If you will.
The money for the transaction
has been tied up now for 14
days.
Who receives the interest on
that money, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen are Mr Speaker and
General lady. I presume that if
you're purchasing runt
To go ahead and do that. I was
just wondering where that money
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen again, we
don't about possession over a
firearm, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady from, uh
Santa Fe. Let's go ahead and go
off in another area for a
moment.
And he brings his rifle.
And for whatever reason, his
rifle, bro.
Is he speaker. Gentlemen. Any
transaction between a buyer and
seller of a firearm is subject
to the provisions? Yes.
So, Mr Speaker. We have hunters
coming in from out of state and
they're paying somewhere between
about
15 and $45,000.
And their firearm is defective.
By federal law right now, they
could go and buy a new rifle.
But now we're going to make them
wait seven days and therefore,
um, their hunt will be over
because that hunting period is
five days.
And I don't see that as
reasonable.
Mr. Speaker in general Lady, Um
Can the guide loan a rifle to
that out of state hunter?
Or what happens there.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this does
not contemplate any live, um,
rifle speaker and General
ladies so it would start the
seven days do the transfer or
you're saying our laws or
speaker General Lady? That's not
how I remember our bill passed
several universal background.
Checks on all firearms. Would
you check with your
With your experts and see if
they find don't have to use an F
F l the loan. It
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we can
loan of rifle without a
background Check. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Current laws about
transactions.
Mr Speaker, and generally that's
not how I remember it reported
on the floor.
But let's move to another one
that is practical.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, So
some of our smaller police about
the officers actually have
officer has a firearm. Um
Gun shop to get repaired.
During that time, he needs a
purchase one
Is there a waiver in this or
does he have to go through the
seven days?
Mr Speaker in General Lady, Do
you think there should he? You
think that we're just go ahead
and
Have him say, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the bill today is
precisely what we speaker and
general Lady.
Let's move over to Page three,
And let's go lying three and
we're talking about records.
And Mr Speaker. General Lady for
the F F L
Uh, let's say, how long does he
have? Mr Speaker? Gentlemen. So
best practice. Um, this is about
5 to 7 years to keep Mr Speaker
and General Lady, um
So in this paragraph, it says
that the human make them
available to law enforcement.
Do the alcohol, tobacco and
firearms.
Rules allow for local law
enforcement to examine
Um
F F L records.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So the
records that we're talking about
here are about receipts, so just
Question. Okay, Mr Speaker,
General Lady on the
On the record. You're saying
that federal license federal
dealers
Have to allow local laundry.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if you
read the bill, H records of
firearm sales shall be made
available by the seller for
inspection upon request.
Of a law enforcement agent.
Mr Speaker and
But are there federal laws that
prevent local law enforcement
from examining what we're
talking about is 4473 forms.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is about
transactional. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, they would not see
the
Ah, or authorization to give
that firearm. They would just
see that correct.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. This
is about fire, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Thanks for that,
Um
Now on
On that same paragraph, he have
to keep a record records.
There's no standard for that.
However, Mr Mr Speaker in
General Lady, I see where it
says.
And I think that means to me
that
The seller also must keep or how
long they have to keep the you
know the I. R s code is one
thing. But this this legislation
didn't talk about how long they
have to take them.
Anyway, we can agree to disagree
on that. Mr. Speaker in general
lady, Let's move down to lying,
12 and I see
A firearm, muffler or a firearm,
silence or what is a firearm
silencer?
Mr Mr Speaker and General Lady
for, um uh, let's let's talk
about firearms silent, so there
is really technically it is a
Firearms suppressor.
It suppresses sound, but it's
not silent.
Um And I think that would you be
willing for a friendly amendment
to change firearms selling
silence or
Two.
Firearm, in which case it would
be inconsistent silence or and
after conferring with my
experts, Mr Speaker is actually
regulated by the A T F
federally, Um would Mr Speaker
and General lady when we're
talking about the transfer, and
if you want to use firearms
Silencer will use that.
Um
It is your expert is correct. It
is done by the FBI and ATF,
where they give approval for the
end of vigil to go in and
possess it.
Does the
F F L Who's now handing it over.
Speaker and General lady. This
is where I'm confused, so the
background check is complete.
FBI
Now does the firearms dealer who
is
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Speaker in and General Lady when
we go down to page three lines
1820 C those listed as who are
immediate family members.
And, um
One of the things many blended
families.
And so I see that
That we don't include a step
child, and I would add.
Ah, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
um
Thank you one of the things that
I'm wondering yet. You know what
this is?
This is towards if you will the
lawful gun owner. I'm wondering
how we're going to get
criminals. Well, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I think that what
we hear is that a criminal with
a long criminal history just
committed a murder or robbed a
store. Whatever.
How are we going to get
criminals to go ahead and follow
this law that applies to
everyone, or does it not apply
to criminal of that question,
Mr Speaker and General lady, and
when we look going on, and we'll
And Madam speaker and I, Mr
Speaker in general, ladies, So
let's say
The background just now. 31
days. Uh, what now occurs
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, subject
to in the states. Uh, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. If that
background check did not come
back within now, seven days, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, you wouldn't
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if it
hadn't come back within 30 days,
and it sent day 31, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, you would have to do
it.
Um men, Mr Speaker, and, um
General lady. Thank you. And
what I'm doing is I'm reading
through my questions. I don't
want to be redundant and so give
me just a moment. I'll have
another one. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. How will this
legislation and sure
confidentiality and security of
person. We're not talking about
any collection of any data that
is an already part of the
transactional process.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this is
just merely a waiting period
That background check occurred
with him.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, Mr
Speaker in General Lady when we
look at, um
Eight. What we see is that
firearms used in the Commission
of Crimes.
Is a generally an average of
about nine years, and I think
that's important data point for
the body to understand. And Mr
Speaker in general Lady when we
look at a T F
And their false answers on the
4473 form. We find that 112,090.
Ah, of those individuals were
prosecuted for their false
answer The penalty on um
The
Form is 10 to 20 years. In fact,
you know, when we do a
background check it is it is
really, um, that form you've
gotta answer it correctly and
General Lady for a person who
Has a
Medical marijuana card.
Can they go in and purchase a
firearm or I sell them a
firearm?
I met Mr Speaker Joe. Thank you.
And Mr Speaker, General lady, So
I'm go back to the scenario
where I'm giving you the
firearm. I'm selling it to you.
So if the firearm is in the cuss
and now
So, Mr Speaker in General lady.
I want to talk about an online
transfers. Now, you know if you
buy a firearm, there's this
belief that you can order it
online, which is not true.
So you have to order it from
whatever firearms dealer
The firearm is transferred.
To a one. You can go and you
have to do the background and
you can pick that farm up.
Is, is that correct?
And
Mr Speaker when you inherit of
firearm and let's go ahead and
let's take and inheritance from
a friend to November.
German from earlier you still
have the floor. Um
Mr Speaker in General Lady when
we look at suicide, which is one
of the things
And from my also my degree is
in people's psychology. What we
see is
What I would call cry for help.
And a crime for help would be
slitting the wrists or something
like that.
And I think it's important for
us to understand that
That those are cries for help
and that the family and I would
say that the individual and
yesterday's we had a cry for
help last October, and somehow
he got another firearm.
And that is really a where he
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
You can. You can buy multiple
parts for I want to buy a slide
for and one of the most common
guns automatic.
Does that have to do and I'm
going to sell you that slide
Does that have to go through the
F F L
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. If
that is meant to be defined as a
firearm under statute and Mr
Speaker going to buy any portion
Of a firearm. I have a seven day
waiting, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
if the part that you're
discussing right now, without
knowing about is an actual
firearm, But Mr Speaker and
General Ladies, let me divide it
up. So the slide is this top
part that goes back and forth.
It's got the barrel. I want to
buy that slide from an
individual wants to sell it. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, under
federal statue any well by the
action of the explicit ER,
speaker gentleman.
And by federal
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
then I'm going to break it down.
What about the trigger group in
that model 1911. I wanted to buy
a new trigger group and Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
When I look at the lower
Of that We call it the lower
frame. That is actually the part
that has a serial number.
I can, um
You know, would require federal
license check.
But only understand the, um
Trigger group and the slide
group.
And I guess Mr Speaker in
general, leading the Do you
agree with that, or I would have
to
Um, parts that are
Mr. Speaker in general Lady, Um
What is the percentage of
breakdown by gun types used in
suicide?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
have that data in front of me.
Maybe
Well, Mr Speaker in general Lady
most of the time. It is a
pistol.
And when we look at pistols uh,
what age
Ah, is a juvenile loud to
purchase fire Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, as commonly used when
it's suicide if we look at
firearm related deaths in New
Mexico 195 were suicides. Um
And when we look at the
nationwide statistics side
So, Mr Speaker, general attempts
to suicide, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and regardless of
age, those who have been able to
access them, um and again with
firearm deaths among our youth.
Um it is the highest rate of
death in the state who are in a
place to do harm to themselves
or others. This covers that
Mr Speaker in generally I want
Mr Speaker in generally I wanna
give you in another
hypothetical.
So can termed a long gun, which
is
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
know what state you're talking
about. I don't know the laws of
the state that you're talking
about.
Well, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Let's say go to Texas or
Colorado. Can I buy a long gun
currently depends on your age.
It depends on a lot of things,
Mr Speaker and General Lady, it
goes back to the example of the
hunter. Yes, I can go out of
state and buy it.
Now that I've
I come back into New Mexico. Do
I have to do another f f l check
because I did. And whatever
state I purchase, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, under this law if you
transact in the state of New
Mexico
You will have to undergo a
background check if that
background check has not come
back after three days or seven
days with the requisite that
firearm.
If in that response from the
Knicks system, you would have to
undergo a new For whether or not
you could obtain a firearm, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
In my scenario, I just said I
can circumvented your
Okay, Mr Speaker in General
Speaker.
Um and general lady, See, I've
have circumvented.
So, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I am
getting close to the end of my
questions to house rules, 7-4
and 7-41.
I moved for a call of the house.
The purpose of the call of the
house is for all issues related
to house Bill 129.
And to compel the attendance of
absent that is
motions in order.
Members, please, if you're in
the chamber's report to your
chairs, it'll make it easier on
our staff to complete the call.
Um, I do know there might be a
couple of people that ran into
the lounge restroom, so we'll
give it some time.
Alright, folks.
I have been informed that the
college gentlemen from early Oh,
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I have a few more
questions for you. Um, Mr
Speaker in General Lady, Can you
and your experts explain how the
Heller doesn't just elation? Mr
Sit? Um, this law was upheld.
This also has not been brought
Bill or Excuse me this
And or other cases under and so
we would just be like Mr Speaker
in general Lady, Would you agree
with me that the one was that
the individual had to have
immediate access to the fire
protection.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That's
one interpretation.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I'm
sorry. I didn't hear that. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, that's
one interpretation effect to
waiting periods was held up and
was held to be, um, stayed in
the in the tent certain
Lower court is to if you will
look at it again.
And determine view of other
another decision. Would that be
correct?
Mr Process through the courts.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, Can
you tell me what are the
And Mr Speaker, gentlemen, up to
a year and $1000, Mr Speaker,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
believe it's two years, um, on
the misdemeanor speaker General
Lady has set two years from the
transaction or two years from
learning of the violence.
Mr Speaker. Generally d thank
you now.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. How
are we going to educate?
Mexico of every law that we
create.
Mr Speaker and General Lady is
law enforcement going to
routinely checked, uh, licensed
firearms dealers to see that
there's
And Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and General.
Mr Speaker and general leading
And Mr Speaker if the
License and he had and he put
he's having to cover
Mr Speaker. I'm trying. I'm
getting close. Gentlemen. Okay?
And Mr Speaker.
When Mr Speaker in general lady
when there's a transfer to a
family member.
What records Any number of
firearms limitation on how many
I could Mr Speaker and generally
transferred to family.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, if
I transfer a firearm to
A family member.
Mr Speaker, General lady ups
anyway, Mr Speaker.
Percent to house rules 20-1
That limits debate 23 hours I
moved the debate on the House
judiciary Substitute for house
Bill 129. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Just I'm gonna working with the
board operator just so, but it
was understands. I'm going to
repeat the motion for wait for
the board operator to set up the
board.
That works. Alright members. We
are on emotion by the gentleman.
From Bernie Leo, too close.
Debate.
Pursuant through through to the
three hour room.
And where local voter voted yes,
and debate would would have been
close to vote of knowing we're
not closing debate.
And we're in the twilight zone
and missing around the 100 Bill
party.
Vote is now.
Open.
The votes about to close.
The board is now closed by what
a 16 and informative to in the
negative.
The motion to close debate.
Carries.
All right, let me go back to the
sponsor just to do a brief
close. Oh, go ahead. I'm sorry.
Go ahead. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
And thank you, General Lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you gentlemen, generated
from Santa Fe.
To passing this bill and in
commemoration of all of the
memories of those who have
passed
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for help. They want 29 as
But it's about to close.
Closed by a vote of 37 in the
affirmative 33 in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute has been 129 as
amended has duly passed this
house.
Gentlemen. Um
Pursuant to the call of the
house. I believe we can now lift
the call Sergeants, you can lift
the courthouse.
Members. Um, we do have and you
know, these are long dog days
over 30 Day session. Um, we do
have the
100 Bill Party later today,
which is on behalf of our hard
working staff. So with that I'd
like to have this be the
conclusion of third reading for
today. That's okay with
everybody.
Um, I will go to thank you.
I will go to the Julie from
Braulio Chase E just to make
some announcements.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business disorder. Gentlemen
from Sam again, Torrance, you
have an announcement.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I just want to
buy everybody. The 100 Bill
party at the Eldorado.
Yours truly will be there and I
might be singing.
Members take note, and I hope
the sergeants and the clerks and
everybody else brought their
dancing shoes. There are three
bands, I believe
Three bands. Alright, remember
saying no generated from early?
Oh, thank you, Mr Speaker, House
Health and Human Services will
meet tomorrow at nine o'clock in
307.
Members take note.
Ah!
Announcements. Gentle lady from
early Dona Ana presented
Ferrari. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Your House Consumer and Public
Affairs Committee is going to
meet for one bill at 11 o'clock.
Members take note.
Generally from all those
beautiful counties channel.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, your
House Judiciary Committee will
meet at 515 in room 309 and
members. We will be meeting
tomorrow morning at 830 in the
room 309.
As a wise man once said, a tough
on the road to do and I am
trying to get some pita brought
in. So we have something to eat.
Anyway. Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Presented. Diego's Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Your house commerce
will be meeting tomorrow at 9
A.m., and there will be
breakfast members take note any
other announcements?
Gentlemen from
Member Gentlemen from violence
and one representative Linda
Thank you, Mr Speaker. House,
taxation and revenue will meet
on Monday morning, 830.
Thank you.
Thank you Members. Um
Your capital Outlay sheets are
due to somebody in four minutes.
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet in room 307,
also at 515.
Party poopers members like note.
Members. We will be working on
the floor tomorrow.
After committee.
And we'll let you know that time
here shortly.
Generally from early Oh, Mr
Speaker. I move the house stand
in recess until 1130 tomorrow
morning Saturday.
Um, before I take that motion,
gentlemen from McKinley
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know
I'm way over here in the corner
of your house, labor and better
in Military Affairs Committee
will meet tomorrow after the
floor session. We have three
bills will be out of there
before Sunday morning.
If I had some ritually chips
out, my I sat on my right side.
My improve members take note.
Generally from earlier
representative Chase E.
Lady from Santa Fe represents
the Penske.
Mr Speaker. I move that the
house stand in recess until 1130
tomorrow morning.
Members. Thank you for a
productive day. Great day today
on the floor, respectful, debate
spirited debate. Appreciate all
of you. No one's listened to me.
It's okay.
The house was said in recess.
