Well call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation, led by the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan,
Representative Johnson.
Mhm creator. Thank you. For this
day we ask you once again that
you bless us.
As we do our work in this
roundhouse and the Legislature.
Touch your minds. Touch your
hearts, give us wisdom and help
us to make away
I asked that she bless our
families back home.
Bless our fire keepers, those
who make it possible for us to
be here and to do this work. We
ask that you bless our home
places.
And we ask that you bless our
constituents or communities
bless our students here in the
roundhouse today.
I pray for our students today
who are visiting from two Hachi.
We ask that you
Make it a good experience for
them Creator Maybe they could
see something good. Maybe they
could hear something good that
they could learn something so
that they could continue their
education and career paths.
Creator We asked that for all
our students
We pray in your name.
Amen.
Well, the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott, please
lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentleman from Bernardi,
your representative.
Miguel Garcia leaders in the
salute to the New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representatives Penske. Good
Morning, Mr Speaker. Good
morning, gentle lady. Mr
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business. It
is so ordered Good morning
members.
Good to see all of year friendly
faces this morning. We've got a
very special day. Today. We've
got some very special
dignitaries joining us today.
here in the House of
Representatives.
Um, I'm going to go to the first
announcement to the gentle lady
from
Luna, Dona Ana ended Algo
representative Jones.
Generated. Um, Pardon me. We're
going to introduce the memorial.
They want to come back to you.
Give me a second lady from
earlier, Casey.
Introduction. Mr Speaker. I move
we go to that order business
introduction of legislation
disordered.
Mr Speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that
generated We're going to
introduce it first, and then
we'll come back to you. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
House Memorial 40 introduced by
representatives Jones,
Enterasys.
Memorial, declaring January 31st
2024 Deming Luna County Silver
Spikes Day in the House of
Representatives House Memorial
40 introduced by representatives
Jones and Terrazas commitment
was by title disorder not
printed in place in the
speaker's table.
House Memorial 41, introduced by
representative Herrera
A memorial declaring January
31st 2024 Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum Day in the House of
Representatives House Memorial
41 introduced by representative
Henrietta House Memorial 41 have
been raped twice by title
disorder not printed in place on
the speaker's table from Borneo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business disordered generated
from Luna algo and from
Tatiana.
That was a practice run. Now
we're ready.
Mr Speaker. I apologize. I think
I have my script turned around
here. But, um, is now when I ask
you an unanimous consent to
apologize, because so is mine.
So that makes two of us? Yes, it
is. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I do
ask unanimous consent that house
Memorial 40 be removed from the
speaker's table and made the
next order of business
Objection to the Silver Spikes
Memorial. It is ordered.
Mr Speaker, would you get me to
that point, please? At the
record that election necessary
for placing House Memorial 40 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the
memorial.
Mr Speaker.
I would like to welcome first of
all the silver spikes who are a
an organization and Deming, Luna
County of leaders here they come
every year to the roundhouse to
advocate for what's good for
southern New Mexico and
specifically for Luna County and
Deming. They are the
The motivation for many of us,
Um they meet every month and
they talk about what's good for
Luna County, and we're just so
proud to have them here right
now, And that is my
introduction.
General lady. Um, I believe we
have some guests. Who are they
on the floor. Are they on the
gallery? I have guests on the
roster and you want me to
introduce them Now? Go right
ahead. Excellent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of
all I have county manager
Luna County manager Chris Bryce.
Stand, please.
I have a collection. Chandler,
She's Looney County
Commissioner.
Scott Chandler's sixth Judicial
District magistrate judge of
Luna County.
Might. Renteria are six judicial
district attorney
Nikki Schelotto, our new mayor
of dimming
Welcome.
Camera hand.
President of silver spikes and
also marketing of members
Memorial Hospital.
Ah, I don't see Stephen Western
Hoffer. Irma Rodriguez,
Councilor the city of domain.
And I think that's all am I
missing anymore? Yes.
I'm sorry. I don't have you on
my list, and I don't remember
your daylight, apologize with
the schools. Um
Charles? Yes, Charles. Welcome.
All of you. Welcome. We're so
glad to have you here.
And now do we read the memorial?
to the house? Click to read it.
How's Memorial 40 introduced by
representatives Jones and
terraces.
Memorial, declaring January 31st
2024 Deming, Luna County Silver
Spikes Day in the House of
Representatives.
Whereas in the mid 19 seventies,
several business people from the
city of Deming and Luna County
formed a local non partisan
group.
To greet perspective, new
businesses and industries and
visiting dignitaries. And
whereas the small rural
community area benefited from
the opportunities provided by
the organization
And whereas the name silver
spikes comes from the ceremony
held when, in March 1881 a
silver spike was driven into the
railroad at Deming to mark the
completion of the second
transcontinental railroad, which
United the Santa Fe and Southern
Pacific railroads. And whereas
with the completion of the
railroad
Deming and Luna County began to
experience growth.
And whereas Deming has always
been known for its hospitality,
beginning with its famous Harvey
House restaurant and Harvey
Girls, making Deming a must stop
for rail travelers, And whereas
the Harvey Girls were Demings
predecessors to the Deming, Luna
County silver spikes
And whereas the Deming Luna
County Silver Spikes members
were called upon to greet new
members of the community
And whereas in the 19 eighties,
the community leaders realized
that Deming Luna County silver
spikes could serve a valuable
role by visiting Santa Fe each
year during the legislative
session and meeting with the
governor and select department
officials to discuss the area's
local needs.
And whereas also during the 19
eighties, the benefit of
bringing together elected
officials and administrators of
Deming, the village of Columbus
and Luna County school districts
to express their needs was
recognized and whereas during
the legislative session a large
reception is held one evening
for invited guests.
And whereas the Deming Luna
County silver Spikes have
provided a valuable venue to
promote the needs of the area
and assist with the creation of
new businesses and industries
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
January 31st 2024 be declared
Deming Luna County Silver Spikes
Day in the House of
Representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the Deming Luna County silver
spikes.
House Memorial 40 introduced by
representatives Jones and
Terrazas.
Is there a debate on house
Memorial? 40 The gentleman from
Otero, representative Block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady for bringing
this memorial forward. I love
when I go over to Luna County.
Mr Speaker. I was just there a
few months ago to be with my
good friend, Representative
Jones talked to some of the
great folks out in Luna County.
They have amazing wine out
there. They have the ST Clair
Winery, and we're all very
supportive of those guys. Right,
Madam Chair, Mr Chair.
Mr Speaker. Pardon me. I was in
committee with Madam chair this
morning and I really appreciate
the contribution they bring to
our state as well. I love to
hike in the Florida Mountains
Beautiful area. Beautiful views.
Amazing place to go so serene,
so beautiful. They contribute so
well to our economy, Mr Speaker.
General lady and since it is
also a border area, I appreciate
the silver spikes for bringing
together all the border
communities and folks in those
areas to talk about the issues
that truly mean a lot to folks
in border counties like myself.
I'm in Otero County right over a
couple of one county away from
you guys. So I truly wanted to
say thank you to these folks and
all the good things they do for
us, and then also, I didn't know
about the Harvey girls and all
the history about that. I'm glad
we're learning a lot more today.
Mr Speaker, General lady, So I
just wanted to welcome you to
the house. Thank you all so much
for all you do, and thank you,
General lady for bringing
forward this extraordinary
memorial. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
for the debate from the co
sponsor the gentleman from
capturing Grant me, they'll go
represent entity. Russia's Mr
Speaker with the general 80,
please yield.
Yes, I yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. You know, Mr Speaker?
Ah!
The county is the home of the
famous duck races. Mr Speaker.
And so it's a nice event that
they have once a year over at
the park there. Everyone enjoys
that people come from all over
the place to do that.
And that's one of the highlights
that they have in Luna County.
of course, their wine and so
forth.
And they have a beautiful vast
mountain range. The Florida's
Florida Mountains are beautiful.
The harmonies cook speak. Those
are the mountains that are in
there in that in that area, and
that county and so this this, uh
The council, the council
themselves, the City Council and
the commissioners have
Uh, voted unit well in the city.
They voted unanimously against,
uh, making those mountains of
monument.
And they're trying to protect
their, uh they're trying to
protect the agriculture, The
ranching that's in that area and
access to those mountains. The
county also voted unanimously
against well, shouldn't there
was all but one voted against
having that same resolution
against the making that a
monument
I think that's instrument and
instrumental, and I hope that
our federal delegation is
listening to what Luna County
doesn't want in their county and
so they respect them in
protecting their AG.
Now, Mr Speaker in that area, I
happen to own the future. One of
the one of the places is there
one of my funeral homes.
And I'd like to tell this body
Mr Speaker that we see a lot of
tragedy on that border, Mr
Speaker.
Um, there's been times that it
just my facility alone will
remove. Uh, six.
Uh, undocumented.
Immigrants coming into that area
in a month.
This is a big problem in our
southern border.
And to be honest with you, Mr
Speaker.
From the border to were really
any. Anybody can make it to, you
know, finding water or real as a
place to sleep or whatever is
that there's a about 20 or 30
miles of desert.
And so many, many people die in
the desert because we're we
don't have a good immigration
policy. Mr. Speaker there.
And so I encourage us to
continue to work in in border
security, securing our border so
that we don't see all the debt
so that we don't experience all
the debt that we have there from
little kids to the elderly.
Now, um
One other thing that happened,
Mr Speaker in that area in Luna
County was a recent bomb was set
up set off in in at the
Magistrate court and that you
know, these are concerns from
Luna County, and they came to me
asking, you know, where's you
know I was there any funding and
we'll talk about that later. Mr
Speaker in the budget because of
the lack of security and some of
the Magistrates in that area.
But other than Mr Speaker, I
just want to thank the them for
the silver spikes for being
here. Thank you, Mr Speaker for
always giving us the time that
we need to express the needs of
our communities. And I love this
community. There are great
people, a bunch of people, and
so those are just some of the
issues and some of the
highlights of Luna County. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
And further debate on house
Memorial 40, the gentle lady
from Chavez, Korean Roosevelt,
representative rib Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and I also want to
stand in support of this
memorial by the to Costco
sponsors. I think that the
Deming and looted county people
are just awesome and following
up on what
Representative to process is
saying, um, and the bombing that
you had in your magistrate
court? I would just like to add
that I've I have gone through so
many magistrate courts in my
career, and there is just no
security for magistrate courts
and anybody can walk in there
And so I sympathize with what
happened to you, and I just
wanted to
Say standard support of all that
you're doing and I hope that we
can look in the future to make
these magistrate courts more
secure, especially in the area
that you live in. But thank you
again.
Further debate on house Memorial
40 The gentleman from Colfax,
Curry, Harding, Quasar, McGill
and Union Representative
Chatfield
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. A lot of you may not
know it, but I used to live down
in that country effect. I grew
up there whenever I was kid used
to go down through nut station
right on down to Deming to that
was that was town for us.
Beautiful country. Beautiful
people, a lot of wonderful
ranches in that area.
Mr Speaker. I just wanted to say
a few words.
Uh, not only
In the thanks for the the silver
spikes being here, But I want to
say a little bit about private
property and about the
declaration of a national
monument down there. Uh, New
Mexico is 47%, owned by the
government.
Uh, Sometimes the best pressure
aeration plan is private
enterprise are ranchers take
wonderful care of the grasslands
and the in our forest in the
areas that they are in charge
of, and and, uh
So I'd like us to
To send a message to our
delegation.
Back east that that we we like
private property, and and those
are the people. That's why it's
here. The ranchers have taken
good care of it over the years,
and they will continue to do so.
So thank you all for being here
today hope that your private
property stays private and all
that good country keeps a I like
to hunt. I like to
Chase cows.
And all of that's available down
where you come.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. See, you know,
further debate generally too
close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you fellow members for your
input and your support. I would
like to make a correction about
who's on the roster. Mr.
Speaker, May I before you close?
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There's
someone hiding right behind our
county manager.
Yeah, very valuable to our
community. Debbie Troyer, please
stand Debbie. She's with the
Deming headlight.
And I would also like to
recognize Charles Turner again
with Deming. Public schools,
Please stand, Charles.
Accept my apologies.
Thank you, everyone.
I just want to say that I'm
really honored to represent
these people and welcome again
to silver spikes Day and to the
roundhouse. You guys travel a
long way to be here and make a
lot of sacrifices. And I so
appreciate your staying for
today.
Um, I'm really proud
to be representing you, damning
and Luna County and I want I
just wanted to, um, tell the
The rest of the house and
members that
They faithfully arrive in Santa
Fe every year. As we've said
they put on the lovely reception
every year and without fail,
they bring us each a bottle of
wine to remind us that, um
Deming, and that area is the
heartbeat of New Mexico's 13.
I'd like to share a few things
with you that make Deming and
Louis County a unique part of
our beautiful state. As I said.
We're known for vineyards and
wineries were also known
worldwide for our hatch Green
Chile, much of which is grown in
the member's valley in Luna
County.
People come from all over the
country to hike and hunt and are
spectacular, Rugged Desert
mountains. The Florida Mountains
are home to the Persian mountain
goat called IBEX, which were
introduced in the 19 seventies.
We have the only state Park Rock
Hound State Park where people
from all over the country come,
They're invited to come and
enjoy our beautiful desert
mountains.
While they're there, they can
collect semiprecious stones and
then take them home. They are
rock founders, and they're
everywhere.
Um, last night at our at our
meeting our event that was
sponsored by silver spikes. I
asked a few people I took the
time to ask if you people what's
your favorite thing about
Deming? What's your favorite
thing about Luna County and
without fail, they said the
people
And the relationships that we've
built and I just so appreciate
that we have here represented
long generations of family
relationships and friendships,
But we also have new folks and
one of the things that people
always say when they're
newcomers to Luna County is that
they have moved there because of
our people.
The friendliness draws people in
and we accept them. We gather
around each other. We watch out
for each other. We watch
people's kids. Um we just make
sure that we get our needs met,
and I think that's part of our
pioneer rural spirit that shows
every day. So again. Thank you.
Silver spikes for being here for
representing us and
Happy Silver spikes Day.
So, Mr Speaker.
I move that house memorial do
now pass.
And I ask unanimous consent of
the house that the records show
that the role has been called,
and all members present voted in
the affirmative. There's been a
motion to show members of the
house present and voting in the
affirmative, xeno objection. It
is ordered.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 40. The vote is now
open.
The board is now closed by a
vote of 70 in the affirmative
zero in the negative house
memorial. 40 has duly passed
this house. Congratulations.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally from McKinley in San
Juan with a certificate.
Got it. Okay, so I'm gonna
introduce some guests of the
generator from San Juan and
McKinley. There is a certificate
that will be coming the way of
this beautiful, beautiful
elementary school. But I would
like to introduce to Hachi
elementary school.
Welcome to the House.
And with two hockey elementary
school, we've got Robin holder
principle. We've got Sharon a
And with two hockey elementary
school, we've got robin holder
principle. We've got Sharon
abyss NT. Joan Thompson, Herman
Dean at me.
Carmelita Shirley Rosie, Kalinda
says in the window. Dennison.
Welcome to the House.
General Lady from Rio Rivers,
Sandoval and Santa Fe and also
from towers with the memorial
representative. Data. Mr
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
that H M 41 be removed from the
speaker's table and made the
next order of business.
Objection. Disordered. Mr.
Speaker, would you get me to
that point the record reflect
that election necessary for
placing House Memorial 41 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
generated to explain the
memorial. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
It is, uh, it's my honor today
to recognize and
A beautiful museum in our state
in the city of Santa Fe, the
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum and
today you have as a handout. Uh,
you have a beautiful calendar
from the Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum. Blue corn cookie with
lemon drizzle and you have a
free pass to the Georgia
O'Keeffe Museum. And for all of
you
If you happen to have an extra
hour while you're up here this
year, it would be worth your
while to go see this museum and
they are they are in the midst
of a great expansion and I'm I'm
very proud to work with the
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum. And
what you should all know is that
they have a branch museum in
ABAC. You
Because that's where Georgia
Keith lived for many years. Um,
live near Ghost ranch and, you
know, I know all of you people
in the city. Sometimes you need
to get out of town, right? A
great day is to take highway 84
the chom a highway up to ABAC.
You
And, uh, go hiking at Ghost
ranch and then go have dinner at
one of our many restaurants and
Ah, in abac. You and they
include. Don't want to miss
anybody. The cafe abac you,
Mama Sita's pizzeria. You should
know that she orders her dough
from Chicago.
Ah, the cafe Sierra Negra.
Beautiful little place. Of
course, the ABAC you in
And if you have time, you can
also go. It's about a 15 minute
turn off to the El Rito campus
of Northern, which was founded
in the year. 2010. It was a
constitutional college very
important, And if you're lucky,
there's a little restaurant
there. That's called El Farah
Litos, which I think has the
best green chile chicken
enchiladas in the state.
They only open when they feel
like it, which is interesting.
They only serve 12 people so
If it opens. I can just tell you
The whole town knows the whole
town knows And everybody starts
calling in orders and they go in
and they pick it up to go. It's
really a fun little place and
you will not be disappointed. So
that's a day in abac. You and of
course you have to stop by the
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum and
advocate you. It's a beautiful
Beautiful museum, and you don't
want to miss out on that. And
then on the way home, you might
want to take a little stop at
the lavender farm, and that
would be a great day in abac.
You everybody highlighted.
By that by the museum and Mr
Speaker. I have two
distinguished guests to
introduce and, um
And I would like to introduce
Jane Bagwell, and she is the
vice president of the board of
trustees of the Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum. Jane. Welcome to the
House, Jane.
And thank you, Mr Speaker, and
I'd also like to introduce Bell
Alonzo He's the secretary of the
board of trustees of the Georgia
O'Keeffe Museum, and you will
help it here now that they're
going through a great expansion,
So thank you for coming and
thank you for sharing a sharing
this stay with us.
Mr Speaker with the clerk.
Please read the memorial.
House Memorial 41, introduced by
representative Herrera Memorial,
declaring, January 31st 2024
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum Day in
the House of Representatives.
The Georgia whereas the Georgia
O'Keeffe Museum is dedicated to
perpetuating the
Artistic legacy of Georgia
O'Keefe and to the study of
interpretation of American
modernism and whereas through
its collections, exhibitions,
publications, research center
and educational programs the
museum contributes to scholarly
discourse and serves diverse
audiences.
And whereas the Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum is the only museum in the
United States dedicated to a
single female artist with
international status and whose
work is closely associated with
New Mexico, And whereas the
Georgia O'Keeffe museum is the
only museum in New Mexico to be
invited to join the 106 year Old
Association of Art Museum
directors
And whereas the Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum is the most visited Art
museum in New Mexico and the
most visited tourist attraction
in Santa Fe,
Drawing more than 185,000
visitors annually.
And whereas the museum held a
kick off event in October, 2023
to celebrate the launch of its
$75 million expansion.
And whereas local architect
Devendra contractor is designing
the new building and nearly an
acre of green space is set to
replace the museum's education
annex in downtown Santa Fe.
And whereas to date donors from
all over the world have raised
80% of the total cost, which is
over $60 million
And whereas the Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum collection includes 140
oil paintings, 120 water colors
and thousands of photographs
relating to O'Keefe's life, and
whereas the project will triple
the museum's gallery space to
allow for the museum to
profoundly tell the story of
Georgia O'Keeffe's art, life and
legacy.
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
January 31st 2024
Be declared Georgia O'Keeffe
Museum Day in the House of
Representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the board of directors of the
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum.
House Memorial 41, introduced by
representative Hedorah
Is the debate on the memorial.
Gentlemen from Montana
representative Block.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I forget.
Do I have to ask the general
lady to yield Mr Speaker?
Yes, Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Well, the general lady, please
yield. Of course, Mr Speaker, I
yield to the kind gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, And I just
wanted to say thank you for
bringing this moment. This
memorial forward. I love Georgia
O'Keeffe country. Whenever I'm
up there, I like to hit all the
sights and I like to go to the
museum, the actual museum out
there, Mr Speaker, and I love
what Georgia, O'Keefe said about
our state when she got to New
Mexico, she said.
When I got to New Mexico, this
was mine. As soon as they saw
it, the This was my country.
I've never seen anything like it
before. But it lifted me
exactly. It's something that's
in the air. It's just different.
The sky is different. The wind
is different, and I feel at home
here and Mr Speaker. It makes me
very proud to be a native New
Mexican because I didn't have to
come here. I'm already here. But
Mr Speaker. I appreciate Georgia
O'Keeffe in the great legacy
that she that she made.
Mr Speaker, and I also
appreciate the contribution that
she made her state and I love to
go hiking in your area of the
state. I love to see that
beautiful black Mesa that you
will have up there. I like to go
to visit the monastery of the
Christ in the desert, which is
very cool stuff. So, Mr Speaker,
I just wanted to say thank you
to the folks at Georgia O'Keeffe
for all the good good things
you're doing, and I'm excited to
hear about
The growth of this museum. So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Seeing no
further debate, the gentle lady,
too Close speaker. I move that H
m 41 do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the house
and that the records show that
the role has been called in all
members present voted in the
affirmative team members of the
house present and voting in the
affirmative, You know?
Objection. It is so ordered.
We are now on final passage of
House Memorial 41. The vote is
now open.
Vote.
Is now closed by a vote of seven
in the affirmative zero in the
negative housing Morial 41 has
duly passed this house.
Congratulations.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana
representative small with a
certificate in some
introductions.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I have a
certificate here today. I am so
pleased along with my
colleagues. The general lady
from Catrin, Valencia's and
Sierra as long as the general
lady from McKinley to recognize,
actually distinguished gentleman
and his distinguished family
that happens to be right there
behind you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Who else is there?
Someone behind you there, Mr.
Speaker. I ran into somebody
this morning. I said, Oh my
goodness. It's a flashback. It
must be budget day. Um and, uh,
yes, it's It was a very, very
nice surprise. And I'm gonna
have you introduced him and his
beautiful family and friends.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker,
So I want to introduce our
esteemed
Long serving continued
connection with Mr David Abbey.
Of course, Mr Speaker, David is
joined by his incredible
powerful and wonderful wife,
Miss Lauren, Abby.
And if there's a market
resemblance to the gentleman to
David's, right, this is a
Davidson Clayton, Abby.
As you said, Mr Speaker, there's
no every day is David Abbey Day
here at our Legislature.
But there is no better day than
budget. They I just want to say
a couple of quick remarks. I'm
going to turn it to the general
Lady from Katherine Sierra in
Valencia and in the general lady
from McKinley before finishing
up.
But David has built a staff, a
culture and a standard of
excellence of service. And that
has of carrying and relationship
that has served us incredibly
well, Mr Speaker, um, the
toughest days of the great
recession.
We would not be anywhere near
the position we are in with full
day pre K and so many other
features without the service of
David Abbey, Mr Speaker, we
wouldn't be headed to the places
we're going with our
extraordinary revenue now
without the foresight, the
leadership and the strong
culture of collaboration with
All members and the executive
that David has built.
And so it's with gratitude for
his over 40 years of service
with the recognition that our
state would be nowhere near, uh
we would be in a far worse place
and we would be unable to reach
the heights were just about to
reach and with gratitude for his
future service.
Maybe seeing him on a mountain
somewhere. Certainly seeing him
here in the house of the capital
that I want to say Thank you,
David and turned it over to the
general Lady from Katherine
Sierra and Valencia.
Thank you, gentlemen. And before
we go to the general lady, I
also want to recognize three of
the Abbey family's best best
friends, and that is Miss Julia
hidden
Of course, everybody knows this
gentleman, Mr John Hayden.
And last, but certainly not
least somebody you all know very
well. Mr Joe Thompson. Welcome
to the house. Thank you for
joining us.
Generated from Katherine Sierra
succor to Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I, uh I
to stand to recognize Mr David
Abbey and his beautiful wife,
Lauren, without Lauren by his
side.
Pushing him protecting him and
shoving him. I think that that
it would have been a different
story. Possibly, uh, Mr Speaker,
I came into the appropriations
with, uh, one chair. I'm now
with another chair. I came in
with David. I'm now with another
director.
And the just the thoughts and
the, um all of the education
that all of those people have
brought to the state of New
Mexico and to the roundhouse. I
just appreciate them so much.
I can't say enough about Mr
David Abbey. He will He and his
wife will be coming to my ranch.
And we are going to have a good
time. So that was an invitation
I sent to them. We we missed
out. We couldn't connect if you
if you weeks ago, but I can't
wait to sit down and visit with
him just as a person and not the
director. I still have lots of
confidence that any information
I need or any advice I need
Um, I'll be reaching out to to,
for his wise words and, uh,
thank you, Lauren for being
beside him, and thank you,
David. And I'd like now to turn
it over to, uh,
The general lady from McKinley
generated from a calendar
percent of Lundstrom. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Um, you know, David,
I'm very pleased to see you back
on the floor. I noticed that as
soon as you got here this
morning, you were talking to all
the members and hugging and
looking at spreadsheets and
everything that you always do,
which I thought was really,
really neat.
Since 2001. We've worked on
many, many budgets during that
period of time.
And I'd like to say, Mr Speaker
that many people take credit for
the positive things that happen
and little recognition for the
true mastermind behind those
initiatives, representative
Small had alluded to that a
little while ago and I'd like to
press on that a little more.
Some of those key initiatives
that certainly I had witnessed
with David Abbey.
Was the creation of the early
childhood trust fund. You know,
that was something that
particularly that David and at
that time the LFC leadership was
Senator John Arthur Smith. I was
the vice chair at that time.
But it was a fun transfer and
section 10 that year of the
budget. $300 million was moved
from one account to another in
the Treasury and taken from the
General Fund Appropriation Act,
So there was actually three
bills that made that fund work.
We set up one for reoccurring
than what one time appropriation
and then, of course, the
authorization bill, which
representative Gallegos carried
with, uh, at that time, so there
were three different pieces of
legislation that made that
happen.
The next that I was and I'll
never forget was David's work
with the tax Stabilization
Reserve, the rainy day fund that
he had worked on with them.
Former representative Larry
Larranaga.
Larry and David put that
together. They brought it to
lfc, and it has been a very,
very important piece of how the
budget is being built today.
Next was stress testing. David
and I set that up, and that was
a major tool for this staff to
understand how we get and how
much money we should be
spending. David also served as a
financial
Staff chair for NCSL. So he
taught other states those best
practices that new Mexico used
and I remember going to one of
the meetings last year, and
everybody was asking Where's
David Abbey when it came to that
financial breakout group?
Ah, under David Abby's
leadership was a state agency
audits when the all that
auditing work started, so the
Legislature had a key key idea
of how these agencies were
working.
And I feel Mr Speaker and
members. The only person I know
that could strike the fear into
the heart of any governor was
David Abbey because they spent a
hell of a lot of time trying to
get him fired. I can remember
that. All these governors were
now David Abbey says that so
we're not, you know they'd get
super upset.
I think one of the most
important
Traits for me and this this
ties, of course to his lovely
wife. He's an official Gallup,
Ian. I don't know how many
people realized that his wife is
actually from Gallup, New
Mexico, So we see them often in
Gallup. And and David. I can
tell you we're waiting for your
help on the cabin. Ron asks me
every day. When is Abby going to
get up here and help us? Of
course we've got four or 5 Ft of
snow up there.
When that melts will expect to
see and thank you for being here
today. Thank you for bringing
your family and thank you for
all the work that you've done to
make the state of New Mexico a
better place. Thank you very
much. Thank you, General lady
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Mr
Speaker. I wanna do two more
things. One. I want to ask if
the members of LFC can please to
stand up.
Where
On the sidelines. I see
everybody here. Would you mind
standing, please Staffers,
please rise to be recognized.
And in the gallery, too.
Mr Speaker. Thank you for that.
Thank you. The standard culture
commitment to excellence to
collaboration and to doing
what's best for New Mexico lives
on and continues to grow, and it
is so much a part of David's
legacy and continued influence
here in these halls.
So, Mr Speaker, if I could ask
now the clerk to read our
certificate.
Clerk to read.
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
David Abbey.
Whereas David Abbey began his
career with the New Mexico State
government 40 years ago and
served as the chief economist of
the Department of Finance and
Administration, the director of
State Board of Finance and chief
investment officer for the state
treasurer before he started his
long term as the director of the
Legislative Finance Committee.
And whereas Mr Abby, a graduate
of Brown University with a
degree in economics, was the
director of the Legislative
Finance Committee for 26 years,
serving for nearly one half of
the committee's 66 year history.
And whereas Mr Abby has
encyclopedia knowledge of New
Mexico government and public
policy, strange and
extraordinary, critical problem
solving skills and an ability to
rapidly and accurately calculate
figures in his head that is
second to none, And whereas
Mr Abbey, who researched the
environmental impact of energy
policy for Los Alamos National
Laboratory early in his career.
Possessed a unique set of skills
that was indispensable to the
committee and the more than 20
committee chairs. He served
through multiple multiple
financial downturns and the
current explosive revenue
growth. And whereas Mr Abby's
skill at negotiating the
turbulent fiscal waters of the
great recession led to him being
honored by the National
Conference of State Legislatures
with the 2009 legislative Staff
achievement Award
And we're as Mr Abby, the
longest serving member of the
public School Capital Outlay
Council, received the University
of New Mexico Distinguished
Public Servant Award for his
efforts in the development of
the state budget recommendations
that are almost always adopted
on a near unanimous committee
vote, he received the 2015
Spirit of Bipartisanship Award.
From the New Mexico first.
And whereas under Mr Abby's
leadership, the committee staff
established a reputation for
sound and insightful analysis.
that was the most credible
source for objective information
on state policy and services.
And whereas under Mr Abby's
direction, the committee
developed a performance based
budget system that has been a
model for other legislatures,
and the staff grew to include a
performance evaluation unit.
Making the Legislative Finance
Committee, the only legislative
budget agency in the nation to
both develop a budget proposal
and closely examine state
program management.
And whereas Mr Abby's commitment
to transparency led to the
development of agency report
cards, the insightful and
concise policy discussions in
the budget recommendation and a
range of materials intended to
help the public understand and
participate in the democratic
process, whereas the Legislative
Finance Committee
Under Mr Abby's leadership was
known for training and skilled
and committed public policy
analysts and managers who are
often lured away by incoming and
ministrations.
And whereas Mr Abby had the
remarkable ability to
respectfully engaged with with
the divergent personalities of
112 legislators and at the same
time work with the afternoon
oppositional leadership of the
executive executive and its
agencies
And whereas while every minute
minute detail of agency budgets
was firmly ensconced in his
brain, Mr Abby struggled to keep
his cellphone charged and
operable.
I had to strategically placed
spare reading glasses around the
capital because he could never
find the pair he'd just had on
And often lost track of his
hearing AIDS.
And whereas Mr Abby was known to
ride his bike to work in
questionable whether bike
through the capital North Annex
drive cars of questionable
reliability and take detours on
questionable roads to point out
good hiking trails.
And whereas Mr Abby directed
staff testifying before the
committee like a conductor with
a baton, signaling times to wrap
it up and instilling fear and
staff watching the testimony
with the up, pointed figure that
meant he had an assignment for
someone
And whereas Mr Abby's life
outside of the Roundhouse
includes being an avid hiker and
golfer and intellectually
curious reader and reliable
volunteer at the international
folk art market
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition and appreciation be
extended to David Abbey for his
26 years of service to the
Legislative Finance Committee
and congratulate congratulations
offered to him on his
retirement.
Generated from Burnley
representative Bachmann be Hill.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker. I appreciate you
accommodating me having to be in
two places. And once I just
wanted to say a couple of words
about Director Abby. Um, I came
in as a freshman, and he, um I
knew nothing and he took me in
any way and taught me how to
read budgets.
Look at line items. How agency
budgets work, how the system
works, what we actually do
during the interim, and most
importantly, how to read a
budget as an expression of our
values. So because of that work
that dark that director Abby did
not have to do with me, but did
it with me anyway?
I am now here using that
knowledge every day as a chair.
I do not believe I would be here
without the knowledge that he
gave to me and I, it was having
him as a mentor was one of the
most important experiences I
have had not only as a
legislator, but in my life and
thank you for everything you've
given me, David.
Thank you, gentle lady. The
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero, Representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would
be remiss.
If I missed the opportunity to
stand
And I think, um, David for his
contributions to the Mexico
One of the better.
Contributions.
That I think he has bestowed on
us. Is he
Made each of us who have had the
Opportunity to work with him
better legislators.
Because we were more
knowledgeable.
Now.
I have to tell you that the
other thing that David did is he
made me a better
Uh,
Person to question
Um
When I was asking question to
David because sometimes it was a
day or two later that I realized
That he had outsmarted me.
That he hadn't answered.
What he knew I wanted, But what?
I wasn't smart enough to ask the
question for
But
He always came back and
straightened it up and said
This is what you're doing, but I
think it we would be remiss if
we also didn't realize.
That for 70 legislators that are
Separated strongly by by
political initiatives.
Sometimes and fight like cats
and dogs most of the time.
Fostered and recognized him.
For his help and trust that we
felt when we talked to him, and
we knew the answers that he gave
us were were in line with what
he knew we were trying to do so
with much respect. Thank you,
David. For all you've done,
Thank you, gentlemen. The
gentleman from San Juan River,
Reba and Sandoval,
representative length.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I want to
also I'm right here, David.
Hey, buddy.
I just also want to say thank
you to David. I worked with you
for one year and that was not
enough time, but thank you for
trusting me and giving me
knowledge and then and also
last, but not least Thank you
for gifting me about. I
To which has many YouTube video
tutorials that I watch. I cannot
tie a bow tie as well as you
can.
And so that's why I have not
worn one to this body yet, but
thank you, David.
I miss you, man.
Thank you, gentlemen. The
General Lady Gentleman from
Valencia representative Buck up.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. I
also rise and
Recognition and thanks of David
Abbey.
Although new to the ledge sites
are actually
Being an education I had heard
of David Abbey for many years.
I remember being at several
functions and seeing
David and passing people going.
That's David Abbey. That's the
guy who runs a budget. He's kind
of the Wizard of Oz, the man
behind the curtain. He's He's
one of those that he's pulling
the levers.
But never really. You didn't
know who was doing it. Who would
have thought that a few years
later?
I got to be in the Legislature.
And I got to actually work with
David Abbey as far as on
appropriations and lfc.
But to me he's still the legend.
So every day he can tell you
that when I greeted him always
referred to the man the myth,
the legend.
Because I think that's what he
does.
I mean to be in the position
that he did.
To help
Our state in the good times and
the bad.
And make sure that we are both
fiscally sound and doing what's
best for people.
I greatly appreciate it. I
appreciate him as a
As a director, taking the
younger legislature owners wing
and kind of tell me about the
budget.
I can't share enough about it.
And not only is he a great as
far as
Director is also a great man.
Someone that I'm very happy to
call my friend.
With his wife.
And son, Clayton.
Just the finest people, so I
want to thank you on behalf of
all the
People of New Mexico for all
that you did for our state and
all he did for all of us.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. The gentleman
the generated from Beverly
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Um, my goodness, David Abbey.
He's got white hair and I don't
so I'm happy about that. Um,
I've known David David Abbey and
worked with him for probably 30
plus years and he probably
doesn't remember. But I remember
when, when he was d f a staff
and then he became D F a
director.
And now at Lfc and now retired.
Um but what I want to
What I want to say about him is
that when I was a neighborhood
planner in Albuquerque in the
inner cities, um he kept us
straight. And now I'm seeing
things as they say from both
sides. I see things from both
sides. Now, um David kept our
projects online. I mean, he kept
us straight in the city of
Albuquerque.
We would make our request for
capital and I'm going to give
you some examples. David, you
probably don't remember, but I
do. Martinez Town, South
Broadway, Ella's Nob Hill places
that you look to now and they're
thriving, and David kept our
capital projects online.
And they sure that we were
within budget and if we weren't
spending our money, we would get
a call from David or his staff,
And I also want to put in a plug
Because David um my cousin Rene
Burri, go worked for you for
many years and Debbie Baringo,
Um and you look at where they
are now. They both succeeded.
And I think you were a great
mentor to many, many people, uh,
looked up to you, but I just
want to thank you because you
helped Albuquerque is inner city
neighborhoods when I was
redevelopment official later on
and now serving in the
Legislature, looking back at
some of the things we've done.
I commend you for that, David
and I hope that you really,
really enjoy your retirement.
Thank you, young lady. That
young lady from Eddy and Lea,
Representative Brown. Thank you
so much. Mr Speaker. I, too,
would like to just add a few
words regarding David Abbey. So
Mr Speaker several years ago
During the interim, I placed a
phone call to David and he
answered on barely the first
ring. It was, like, half a ring.
And his first words were. Hello,
Julia.
I guess he saw it was a Carlsbad
number on the screen and I had
to say, Well, this is actually
Catherine Brown.
And I thought, Well, it was kind
of my first inkling of the
relationship that those two
families have, and that's very
precious.
Mr Speaker, Um
I think that in some ways the
first computer must have been
modeled after David Abby's
brain.
Talking a lot of gigs or
whatever you call that he could
remember everything.
In his head about the budget and
rarely really truly had to refer
to paper except to show us on
paper What we were interested in
knowing about so I really do
admire that skill that he has
that ability and, um
I think David leaves a personal
legacy, but he also leaves a
legacy for the Legislature and
the Finance Committee because
He has done such an exceptional
job. Mr Speaker of hiring staff.
He has very high professional
standards. He, um he was very
careful about whom he hired and
it has paid dividends for the
New Mexico Legislature. So I
think that's that's also very,
very important and just finish
by saying that I think David is
a very distinguished gentleman.
He's added a great deal to
Our state, and he truly has been
an exceptional and stellar
director. And I know we miss
him. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The
gentle lady from Rivas and the
World Santa Fe Towns
Representative to thank you, Mr
Speaker and I choose stand in
strong.
Well, I guess not support but
strong admiration for this
gentleman, David Abbey and
Lauren. It's It's so good to
have worked with you over the
years and I want to tell this
body that when I was director of
the Mandell Foundation, and I
can't believe it was this long
ago. Back in 2006 kidney we met
with all the kidney garden
teachers in our region, and they
said
Susan Kids, Kids are just not
coming, ready for kindergarten.
They have so many problems, and
my board said, Well, go out and
find something. Find something
that works and we went down when
I looked all over the state and
all over the country, and I
found this little model in
Silver City, and it was called
the firstborn problem program,
and it was a home visitation
program.
So I took it back to the board.
They liked what they saw. I had
one of the leading scientists
in, um early brain development.
George Cowan on the board.
And then we raised a million
locally and we were going to do
this. We're going to pilot this
program in three cities, Towels,
Espanola and Los Alamos because
we wanted to see how it looked
in in the communities that had
Lots of resources, communities
that little resources. We wanted
to examine how this pilot would
work.
And I raised a million and I
needed another million.
Ah to implement the program, so
Nick Salazar, former
representative the late
representative Nick Salazar and
David Abbey came with me and we
did a home visit. We did a home
visit. And it was. It was such
an interesting thing because
both of them got it right away
And that year I came back and
Nick, help me. We we introduced
legislation and we did raise
that million dollars.
A match. We were now able to
start the pilot program to do a
study by the Rand Corporation to
see what the results would be.
And David was a very big part of
that whole process, So I want to
recognize his work in creating
home not only really childhood,
but all the things that go along
with that, certainly including
home visits visiting programs.
We still have a lot of work to
do.
But it but he helped set the
groundwork and he helps set the
framework to bring it into
fruition. So I will forever and
Children who will never know
your name will forever be
indebted to you. Thank you.
Thank you, Gentle lady. The
gentleman from Union San Miguel
Quay, Harding, Curry and Colfax
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. It's an honor for me
today, too.
To add my voice voice.
To those others.
Praising the work that director
Abby has done. Uh, whenever I
was one of those folks that got
put on house appropriations my
freshman year for which I will
always be grateful.
Ah!
Just drove in from the ranch.
Director Abby reached out shared
with me his wives ranching
heritage, his love for the
cowboy way alive. He reached out
to me and he made me feel
accepted and he helped me learn
the
Learn the process and for that,
I will always be grateful.
I think
Everyone except representative
Brown.
Although he's known
Throughout this building for his
memory for his ability to
remember a bl 345 years ago. The
numbers that go with it, it's
kind of frightening.
He has remembered for that, but
I think his greatest talent
Has been and always will be his
ability to assemble a team.
I think the people that that he
hired
Continue his legacy today.
And I appreciate gentlemen
Gentlemen, from Valencia,
Zokora's and Juan McKinley
Sibila and Burn. Ali, your
representative, We've got to
CIA.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
Mr Abbey.
You know, it's been an honor
working with you.
You've always been a friend. You
know, when I came in in 2016, Mr
Speaker, you know
I didn't have no college
education. I came quickly right
at the Marine Corps to all this
stuff, but
You know, Mr Abby?
Ah, your middle name is Mr
Google, Because no matter what
you asked him, he knew what Page
What book One line. He knew it
all. And you know, that's that's
amazing, you know? And Mr Abby,
would you've helped
The student in Mexico
accomplishes great.
The
closure will see one thing, Mr.
Abby. I learned this in the
Marine Corps and I was 18 years
old apprenticeships are not
given. They're earned.
And I think I heard your
friendship in your in mind and
were the most respect of anybody
that I've ever known.
In any type of business. You're
the man and you know
Our friendship will be there
forever. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen and lady
from Chavez representative as L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
I want to thank David Abbey for
his patients.
I was put in put on house
appropriations midyear, and so
it was like
A freshman.
That he was having to deal with
in regard to the seniors that
were already there, and I do
appreciate the patients that you
showed me and your staff,
especially on getting caught up
to speed. I mean, it was
awesome. I do have to laugh,
though, about David. He knew
what my background was. And
every time I'd seen passing in
the hall if they had been down,
visiting the red
I finally got to flanker calf.
Finally I finally got to brand a
calf, so we always had to laugh
about that.
Even though I'm a product of our
teacher has our teachers school
systems in particular Cottonwood
Elementary School. I had the
background for the numbers and I
loved it. I really really did.
But my
Appreciation does go out to you
and your staff for your patients
and teaching me everything there
was to do. But, Lauren, I do
have to tell you we cannot spend
$900 billion billion
On certain projects that you're
requesting. Ask your husband. We
cannot do that. Thank you very
much. Mr. Speaker. Have fun
writing your book lady generated
from Santa Fe Representative
Luhan. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um, I just want to stand here
and thank David and his family.
And all those that he's touched
for giving us the gift and
giving us the time of having
Ah, David with us For all these
years, I known him for quite a
while. And for a time he was my
constituent until we
Until redistricting happened,
But I want to say I've learned
so much from you. You've been
patient, not just me, but as you
heard from everybody else and
teaching us what
It takes to run the state and
the magnitude of that
information that you're able to
retain, and I'm pretty sure if
we still ask you a question.
Anybody ask you anything you'd
you'd be able to answer us and
eloquent way in a and, um
But with the heart
Is what I really want to say. Is
that all your decisions and all
the work that you did came from
your heart and I want to say I
saw that and I think that was
The lesson. The biggest lesson I
learned from you is that making
these decisions isn't going to
always be easy.
But when we do it from our
heart, and we do it from the
that place in making these hard
decisions that we have to make
at times that we're going to
make the best decisions for our
state, and I just want to
recognize that I always saw that
in you and everything. You did
everything you taught us. So
thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Ladies, gentlemen from
Sandoval, representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted
to stand and
Let Mr Abby know how much I
appreciated the many years we
spent talking about.
Veterans programs and how best
to
Fund these programs and what
programs didn't quite need the
funding that I don't think you
realize how many veterans in
this state you had a direct
impact on
And I don't and I know that
veterans of the state have no
clue how you helped us. Take an
agency that was a commission and
build it into one of the best
veterans agencies in the
country, and you had a direct
impact on that, and I wanted
from every veteran in the state
and from me.
The lessons that you taught me
in those years, the patients
that she showed me and the
lessons that I
Thank you, gentlemen. The
gentleman from Colfax, Mara
River Rivers and Miguel and
House representatives. Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also
want to thank you, David. I know
spent countless hours with you
and Charles
Starting in 2018.
Learning about the budget. I've
managed lots of budgets, but
It's the whole thing to learn
when you get here, so I just
wanted to say thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I thought the my colleague um
Would speak a little bit longer.
I apologize.
I'm sorry. You're fine. You're
fine.
Um
Mr. Speaker, Mr Abby.
I just want to say thank you.
I've never seen somebody as
patient. Well, actually.
12th 12th grade calculus teacher
was very patient with me as
well. And so
But I do appreciate the time
that every time that I came to
you with the question and asked
you if you could prove it with
data and the chart
You would always chart
You would show me where the data
proved.
Even me, right?
And but you're always very
thoughtful.
Your whole family is just
amazing. Thank you. Thank you,
gentlemen. Gentlemen from San
Miguel and torrents,
Representative Augusta. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. David. First of
all, I want to thank Lauren and
Clayton for lending the state of
Mexico.
You all these years that you
served with us? I mean, the late
nights, the dinners, everything.
Thank you guys for supporting
him and all his endeavors. Um,
when I was on the community
College board at Luna Community
College, we were doing our
multimedia center.
The late widow Sanchez with me.
We need to talk to David Abby.
Who's this David Abbey guy? I
don't know who he is coming to
meet David Abbey. He walked
around like the guru that he was
here at the Capitol and in
working with him on
appropriations. I understood why
everybody came today with Abby.
And I just wanna thank you for
all your dedication. David, your
hard work And as everybody says,
your patients.
You know, I didn't make a
friend. I made a family member.
You and your family. We're all
family. And we love you guys.
Thank you, gentlemen. General
from Sandoval, representative
Harper.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I am a so grateful for this day
and this opportunity to share
some quick thoughts. I want to
echo the wonderful comments that
have been shared.
I want to. Also specifically,
thank Lauren.
I know that.
I cannot do half of what I do
without the support and
encouragement and counseling
from my wife. And so thank you
to you and your family for for
supporting. Uh, David. I just
want to also say, David, you
know how I feel about you and
the great work that you've done.
I'll just add to that.
How much respect I have that
someone with your abilities made
it their mission.
For public service to be their
life mission.
Right. You could have chosen
many other things and probably
made a lot more money.
Um, but your impact
Your impact on people.
I think we're just touching the
ice tip of the iceberg.
The impact you've made on new
Mexicans is
His monumental substance.
Incredible. It's hard for us
hard for me to to
articulate what I what I'm
feeling.
But thank you so much for doing
that.
And I guess my last thought I'd
like to share Mr Speaker and Mr
Abby. We've talked about the
wonderful things that you've
done to help us great programs,
etcetera.
But
I want to mention the hard
things you've helped us with.
I've only been here 12 years,
but I've experienced two major
Economic downturns in the state
of New Mexico that went to
budgetary crisis is
And and
During one of those
We were actually the majority
party.
And
And the responsibility of trying
to
Overcome that that challenge
with the least impact on the
state. It was incredibly
daunting.
But you have helped us. You and
your amazing staff have helped
us through the hard times too.
And and that means just as much
to me as all the good things
that we've mentioned here.
So thank you so much for
sticking with us all these years
and helping us through the
downtimes as well. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Lean
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Welcome. Dr Abby is I understand
You recently received an
honorary doctorate, Well, well
deserved, And it's always good
to see you, my friend and
Believe me. There are a lot of
people in this building. I would
say that about but I really do
mean it when I say it's always
good to see you.
Ah, I echo many of the
sentiments that one thing I want
to highlight, Um, that David was
very, very adamant about
Which I think right or left. We
should celebrate is he was
always about protecting the
legislative institution.
And he railed on that and talked
about that the importance of the
institution protect the
institution. We are the closest
to the people of New Mexico. We
must protect the institution and
I greatly appreciate that. And
that's something that I'm I'm
vocal about as well. I think
it's incredibly important. So
thank you.
For your voice on that, Um, the
other thing I'll say is, you
know we've talked about sort of
your legislative legacy, which
is well deserved, but you also
raise them awesome son and
granddaughter And you have an
amazing wife and those are
legacies as well. So I just
appreciate you, Dr Abby. Thank
you.
Thank you, gentlemen. Gentlemen
from Catrin Hidalgo in Grant,
Representative Terrazas. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. You know, Mr
Abby? Dr. Abby, I was there for
To witness that and that, you
know, he
When I came here, Mr Speaker.
Um, you know, I was directed to
go talk to him about certain
funding so and answer questions.
You You know when you first get
here, you don't know what you're
doing.
Oh, and
How to ask for funding and what
to do, and he was just always so
welcoming. And so, uh,
Just just he just the way he
carried himself to me. His his
demeanor always impressed me.
And I and I always tell him Mr
Speaker, he always has some
fancy ties. I like his his his
wardrobe.
But his his family he's raised a
beautiful family has got a
wonderful wife like our leader
said.
Uh, you know, I'm not going to
repeat all the other things that
you know that everyone knows
about miss about Dr Abby.
What I will say is that I was I
was honored to get to work with
him and know him and we were
blessed that he was a part of
this legislature for so long.
God bless you, Mr Abby. Thank
you, gentlemen. Generating from
earlier representative Chase E.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am
I would also like to thank David
for his years of service, and he
didn't often give me the answer
that I wanted, but
Mr Speaker. I knew he was
telling me the truth. I really
want to appreciate the fact that
you helped us be more
intelligent about criminal
justice reform and looked at
where were spending money
unnecessarily in corrections or
in, um and some of the some of
the areas that have become very,
very controversial.
Hmm. In recent years as we're
trying to make our communities
safer, I I rely on the LFC for
for their talent and all their
work. And I compliment you for,
um, hiring the staff. You did. I
really appreciate Charles Sally
and John Courtney and the years
of working with me on trying to
get differential response, which
we're still hoping to get geared
up.
Properly, But I really do
appreciate that. And I think
that although I had a fairly
high opinion of David, it went
up a little when he married my
old friend and almost
constituents. She was just on
the border of my district.
Uh, Lauren, who was my Pilates
Teacher and friend. So, um,
thanks a lot for all your work,
and I think that his good taste
is apparent.
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen
from Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I
also rise to honor not only
David, but his whole family
because
I feel kind of special because
he engaged me when I got here. I
didn't. I didn't get to work
with him or anything. He engaged
me and we talked a little bit
And I told him that I was a
little freaked out about being
here because there's so many
moving parts and he told me
everything's gonna be alright.
Do you have any questions? Give
me a call, and that was my
freshman orientation.
And then here comes Clayton on
about my third or fourth day.
And just befriended me right
there. And after my conversation
with David, he's like, man.
You've got to meet my wife.
And we started talking about
some areas that she spent lots
of time with in my district and
I'm like Representative Castano.
They're They're like family to
me, so I didn't get to really
know David on the business side.
But, um
I do appreciate your friendship.
And hopefully, if I have any
questions, I'll work through
your wife to get to you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Ah, Um, Mr Abby. I would like to
add my words of celebration and
gratitude with you.
Like the gentleman from Lincoln
and Otero. When I walked in here
10 years ago, sitting in the
back bench as a rookie, you took
me as seriously as you took the
speaker at the time, and I think
that that is really what defines
For me.
Your leadership and your public
service in this body is that no
person was too big. No person
was too small. Everybody had a
fair shot.
I mean, that's something that I
certainly try to emulate in my
own leadership sitting in this
chair as well, Uh,
Thank you for your service.
Thank you to Lauren and to your
Children for their service
because I realized that it is a
shared sacrifice.
And as it's been said here,
Many, many times over.
The impact that you have on this
state will outlive all of us and
there will be Children in two or
three generations who will be
grateful for your leadership and
all of your years of service to
this great state. Thank you.
Generally the from Bernard Leo,
representative Casey
General lady from earlier
Thompson. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And today we have occupational
therapists and occupational
therapy assistants and students
from throughout the state
visiting the capital
Occupational therapy has been an
important healthcare profession
for over a century since its
founding in 1917, OT
practitioners work with people
of all ages and any physical,
neurological or mental health
condition.
To empower them to complete what
matters most the activities that
make up life
You will find OT practitioners
in all settings in hospitals and
schools and clinics and in your
homes in New Mexico. We have
four colleges that train
excellent occupational therapy
practitioners in 23 U and M
graduated 24 0 T s and the three
colleges with associates
programs have collectively
graduated over 37.
OT assistance. As with many
healthcare professions, we have
a shortage. Currently the
November data from the New
Mexico Workforce Solutions
indicates 421 advertisements for
O. T s.
Everyone gets into health care
with the love for helping others
and those entering otr no
different. There's a need for
this work and there is a need to
continue growing our profession
of qualified OT practitioners
and I will say, working in the
schools and other places I
worked very closely with O T s.
They know a lot. They're really
good. And I
Mr Speaker. I think there may be
some in the gallery.
Thank you, gentle lady. And
welcome to all the occupational
therapist in the gallery. Thank
you for your work and your
service. Welcome to the house.
Jill Lady from Santa Fe
represented Luhan. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. You will see members.
You have this purple water
bottle on your desk today,
something we brought today from
the Boys and Girls Club.
Of New Mexico and I'd like to
have a few words to say about
them. We have some of the
students and family members in
our gallery and I should like to
say we're pleased to welcome
today. Some exemplary youth
members of the boys and Girls
Club in New Mexico to the New
Mexico state sent Senate and
House along with the club staff
and parents. They had a
breakfast today where they we
had some really insightful words
from our lieutenant governor,
Howie Morales.
And joining us. Our club youth
representing over 14,000 youth
served each year during out of
school time.
The boys and girls clubs of New
Mexico at they serve at 24 sites
serving 20 communities
throughout our state, including
four sites on native lands and
for our military bases. We
recognize the critical work
provided by New Mexico clubs,
which happened proved youths
academic and workforce skills
and health, leadership and life
skills, while also building
strong character and preventing
risky behaviors.
All within a state of the art
Youth Development Program
framework.
This is delivered by caring
train professional staff.
And we support the mission and
invaluable work of the new
Mexico clubs to ensure that all
young people reach their full
potential as productive, caring,
responsible citizens. We
recognize that their work is
vital to thousands of young
people and their families in our
state, allowing parents to work
knowing their Children are
learning and supported in a safe
welcoming environment.
Thanks to the New Mexico Boys
and girls clubs for over half of
a century of contributions,
which improved the lives of so
many young people in our state
into the thousands of young
people who participate in their
local boys and girls clubs and
take steps towards a successful
future every day, Mr Speaker, I
ask us all to welcome the Boys
and Girls Club and the
representatives today as they're
walking the halls asking us for
help on in some of our budget
areas, which we've been able to
do.
And continue to do and working
to meet their their goals in the
work that they provide for our
state. Mr. Speaker are you threw
up in the gallery? Thank you.
Thank you, Boys and Girls Club
of America. Welcome to your
House of representatives.
The lady from towers represented
artists. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Today is House County Day, so
you'll see lots of tossing knows
Public officials, community
members wandering around the
roundhouse there on the Senate
side right now, they'll they'll
come over and visit with you,
but I wanted to
Let you know that those folks
supported this beautiful
townhouse blue bag, And in this
goody bag. There's lots of
awesome stuff. Um
And a mug with some coffee in
it, So get gear up for the next
thing on our agenda with the
coffee, and then when you really
need some chill out time, have
some high
Desert sage tea, and it'll be
delicious and amazing. And I
wanted to alert you also to this
incredible local newspaper the
question Elrio news. This shows
you that tells county you know,
in a rural part of the state is
experiencing a lot of the things
that all of you and our other
rural areas are experiencing,
and they are covering it with
grace.
And beauty and well thought out,
researched news articles.
I also want to point out this
flyer.
Over the next of gets 55 Days of
water policy conversations that
Chevron is sponsoring, along
with cost overrun Denia in
Albuquerque. Check it out. I
encourage you to participate.
And if you're hungry, you should
eat the lunch that was placed on
your desk that was supported by
Chevron really grateful for
their work and House County over
the summer, I got to visit the
Chevron mine in Cuesta, and
they're putting millions of
dollars and billions of dollars
into our community for mine
remediation. I'm really proud to
work with them in Cuesta, and
I'm really grateful that they
are fueling our three hour
debate. Mr. Speaker. Thank you
so much.
Gentlemen from Lee,
representative for the girl.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on
a point of person. Two points of
personal privilege, please,
first point and then we'll move
on to the second one.
Mr Speaker, One of the things
that's so amazing about being up
here.
Is when we have our youth come
through.
Today, Mr. Speaker, I had the
opportunity to meet with several
members of the Los Alamos. Uh,
AP
Program.
And, uh,
Very well spoken, very
intelligent, young men and women
and I just
It brings joy to my heart to see
our youth up here and and our
Doesn't matter what age they
are. They're in here, and they
they want to be engaged.
Mr Speaker. I come in, Uh,
The representative from Los
Alamos. Uh,
And that group is just amazing,
And and I will say I put a
challenge up for you because I
left them all with with
constitutions and how the House
of representatives pens. So, um,
hoping that you cannot beat me
on that one.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. I also rise to talk
about a document that
representative and Chairwoman
Day Hartman v. Hill left on your
tables.
This is the trip report.
This report.
Is not funded by the D O T.
This report comes through
insurance agents, businesses,
engineers.
And through research center out
of out of D. C. And there's a
couple of pages in here.
Mr Speaker that I think is
critical. On the first page. The
hidden costs of deficient roads.
But then it starts in the bottom
half of that.
Goes by your district and tells
you
What's important to your
What people have made important
and what the district says is
important and what needs to be
funded and built within your
district and within the six
different districts of the D O T
Challenge and ask my colleagues
to read through this?
If you flip the page
Mr Speaker.
At the bottom, it says due to
inadequate state and local
funding, 53% of major local and
state maintained roads and
highways are in poor to mediocre
condition.
What
What's
most important about that is if
you flip to page 10
In this report.
It will tell you
A little diagram on the right
hand side for every $1 of
deferred maintenance on roads
and bridges. The cast
Additional 4 to $5 is needed for
future repairs.
I ask my colleagues to go
through this report. There are
several people from the D O T
that are willing to answer your
questions. I'm willing to answer
your questions. Many of our
colleagues and transportation
are
Um
This is critical for us.
Mr Speaker as we go through the
budget today.
This document.
Clearly lays out the importance
of what we need to be doing on
our infrastructure for our roads
for public safety.
I hope Mr Speaker and colleagues
that everybody gets the
realization
150 million for road projects
doesn't cut it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from River Sandoval and 100% of
Atlanta. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
I'd like to introduce my shadow
for the day. I have Mark
Morales, who was a first year
graduate student at the
University of New Mexico
University of Highlands
University. Excuse me, his
master's of social work career.
So thank you and please invite
him to the House
Representatives. Welcome to the
house.
Gen Lady from Britain, Ali
representative Moon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'd also
like to introduce my shadow for
today. Rakhine Farouq. She is
the president of the U. N. M
College Democrats and the You
know, I'm college Democrats are
here today, shadowing various
members and as young people,
they're engaging with our
democratic process today. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
Your lady from Eddy and Lea,
representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an
anniversary announcement today.
Um, this year, Mr Speaker, the
U. S. Department of Energy's
waste isolation Pilot plant
Located 26 Miles east of curls.
Bed celebrates 25 years of
operation the massive
undertaking of constructing whip
began in the early 19 eighties.
Teams of engineers, scientists,
geologists, miners and trade
workers.
Successfully completed
construction of this first of a
kind facility by decades in on
the historic day of March, 26th
1999 whip received its first
trans Jiranek waste shipment
from Los Alamos National
Laboratory.
Shipments. Mr. Speaker soon
followed from Idaho National
Laboratory in the Rocky Flats
Environmental Technology site,
and since then,
Which has continued its mission
to enable
Legacy waste cleanup throughout
the nation, which remains a
cornerstone of the Department of
Energy's environmental cleanup
and national security work. I'd
like to congratulate the waste
isolation pilot plant and its
workforce for 25 years of
mission, critical delivery, our
state and the nation are better
for it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Happy
birthday Whip. Thank you, gentle
lady.
Generally from Burnley,
representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. It's my honor to
present my shadow for the day.
Her name is Kali Coachella. She
is a junior at you and M, where
she is studying political
science. She is here today to
enhance her knowledge of the day
to day operations of the
Legislature, our procedures and
our routines. She is a native
new Mexican who resides in
Albuquerque, and she also in
loves to engage in illustrations
because she is a little bit
Of an artist and Mr Speaker. She
is drawing and illustration of
you today.
Wow. Okay, let's not make that
public generally. Let me approve
it first.
Generally from Catherine Hidalgo
and Luna representative Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
I would like to speak about
something that happened in
Health and Human Services
Committee this morning point
personal appointed. Thank you.
This morning. I introduced HB
180. It's a
Bill that would bring about a
pregnancy and parenting hotline
and website.
It's been on my mind and heart
for quite some time, as, um
After all the years that I spent
in healthcare working, taking
care of
Families and women as a
registered nurse and the desire
to provide patients with
education.
Has just been second nature to
me.
So this bill would provide New
Mexico women
The information needed to make
choices that work for them as an
integral part of their health
care.
Currently
On the Department of Health
website Under reproductive
services. There is one option
And it there are
There are many resources
provided for women who will take
that option, but
Mr Speaker. That's not choice.
That's one option. So I was
really hoping that we would work
together to provide
Knowledge and information to our
women of New Mexico so that they
can make choices.
Because knowledge is power.
We should be working for women.
And the families to have the
rights, the recognition and the
resources they need to thrive.
HB 180
Is an appropriations bill that
would provide New Mexico
mothers.
And families with information
and links to social services
financial assistance.
Adoption services.
Pregnancy and parenting
information such as a B G Y n
doulas birthing options planning
guidance care centers, agencies
and other available public and
private resources for expectant
Families and new parents.
Mr Speaker. I wasn't asking for
any, um, for any of the current
options available on the
department of Website Department
of Health website to be changed.
I was simply adding for an
addition so that we could give
women the respect they deserve
here in New Mexico to have
Choices.
Um
In spite of my willingness to
work on the technicalities of
the bill and move the bill
forward.
The bill died.
Along party lines.
New Mexico. Women deserve
better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you generated from Santa
5% Romero. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I know she's listening,
So I just wanna acknowledge the
fact that our former colleague,
she was only two terms, but she
made a big impact on our state
Now, Congresswoman Melanie
stands very today is her
birthday, and I know she's here
Listening for our budget today
is just wanted to celebrate our
former colleague and which are
very, very happy birthday and
hope she celebrating us and for
herself out in D, c. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Happy birthday.
Congresswoman.
Gentlemen from Colfax. Great
hurting Quiz and Miguel and
Union Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. You're
getting good at that.
Uh,
Mr Speaker, I'd like to
introduce my shadow.
Today. I have with me.
Tywin. Um ah.
He's from Melrose, New Mexico.
He participates in four H.
He does a beef project in
You know, I hear that he likes
to ride bucking horses, so beef
and rodeo.
Proud to have him He really
enjoys the process that he's
seen so far. And I told him you
hadn't seen nothing yet. So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Nothing yet.
That's right. Thank you.
Gentlemen, from
The back of the Roosevelt, San
Miguel, representative Samara,
Mr Speaker.
I'm very honored today to have a
shadow with me here.
And her name is Shelly Priest.
She also is a companion to check
fields shadow.
I'm very proud to have her here
today. She participates in four
H also and
My family has known
Her family for generations.
My dad.
And her grandpa, which
Are both gone. Not here with us
today, but
They've been friends.
And our brothers and sisters
have been friends and
Very proud. Thank you,
Gentlemen. Welcome to all the
shadows are here with us today.
Got a lot of them.
Generally from bring Leo. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I too have a
intern from the from the
University of New Mexico. His
name is Chase. Jacques Maynes.
He is a junior at you and M, but
he came straight from high
school to be a junior at U. N. M
because it is a P credits so
that
That's how advanced placement
courses can pay off. I'll tell
you he's a political science
major. He's from Santa Cruz,
California, the Santa Cruz
County area of Watson bill and
my first teaching job was in the
next county over in Selena's so
glad to welcome and hear him
here, and we're doing a little
reminiscing about California. He
is program manager with the
college Democrats said he'll be
here for three days.
Welcome.
Welcome to the House.
Gentle lady familiar presented
Abrego.
Mr Speaker. Thank you so much.
Um, I wanted to go one step
further with wishing Melanie
stands very, our congresswoman.
Happy birthday, and I asked
respectfully that the floor
saying Happy birthday to our
dear friend and Washington.
these delegates that we have in
Washington regardless.
Of their political party or
working hard. They leave their
families and they work hard for
New Mexico. So with that, Mr
Speaker take it away, Gentle
lady. Happy birthday to you
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, dear
Congresswoman.
Happy birthday to you Happy
birthday thinking.
Gentle lady from earlier,
representative Casey.
Mr Speaker.
Now being 1159 am I move? We
adjourn until 1201 pm reports,
please.
Mr Speaker. I apologize. Mr
Speaker. I move. We go to that
order Business Committee report
disordered.
Mr Speaker. Excuse me, your
consumer and Public affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 144.
Has added under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended.
And then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. U. N. J. Ferrari
chair for adoption. Adoption of
favorable committee report on
house But 140 for all those in
favor signify by saying Aye.
Name the committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, Your
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee tomb has been referred
hospital 195 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrari chair.
Mr Speaker moved for adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
195 all those in paper or
signify by saying, Aye. Name the
eyes have it Can we report
adopted? Mr Speaker, your
Education Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 134 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass as amended.
And then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Jeon dressed in real chair, Ms
Speaker. I move adoption of the
committee report. We are an
adoption of a favorable
community report on house Bill
134. All those in favor signify
by saying, Aye.
Opposed name. The report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Labor veterans
and Military affairs Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 240 has added under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations do pass and then
referred to the Appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Ellis
Elio Conquer
Speaker. Mother report adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house Bill 240. All those in
favor signify by saying Aye post
a committee report adopted
Mr Speaker, your labor veterans
and military affairs Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 241 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass and
then referred to the government
elections in the Union Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
and I say Leo Contra speaker
with the report, adoption of a
Federal committee report in
house Bill 241. All those in
favor say Aye.
Opposed? Nay, the report adopted
General lady from Burleigh. Oh,
Mr Speaker. Thanks. I appreciate
your tutorial it now being 1159
am I move We adjourn until 1201
pm
House will come to order Mr
Speaker. I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended that
the journal showed that all
those present in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session. So ordered Mr
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that the
journal has been red and full
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
Order of Business committee is
ordered.
Generated from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business messages.
Objection, disordered clerk to
read.
How's executive message number?
49, Speaker Martinez and members
of the House pursuant to Article
four, Section five B to the New
Mexico Constitution.
I am authorizing for your
consideration during the 56th
Legislature. Second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council drafting
number 0.227835 a bill providing
exemptions from the state
licensing Department licensing
requirements for childcare
programs.
Or facilities licensed or
certified by the United States
Department of Defense or United
States. Coast Guard.
Adding military family status as
a protected class under the new
mix Human Rights Act.
And adding space force.
To the definitions of armed
forces in the N M s a 1978
Respectfully yours. Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute percentage
Bill five as amended and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
message will be entered message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate Joint Resolution nine as
amended.
Requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted.
Sherry D. Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered Lady
from
The leaves and the J. C.
Mr Speaker, and we would go to
that that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business is ordered members just
a couple of quick reminders
today by the close of business
Your financial disclosure forms
are due to the secretary of
state.
Today do closer business.
Which is 5 P.m., Although for
us that's not really close of
business. That's when the party
is going to get started.
Not literally figuratively.
Um and also
Today is the last day to
introduce house bills. So if you
have a bill that you are cooking
up
Bring it to the clerk.
Before we leave today.
So I suspect we'll be here for a
few more hours. Now is the time
to get your bills ready to go
Get your co signers get all that
good bipartisan legislation in
so that we can get it into the
hopper.
And also make sure it's
Germaine.
Alright from Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I'm moving. Go to
that order of business. Third
reading of legislation.
Objection. It is. Order is a
gentleman from Dona Ana Ready on
that item. I am Mr Speaker.
Would you give me to that point,
please record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Appropriations Committee
has a provision of finance
company substitute for House
Bill two has been taken.
And it is now subject
To to debate amendment or
substitution.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will Mr
Speaker body I'm so pleased to
get to visit with you today.
I want to take us back last
year. Have you stopped real
quick? I misread the bill.
Gentlemen.
Let the record reflect that
election history for placing
house appropriations of Finance
Committee substitute for house
bills to end three on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate a
member of substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker for
getting us getting me and us to
that point, Mr Speaker and body
Last year we talked about how we
were climbing a mesa.
The revenue increases that we
have seen here in the state of
New Mexico Growing 20 30%.
And budget increases. In fact,
Mr Speaker body in Director
Abbey's final year over 12%
budget in over actually 14%
budget increase
And we talked about Mr Speaker
that we expected to continue to
climb to move up.
Mr Speaker body. My message is
to keep your boots on. We are
continuing to climb. We continue
to see strength across so many
sectors of our economy.
Also Mr Speaker and body were
maybe towards where one of the
first sort of flat part of this
mesa that is the new normal for
New Mexico Last year, Mr Speaker
in body or for FY 24. We had a
forecast of 685 million barrels
of oil that works out to about
57 million barrels a month.
Mr Speaker body. We are right on
track, if not ahead of that.
Ah, two point Mr Speaker and
body. When it comes to this
coming year, we're projecting
710 million barrels of oil that
are produced and Mr Speaker body
with the strongest methane rules
in the country with good rules
that are helping save
freshwater. We are on track to
reach that point.
And with a strong budget. Uh
Alongside Mr Speaker body are
gross receipts, tax, our
personal income tax and our
corporate income tax continue to
show strength, and that's why
when we see when we look at this
year, we had a lot of new
revenue, Mr. Speaker and and
body. I want to explain briefly
what we did with that.
In our bipartisan house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. We will not go
through this debate without me
thanking our members profusely
because they put an
extraordinary amount of work.
Mr. Speaker body briefly, we
increased our budget 6.5% on a
recurring basis. That's the
lowest in the last few years.
Because we've made up so much
ground.
And Mr Speaker and body doing
these targeted moderate
increases guarantee this
legislature and they state of
New Mexico. The ability moving
forward to continue to make new
investments in places that are
important to you and to your
constituents. If Mr Speaker body
we went too far too fast.
We might endanger that ability
for the next couple of years.
Certainly toward the end of the
20 twenties for the state of New
Mexico to continue to make new
investments and we know that
that's important. $621 million
recurring is what that works out
to Mr Speaker body. There's
about 1.25 almost $1.26 billion
in special, non recurring
appropriations.
You're going to hear a lot about
housing. You're going to hear
about water You're going to hear
about infrastructure You're
going to hear about higher
education and workforce training
that and so many other areas or
where these special non
reoccurring appropriations are
dedicated. Finally, Mr Speaker
in body there's about $1.187
billion
In trust and transfers for FY
25 that is making good on the
commitments, including the Land
of Enchantment Trust fund that
supports the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture,
energy, Minerals and many others
fully funding into perpetuity.
The important functions of
watershed health
Soil health support for
producers and our environment.
Mr Speaker Body in FY 24. There
is a large $959 million transfer
to create a new Higher education
Trust fund.
We can say, Mr Speaker body
truthfully that now if we pass
this budget from a cradle to
career perspective.
New Mexicans seeking higher
education, including workforce
certificates for which we're
very grateful for strong
leadership on house
appropriations and finance
committee that continues to work
and add language that describes
these certificates and the high
impact high demand jobs that
they provide entry to
Making those eligible for our
higher education supports. I'm
going to get the chance to talk
a lot more with you all Mr
Speaker body if we so choose.
Um, but for now, I want to go
ahead and ask a few of our house
appropriate Well, first Mr
Speaker body can I ask our House
Appropriations and finance
Committee members to stand
And please, can we recognize
them?
Members of HFC, please stand to
be recognized.
Next Mr Speaker body I would
like to yield to Vice chair
Dixon to talk briefly for about
public safety and housing, and
we're going to have a few of
these very brief Mr Speaker
embody to explain the high level
investments and also focus on a
couple of the Marquis
Investments. Thank you, Mr
Speaker from earlier percent of
Dixon.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Do I need
to ask the gentleman to yield
Does the gentleman from Dona Ana
yelled, Mr Speaker, I gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
Braulio.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am so
pleased today to be able to talk
about some of the investments
that House Appropriations and
finance Committee substitute for
House Bill two and three makes
in terms of public safety and
housing. Both of those two
issues are really they're tied
together.
And for my district, they are
extremely important.
I've been working on public
safety issues since I first
arrived, and I am thrilled that
we are continuing to make smart
investments into public safety.
So, Mr Speaker. A couple of the
things that are included in this
bill. Um first, um, we are
continuing with our holistic
approach. We are taking a multi
So, Mr Speaker, a couple of the
things that are included in this
bill. Um first, um, we are
continuing with our holistic
approach. We are taking a
multipronged approach. We are
looking at the factors that
drive crime and we are also
providing the resources to fight
crime.
We are using effective and
evidence based solutions,
something that I think is
foundational to the work of the
Appropriations Committee and the
Legislative Finance Committee.
With the Department of Public
Safety.
We are making investments to
reduce vacancy rates.
We are funding new positions,
positions that will support
crime reduction and ongoing
investigations, and we are
ensuring that our law
enforcement have the equipment
and vehicles that they need.
Mr Speaker. We are also making a
substantial investment into our
judicial branch agencies. We all
know that it takes a village.
Uh, to do anything and so
ensuring that we are adequately
funding our judicial branch is
critical.
So this budget
Increases our support to the
judicial branch agencies by 6%.
That means additional millions
for safety. I T and other
upgrades to our New Mexico
Supreme Court and our other
district courts. I think we
heard earlier today one of my
colleagues from um, the
southwestern part of the state
talked about an incident in one
of our
Courts and we need to make sure
that our judicial branch is
protected and have the security
resources that they need.
This budget also includes $1.5
million to improve the
supervision, monitoring and
supervision of people released
on pretrial detention.
That's something else that we've
been working on for a number of
years, and I'm really pleased
that we are continuing with this
investment.
The funding for the judicial
branch also includes recurring
funding for jury trials and
warrant enforcement to other,
um critical and smart ways to
address public safety.
Mr Speaker, Um, another area
that perhaps we don't talk as
much about when it comes to
public safety.
But it's very important for
families.
Is the support that we provide
to victims of crime.
This budget provides a total of
$7 million to support victim
advocates.
Support for sexual assault
victims.
And to supplement federal grant
money for crime victims.
Lastly, in terms of public
safety, I want to highlight I
mentioned this holistic approach
and the multi pronged approach
that we have been taking here in
the Legislature for the past
several years.
So not only are we making these
concrete investments, but we are
also supporting efforts to
ensure that our constituents
have increased access to
behavioral healthcare, substance
use treatment, poverty reduction
programs, support for our
working families and access to
quality education and health
care.
All of those are key supports.
In public safety.
And then finally, Mr Speaker
that
The chairman mentioned housing
And I think for a lot of us, we
recognize that in order to have
a stable family you need to have
A roof over your head. You need
to be secure in your housing.
And so, Mr Speaker. I am very
pleased that this budget
includes new funding.
And an infusion of funds into
existing programs that support
housing across the entire
continuum.
From shelters for victims of
domestic violence. The linkages
program housing vouchers,
reentry services, transitional
housing for our youth, who are
transitioning out of foster
care.
As well as, uh, 40, plus million
dollars into m F A, which does
incredible work supporting home
ownership across the state.
And then in additional 75
million to support housing
development to make sure that we
have the resources to get
housing programs off the ground
and work in complement with the
M F A
So, Mr Speaker and Mr Chair. I
am just very proud to have been
a part of this process and
really appreciate the
committee's hard work and the
leadership of our chairman.
Thank you very much.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Thank
you so much, Mr Speaker. Next
I'd like to yield to the General
lady, also from Berna. Leo
represent Herndon to speak
briefly about some of our health
related investments generated
from earlier percent of Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
gentleman yield.
I am.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is
nothing more important than
making sure that the people of
New Mexico had their healthcare
taken care of. And I am proud to
say that the committee that H a
F C. Support of foundational
need that will help keep the
people in New Mexico healthy. We
have increased funding to the
Department of Health by 6.3%.
Totaling $11.7 million. And
what's most important Mr Speaker
is this funding will support the
expansion of public health
programs. It will like support
departmental operations and
staffing, but most important, it
will support vital services for
our elders. They make up 19.1%
of our population. Mr Speaker,
and this funding will help them
not only with the providers that
they see but also
Making sure that they have the
food support that they need.
And Mr Speaker. There is another
$1.96 billion that we have a
transferring from the General
fund that will go to the new
Healthcare Authority Department.
and what that funding will be
used for it will help support
critical rate increases for
primary infant and maternal care
providers. We know that our
providers work really hard, and
we also are making sure that
they are taken care of.
We are providing support for New
Mexico's smallest rural
hospitals were providing support
for rural and primary care
clinics and for providers.
Indeed, the waiver and
behavioral health systems all of
these items, Mr Speaker will
help ensure that new Mexicans
can access health care when they
need it.
But Mr Speaker, let me just tell
you about three other quick
items there is under the new
health care authority. There
will be federal funds that will
be used to expand transitional
programs such as tan. If and as
you know, that's temporary
assistance for needy families
and under that program, those
families will receive temporary
cash assistance as they
transition back to work.
This is exciting. We are
supporting new Mexicans at every
single level of the economic
need. The healthcare authority
will also use funding from
opioid settlements to increase
service for infants exposed to a
This is exciting. We are
supporting new Mexicans at every
single level of the economic
need. The healthcare authority
will also use funding from
opioid settlements to increase
service for infants exposed to
illegal and illicit drugs and
other substances. We will
provide treatment for the
mothers and other costs
associated with the OPR.
Epidemic. We also funding Mr
Speaker. Everyone is going to
jump up and shout for joy,
Tribal health councils with $3
million to safeguard those vital
rural healthcare facilities and
my colleague, representative
Anthony Allison has worked hard
on this issue for many, many
years, and now we are seeing the
results of his work as we all
work together. We are so happy
to deliver the
Yes, on this year, And finally
Mr Speaker, but not last. The
budget is investing millions in
pilot projects, including
greater in home support for our
seniors. We never forget our
seniors and helping behavioral
health providers, which are
greatly needed in New Mexico
would start up and expansion
cost. We want to make sure that
they are here to help us
continue to grow our own.
Thank you, Mr Speaker from Dona
Ana. Thank you so much. Mr
Speaker. Next I'd like to ask if
representative of the general
lady from Berna Leo represent
Garrett could visit briefly
about our career technical
education, workforce and
economic development portions of
our budget from earlier
Mr Speaker Will the gentleman
from Dona Ana? He'll gladly
yield Mr Speaker.
Thank you.
I have to start by saying my
favorite quote of the last two
years, which is from
representative Baca. He always
says on house education. We're
not Democrats were not
Republicans were educators and I
felt the same way working on
house appropriations. I felt we
weren't Democrats. We weren't
Republicans. I felt we were new
Mexicans, and I felt like as we
worked on the K 12 budget, the
higher education
Budget. We heard our fellow new
Mexicans loud and clear. Say, we
want those cradle to career
career and technical education
opportunities, funded and
developed at every step of the
way. So looking at the budget,
First of all, we fully funded
the opportunity Scholarship,
which targets
Adults who aren't eligible for
lottery scholarships, often
returning to school, often
pursuing career opportunities
and for credit classes to get
those scholarships. The higher
Education Department will
receive 1.3 billion in recurring
funds. Those include students
support initiatives, including
basic needs.
Nursing and healthcare programs.
Tribal dual credit education
graduate student worker
compensation and faculty pay. We
really prioritize setting up our
students for career.
Success we want to attract. We
want to train and we want to
retain all of our young people
in those high need professions.
To that end, we're dedicating
100 million to developing a
strong workforce. I think it's
one of the most significant
targeted intentional.
Investments we've ever made and
workforce development. To really
staff are frontline careers
where we're needed to really
prepare.
Our state for the careers of the
future, which we already know.
we don't even know what some of
those future careers art, but we
want to create those good paying
jobs.
Also, this includes millions for
loan repayment for medical
professionals are surrounding
states have given more to
doctors paying back their loans.
and we have we're upping it so
that we can retain. We can
recruit. We can really build our
medical workforce,
apprenticeship and workforce
training at community colleges.
And I want to thank
representative Brown because on
page 238, you'll see that that
funding includes those non
credit industry. Specific of
boot camps. Uh I t those special
targeted courses. That's the
explanation of that is right on
the page.
We have a growing nursing
program. Stem scholarships,
social worker practicum so that
we really build this social
worker pipeline that's so vital
vital to the social, mental and
emotional behavior health of our
people, Um, grant matching for
technology projects tied to
economic development.
There's appropriations for the
Department of Workforce
Solutions. Many of you have seen
the B probie Proud truck, which
takes professional
Virtual reality experiences to
every corner of our state for
our high school students so they
might not have an expensive
technology career center. But
that super truck
Offers like 16 experiences, So
that's the sort of thing we're
funding pre apprenticeship
programs targeting disengaged
young people, workforce
development, training and higher
ed apprenticeship programs. We
want to make sure that our
workers can not only do their
livelihoods but there are other
aspects of their lives are
fulfilled.
So the budget includes a 4%
salary increase for state
employees, public school staff
and higher ed employees. We've
also short up the state's
employee health plan. We have to
ensure that our workers get the
coverage that they need, and
then a few final points to make
sure our workers are supported
by a strong economy.
We're investing in commerce and
industry, including our Tourism
department, local grants to our
creative economy, low interest
loans to childcare facilities in
high need areas. Additionally,
some of the proven economic
drivers are being supported 13.5
million for lead of funding.
Um And then, as representative
Dixon referred to 100 and 75
million to expand the
opportunity Enterprise fun to
include housing that funds
support specs so that when
companies are reassuring or
coming from out of state, we can
all already fun building sun
specs, so they're ready to move
in.
And with that I yield back to
the gentleman from Dona Ana.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd now
like to turn to the gentleman
from Leo represented daylight
Cruise to briefly discuss
another couple components.
Gentlemen from Berlin. Mr
Speaker. Do I have to ask for a
yield from Mr Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
You know, there are so many
capable legislators that are
part of this body that I am just
I just feel so privileged to
work with every day that we're
here in the interim, as well as
during the time that we were on
appropriations and in
transportation.
Mr Speaker.
The work that is done in the
interim. The work that is done
in committee is Yeoman's work.
If you look at the size of the
volume of the document, that is
before you
I am still so impressed with
that level of work.
And having been part of it again
makes me feel totally honored,
Honored and privileged.
Mr Speaker.
The men and women that work on
this.
Our dedicated and I feel
particularly proud that this was
a bipartisan effort.
Mr Chairman. Lot of that goes to
your credit as well.
And the document that we have
now that will be a living item
for the citizenry of New Mexico
is something we can all share in
that pride. I am particularly
proud of the work that was done
in the House Transportation
Infrastructure Committee under
the chairmanship of Chair
Hawkman V. Hill.
And now incorporated into this
particular legislation or soon
to be legislation.
Will go a long way. Mr. Speaker
in
Providing the needed revenue for
the entire state of New Mexico
when it comes to transportation
when we talk about
transportation
Every member of our community
and from other states as well.
Everyone travels on those roads.
So the money that will be
expended to improve those roads
is essential for everyone's
livelihood and living.
I see living because it means
going to a grocery store. It
means going to school. It means
transporting goods across our
entire state and that investment
This year will go a long way to
that, and not only investment
today, but it far far into the
future. So when we talk about
transportation, what are we
really talking about? Beyond
what I just mentioned?
It means economic development.
You know, we hear from our
colleagues how a part of the
state the Southeast part of the
state, which we derive much of
the revenue comes from is not
always receiving the love and
attention that he needs when it
comes to our transportation and
roads. That's what that's about.
Well, I think we've gone a long
way in correcting that, and you
will find that in that document.
Much needed.
Much will be done, and I am
proud to have been part of that.
And we're having voted yes to
that.
In addition to that, when we
talk about economic developments
far far more than that.
When we talk about it devolved.
What are we talking about? We're
talking about
Community.
If you don't have our citizenry
involved as part of community in
that effort, we have failed. We
have not failed in this bill.
Mr Speaker. We have succeeded.
We have succeeded because of the
yeoman's work that was done in
appropriations. I often like to
describe it Members, Mr Speaker
chairman that in the interim in
the LFC is where all
All of the raw ingredients are
prepared.
It's like a stool and there's a
lot that goes into it, however.
It was during the time that we
convene here that it is actually
cooked into a reality, and that
is to the credit of all the
members of appropriations. And
so that would be a huge item for
community. And lastly, I'll
close with this, Mr Speaker.
Housing.
Investment that we have.
Need for housing.
In a time when housing is an
issue nationally.
Not just here. Nationally, it
has come to fruition many years
ago.
Mr Chairman. I mean, Mr Speaker
and Chairman, I was privileged
to hear Henry Cisneros speak. He
was the director for
President Clinton and he said in
the next decade
In the next
Millennium.
Which we are in now there is
going to be a huge housing
shortage nationally, took that
to heart.
I understood that And here's
what he's what really struck me,
he said. We are not only going
to need single individual homes.
For families, but we're also
going to need to have multi
family who is multi family
apartments. He also said this
and this was the one that really
struck me.
We're going to need to have
trailers available for people.
We are now living that when you
consider the homelessness
We are living
What he talked about in the
middle nineties. And so to that
end, the investment that is in
that document is going to go a
long way to solve that. So, Mr
Speaker, chairman, Thank you for
your work. Thank you, all the
members and it was my privilege
to be a little part of that.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Next I'd like to
briefly go to the General Lady
from Santa Fe.
To talk about our investments in
natural resources and also an
aging.
Speaker of the gentleman. Yield,
I gladly yield. Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I to, um, one of our
members on HFC in newer member
and I have learned a great deal
from from having this experience
and understanding our budget at
the level that we have been able
to put in these new revenues in
And and understand how that is
going to benefit our state and
one of the biggest benefits I
can say is, but this budget
continues our urgent investments
to combat climate change and
ramp up our clean energy
economy.
We are significant,
significantly increasing funding
for state agencies to better
enforce existing rules and
regulations.
And carry out their missions,
including increased funding for
state parks, reforestation.
So the oil conservation division
and the mine reclamation
program.
And we're also
Making investments in staffing
staffing our agencies, energy,
Minerals, Natural Resources
Department, Environment
Department and the office of the
state engineer.
These investments in our state
agencies and personnel will help
us meet our carbon reduction
goals and support our transition
into a cleaner future.
To manage our investments in our
climate goals. We are dedicating
$10 million to establish a new
green bank.
Which will help us improve
access to critical
infrastructure in the carbon is
decarbonization. This includes
solar, wind and geothermal
energy and weatherization
support for low income in
another.
Underserved new Mexicans.
These investments and the budget
has put $100 million into
transfers to the water Trust
board. We have put 200,000
recurring dollars to the Water
Data Act and $7 Million for NME
D Surface water.
Protections.
Preserving our natural treasures
is a the biggest cause for me,
Mr. Mr Many of us to invest in
We all want our land and
ecosystems to thrive for future
generations, and that's what
we've done by investing 300
million in the Land of
Enchantment Legacy fund.
This is for water conservation,
outdoor recreation, agriculture
and wildlife protections. This
will support 10 programs across
60 agencies. Current front,
immediate and long term climate
challenges and protect what
makes our land of enchantment so
special.
So these are the investments
that we're all
Proud of. I hope I know I am
because this is some of the work
that many of us are dedicated
and achieving as legislators for
the future of our state for our
future generations, and this
This bill that we put together
this budget that we put together
enforces those those challenges
that we've we've had in putting
our dollars where our values
are, Mr Speaker.
And I want to say thank you to
all of our members into our
leadership for all the time and
investment that we do as
Volunteer legislators.
And then they get dedication
that we have.
And working with LFC staff.
Day in and day out to make sure
that we are we are talking to
everybody and making sure that
these details are paid attention
to and that the the voices of
our communities and our states
are being heard.
And the only way we know that
we're doing that is how it's
represented in our budget, and
that's exactly what we aim to
do, and that's exactly what we
did.
But
Mr Speaker, I was want to say
moving forward. I know we have
more to do.
There is always more to do. And
as I mentioned before, and we
were honoring
Former director David Abbey.
That when we're making these
decisions, we may not always get
what we want.
But we are we are championing.
The issues that we have before
us from our heart from a place
of compassion and the leadership
through that that compassion
shows in our budget, and I just
want to say thank you to all of
our members, not just those on
HFC because everybody, everybody
in this house everybody in this
chamber has made a contribution.
And you've been heard and
There is a lot more work to be
done, and there's a lot more
listening to be done. But we we
all work together. We all have
to work together, and that's
what we were doing through our
budget. And I want to say the
process is long.
The hours are long.
But we get it done. And I want
to say thank you again to all of
our staff, especially lfc, and
all those are working day in our
staff at HFC and our leadership
office because this is hard,
hard work.
Um, and the challenges are there
in the passion is there and
again we don't always get what
we want. But we we do the very
best and I know that this is
reflected very well in our
budget. So thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you for the time,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, and we'll be wrapping
up very shortly. Mr Speaker. I
want to go briefly to
representative Ha Romeo to talk
about some of our
Ah child welfare and education
investment.
The only from Diana.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Dona Ana yield
The measure of a community is
how we support our Children.
We are making sure that Children
in New Mexico not only have the
ability to survive but also to
thrive.
And that should be the goal of
all of us. And I know that all
of these compassionate souls in
this chamber are with me when we
say it is time for Children of
New Mexico.
With that being, said House Bill
two, offers support for our
Children based on a foundation
for the future and future
looking support in early
childhood education for Children
as well as for their families.
This year's budget increases
spending from the early
childhood education and care
department.
By 6% in additional $19.6
million to explain, expand pre K
and offer greater support to
providers. It also increases the
distribution from the early
childhood Trust fund to help
families with child care cost.
Support for our Children
continues as they enter into
school with 4.43 billion in
reoccurring fans for public
schools, as well as a 6.1%
increase again in order to
expand K 12. Plus programs
provide capacity it capacity for
career technical education.
Structured literacy teacher
mentor ship and community
schools.
We have also invested 200
million in non reoccurring
appropriations, which will
provide support for these
programs as well.
Showing up universal school
meals so that no child in new
Mexico will go hungry.
And supporting educator
fellowship initiatives to
support teachers in educating
our precious resources.
50 million will be dedicated to
the tribal Educational Trust
Fund, a major House initiative
championed by our chair Derek
Clinton of Sandia Pueblo.
Another 75 million pilot pilot
program will help us feel hard
to staff special education
positions and study education
Editor Educational Clinical
practice programs again in an
attempt to find teachers to
educate our Children and our
budget is making great key
investments in improving C Y F.
D.
To recruit, train and support
foster care providers and
families.
To replace Children. Social
Security benefits.
That were previously used to pay
for their own housing.
And $20 million to pilot and
evaluate evidence based
strategies to improve C Y F D.
These include Workforce
development prevention and early
childhood childhood and
intervention programs within C Y
F D and a differential response
when working with families
within C Y F. D.
We are also utilizing federal
fundings for the fostering
connections program, which will
allow Children who ate out of
foster care.
To have aged appropriate support
into the age of 21 years.
Wage and career ladder
development for childcare
professionals and teacher
clinical practice supports.
These pilots will help us
identify what programs work Best
for New Mexico and establish a
foundation to receive federal
funding in the future as well.
These investments are so
important because education
again is the foundation for our
success.
Not only for all of new
Mexicans, but for our entire
state. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. We're going to conclude
I want to go to the gentleman
from Cibola. McKinley San Juan
in Valencia represented Garcia
and then the gentleman from
We'll go briefly to that
gentleman, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, from Berlioz's Ebola,
McKinley's and once a quarter
violence representative. Gotta
see out. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, please, Mr Speaker.
You had already yielded. So
you're good.
Okay?
Representative down there. You
forgot your account UK so
I said that one first I said it
real fast.
Anyway.
What I want to talk about
briefly as a transportation.
Transportation is the backbone
of the state of New Mexico. As
we all know, you know this this
time around, we were able to put
$150 million
In the budget for infrastructure
and maintenance on our highways
and in our communities, you
know, it's very important that
women make sure and remember.
That
Everything comes in on the
interstate like Interstate 40 is
the main corridor of the
country. I think you know, we
need to keep these roads up
because Mr Speaker there in real
bad shape like I mentioned
earlier.
We had an accident. Uh,
A couple of weeks ago and
involved in semis Rick and 11
place.
You know, we hear about Mr
Speaker. These accidents
happened in New Jersey and New
York and Chicago. Whatever.
They shouldn't be happening in
New Mexico, but they are
happening, so we really, really
need to look at the
What's going on in your Mexico?
You know, we're working on the
ports of entries.
Working on broadband and
cybersecurity. You know, there's
a lot of issues that are that
are
There are connected to
transportation. You know, that's
very, very important.
That this you know, there's a
lot of issues in the state of
Mexico. It needs to be
addressed. Everybody needs
money. But let's keep in mind
Like I said earlier, the just
the state highways or the
backbone on your Mexico and New
Mexico that will keeps us Ah.
In touch with each other because
you know you go out to my part
of the country, and some of
those roads are in bad shape,
and we need to address all these
issues for everybody in the
state.
That $150 million came out, Mr
Speaker.
If it all goes well in the
Senate puts their share of it
that will be divided equally
between between the six
Districts in the city, New
Mexico because my
Look at this. Mr Speaker is that
everybody has the right to have
the same amount of money no
matter where you're at. If
you're southern, northern,
eastern or western New Mexico,
they all deserve the same amount
of money and
We need to remember Also Mr
Speaker that
Our kids, right school Busses on
the roads and the highways and
it's you know, some of these
highways are dangerous. You
know, if you ever want to go for
a bad ride go between after
breaking grants through the
state line, you know, there are
so many potholes on these
highways that have been the
highways are in bad shape. We
got thousands and thousands of
miles.
And horrible, bad team, Mr
Speaker, and it's not the fault
of the Department of
Transportation because they're
doing as much as they possibly
can with what they got, so we
need to make sure we keep on
funding these projects and the
highway Transportation
Department.
That being said, Mr Pekar, Just
keep in mind.
You know, we get about 35 4000
semis a day coming to the
ministry 40 that's commerce
coming into New Mexico. We're
going out in New Mexico Big
economic driver and another
thing with these bonding that
we're trying to put on the
highway department that that
creates jobs.
You know, the highway department
is busy. They hire people they
hire subcontractors and
contractors to do these highways
and that's very, very important
And it would have been saying Mr
Bacall Close, well seen
Whenever we hire people to do
our highways, we need to make
sure and try to get
People from New Mexico hired
from some results.
And Mr Speaker. One more thing
I'd like to thank the
Transportation Department
Chairman Hoffman Vakil.
Do you really stood out? And I
know it's hard work, and it's
A long process. You know,
everybody in the committee but
really, really put out to, uh,
make this thing happen. So we
have been saying, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
And Mr Speaker. I want to
conclude with the gentleman from
the Colfax, Real Reba and the
other Northern counties
represent Sanchez, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
want to speak real briefly.
That I'm
Proud to know that there is
funding for the new state
reforestation center in Mora.
I know I have the entire Kanye
Moron, my district and part of
San Miguel with representative
Castano.
And, uh, those fires were
devastating. And, um
This is much needed for our
state. That forestation center
is gonna serve the entire state.
It's going to be, uh, jobs for
the area. It's going to help.
Hopefully bring back our
beautiful mountains.
I'm happy to say that there is
funding for operations and
construction. And I know we're
gonna have to come back next
year to finish that off, But I'm
proud to know that there's
funding for that. And I'm also
proud to
See that there's money for the
tribal water settlements. This
is going to be critically
important for our water systems
in northern New Mexico.
Just I'm very happy to see this
funding in the budget, and I
just wanted to mention those
things. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And Mr Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I want to just conclude
with with our reserves and with
a rule Mr Speaker body as we've
shared here. We've set higher
reserve targets. This budget
sets a 32% reserve target.
Mr Speaker and body which is
strong. It also gives our
colleagues in the Senate
additional capacity to do work
on their end. Finally, Mr
Speaker and body I want to say,
um, we have a joint rule. We
stuck to that rule last year.
We're doing it again this year,
the 16th day of the session. We
want to get our by the 16th day.
We want to get our budget over
to our colleagues in the Senate.
By the 21st Day. We want to get
it back, and we're going to
visit about more on that as we
go through these next few four
sessions, Mr Speaker, the amount
of time meant that goes into
printing this bill any changes
that delay up to two or three
days because of the proofing and
procedures that are lfc staff
goes through.
Mr Speaker. I want to share that
because we're on time. We're on
budget.
And Mr Speaker body. I won't be
accepting any amendments.
Certainly any substitution as
friendly today, in part because
if we, uh
Uh, if we were to change this
budget, we would break that rule
at this point, and we've stuck
very hard. We've worked very
hard colleagues in the Senate
have a lot of work to do. We've
done an extraordinary job, and
I'm excited to have the
conversation about that today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is
debate.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Lane. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Does the gentleman
from Dona Ana Yield Mr Speaker,
I gladly yield to the gentleman
from San Juan. Mr. Speaker, I
mistakenly took the over
I should have taken the under. I
bet that the insured last longer
than an hour only lasted 44
minutes, So I lost that bet me
lunch, gentlemen.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from
Dona Ana.
You haven't heard what the
committee substitutes going to
be at their the four
substitutes. So you might you
might change your mind never
know so
I do want to commend Mr Speaker.
Um
Chair the chair from Dona Ana.
Um
I recognize and actually
appreciate what you concluded
with.
Not so much that you're not
going to accept any amendments
or force obtuse, but but the
reality that we have a deadline.
I do appreciate that.
And that creates I think some
tension for you and your staff.
To pull together a budget for an
entire state within you can't
even call it a 30 day.
Process because we know we're
basically at the halfway point,
So that is not lost on me. I
wanted to thank you for you and
your hard work on that, Um, the
committee's hard work on that
and your staff's hard work on
that.
So, Mr Speaker, you know, it's
not a secret. We do have a four
substitute and the reason for
that Mr Speaker is
Um, we have some concerns as we
represent our constituents.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico.
Um we have been very blessed to
have such an abundance of
revenue.
And that's due in large part
because of the cost or the price
of oil has been high.
And production has been high.
And so we have a lot of revenue
to spend. And Mr Speaker, we
hear about this this fact of
life all the time.
That we are relying on what is a
volatile industry.
And so it's a double edged
sword. And so as we look at
Growing government.
Instead of growing the economy.
I think that's where the rub is,
from our perspective is we want
to be careful not to overextend
ourselves to not grow recurring
spending.
So much that we create
programming that that our
citizens rely upon and then in
the lean years, we have to pull
back from that. And Mr Speaker.
I do appreciate that we have We
have taken the initiative to
create, you know a number of
trust funds as well to try to
Um
Round off some of those sharp
curves, and I appreciate that. I
think that's really important.
Mr Speaker. I do have a specific
question about what's the newer
trust fund that's in
House Bill two and three, and
it's this government
Accountability Expendable Trust
fund.
Mr Speaker. I didn't hear much
discussion about that, Um, in
that that length the intro, but
I am curious is that earmarked
as recurring or non recurring in
this budget? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that is
non recurring, but three year
funding, so it's Mr Speaker.
Body excited to talk more about
those, and for each of those
investments represents a three
year fully funded commitment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from Dona Ana. It's so
I think
And I understand. Obviously, we
have so many needs in the state.
You know, we're
Or 50th, and so many of the
important metrics
We have an abundance of revenue
and so let's put our heads
together to try to tackle those
various problems that are facing
our state. And I do appreciate
that effort. Um, I think maybe
this is more of an accounting.
Um
Issue that I have, but that sure
fills a lot more like recurring
money to me because we're
putting it in programming.
Typically, when I think about
non recurring its its
infrastructure, it's one time
uses of money and we're
stretching it over three years
and we're categorizing it as non
recurring.
Um
And again. I don't I don't even
know that I have an issue with
the fund the concept of the fund
itself. I just think that we
should call it what I think it
is, which is recurring funding.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen from Dona
Inez. So do you know if
If we count that money as
recurring. Do you know what
percentage increase in recurring
that would come to
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, first, I
think I appreciate the
conversation about this
expendable trust Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, as we've talked
about, we've increased budgets,
12 and 14% over the last couple
of years. In some cases we know
like when those are raises for
teachers that that is we know
immediately the impact of that
money. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen,
There are high priority areas
that really I think we can
agree deserve investment, but
where we need to work on fine
tune and improve the
implementation of additional
investments. Also, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, important to this
body spoken about this morning
is measurement. This trust gives
us a unique Perhaps.
Uh, rare and unique opportunity
for the country to target
investments in places that we
know is going to yield benefits
and to measure that in real time
and year over year, certainly at
the end of three years to know,
Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, it's
less than 1% annually. The
amount of spending we see a
little bit larger because it's
Three year Um, it's a three year
commitment, then it's a little
bit larger but annually. It's
less than $100 million annually.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona
Ana. So, um
This question of
Of my budget guru who which I'm
sure you know who I'm referring
to, and and the number that he
crunched was it would take the
recurring number 288.35%.
Um And I think that's the real
number that we should be be be
debating here this morning, and
I think when we go to vote,
because, um, and I hope that all
of that
That programming is successful.
Um, you know, I hope that
literally every dollar that we
ever allocate is not a waste of
taxpayer dollars, but
unfortunately, that's not always
the case.
With state government, and so I
just think we need to be aware
of that piece.
Um
And Mr Speaker. One other thing.
I think that
And this is really
I think where I'm both a citizen
and a legislator. That that I
find a little bit.
Of and I expressed this in L c
two when we were going through
the framework was
With such an abundance of of
revenue to me now is the time to
make
Generational.
Changes in our tax code.
To make us competitive with our
surrounding states. Um, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen from Dona
Ana. I know you're not the chair
of the tax committee, and so I'm
not going to ask you sort of
What are those proposals? But my
understanding is this This
budget allows for 200 million of
tax changes or tax cuts.
Everyone described that. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen?
Yes.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
from Dona Ana when we're talking
about 3.5 billion of of new
money, um, that number I wish
would have been much higher. Um,
I think again, Those are the
kind of changes that
Have generational impacts for
the benefit and as opposed to
maybe something like the
The government Accountability
Management Trust funds, so
Mr Speaker. I won't delay the
Neville anymore. I'll move.
House floor substitute for house
Appropriations of Finance
Committee substitute for house
Bills two and three, and I would
like a roll call vote. You have
a roll call.
Alright standby As it gets
passed out. It's a big document.
Mr. Speaker. Would you like me
to read it Line by line?
And we're going to get it
online, too, for the public
Because everybody have a copy of
the House floor substitute.
When I take that as a yes.
Back to the gentleman.
Good. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
So I just want to give the body
just a brief overview of the
Um
So
What? Our floor substitute.
does. Mr Speaker Gentlemen from
Dona Ana is it maintains the
same level of recurring
spending, which was 5.9%
increase from what was voted on
in the L C framework.
Um, and that original
recommendation and that saves
about 52 million in fiscal year
25 from the current version of
what's being proposed for HB two
and three
Um
It reduces the overall general
fund amount of
What we consider to be
unnecessarily non recurring
spending and generates about 826
million in budget savings as
compared to the amount of non
recurring found in the current
version of HFCs.
House Bill two and three.
Um, our substitute spends about
1.77 billion and non recurring
While the current version spends
about 2.6 billion, and these
budget savings are used to
finance what we consider our
higher priorities in tax cuts.
Um and what we think needs to be
more spinning and road and
highway projects about 500
million towards road and highway
projects, Mr Speaker so we might
we might pull the General lady
from Berna Leo. With that little
nugget. We'll see. But
Um We also report re prioritized
General fund non recurrent
spending by providing
Um, about 150. More million
inroads.
And we changed the tax cuts the
tax package to 600 million
Um we film Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
from Dona Ana that the people of
New Mexico this is where it hits
their pocketbooks the most. We
want to have the biggest impact
for our working class folks, and
so
We think 600 Million is a much
more appropriate number given
that we've got about 3.5 billion
In new money. Um and
Um our our version of the budget
also creates greater state
reserves. Um, then both the LFC
recommendation and the HHS FC
version so ours would land at
about 53% for FY, 24 and 44% in
reserves and fy 25.
And
The last thing that I will
mention is the big difference
here again is the difference in
recurring about 875 million is
being saved.
And we think that the individual
earmarks are going towards
Greater needs in our
communities. So with that, Mr
Speaker, I'll stand for any
questions from Dona Ana is a
friendly floors. Substitute Mr.
Speaker. I have a couple of
quick questions. I don't think
it's friendly, though, if I
could ask a couple of quick
questions. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
from San Juan. Thank you very
much for bringing this. I know
the amount of work that goes
into it. I compliment you in the
team for
Doing that. So first, there's a
lot of work. Congratulations, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, the reason I
don't There are a number of
reasons. I don't think it's
friendly first. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I want to confirm
there is not $100 million in
here for projects through the
water transport. Is that
accurate? Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona
Ana. It is in our borders. It is
In our version.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm not
talking about the trust fund
that spins off a little less
than 5%. Annually. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm talking about in
house Bill two that came out of
HFC that sends $100 million to
the water Trust board for
expenditure on large projects
over the next
You know, 2 to 5 years.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona
Ana. I would point your
attention and see if this
answers your question If we're
talking
Apples and apples or apples and
oranges, but Page 204 lines 11
and two
Thank you. Mr Speaker. It does.
I appreciate you pointing me to
that. And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I think that does confirm what I
think it is. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, this is a permanent
water trust fund that spins off
a little less than 5% annually.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, the Water
Trust board is in a position to
make these largest persimmons to
needed projects all over the
state. So I appreciate Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen and
We do it differently. We move
that money so that it can go out
to communities all across New
Mexico. Right away, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, just a couple of
quick questions. I believe that,
um
You. There is $50 million that
you include in the Land of
Enchantment trust fund transfer
Is that correct? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from Dona Ana, That is
correct. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
The difference there, of course,
is $250 million. But Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the big difference
there is that we have projects
across five agencies.
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture, energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department. New Mexico
Environment Department cultural
affairs and others that those
funds Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
match federal funds at least 1
to 1, often, much, much higher.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen were in a
financial position to fully
capitalize that
And so that from now
For into the foreseeable future
will fully fund that. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen also want to
confirm we heard the gentleman
from Colfax. Real Riva. Uh more
and Santa Fe. There's $15
million less for Indian water
rights settlements in the
proposed budget that you bring
today Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen from Dona
Ana. So we we adopted the LFC
recommendation with regard to
that item.
Understood. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
For the body that was at $5
million from the LSC. The HFC we
raised that $15 million. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, in large
part to what? We heard the
gentleman speak about that There
are components of these water
rights settlements in
communities from
The Espanola Valley in the
northwest part of our state. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, work that
can be done right away that we
heard really convincing
testimony. This money would not
only help spur Congress to
finish these settlements sooner,
but also as Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, put that money on the
ground right away.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. One thing
of great concern that I'd ask
you to look at. I don't believe
that there is the $1.5 Million
for AOC for the ankle monitoring
for the ankle bracelet
monitoring I would ask you about
that, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'd
also point out we funded the
rural libraries.
Trust fund in HFC after much
discussion, I don't think that
that's included here and also Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. Is there any
additional funding for local
economic development? Actor
speaker gentleman from Dona Ana,
So there is money in there for
the world libraries with regard
to lead of funding. We matched
the LFC recommendation, which
again was voted on and
unanimously adopted.
Okay. Thank thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
And again with I think a lot of
pride there we adopted a $13
million increase to the local
economic development Act also,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, we
included half a million dollars
for site readiness surveys as we
start to flow money
aggressively into
Our economic diversification as
we're in a position to use that
we're going to be ready with
bipartisan legislation that does
site readiness surveys. Um, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
for answering my questions. I
would also just say, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, one of my big
concerns, and this is with the
Reserve area. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Um, we've ended the year at 30%
reserves the last few years.
Would you say that's accurate,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from Dona
Ana. I think, plus or minus, you
know 1 2%. I think we've been
really good about statement
saying above 30% to 2.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Uh, I
agree. Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
one of the actually the
interesting features we've seen
is we end the year at 30. We
come back, and even before we
come back, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
were up in the 40 up to 50%
reserves and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
That amount That's not earning
interest at a very high rate for
the state. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, that's not funding
infrastructure for the state. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, it's that
money. We certainly know and I
think we're being cautious about
spending too much, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, as we go over 30%
reserves and that that this
level
I think this means Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, that there is a lot
of money that can do really good
work in the state. That
unfortunately, isn't allowed to
do that. So unfriendly. But, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I want to
again. Thank you. I know the
work that goes into it. I
appreciate very much your
diligence and your answers.
Thank you. All right, we have an
unfriendly house floor
Substitute number one.
Is the debate on the substitute.
The gentleman from any Chavez
and Otero.
Representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
yelled Miss Speaker. I yield the
gentleman from Eddie, Travis and
Lincoln.
Um
Gentlemen, I just wanted to
Try to
Real quick synopsis on the
difference between what you're
presenting the people of New
Mexico as an alternative.
Versus the original HB two bill,
and that is that you took about
A billion dollars.
And took it out of
Growing government and gave it
correct, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from um
Travels.
Anyone, Otero? So, Yeah, I think
the way that I phrase it is
we're focusing on growing the
economy, not growing government.
And if I had to just pick, you
know a couple of things,
Honestly, The biggest
differences are the amount that
were allocated to tax cuts is a
huge difference in the amount
we're allocating to. Ah, roads
and highways. Frankly, yeah.
Yeah, And I appreciate that I Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I am.
I'll support the amendment for
the For that reason, because it
puts more money back in the
people's pockets.
And it has considerable more.
Money in infrastructure, and
those are the two that we've
heard testimony all over the
chambers today about how bad or
highways are
And quite frankly, $150 million
is a pittance of what the
highway department tells me.
They need in order to get us
fixed up and do it. Right. So I
stand for the debate on the
substitute The gentleman from
Eddie. Pardon me. The gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will come
from San Juan Yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr Speaker and John Wong
provision of your
Substitute bill was going to
eliminate
Or rather reduce the $300
million appropriation.
To the what's called the
conservation.
The Legacy Permanent fund.
And reduce that down to $50
million.
Are you aware that provision and
What are the consequences?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from Lee.
So the way I
At least colloquially understand
that
The name of that phone is it's a
land of enchantment fund.
Um and I the the current version
of HB two and three has 300
million. The floor substitute
would take that to 50 million.
Which matches what the
Legislature did in the in the
2360 Day session. Ms Speaker
Gentlemen from San Juan, Are you
aware?
Of a program that I believe was
described as 30 by 30.
That had the potential to put
State resources in competition.
With private entities for the
acquisition of land in the
state.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from Lee,
so the floor substitute has
language in it that would
prohibit the 50 million that
we're transferring to the Land
of Enchantment Fund for being
used to acquire any kind of real
property or real property
rights.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen asked,
and and I certainly do.
Appreciate that provision,
because I believe that 30 by 30
Public policy.
Has the greatest risk.
To frame market enterprise.
Of these lands.
Particularly with the
development.
Of carbon credits.
That would
Monetize if you will.
The conservation of these lands.
To turn doing nothing.
Into a profitable enterprise.
Very much do appreciate that
provision in
Your substitute legislation.
And I will be happy to support
it. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, gentlemen
For the debate on the floor
Substitute, the gentle lady from
Chavez representative as ill.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Will the gentleman yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
general lady.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much
along the same lines that
representative Scott was talking
about.
I had some
Concerns whenever I was reading
about the
Land of Enchantment fund because
couple of years ago we were
notified about the 30 by 30.
It's very troublesome to me that
government keeps growing in our
state right now. I think that
that are private land.
Versus what is owned by the fans
by
Core of engineers by the state
and other entities is very
troublesome.
And whenever it can be due to
decreased to the amount that you
did in this
Amended bill right here. I have
to support that as well.
Mr Speaker at
And gentlemen, from
Farming tonight.
I'm sorry. I called you the
wrong thing. Yeah, it is San
Juan County of
I guess I'm kind of concerned
about why we are not going ahead
with this floor substitute when
it can save the taxpayers of the
state of Mexico.
All the money that you have
pointed out here that we have
gone through and read about. So
I guess my concern is I know
what my
Constituents. Do they work hard
for a living? They don't want us
up. You're wasting their money.
And to me this since a clear
message to all of our
constituents that we are saving
them many we are preparing for
our grandkids and great
grandkids future to have a
viable state. As we all know, we
do have an industry that is
burning over 40 some odd percent
of the state's budget and it's a
volatile industry and we have
people out there that want to do
away with that industry.
And that is the oil and gas
industry along with agriculture.
Along with agriculture. As far
as I can tell Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from San Juan,
everybody eat
And we have to protect our
agricultural industry.
But whenever we have certain
rules coming up, and it's, uh
Been
discussed in lots of committees
already.
Our farmers and ranchers aren't
going to be feeding, being able
to feed the world like we have
In the past. We have seen the
decline in dairies in our area,
so those particular industries
have come off our tax rolls.
So, Mr Speaker. If I can save my
constituents some money and plan
ahead and have that money
available in case there is
another downturn is other
certain industries.
I think we're crazy not to
accept this. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, thank you very much.
There is for the debate on the
floors. Substitute the general
lady from Bern, Elio and
Sandoval. Representative Cates.
Thank you very much. Speaker
does the general person from San
Juan Lee yield
Ah, Mr Speaker, I yield it
generated from Benalouane
Sandoval. Thank you very much.
And thank you very much. Can
you? Um And I'm I'm new at this.
So I please. Thank you for your
patients. Can you identify to me
What line item on the summary is
is the enchantment fund that you
were speaking of?
Mr Speaker, generally from
Berna, Leo and Sandoval if
you'll turn to page 2 to 4
Starting line 15.
Yes. Thank you so much, Um
Thank you very much. Leader. Can
you tell me what percentage does
the removal of that lower the
current proposed budget?
Mr Speaker generated from
burning Leone, Santa Barbara
estimated divide 50 million by
300 million. Is that essentially
what you're asking me? Thank you
very much, Mr Speaker and and
and thank you very much general
person from from San Juan. I am
I'm looking at the summary sheet
That does do the percentages for
me and so you're absolutely
right. I don't have my
calculator out. My concern is
On page
For and what? I have not heard
their your proposal. It looks to
me like a almost 50% cut in the
Department of Health.
And 21.1% increase in the
healthcare authority.
Which is about a 30% decrease in
the Department of Health
compared to the current proposed
budget and my reading that
correctly
Mr Speaker, generally from um
Burnley on Sandoval.
Uh, to be clear. We're not
cutting any agency budget. So
we're talking about from FY 24
to 25. So we're not cutting
anything. The question is, Are
we matching the increase that's
in the underlying HB two and
three. I think that's sort of
the better point of discussion.
Um
And so no, we're not. We're not
cutting those. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you, general
person for that for that
clarification, But But let's
clarify your proposal is 30%
less than the current
Budget presented
For our state health programs.
Correct Mr Speaker generated
from burning Leone. Sandoval,
would you mind appointment to a
page in line on him trying to
track what you're asking?
Absolutely. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you. I'm
looking at the General Fund
Appropriation Submarine, by
agency page for
Um, line 134 and 127.
Mr Speaker generated from
burning Leo and and Sandoval so
I can see
Ah, what might be causing some
of the confusion so
The big change. You see, there
was the removal of the DD waiver
into a different part
department and so it looks like
their organization.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General person. Can you
tell me where the DD waiver is
located?
Mr Speaker, generally from
Benaglio and and, um Sandoval,
it's it's now in the Healthcare
Authority Department.
So thank you, Mr Speaker, and
thank you general person, So we
move the DD waiver. This would
explain the
Almost 50% reduction of the
current proposal in the
Department of Health, and we do
have a 21%.
Increase in the health authority
compared to the current proposed
budget. So is the 30% difference
or near 30% difference. Part of
the savings and what you speak
of.
Mr Speaker generated from
burning Leon don't are central.
I'm sorry. Are you when you say
30% of you talking about the 50%
Minus 20%, where you pulling the
30% from? Yes. Yes, sir. Mr.
Speaker, generally from
Burn, Leo and Sandoval. I mean,
you can't This is my
How I would understand. This is
You can't just subtract the
percentages. So that line item
of negative 49.7%, for example.
That's based off of a different
number than the 21% is. And so I
dont accounting wise match those
numbers.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady from Bernie. Leo. Mr
Speaker. I'm all over the table
house for substitute number one.
We are an emotion to table house
floors. Substitute number one.
To house Bill two House
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for House
bills two and three.
The
Gentlemen from San Juan has
asked for roll call vote. We've
got the roll call.
Okay. A vote of yes, and the
substitute would have been
tabled.
He would have known were back in
the substitute.
Everybody ready.
The vote.
Is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by vote
of 43 in the affirmative 25 in
the negative.
House floor substitute number
one for House Appropriations and
finance Committee. Substitute
for house bills to end three has
been tabled.
Back to the gentleman from San
Juan. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. I just
want to reiterate, um and sort
of drive home The point of a
couple of things. Um, number one
I again I appreciate the
leadership that you've shown. Um
my members tell me that you and
other members of your committee
work with
Our side of the aisle and I want
to just publicly say thank you
for that. I know you don't have
to do that. And so I appreciate
that.
Um, I think it makes a
difference when we're trying to
get dollars into our local
community, So I appreciate that.
I also want to publicly Mr
Speaker. Thank HFC and LFC
staff. This is a six and
sometimes seven day committee.
And the work that you folks put
in for us is not lost in us, so
I really appreciate the work
that goes into this as well,
including LSC staff where we
gotta
Budget guy over there to
appreciate what you do for that
as well.
So with that, Mr Speaker, I'll
I'll be done.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
further debate. The gentle lady
from Sun
Oh, Reba Sandoval, Santa Fe and
Taos representative era.
Mr Speaker will the kind
gentleman yield Mr Speaker, I
yield to the kind gentle lady
from Rio Rebo, son of scent of a
Sandoval and dust.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you kind. Gentlemen, I I would
like to compliment this
committee. Uh, the, um, the
House Appropriations Committee
for their work on on water
projects throughout the
throughout the state. And I
would like for you please, Mr
Chair. If you would elaborate on
all the things that you did to
make that possible. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady, Mr. Speaker, General Lady
our water investments, you know,
last year we actually did do 100
million
Into the Water Trust fund to
increase that distribution.
But Mr Speaker, General Lady
looking at it this year, what we
saw was a water trust board that
is moving projects along that
had a number of projects
actually over $100 million worth
of projects Because new
Mexicans, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, they've gotten the message
that now is the time that we
want to support infrastructure
investments in water.
That now is the time where those
aging pipes those wells. That
regional water system now is the
time to invest in that to fix it
to make sure that it's there for
future generations. And so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady combined
with the federal investments in
the matching funds that are
available, we followed your lead
something that you and your
interim committees and other
members have advocated for
Which is to put money directly
to the water Trust board and get
let them move that money out to
worthy projects all over the
state to better draw down
federal funds to utilize the
different streams of funding in
ways that are affective and so
combined with many other
efforts, including investment
and cogs and others.
We feel that now is the right
time to make this the year of
water investment.
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman, I
I really applaud you on this
effort. And for those of you who
don't understand this, the water
transport every year Does this
this huge analysis of all the
funds that are needed for the
state and all local communities
throughout the state Putting
asked for grants or for
applications to be approved by
the Water Trust board?
They approved over 300 million
in grants this year. That's what
you all know. I need to know
they approved over 300 million.
They have an annual allotment
from the severance tax fund to
pay out about 8.1% so they were
able to pay in the first in the
first round about 150 million of
these grants. So with the X now
That came down halfway on their
list. That's what I want you to
understand. I think the 1st 150
million were about
57 grands. Okay, The next 150
million were really from mostly
small and rural water
communities and I we saw this
coming down the road. These are
projects that have been fully
vetted. They've been for their
their shovel ready. The
communities have come together.
They have approved these grants.
So what? I hope my colleagues
No, is that we're able to fund
with this appropriation 100
million more that will mostly go
to small, mostly smaller
projects, mostly small rural
communities. Uh,
I worked diligently on this for
about the last six months, going
all over the state every time a
conservation meeting was
happening, or rural economic
development meeting was
happening or appropriation
meeting was wherever it was to
talk about this, and I had many
colleagues from both sides of
the aisle support. Support me on
this. This, uh
This appropriation past my
committee unanimously, so we are
very grateful. We are very
grateful that that the time is
now if you ask most people, what
is the most important issue in
the state of New Mexico? It's
water.
It's water.
And this is this is a
Very smart move by this
committee to fund water projects
While we have this amazing
surplus, I hope we can continue
this, uh, for the for the next
five years for the foreseeable
future, because that's whether
it's going to take to. Really,
um
Uh, help these water systems.
Um, um, come into the center
this this century. Most of what
you should know is most of these
water systems and I'm talking
about mutual domestic water
systems.
That do clean water, clean
drinking water. These projects
were really instigated about
right after World War two when
these veterans came back from
World War 275 years ago, they
built all these mutual domestic
water systems. Cease drinking
systems water systems that
support rural New Mexico support
our schools supported businesses
support everything in rural New
Mexico. I want you to understand
that
So
Their aging. These pipes are all
they're linking. We have several
problems, and with this money,
they can come into this century
so again.
Kind, gentlemen and Mr Speaker.
I really want to compliment the
committee on stepping up to this
urgent need in rural New Mexico
And I thank you so much. Thank
you, General lady. Thank you for
your leadership. There is from
the debate. The gentleman from
Otero representative blog.
Thank you so much. Mr. Speaker,
Will the gentleman from Dona
Ana, please yield Mr Speaker, I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from Otero. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen. For this budget. It's
quite extensive. I appreciate
it. I like to read long bills
with big words in them, And this
is one of them, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, so I will be quick
here.
I'm usually not very quick, Mr
Speaker, but I only have one
thing that I'm really trying to
hone in on here, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So I'm going to
direct you to page 9898, Mr
Speaker.
And so, Mr Speaker, I'm I'm
online.
Nine here.
And this is talking about
Funds that were giving for the D
D waiver Folks may via waiver,
folks, anyone developmental,
disability and state care in the
interim committee, Mr Speaker
Throughout the interim,
gentlemen, we have been speaking
about the need to adequately
fund are managed care providers
so that we can avoid
Such things as neglect and abuse
with folks under our DD waiver,
Mr Speaker gentlemen, according
to the New Mexico Department of
Health
Just in 2023. We had 777
individuals in the DD program
that had abuse, neglect or
exploitation. And as well, we
had 547 individuals who they
were determined to have been
abused, Neglected or exploited.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, so
With those harrowing and
horrifying
Statistics here. It looks like
it's a 33.9% increase.
Now, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the
federal government they're
supposed to.
We had our pit funds that were
adequately funding our
providers. But since the federal
government is cutting those RP
funds, essentially the state is
needing to fill the gap with
those funds for folks under the
DD waiver, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, So my question to
you, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is
how did we arrive at this $234
Million figure Online nine.
And I see the online 12. It says
it's $11 million increase. Where
did we get this figure? Mr.
Speaker? Gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, body. I just want to
briefly identify my experts. Of
course, there's Director Charles
easily from the Legislative
Finance Committee and Amanda
Dick Petty, Who's the chief of
staff for house appropriations
and finance. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. First there is a
I am told a that we do backfill
the federal funds that had been
used Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, over
$35 million to backfill those Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there's
further 3% increase to, uh,
better support Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, the with the DDP, See
Towards critical personnel,
including social workers and
staff attorneys, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, there's also 260,000
in one time money for a rate
study and guardianship. Wait.
list management. So, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen we're making. We're
backfilling the federal funds as
you pointed out, and I'm glad
that we're doing that together.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
We're increasing, uh, again,
Another 3% of roughly that.
We're increasing that matching
funds and importantly, we are
doing this rate study. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, as the body
knows, we have moved away from
the waiting list. We have
through really strong work.
Front loading federal funds
ended the wait list. What we're
finding Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
and we're going to have this is
where we have to do a lot of
measurement. A lot of tracking
because that wait list had been
there for so long. We're trying
to track um What rate Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen for new
Mexicans who receive services.
At what rate they're using those
services at what rate will they
be using those services in the
future so that we make sure an
adequately fund the services
support our providers? And we've
I think our budget does that Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. For that that
answer, So I see what the Lfc s
recommendation it was at 302
$150 million for the DD waiver
and under the current HB two, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, it is only
234 Million. Why did we reduce
that number from the
recommendation? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
consolidate. We consolidated
funding and I don't think that
there is a decrease. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we're looking here at
the page number.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. The Yeah.
We have it here on our sort of,
um more details she coming out
of lfc. We had a 28.2% increase
in the DDP c d d waiver. Excuse
me, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
increase that by almost 2% in
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
To 30.1%, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, So, um, we only
increase we increased that HFC
number here is 252,000,529
0.2000, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
So it was, it was increased
through the committee's work.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and I appreciate
that, and I see that there is an
increase. However, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, according to the rate
studies that I've seen that,
unfortunately, some of the rate
the folks in the race study were
contractors and I don't believe
that that is legally allowed,
According to the report that we
got in November from the
department.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
you know, according to what I'm
reading in your bill here, and
the number that we have, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, it rounds
out to about $14 an hour.
Plus legally required $4
benefits for these individuals.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, my
concern is
In my county where I live. We we
just opened a Dutch brothers,
and they offer 19 bucks an hour.
There is a local cannabis shop
that offers
19 bucks an hour Taco bell 17
bucks an hour.
And Mr Speaker. We have other
places in town, such as the
local pharmacy. They have 17
bucks an hour. You can go to
Taco Bell. I guess if you want
to be a ship manager, you can
get 18 bucks an hour. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, you know, I
my concern is we have not put
enough money in this budget to
allow for folks to want to
actually do this definite,
definitely hard.
Works and Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
My question is
How are we going to how are we
going to do this? How are we
going to manage that? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you for your
concern. Thank you for sharing
about these important services
and our providers. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. First we include a
roughly a $63 million block rate
in or bulk rate increased, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
For the health care Authority, d
D. P C over to the healthcare
authority, along with many other
programs. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
it's going to be up to the
health care authority to utilize
that in key areas, including
with, um with these providers to
bet match leverage and draw down
sort of the minimum 3 to 1
Federal match. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
In addition to the raw
increases, the 30.1% increase
the 2% that's really focused on
our work In HFC. There's another
block of over $60 million for
rate increases to the healthcare
authority, some of which can be
applied in this area.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and I
I hope that that's the case. I
do, But Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I
believe that it's it's necessary
to be intentional where this
money is going to ensure the
safety of these individuals. So,
Mr Speaker, I have an amendment.
To the bill. I would be happy to
Move.
This forward, Mr Speaker. The
gentleman moves House floor
Amendment number one to House
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for house
bills two and three.
Um, it's gonna get passed out,
Gentlemen, give it a minute
while it gets passed out, and
then I'll have you read the 2 to
7 number at the bottom. Make
sure we'll have the same.
Copy of the amendment camp.
Gentlemen, from Chavez received
Henry. It is your job to raise
your hand when the amendments or
floor substitutes get to that
side. That's your job as a
rookie, Okay, think of a job for
you, too. Gentle lady from
Burnley, herbs and butter, hon.
I'll think of one
Alright. You know from Chavez
indicates that the amendment has
reached the left side of the
aisle. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And I would like to request a
roll call vote on this once that
is happening, Mr Speaker 67.
Okay, You've got a real call.
Vote. Can you read the 2 to 7
number at the bottom? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. The tutu. It's
0.22785.
4.1, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
I believe that's what everybody
else on the floor has the
gentleman to explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And first I'm so glad
I'm no longer the rookie around
here so
God bless those new new
freshmen. We have so, Mr
Speaker, this amendment here.
It's regarding page 98 regarding
the D D waiver, and so it is
essentially
In essence increases the
increase. $10 million. So, Mr
Speaker.
This will change on page 98 line
nine.
The 234 million appropriation
and increase that to 244 million
and then online 11 to 12
previously stated 11,821,000
that is changed now to
21,821,000. That is the
amendment. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. Is this
a friendly amendment? Mr
Speaker? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. It is an unfriendly
amendment. I want to briefly
explain why Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the conversation we
had we robustly in fund
increases here for this year, Mr
Speaker. General. Gentlemen,
we're doing a rate study.
Because, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
we We want to make sure that
we're caught up across all areas
of health care.
This is year, one of the
healthcare authority and so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, sort of not
doing piecemeal, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Instead, we have
robust increases in our budget
rate study coming and the
ability to continue to invest
into right size as we match
federal money, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Last thing is, the health care
authority does have the large
amount of money that could
leverage almost a quarter
billion dollars, at least in
Medicaid funding to to work in
this area. At least partially,
thank you. Unfriendly amendment
is their debate on the
amendment.
Okay. The gentle lady from
Son of it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I moved to table House
floor Amendment number one.
We are on a motion to table in
motion to House floor Amendment
number one.
Mr Mr Speakers and number two.
I was number one. I'm sorry. We
had
We had a sent Mr. Speaker. Um we
are in a tabling motion to House
floor Amendment number one to
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
bills two and three.
The gentleman from Otero has
requested a roll call vote and
we have a grandson of the world
call. Vote yes in the amendment
would have been tabled. He would
have known we are back on the
amendment.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 40 in the affirmative 26 in
the negative House floor
amendment number one to House
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for House
bills to win three has been
tabled back to the gentleman
from Otero. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, and it's
unfortunate that it didn't go
through. I thought I was being
friendly today, but
You never know, Mr Speaker. So
you know these folks that we've
seen abused in
State care is is really scary
for me and for my constituents.
a couple weeks ago, we had
another person under the DD
waiver passed away in my
district. Unfortunately, Mr
Speaker, so I will continue to
be advocating for the safety of
these individuals in the interim
and here at the Legislature, Mr
Speaker, and, you know, I think
that we need to give these care
providers enough resources.
To ensure the safety of these
individuals and be able to
recruit the folks to be taking
care of these individuals,
especially the most disabled
folks in our state. Mr Speaker
there there was an opening for a
job opening in New Mexico and my
county in my district.
Mr Speaker, and it's been open
for over a year for a care
provider and I I hope that the
increase here will do something
to help this person and these
care providers. But Mr Speaker,
I truly wish we got extra money
explicitly put in the budget to
protect the most vulnerable
members of our society. So, Mr
Speaker, That's all I had on
this bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
for putting this forward. Thank
you. Thank you. Gentlemen. There
is further debate. The gentle
lady from Bernal, Leo
Representative Hochman. Be hell.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker. Does my dear friend, um
yield Dona Ana County, Mr
Speaker, I gladly yield to my
dear friend General Lady from
Bernard. Leo. Thank you very
much. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Dona Ana already talked a little
bit about the importance of
transportation in this budget
and infrastructure and how it's
a driver for
Economic development. My good
friend and vice chair,
Representative Garcia took care
of that. So what I would like to
talk about Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
from Dona Ana is a little bit
about how we arrived at this
process with this budget and
just how proud I am of not only
how we got to where we are. But
why
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Dona Ana, would you say I was
Happy with the first Met first
numbers we came up with for
transportation projects when we
first began this budget
exercise. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, you've
been an advocate for the
entirety of the interim. Which
is why Mr Speaker, General Lady,
we were proud to take that
advocacy and have a starting
amount of $40 million from the
General fund.
Speaker, general lady But Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
you re iterated and we knew that
that was only a start. And I
think you were not happy with
that. I think, Mr Speaker,
General Lady we all saw and
there was a lot of conversation.
your leadership and showing that
we could move higher, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General. Gentlemen
from Dona Ana. That is a very
polite way of saying that I came
to you asking definitely, for
more consideration and more
money to be put into the
transportation budget and the
thing I am most proud of Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona Ana
as you listened
And you didn't listen for into
the process. You didn't listen
the day before the process was
over, you began listening to me.
Actually, the day after I became
chair of this committee, Mr
Speaker asked me told me
actually to go big. And so I
did. I met with you and Vice
chair Dixon and, uh,
We talked
And we've had several
conversations about what we need
for infrastructure to help our
state. And the thing that I
appreciated most, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from Dona Ana was the
openness of the conversation.
The honesty and the willingness
to work with me.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen from
Dona Ana. As you said, we began
with a number of 40. We are now
at $150 Million, which any human
being is a lot of money that's
just coming from the House side
And Mr Speaker, General
Gentlemen from Dona Ana, I
cannot take credit for that
movement alone.
Um I had so many members, not
just on my wonderful committee.
I'm a little biased. I think I
have the best committee in here.
But
That's just me.
He had lots of people on both
sides of the aisle, asking for
more consideration, asking for
more money towards
infrastructure.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Dona Ana. I learned a very
valuable lesson myself as well
in that more doesn't always
necessarily equal more and what
that means. This budget Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona Ana
is in a state like New Mexico
Even though we have
Tremendous resources, excess
resources and revenue that we've
been talking about all year.
Doesn't mean that we have the
capability to get things done.
Money does not equal action, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen from Dona
Ana.
What New Mexico needs is human
capital.
And what we're finding with the
Department of Transportation is
we have lots of
Room to grow.
We need more engineers. We need
more folks on the roads filling
potholes. We need more people
going through every mile every
highway to make sure it's in
good.
We have people that are going
through and playing together.
The trip report that all of you
had on your desks today, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen from Dona
Ana, and that takes not just
money but people in time. And so
what? I'm most proud of in this
budget, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
from Dona Ana, is you give
enough money?
To make a considerable
difference.
To allow us to consider projects
that the Department of
Transportation has asked us to
consider, but that we also have
member considerations and member
of priorities in there as well,
But we give ourselves time.
And so we have a place to start.
It's 100 and $50 Million. Just
this year. You bet Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana. I will
be back next year, asking for
even more money and probably
even more money. The year after
that, if I'm lucky enough to be
reelected, and I just want to
commend you again for the
process this budget process.
Was different. It was open. It
was transparent. It was not
always easy.
It definitely came to a good
result. So I thank you for that.
Thank you for your leadership.
Thank you, gentle lady. There is
further debate the gentle lady
from Catrin Cierta Sakura and
Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
appreciate the time of the
gentleman yield. Mr Speaker, I
gladly yield gladly yield to the
General lady from Catrin,
Socorro, Sierra and Valencia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
wanted to say a couple of words.
First of all, Mr Speaker Kind
Gentleman wanted to thank Rick
May whose are
Genius on house, a budget and I
and all the work and time and
energy and effort that he put in
like to think that LFC staff
I mean, there really?
The guy behind the Green
Curtain.
Pulling all the all the chains
and figuring out how that's
that's all going to be put
together. I'd like to thank
Amanda
Amanda Dick Petty who, um
You know, it was always
Someday she looked very
stressed, but she was always
very approachable and tried
really hard to get all of all of
our asks and and always very
respectful and congratulations
for such a young and beautiful
woman to be in that position
Very proud of her. Um, Mr
Chairman, Mr Speaker, and, uh,
Um
Kind gentleman from Dona Ana.
Um, you know,
Uh, I just wanted to to thank
you for for always inviting me
in. I mean, I I reciprocated to
my colleagues How well you did
that and how much I appreciate
it. Um
It's a it's a welcoming feeling
to be able to be able to step
into your office early morning
meetings. I know I would always
bring you coffee. That wasn't a
bribe. I just knew that you
needed it. And so did I. Um And
so I just want to say I
appreciate that. And I think all
of our colleagues would think
the same if you that your doors
open and we really appreciate
that.
We, um
Um
Worked together and and my team
over here. Um, Mr Speaker. Kind
Gentleman. You know, we
advocated hard for C T.
We have a kid a hard for
schools.
Feeding our kids.
Um, health health councils. We
fought hard for health councils
veterans.
Our court system.
Water and reforestation.
Infrastructure and D O T.
We advocated. We all sat at that
half round table and you heard
Our voices and and trying to
work through and navigate Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
That whole process and so I just
want people to know how much the
team worked on, advocating and
and appreciate that. You heard
that and Mr Speaker Kind
gentleman, You know, I know the
framework. We all voted for the
framework. The framework was
Not completely
Whole like it didn't include BOT
for one thing, And so we as Ah
Um, Appropriations Committee
advocated hard for D O T. We
pushed and pushed and pushed the
last few years. We've put so
much more money and
And then a time when we have
over $3 billion in surplus, we
should be in our opinion, uh,
putting that towards
infrastructure and roads.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman. Um
I'm a little disappointed, Mr
Speaker. Kind gentleman that the
The Government Accountability
Management Trust Fund is not
scored as reoccurring. I brought
this up, Mr Speaker. Kind
gentleman in our committee room
because we are. It is recurring
for three years and its pilot
projects, Mr Speaker Kind
Gentleman, and I I'm all about
pilot projects. But I can almost
guarantee you that any pilot
project in this roundhouse
Comes in turns into recurring,
and so it's a concern. And I
know you heard me on that, Mr
Speaker. Kind Gentleman, the
other thing.
In this summary.
I highlighted a lot of really
great things, Mr. Speaker Kind,
gentlemen. But I also highlights
highlighted some things that I'm
Not happy with the Government
Accountability Trust fund is one
of them Trust fund. Yes, but the
way it's being used, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm not
completely happy with D O t. I'm
not completely happy with
But there's one thing that I'm
Extremely unhappy with
And that's
Funding for the 180 Day school.
Mandate that could possibly be
done through rule.
And so, Mr Speaker. Kind
Gentleman. Um
I have
Surprise.
So, Mr Speaker. Um, I'm gonna
wait for the amendment to be
passed out. We just received it
up here. The sergeant's on arms
Member just for clarification.
Our esteemed clerk has her
office has, uh,
Started a new numbering programs
so
Ah, from now on each proposed
floor amendment, Even if the
prior one was not adopted will
be
Numbered subsequently. So this
is House Floor Amendment number
two, even though House will
remember number one was not
adopted. That's a change from
prior practice, where if an
amendment was not
Adopted. You went back to House
floor Amendment number one, so
just to make sure everybody
understands that
Um, especially those watching at
Because it's 95 degrees outside.
it's been requested that folks
be allowed to remove their
coats.
I will allow it only because
it's 95 °F outside. Good job.
Gentlemen from Chavez, Alright.
The amendment has been passed
out.
General lady from
Catherine Valencia's koro,
Please read the 2 to 7 number on
the bottom.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It's
227779.1 fantastic. That's what
I have. And I believe that's
what everybody else in the
chamber has the gentle lady to
explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. What This
amendment does.
Is on.
Ah!
Page 131 between lines eight and
nine. Insert money appropriated
to the Public Education
Department shall not be used to
implement or enforce any rule
establishing a minimum
requirement of 180 days.
80 instructional days per school
year.
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
I'm from rural New Mexico. Mr.
Speaker Kind gentleman. And this
is, uh
This is very important to my
district.
The largest house district in
the state, and I would like a
roll call vote.
Can you have a real cover The
gentlemen from Dona Ana? Is this
a friendly amendment?
I think, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General Lady, Mr Speaker.
Generally first I want to thank
you and your team speaker,
General Lady, I think we worked
in a close and unprecedented way
and we see priorities and work
and on the ground input,
including Mr Speaker, General
Lady, there are a number of
times in committee were
language.
Suggested by committee members,
including colleagues of yours
was they worked hard on it. We
brought it up and we've adopted
that and I think that in
addition to the funding
priorities is a point of pride
that I share with you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady Mr
Speaker, General Lady, This is
an unfriendly amendment. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
All of the funding in house bill
two is related is not related at
all to any rule adoption. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, there are
increased. The recurring budget
for PD is not that high. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, this
special, Uh, special
appropriations are related to
the increased units that were
generated last year.
From districts prior to any
other actions from the
executive. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, the
We are operating without any
influence from or a nod to the
any potential rule adoption.
This is Mr Speaker, General
Lady. I think perhaps it would
put us into a place that we were
penalizing districts as they
choose to do different things.
In even though I know not
intended, Mr Speaker, General
Lady reason that I can't say
that I say that this is
unfriendly.
Okay is the debate on the
amendment? The gentleman from
Valencia representative Buck up?
Thank you. Mr Speaker, Will the
General 80 from
Coral, Catrin Valencia and
Sierra
Yield, please. Yes, Mr Speaker.
I yield to the kind gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generally.
Um, as as a member of the L. E S
C and as a member of education,
one of the reoccurring
Theme themes have been local
control.
And when we talk about this
through no matter what part of
the state
We've always heard.
Local school districts need to
have
Responsibility and local
decision making to support their
education based upon
Their community needs and what
they have.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, My
my fear and again.
Ah, is that
By funding being placed in
there. It's almost an automatic
that districts
Will be made to go to 100 180
days is that you're feeling it
in reason for bringing this
amendment forward, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman from
Valencia. That's exactly my
feeling. You know we passed
legislation House Bill 130 last
year.
And we actually amended it, Mr
Speaker to say hours instead of
days, and we did that on
purpose, Mr. Speaker Kind
gentlemen. Because we wanted to
give school districts the
option.
Ah, I have a majority of my
school districts that I
represent Mr. Speaker. Kind.
Gentlemen are four day school
weeks I was raised in a four day
school week and all four of my
Children and now my
grandchildren are being raised
in a four day school week. They
have about Comotto. New Mexico,
for example, has a 98%
graduation rate.
And several other things to add
on to that, And so, Mr Speaker,
kind, gentlemen. All I'm asking
is that we just don't fund this
rule.
Not legislation. This rule that
might pass Mr Speaker Kind
Gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. I too worked
extensively on house Bill 99 1
99. Like many of my colleagues,
bipartisan, actually.
And what we've come about, as we
do want as far as to
Make sure that we have this. We
worked about this. We did. I was
part of those conversations.
when we talked about hours and
not days.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
If this is basically districts
of force there, what would be
some of the unintended
consequences and additional
costs to those small districts
that may have be forced to go
from a four day to five day Mr
Speaker? Kind Gentleman
Little men and also utilities
utilities for keeping that
school open an additional day.
Uh, doctor's appointments in
four day school weeks. A lot of
doctors appointments, Mr.
Speaker Kind. Gentlemen are kept
on if they're off on a Friday or
a Monday, uh, some how districts
do it different than others. And
so the other
The other part of that is
Just the travel for the people
that live in the district that
maybe they don't have a bus that
goes to their house and picks
them up.
On tribal lands, Mr. Speaker
Kind Gentleman.
We send a bus.
If they if we're not able to
send the bus. If it costs us
more money, it's going to be
unacceptable for the people of
the community and the people of
the community. Mr. Speaker Kind,
Gentlemen are the ones that are
voicing their opposition in this
along with my school districts.
Yes, Mr Speaker and General Lady
I do.
The bussing is concerned for me.
I know in my desert, which is
not which is more part of the
Metro
We have some kids that are on
the bus for
Upwards of 45 minutes to an
hour.
Mr Speaker. General Lady is a
concern about
Is their students that actually
are on the bus longer than that,
as far as it will be, uh, not
able to work in certain areas or
be able to, uh, you know, as far
as whether it be ranching or
otherwise is there is there are
instances where this would be an
UN do hardship on those
families. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady Mr. Speaker. Kinda in one.
Yes, sir. It would be, um
A lot of instances because in
rural New Mexico what we have is
ranching.
We have the school districts, we
might have the four service
possibly the V L. A in my
district, but it is real
hardship.
On a lot of those families. The
feeder routes go up. If they
don't run a bus, we have to pay
more and feeder out If Mr
Speaker kind, gentlemen, if that
if no one knows what that is,
it's money that the school
districts pay for the parent to
drive their student to town.
To the school it if they don't
run a bus to their home.
And thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. Is there also
a concern about the teaching
staff and students that may be
affected if this role
Or this rule was imposed and
forced to go to the five day
week. Mr Speaker Kind.
Gentlemen. What happens? A lot
of times is this four day school
week is used as a recruitment
and retention tool. And so when
we take that tool away, Mr
Speaker Kind gentleman for rural
New Mexico. It is a hardship.
It's hard to find teachers.
That want to live in a small
town, especially young.
Teachers and we are growing a
lot of our own, but still it is
a recruitment and retention tool
that's used by the four day
school weeks.
And thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you generally, and I do
want to echo the my thanks and
appreciation to the chair and co
chair of the HFC.
Um
Because of this of this process
and
And the willingness to lead to
to listen and to support our
efforts and so my my heartache
and why I support this
amendment.
Is that I truly believe that
school district or local
districts and local communities
They need to have this and I do
not.
I do not support any amendment
or law.
Horse statute is where it's
taken away from our communities,
So I urge the body and those
that have, you know, heard from
your constituents.
That this amendment as far as
be supported. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady, there is for the debate.
The gentleman from son Juan
Representative Lynn. Thank you.
Mr Speaker Does the general lady
From Katherine Sierra Ciccarone
Valencia Yield. Yes, Mr Speaker.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan. Mr Speaker, General
ladies, so to me.
We talked a little bit earlier
about
Safeguarding the institution of
the legislature itself, and Mr
Speaker, I would submit to the
body that this is low hanging
fruit.
We passed the bill last session,
it was signed by the governor.
And it stated specifically that
we were going to fund school
hours.
Then the executive agency issues
potential rulemaking.
That not only changes what we
did but actually contradicts
completely.
And so Mr Speaker generated this
to me is not an R versus d
issue.
This is about protecting the
legislative body.
We made a decision after a lot
of deliberation that we were
going to fund our local schools
through hours and not through
days.
This language would make sure
that the legislatures will is
accomplished that the people of
New Mexico as well as
accomplished regardless of what
a particular executive agency
tries to do through rulemaking,
and so that to me, Mr Speaker is
what this amendment is about.
Is making sure that our voices
as a legislative body or carried
out when we put that into law.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There is
further debate the gentlelady
from Chavez, representative as
L. Mr Speaker. Thank you very
much for the general lady.
From Catrin Sears, according
Valentia yield. Yes, Mr Speaker,
I yield to the kind lady from
Chavez.
And Mr Speaker, I have to
reiterate what Speaker line to
sit. Ladies and gentlemen, we as
a body passed this
And to have it changed just by
rule is appalling to me. We
heard from the school districts
that do have four day a week. We
voted to go buy ours not by
days.
The smaller school districts
can't afford that extra day of
bussing of utility of custodian
work of cafeteria workers, and
the list goes on and on and on.
Mr Speaker General.
Gentlemen and gentle ladies of
the house.
This is what was signed.
This was signed by the governor,
and now it's going to be changed
by somebody that says I have the
authority to do it. What's
happened to our authority?
We are the ones that are
listening to our constituents.
And yet we are having somebody
say no, we've changed our mind.
I am not going to stand for
this, and I hope you will take
the same stance. I do. We have
to listen to our smaller schools
that do go to school four days a
week that are excelling.
They are excelling. Ladies and
gentlemen, Their scores are up
here.
And we have to promote what they
are trying to do to educate the
rural areas of our state. Mr
Speaker, General lady, Thank you
for this amendment. I hope that
people use their head and do
what our constituents need. What
we promised that we would do for
him and we did it and not have
it changed just by a rule. Thank
you very much for the debate on
the amendment, the gentle lady
from Eddy and Lea.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady from Catrin, Sierra
Sikora and Valencia, please
Yield? Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to thee Kind Lady from Eddy and
Lea.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I do
stand in support of this
amendment.
I have had a great deal of input
from my district. We do have
some four day weeks schools.
And they're adamant that they
wanted to stay that way because
the performance is so much
greater for them. And, of
course, the cost savings that
have been detailed here as well.
So, um
Mr Speaker, General lady, Um, I
You know, we know about 180
days. Um
Work. We passed a law, saying
hours would be the measure of
it.
Can you tell me, General Lady,
Mr Speaker? Um, what kind of
test scores that we're seeing
when the in the four day a week
schools compared to the five? Mr
Speaker, General lady? Certainly
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. Um
I'll use Comotto as a as a, for
instance, but they are in the
98th percentile of all their
scores across the state of New
Mexico, A small rural New Mexico
200 kids in the school in the
classroom. I'm not privy to a
lot of the other scores, Mr
Speaker Kind lady, and I know
there's high scores and other
areas, but I'm really just
pushing Mr Speaker Kind Lady.
For the legislation that we
passed and is in law right now
and to keep local control. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General, ladies so
It seems that after a lot of
school districts settled into
the four day a week pattern
That it became more popular than
I think. They predicted. The
teachers like it.
Administrators like at the
students like it. For one thing,
it opens up opportunities to do
more on a weekend if you can
tack on that extra day.
And I know for a lot of
students. That's educational
time for them.
Time with their families, and
that's all very beneficial for
Children.
Um So, Mr Speaker and General
lady, um all I can do is say I'm
a spokesman for my district.
Um, what I'm hearing is, Let's
not undo something that's
working very well. In fact, in
some cases excelling over the
norm.
And
Mr Speaker and
General lady. There's word going
around here at the roundhouse
that as soon as we
Conclude our legislative
session, the public Education
Department is going to move to
put this rule in it will be out
of here at that time.
I hope they're hearing us now.
And I agree with what was, said
Mr Speaker. The legislature
spoke
It's in law and for someone to
suggest a rule trumps law. I
think that's very incorrect and
inappropriate. So I hope will
pass this amendment that I hope,
Mr Speaker.
This truly isn't an R versus d
issue.
And it's often said that not
much changes when we come into
the chamber we've kind of set
are
Minds up on things, but I hope
on this one
We will all yield to the input
that we're getting from our
constituents. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Debate on the amendment
that generated from McKinley to
present evidence from Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the lady yield?
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to
thee, kind Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Lady. Um
I'm trying to get my head around
this amendment. We basically
saying that we would no longer
allow for the four day school
week in the current budget as
being proposed.
Mr Speaker, Kind, lady. No, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Then what
are we saying?
Mr Speaker. Kind Lady. We're
funding schools in this, but
what I might amendment does is
says you cannot. This money
cannot be used if the 180 Day
Instructional, um
Days are made by rule. We cannot
use this funding to fund that.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Did Elia Sea weigh in on this
during your hearings.
Mr Speaker. Kind lady. I don't
remember. But I do know that, um
And I can be corrected. The
majority don't care for the 180
days. They did not weigh in
specifically on this amendment.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady that
surprises me since this is a
program issue, and it's always
been my understanding that when
it comes to program
And it comes to public education
that the L. E. S. C.
Gets to talk about that gets to
weigh in on these issues, so
that that wasn't the case.
during your hearings. Mr
Speaker, Kind lady.
No, ma'am.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I am
also very concerned about things
that are done by rural
When it comes to, um
A legislative responsibility.
I think that we need to prevail
on that Mr Speaker, General
Lady, as opposed to
Being told this is what we're
going to do.
Um
You know I come Mr Speaker,
General Lady from a very rural
community, a very rural county.
And there's been a lot of things
have been put on us over the
last few years have been very
detrimental to the to the area.
Trying to get that straightened
out. But at this point, I just
wanted to have some
clarification on what the policy
position was of Elia Sea as you
were building the budget on this
issue, Mr Speaker, Kind Lady.
I'm being told that Ellis L. E.
S C supported local control.
As as they have, Mr Speaker,
General Lady since I've been up
here
Thank you very much.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The
Gentlemen from
Catrin, either Algo and Grand
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will the
generally from Katherine Sierra
Zokora imbalance here, please
Yield. Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentle
lady. You know, here's the
Here's The thing is, you know
for all of us that are in rural
have ruled districts.
We know from some of our
districts. We're hearing from
the superintendents and what
they need and you know
We obviously
Nothing is perfect.
But we definitely don't want to
yield our authority here. And
what the intent of this body
was Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Um in what? The legislation that
we passed last last time.
I think for me myself.
I see some of the kids that go
to school in my district.
And they've been mentioned, you
know, but it's hard. Imagine
being a little kid having to
ride a bus one way.
For an hour and some of this,
some of these places that we're
talking about. They don't have
self service so that they're not
able to just get on their phones
and stuff. It's a long way one
way.
And imagine the dedication um,
that a teacher and educator
superintendent principal has and
all the other faculty and staff
have
To just work at that district,
way out there and animus New
Mexico, for instance.
And if you've never driven that
it's a long way out.
If you're a parent, and you have
a child in that in those areas
And your your child needs a
doctor's appointment. It is a
long way.
So a doctor's appointment
whether if they got an injury in
the sporting event, or whatever
to go to Silver City, it's a
it's a good hour and a half two
hour drive.
If you want to go to law School,
says it's about a little over
two hours from that area, And so
you know, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I appreciate you putting
this on. You know, we can't do
this. Um, again. It's been
stated several times that this
isn't a R or D legislation. But
it is something that we all
supported the last time and it's
some
It may not be the perfect
language, but it gives at least
a signal to, um and unelected
that, you know, to respect that
this body. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally.
There is a debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General lady yield Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I think there was
a question about Ellie SCS
position last year when we
passed the language Did Elia
Seaway in about adding that
language into the budget last
year?
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. As
as I recall, yes.
Summer speaker and and generally
I think that does answer the
question about that. Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
During the LFC process this
year. Um, when there was
discussion about the rulemaking
process taking place
Did.
Superintendents and teachers and
parents and students all way in.
To the secretary
of Education of Ped Did they
weigh in at that point and make
it very clear where they stood?
Mr Speaker? Kind gentleman. Yes,
they did. And and, um
LFC. Actually, the interim
committee sent a letter to the
secretary.
Ah, wishing him requesting him
not to do this. So one last
question. Um, gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, Um
Your language here.
Would ensure that ped could not
punish
These communities. Is that
correct? Is that the main reason
for this? Not that
Folks couldn't go down this road
that is being suggested, but
punitive measures could not be
taken against our districts such
as withholding money from these
districts. Yes, Mr Speaker. Kind
gentleman. So thank you, Mr
Speaker. I think it behooves all
of us who represent these small
districts and are taking
advantage of this.
To make sure that we're
protecting them were texting
their pocketbooks, the school's
pocketbooks and quite frankly
where we have the best school
districts in the state are the
small school district. So thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
further debate. The gentleman
from Chavez, Eddy and Lea,
Representative Mason. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, do you
yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield Mr
Speaker, General lighting
To come from the district that
has
Two of these four day a week
school systems.
And I have
I know that I my emails and
texts have been let up.
For me, too.
Try to defend their right to
have their four day a week.
And, uh,
So today, I'd like to stand in
full support of this amendment.
We tried to ensure that the
local school districts can
maintain their control over
their hours of instruction.
Thank you.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's
for the debate. The gentleman
from Chavez Edion Otero,
Representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. All the general
idea yields Yes, Mr Speaker, I
gladly yield
General 80. Do you know of any
of these four day school?
Any of these school districts.
That are operating successfully.
And efficiently on the four day
system.
That are asking.
To be pushed to a five day week.
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. No.
And general Lady isn't
Was it?
True that I understood. You say
that many of these, including
the one that tomato was
operating
Um
With 98% graduation rate.
Yes, Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman
there one of the top schools in
the state and have received many
awards. And generally I tell you
that Penny, Asco and Cloudcroft
Um
The same.
Type of criteria exists.
Ah!
You know, I sometimes wonder if
we just can't stand prosperity.
We find something that works.
Our people are happy with it.
They asked that we continue it.
Continue it.
The performance of our Children.
Is exceedingly good.
And for no good reason.
We decided we're going to change
it.
And we're going to change it to
something that costs more.
Is less efficient.
Makes those people in those
rural communities mad.
And I wonder what in the world
are We doing? What I mean, Who
are we listening to? We're
supposed to listen to our
constituents and our
constituents that have schools
that operate like this are
asking us to remain as it is.
They want the option of local
control and to work on a four
day work.
School week, so
I think it's um It's a pretty
common sense.
That we should listen to the
people that are doing a great
job that are educating kids and
kids are enjoying going to
school and we need more of that.
So I strongly supported
Is there food to beat on the
amendment?
Gentlemen from Bernal, your
representative Romero. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker, I gladly yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentle lady and thank you
for proposing an amendment. You
know, I know that the LFC had
voted in December. I believe
too.
Send a letter in opposition to
180 days is that
True, General lady. Yes, Mr
Speaker. I stated that earlier
that they we did in December.
Make that vote and we did send a
letter.
In opposition.
Right. And I appreciate that Mr
Speaker and General Lady, you
reiterating that to me, and we
did. The same in the Legislative
Education Study committee is
that we sent a letter during the
public testimony phase of
Of the hearing for the rule
change because we've heard from
our districts that they do not
support 180 days. Um
Mandate. They, um, the public
Education department will also
take away the embedded
professional development time
within schools. Um
As part of their rule, and I
don't know General lady if that
part is addressed in your
amendment.
Uh, Mr Speaker Kind Gentleman.
It is not. Basically it's just
the 180 days at this point in
time, um, for
Instructional days.
And
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
That's part of the problem that
I have with your amendment here
because I appreciate the 180
days, which I have heard
reiterated over and over again
and has caught headlines in the
news. However, what's important
to my constituents is the
embedded professional
development that would go away
as a part of
The public education's rules, so
I think that's a key component
for the body to know that's
missing here from the amendment.
The other thing Mr Speaker in
general Lady is that would the
amendment should it be adopted?
be vetoed or potentially vetoed
by the governor?
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman. I
must. I'm assuming yes, it could
be line item vetoed.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady.
That's part of my concern. Where
as one of the principal sponsors
of house Bill 130 in our last
session to make law that's very
clear that it's 1140 in terms of
hours. Not days that we sent
that message one by passing the
legislation and to
Sending the letter on behalf of
the LFC and the L. E. S. C to
say our intent was the hours and
not the days and embedding that
professional development, which
again General Lady is missing
from your amendment. Um and then
I fail to see that if we adopt
this amendment
And it be subject to line item
veto exactly what we're doing.
I'm all about sending a message
and I've been very clear and
upfront with our districts and
being able to do that, but it's
missing one key component. I
think to how spill 130. It would
be subject to the governor's
veto, so ultimately the power
resides with her.
Furthermore, Mr Speaker in
Section five and the
supplementals the funding for
the program, as it reads now
would be for the programs for
those schools that are doing 180
days or more already, and I fail
to see where in the budget
Exactly the wiggle room for
adding the extra days might be
so. Whereas Mr Speaker and
General Lady, I certainly
respect the amendment that you
brought in, certainly stand in
solidarity with those school
districts that are on a four day
a week calendar. Um
I think it misses half the point
of House Bill 3rd 130 from last
year as well as I think the
language in the budget, um is
sufficient at not increasing
those days. So with that, Mr
Speaker and General lady, I have
stand in opposition to your
amendment. Thank you for the
debate.
On the amendment. I'm sorry. Did
you want to respond? If you
don't mind, Mr Good. The whole
this whole budget, Mr Speaker,
Kind Gentleman.
Is subject to veto to line item
veto.
This is the opportunity, Mr
Speaker. Kind Gentleman to take
a stand. It's our only
opportunity that we've been
given to take a stand. We passed
a law.
With the hours
That is going on recognized. We
are losing our authority as the
legislative branch of New
Mexico.
And that is why I brought this
amendment. It may not be
perfect. Let her veto it.
At least we're trying to do
something. I don't see any other
amendment, Mr. Speaker, Kind
Gentleman.
Trying to do this so far today.
Right for the debate on the
amendment.
Can't the gentlelady from Berlin
representative chasing
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House for Amendment number two.
Right. We're in a motion to
table House floor Amendment
number two to House
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for House
bills to end
Three.
The Lady has asked for a roll
call vote. We've granted a roll
call vote of yes, and the
amendment would have been tabled
A vote of no and we are back on
the amendment.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close. The
borders are closed by a vote of
30 in the affirmative 39 in the
negative.
The motion to table House Forum
and number two to House
appropriations and finance
Committee. Substitute for House
bills to win three
It has failed.
Back on the amendment General
Lady from Katherine Theater
Valencia
Um, Mr Speaker. I move adoption
of this.
With the right emotion to adopt
the amendment.
And our board operator needs a
second.
All right. We are on adoption to
adopt House Floor Amendment
number two for House
Appropriations and finance
Committee. Substitute for House
bills two and three vote of Yes.
And the amendment would have
been adopted.
He would have known and I'm not
sure what happens after that.
We're in the Twilight zone.
What's about to close. The vote
is now close by a vote of 42 in
the affirmative 26 in the
negative.
House floor Amendment number two
to House Appropriations and
Finance Committee. Substitute
for House bills two and three.
Has been adopted. Your lady from
Katherine's koro, you still have
the floor. You still have the
floor. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
would like to thank the body for
standing up and speaking for
their constituents, and, uh,
it's maybe the First Amendment
ever.
That I got on a bill and
especially house Bill two. And,
um, I'm I'm surprised, but I'm
not surprised. It makes me feel
good. Mexico speaks
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Gentle lady. Next we have
the gentleman from Sandoval,
representative Harper.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Dona Ana healed?
Mr Speaker? I yield to the
gentleman from Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I
I had several ideas to share the
good, the bad, the ugly. Um, but
I think a lot of this has
already been shared. And I
think, Mr Speaker gentleman
I just want to maybe make one
point. Um and then I can yield
the floor to others who would
like to speak But
Miss speaking German. Um I know
this is a very open ended
question. But what do you
believe?
Is the largest problem in
generating a budget.
Uh huh.
Ah, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, the
largest problem in generating a
budget.
I would say, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, accounting for
Needs.
What? Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the
at least in the past.
We were uncertain about what was
coming in. We were uncertain on
what we could build a budget
upon the speaker gentleman that
since changed
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and I
think also the question we
always ask ourselves is what's
going to be different when we
pass this budget when we do this
work when we make these
investments, So what's going to
be different? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, may be the biggest
question.
Yeah. Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I appreciate you saying that and
I and I that is totally valid. I
And I'm just gonna take a slight
nuance on it. You said the word
uncertainty.
Not knowing what we have.
And
Mr Speaker. Ladies and
gentlemen, I believe that really
is our biggest problem in
developing a budget.
Um, I actually heard this and
it's not. It's not a rail on the
staff at all.
I think I first heard this from
all of the staff when John Clark
was the uh, director or the
economic lead at LFC, he said.
The only thing we can be sure of
when we have the projections.
And when you think about that,
how we actually build the
budget, right? The budget we're
voting on right now is for
fiscal year 25.
Which starts in July.
Right. And so the money that
we're spending now is based off
of an estimate a guess?
Of how much we're going to have
Starting in July and going a
year out right and
And if we could all predict what
would happen in a year and a
half.
Um I think all of our 41 ks and
you know, we we'd all be doing
really well, right?
And and our staff does the best
they can.
But
They just It's impossible to get
it right.
And so, Mr Gentleman
Um, having been here for 12
years, and I know there are many
folks who have been here longer
than me, but a lot who have not.
The most painful years for me
are the bad years. We've gone
through too awful cycles where
we had to come back.
And cut
Um
To the bone, and I remember how
painful that was. I mean, swept
money from K through 12. Public
schools in my district called me
up and said, What are you doing?
We've been punishing our pennies
so we can pay for some new H
fact facilities because the old
ones are falling apart in our
schools trying to keep your kids
warm.
And I said, Yes, we're trying
not to do that. But that's what
ended up happening.
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I just want to share an idea.
Um And I hope maybe
This idea. We think about a
little bit.
Must be your gentleman.
We have incredible reserves.
Right? I remember when we were
fighting for 15% 18% reserves.
And and we're having. I believe
32% reserves is what the
calculation is. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Yes, speaker.
Gentlemen. That's that's
amazing, and we can actually
came into this session with
something of 40 something
percent reserves.
I'm just thinking we might have
An incredible opportunity.
Write something that would be
transformative.
Right. That would just change
the way we do. Budgeting. Um
And and I just would like all of
you to imagine that when we
build the budget when we come
here for next year
We already have the money for
next year in the bank. There are
several states that do that, And
I remember learning about this
during, you know, NCSL
conferences and just being so
envious right that we don't
have. They don't have to worry
about
Is that money? We're guessing
where they have not going to
show up.
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I would just ask that
you the staff and are
appropriated committees. Think
about that.
Essentially two or three years
with reserves at 30 40%.
You could have in the bank.
All the money you need for the
next year.
And I know that would mean we'd
have to spend a little bit less.
But
We're spending a lot more than
we did when we started when I
started here. Our budgets are
about $5 billion.
They they've doubled.
Right?
So I think this this might be an
opportunity and I just want to
just want to share that with you
in the body. Something that you
know could be disruptive and how
we do budgeting here, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I've got an
idea for you.
And expendable Trust. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, What we see,
in fact, is innovative policy
from lfc that and from our
committee, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
that begins to go down this
road, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, as
we've talked about in our
expendable trust right now it's
about $512 million.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, Programs
for three years. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, there's that
guarantor of funding.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, there's a
front side of essentially that
core question. What's going to
be different with these
investments and Mr Speaker?
gentlemen going through some of
these investments, it gives us a
great opportunity to have a
conversation. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm going to go down
here. This is on our
Some of these investments, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, first aging
and long term services, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen within aging
and long term services, we know
that we have an aging
population. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, we actually uh and Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, we know that
there are innovative programs
that serve this aging
population.
Well, that adds, you know, in
some cases, particularly in
rural areas, groceries and
access to fresh food. Big issue.
Big challenge, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and so as we go down
this pre funding route, which we
have chosen to do in this
budget, That's something that we
can look and address. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I want to
keep going down this list.
Implement and evaluate you three
employment apprenticeship in pre
apprenticeship programs. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, this is
further language targeted
towards disengaged and
disconnected young adults who
are currently unemployed or at
risk of being unemployed and not
currently enrolled in high
school. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
we face a huge challenge.
But also stand on the precipice
of a huge opportunity funding to
build infrastructure. Whether
it's the water projects that we
discussed earlier whether it's
highway projects, which now $2.1
billion will have been
appropriated by this
legislature, just in special
appropriations. We need the
people to do that work. And so,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Your idea. We're actually trying
that out. We're moving that
forward, working with our higher
education as institutions. I'll
keep going down the list here,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen again,
These are three year
appropriations. Um
That our budget and in each
fiscal year so it's making sure
the funding is there. You said
year to year we're doing three
years in specific target areas
we think are the most important.
Let me just go down. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, briefly with our
Children, Youth and Families
Department within C Y F D. We
know there are very important
investments that need to be
made.
But more results that we need to
yield. We talked about aging and
long term services. Mr Speaker
Gentlemen within early
childhood. It's a particularly
exciting one because that's
raising the wage and career
ladder. Not only Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, are we going to have
the best paid K through 12
teachers, but we're on the road
to getting the best paid.
Early education teachers and an
early childhood educators, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I want to
go down certainly within the
public education department.
There are a number of others.
We've got the higher Education
Department, which is one of the
single largest recipients within
the trust fund, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Funded at $60 million courses.
We know Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
That's $20 million a year for FY
2526 and 27, and this is to pay
up to the full cost of student
tuition and fees for workforce
training courses not eligible
for other state financial aid
and the results in an industry
recognized credential or
endorsement.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, This is
language that we worked on in
our House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Going down the road, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen were Workforce
Solutions Department.
Integrated basic education and
skills training programs,
providing basic skills and work
force development.
Ah!
Are is another big one. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, this is
something to pilot and evaluate
expansion of integrated basic
education and skills training
programs, something we learned
over the summer, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'll wrap up after
this, But I appreciate again.
You're pointing to the idea and
the ability to pre fund where in
the past, we were
Just hoping that we wouldn't
have to defund. Now we can pre
fund Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, when
we only use federal dollars in
our workforce Solutions
Department and in our higher
education department, it really
doesn't allow us to reach all
new Mexicans were doing that
through our pre funding
approach.
Speaker and gentlemen, Thank you
for that answer, And and and I
appreciate where you're going.
What's that? And
I think I was imagining
something just a little bit
different, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, but I do appreciate
what you're doing there. I'll
just say the
The the added benefit of having
all that money in the bank as if
the bottom does fall out.
We've got a backup. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes.
Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you. For that. I will yield
another other folks that would
like to speak, but
Thank you for the great work you
and the committee did and the
staff we really do appreciate
all the work that goes into
making this budget. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
There is ready to bait the
gentle lady from Achille
representative Lundstrom.
You know, Mr Speaker? Thank you
for calling on me. I got a ton
of questions, but I'm going to
pass today. Thank you.
Okay?
Uh, there is further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representatives representatives.
Nope. God.
Okay, We're skipping over. No.
Okay, represented Scott.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. Will
the gentleman from Donna and you
yield Speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
looking at a spreadsheet here
that has the
Special, supplemental and
deficiency appropriations and
see
On that list a billion dollars.
That is going most of which is
going to
Governmental accountability
funds.
In the question. I have
Is why we
Would need to spend a billion
dollars
On governmental accountability
because I always thought
That this legislature, the House
and the Senate and the
administration.
We're accountable to our
constituents.
Without spending a nickel. Could
you explain this speaker?
Gentlemen, I'd be happy to Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, there's $512
Million in the expendable trust.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, first
to be very clear There is $512
million in the expendable trust,
not the billion dollar figure
that you alluded to
Second, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
the conversation that I just had
with the gentleman from
Sandoval.
Roughly half of that, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen is set aside
for uh annually three years of
appropriations.
In the most high impact high
importance areas, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen that includes
Workforce Solutions Department
that includes our aging and Long
Term services department are
higher Education Department.
Most of this Mr Speaker.
gentlemen, with the exception of
aging and Long term services, C
y F D. Perhaps it's all about
expanding our workforce. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so that is
high impact money about 200.
$40 million, just about half of
the total amount in the
expendable trust Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the remainder that's
in the expendable trust serves a
couple of key purposes. First,
it acts as an immediate reserve
should anything that is
unforeseen. Unexpected happened
out in the in the larger
economy.
In the larger world, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, that money is
accessible easily. It ensures
that we won't have to cut
teachers cut line Force mint cut
healthcare workers or any of the
cut state police officers, other
things like that, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, further because we
know we have this
Revenue strength over the next
few years. That funding allows
the Legislature to innovatively
work to target investments
towards other high priority
areas. In effect, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, taking the most
impactful places to invest, and
I would think you would agree,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Our higher Education Department
workforce solutions and creating
a stronger, diverse, well
skilled workforce is at the very
top of that list. We can
continue to do that as we go
down the road, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, in a year or two time
there may be additional work
that have to come when it comes
to healthcare professionals or
other areas.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, but
that's a short synopsis of this
trust fund and its uses.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
nonetheless, in spite of it
being called a trust fund, the
monies or in fact being spent
over a period of three years.
So and I suspect that if
Times get tough.
Those would be subject to re
appropriation by the next
legislature because we're as
alert as a house. Where's the
Legislature?
Cannot put that money into a
lockbox with that Mr Speaker, I
would like to propose I would
like to move. House Amendment
number three.
True.
House of House appropriations
substitute for HB two and three.
Ah!
Okay. That's house
Appropriations and finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bills two and three. I would
like to move
House as amended. I would like
to move House Bill number three
for consideration and request a
roll call vote.
Right. Uh, the amendment will be
passed out.
Okay. Looks like the amendments
been passed out. Gentlemen, Can
you please read the 2 to 7
number at the bottom?
Mr Speaker. That number is
227780.2 gentlemen to explain
the amendment.
Mr. Speaker of this amends the
legislation on page 111 between
lines 22 and 23.
And basically says money
appropriated to the Department
of Environment.
Shall not be used.
To implement or enforce any
rule.
Establishing a new state motor
vehicle emissions standard.
Including electric vehicle.
Mandate.
Gentlemen, Is this a friendly
amendment? Mr. Have a couple of
questions, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, Does this have
anything to do with your
question about the trust fund?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, it does
not. Okay, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I was I was trying. I
was racking my brain to try and
figure out if there was a
connection there. Good gentlemen
apologize for the shifting
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Uh, the
The budget is the appropriate
place to pursue policy. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um, numerous, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen from Donna India. Yes,
Speaker. Gentlemen. Does the
gentleman think that respiratory
disease is a problem in New
Mexico?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
can. We can have a very long
debate. Excited to Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen about the consequences
of
40% of electric vehicles running
in New Mexico on the air quality
of this planet.
Hey, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. I didn't quite get an
answer. Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
but as your I believe this is
going into the New Mexico
Environment Department. I
haven't looked at the page
number. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
it seems that you're going in
saying the rules and regulations
protecting new Mexicans Health
and safety. You want to make big
decisions about that here on the
house floor.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, from
Donna and you with respect to
electric vehicles? Yes.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. Gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Um, I could
ask a lot more questions. But Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I want to
share my strong opposition to
this amendment. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think the gentleman
is proposing going in saying the
health safety and well being of
new Mexicans is secondary.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen to
Ah, something quick actions here
on the house for and albeit Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, with the
best of intentions. I can't
support the amendment. Thank
you, lady from Berna Leo
represent Casey.
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House Floor Amendment number
three.
We are on a table in motion to
House floor Amendment number
three.
Appropriations and finance
committees was to for house
bills two and three.
The amendment would have been
tabled.
A vote of no, and we're back on
the amendment.
The vote is now open.
The vote about to close.
What is on closed by voting 43
in the affirmative 25 in the
negative House floor Amendment
number three to House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bills two and three has been
tabled generally from earlier
represented Casey.
Mr Speaker, this matter, having
been debated for three hours, I
moved to close debate.
Gentlemen.
Point of order, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, hold on.
We are the three hour mark we
are supposed to dispose of
The amendment in front of us,
which we did. We can now move to
close the bait because we are at
the three were passing.
Mr Speaker from earlier speaker.
Mr Speaker. Point of order, Mr.
Speaker. I believe I still have
the floor. Okay. Um I had two
different people Ask
So, gentlemen.
You have the floor until we
disposed of the amendment, which
we did.
Which we are supposed to do by
rule.
Now we're at the point where we
are passing three hour mark and
I can go to the general Lady to
move to close debate, which
Um, Mr Speaker. I have two more
amendments to propose.
Gentlemen, we are past the three
hour mark, and I appreciate the
amendments. But we are past the
three hour mark. Mr Speaker.
Point of order.
State Your point, Mr Speaker.
I believe you went to the
gentlelady from Bern, Leo. And
properly uh, the gentleman
should have been able to have
his closing remarks at that
point.
And I believe he was likely to
enter a new amendment at that
point, But Mr Speaker, you
avoided the gentleman from Lee
County and went directly to so I
believe that you went out of
order. Mr. Speaker, you should
have returned to the gentleman
from Lee County.
Mr Speaker, and I would like to
like to quote if I could.
Even though my
Eyesight is poor.
Um
New Mexico Page 12 rule 7 to 15
upon appeal from the decision of
the speaker. The question which
may be debated subject to the
limitation of house rules, 4.4
Dash three Shelby put as
follows. Shall the decision of
the chair be sustained, and if a
majority of the members present
vote in the negative, the
decision shall be reversed.
Speaker. I asked for a roll call
the situation talking about,
sir.
Your decision to close debate.
Mr. Speaker. We have not caused
the Bates her. Mr. Speaker. You
have gone to the generated from
Benaglio to close debate.
All right. Gentlemen, from Lee
to close
Here's the baby.
Mr Speaker. As I understand the
agreement, I am allowed to
close.
The
With comments on the previous
vote on the amendment, but not
offer either of the two
amendments that I have in front
of me. Is that accurate The
agreement between the
leadership, your leadership and
myself.
I have no speaker.
Obviously disappointed both with
the vote.
And the decision of the chair. I
believe we still had issues to
cover with respect to this
legislation.
And I am very disappointed that
we were not able
To continue. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker. Point of order.
Gentlemen from San Juan. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. So to me, I
think this comes down to the
crux of the issue and what I
would like role to an issue as
written opinion because I think
this would come up again and
And try to keep tempers from
flaring. I think the question
for the body is when does a
member succeed the floor?
Um, because if the act of
offering amendment
Is an act of succeeding the
floor, then I think that ruling
of the chair is accurate if my
member did not succeed the
floor, then I do not think you
can recognize another member and
asked for a motion from that
other member. So if we could get
a written ruling from role on
that point, I think that's sort
of the crux of where we're at
enough Gentlemen from Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you for your
Consideration. This we go
through this process. I do
appreciate that. Thank you.
Gentleman gentlelady from
Burnley or present JC one more
thing. Apologies. I'm sorry. I
forget that you take pauses.
But the other the other thing we
should do.
Is
The rules, say three hours of
consideration.
And I believe that's correct,
and that's been historical. But
introducing a bill for an hour
Taking away to an hour of
debate, I believe should be
Also considered, I think
A proponent of the bill should
have as long as he wants to
introduce the bill. I'm not
arguing that point. I'm just
saying that once he stands for
questions, the time should
start. Thank you, Mr Beeson.
Thank you, gentlemen. Generator
from really? Oh, Mr Speaker.
this matter, having been under
consideration for three hours, I
moved to close debate.
There's been a motion to close
the bait. All those in favor
seen above us and I
Host name.
The I seven debate is closed.
From Dona Ana.
Too close to Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker body. Thank you. As I
said At the beginning, we have
to keep our climbing boots on Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, body we are
continuing to make new
investments in the places that
matter most for new Mexicans
from economic diversification
and new jobs to healthcare
healthcare professionals.
Our education system, public
safety, infrastructure and
housing. This budget reflects
all of those priorities in a
considered and collaborative
way, and I urged the body to
adopt to vote yes, and to adopt
bipartisan budget. We are on
final passage of house
appropriations and finance
committees. Substitute for house
bills two and three as amended.
The vote is now open.
What's about to close Not close
by voter 53 in the affirmative
16 in the negative house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for house
bills two and three as amended
as duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Sandoval.
Mm.
And Burnley your representative
kids, are you ready on
Supplemental Calendar Item
number one. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Would you get me to
that point let the record
reflect that election necessary
for placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
relate on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. The general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Um, I'll be
explaining House Bill AIDS. I
first want to thank the body of
this chamber.
We passed House Bill five last
year, which is the government
conduct at and send it to the
Senate. This is, uh there is no
major content change to house
Bill eight. We just clarified
some of the language, hoping
that the Senate will be able to
be successful that any other
chamber
I will say that this bill is
about transparency and
accountability. The government
Contact Act gives shape to the
core that commitment to public
trust. This bill improves the
cover the current governmental
conduct act unnecessary ways.
First. The bill makes clear that
public servants cannot use their
government offices to assist in
election campaigns.
The bill makes New Mexico law
consistent with the Federal
Hatch Act for federal employees.
Second, the bill makes it clear
that it is prohibited to New
Mexico in terms of the abuse of
office, conflicts of interest
and unlawful could pro quo
transactions.
Last. The bill creates actual
penalties for violations of the
Governmental Conduct Act, and
currently the penalties for any
violation.
Have been changed and amended as
well. I'd like to introduce my
co sponsors, Mr Speaker, if that
is all right.
Yes.
Mr Speaker. I have
representative little is on this
bill as well from Braulio.
Thank you, Mr Speaker of
Well, the gentle person from
Centerville and burn, Leo Yield,
please. I yield. Thank you.
Mr Speaker Embody. I am co
sponsoring this bill. Um,
because this legislation
strengthens the Governmental
conduct act in ways.
Thank you that are long overdue
three in particular engaging in
political activity while enough,
an officer, an employee or an
employee is on duty.
Quid pro quo and this
Civil penalties now at a minimum
of $250 would be increased up to
$10,000 per violation.
As was pointed out in our
committee by a member.
Finds which have not been raised
since the early 19 nineties.
We're actually happened. The
last time it happened. We're
before a couple of my colleagues
were born.
It is time for those violations
to have consequences.
Mr Speaker and gentle person.
Although many of us in this body
have disagreements over various
policy issues.
I know that we share a common
desire and a commitment to
serving our constituents.
Yes, people in different
districts will have different
priorities, but one priority. I
believe that all of our
constituents share is that they
all want their government and
public officials to be
transparent, honest, ethical and
accountable. House Bill eight
helps US move towards that goal.
If I may I have a couple of
questions, gentle person.
Gentle lady do is if it's debate
will do it during debate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Okay.
Thank you. Generated from Santa
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Okay.
Thank you. Generated from
Sandoval in Burnley. Oh, thank
you, Mr Speaker. I just like to
bring attention that I have
other sponsors on this, but
considering, um what we've just
gone through in our debate. We
will stand for questions at this
time. There is debate. Gentlemen
from San Juan. Representative
Montoya. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Does the general lady from
Um Santa Auburn, Leo. Yield I
yield to the speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, just a couple of
quick questions who is exempted
from this in the legislation, Mr
Speaker, and, um, serious
general person from San Juan
there, There are sections that
are pertained to state
employees, and there are
sections that pertain to state
employees and elected officials,
speaker and generally, I guess,
um, it is my understanding that
The governor is exempted the
attorney general's exempted and
I understand There's reasons for
that. But could you could you
briefly explain to me
That
Yes, Mr Speaker. And and yes,
thank you. Um, they are not
exempted from this bill. There
is a section in this bill that
because certain elected
positions, which include the
governor in the G, and also
conclude
Other governmental officials may
require security detail and when
requiring security detail in a
vehicle that they are excluded
from. We want them to be safe
when they go to, um, activities.
Thank you, Miss Speaker and
General Lady. I actually am
supportive of this bill.
But I think there's a couple of
folks that
Maybe should have been exempted
as well.
And Ms Speaker, and generally I
from the vehicle use. So, Miss
Speaker and generally we have
Sheriff's around the state and
DS around the state that
Through the day or doing the job
literally around the clock.
They're not ever off the clock.
So Miss Speaker and General
Lady, I think there's a little
bit of a hole here.
Because, um
A during the day, a sheriff
Potentially would be in the
middle of his duty and then Miss
Speaker and General Lady Ah,
maybe attend a Rotary club at
lunchtime.
Ms Speaker and delayed it
doesn't make sense in my mind
for them, too.
Uh, have to go and switch
vehicles and then being their
personal vehicle and then
Go back to work in their
personal vehicle. And so I
understand the reason for this
and I support
The overall bill, but Miss
speaker and generally I think
that's a bit of a whole.
In this legislation. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you,
general person from San Juan. I
will say that we were able to
get this bill through the city
of Albuquerque. We've had law
enforcement. Look at this bill.
There were some changes, and
that's why it clearly states
that an official who is has
security detail or law
enforcement just as the scenario
you just brought.
It says clearly that, um, even a
local government official for
whom law enforcement officers
provide security will be exempt.
We don't want to list every
position that could be. We want
to list the circumstances in
which makes them exempt speaker
and generally, I don't believe
by that definition, a sheriff
would be exempt. He's
Maybe essentially providing his
own security.
I also don't believe a D A would
be exempt under that language as
well. So, um, I'm going to
support this legislation, but I
am going to see if maybe along
the way that that language
Maybe could be tweaked a little
bit.
I just think, since those folks
serve literally there really
never off the clock.
And their elected officials. I
think maybe they should be
There should be some sort of
language to cover that. But I do
plan on supporting your bill.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There is
for the debate. Gentlemen from
Lee, Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady from burner Leo
yield
I yield to my colleague. Thank
you very much. There was a lot
of talk going on while you were
introducing the bill, Could you
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
Could you reintroduce your
expert?
Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you. I was not able to
introduce my experts. So thank
you very much for clarifying and
I have Mark Baker here, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, attorney
Who's Mr Baker with
He's an attorney.
Mr Speaker in general lady,
Handsome.
Marlins and Baker.
Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker
in General lady does he happen
to support any non profits or
any other groups like that? And
it's so those that maybe in
support of this who's he?
Who does he work with?
I'm sorry, gentlemen. Uh, can
can you What is the purpose of
the question to understand the,
uh, background of the expert
witness? The expert witness,
gentlemen, is as stated a
attorney in private practice. He
is also working for our office,
helping us do legal work during
session.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
Um
But
General lady Mr Speaker in
general Lady within the
The different documents that
Were provided from from the
Department of Justice.
Um, there were several different
suggestions.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I'd
like to know if if you consider
those adjustments and if you did
was the bill corrected for that,
Mr Speaker, General, I'm so
sorry. I didn't understand the
question. Can you repeat it?
Department of Justice create, um
Had a had a response to the
bill.
On House Bill eight. They
suggested changing language on
page Line Page four line 15 on
Page five Line seven through
nine page five lines 22 through
23.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker of
Thank you. General Person, the
Department of Justice has not
Provided comment.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
have a document.
From the New Mexico Department
of Justice with respect to this
bill.
Can you miss Mr Speaker? General
person? Can you ask the question
again?
Mr Speaker and General Lady on
Page four line 15.
Comments from the Mexico
Department of Justice. This bill
would would not amend the
prohibition of section 10.
That's 16. That's 3.1 a against
certain acts for a political
purpose. The term undefined by
the C G A is this bill would add
a new definition of political
activity to the IGA amending
this provision to substitute
political activity.
Or a political purpose was to
create a greater
Inconsistency and uniforms and
lack of uniformity in the
interpretation.
Mr Speaker. Uh, general person,
I have been notified that they
do support the the A G does
support this document is
current. Lee presented
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
Lady, there is debate young lady
from Dona Ana Laura and Ciera
Representative to meet you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
General Lady from Burner Leo in
Sandoval.
Well yield.
I will. Thank you very much
general person from Donia now
and so, Kara.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I know that this bill
came forward last year, and
there's been numerous changes.
Can you just detail for us? Some
of those changes to this bill?
Absolutely Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you,
representative. Yes, the bill
was passed by. Why'd support
from this chamber? A very
happily.
Um, and the content of it is
basically the same. But there
was clarification of definitions
such as political activity and,
um and defining more about the
penalty changes, But the
substance itself is the same as
the Bowie Pass. Thank you,
gentle lady for bringing this
bill forward.
There is to be generated from
Bernalillo Representative
Corolla. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentle person from Bern
Allegiance and the wall yield.
I yield to my colleague from
Bernard Leo.
Thank you. It has been a great
honor for me to be part of this
chamber when people approach me
and say, What was that thing
that I appreciate the most is
set up on all of you. I think
everybody is here for the right
reasons. I believe everybody as
much as we disagree are here
with our hearts are with our
minds for the right reasons.
So
I have a question for you. And
you already have a
Government conduct act.
Yes, Mr Speaker. And yes,
General Lady. Yes, we do so this
kind of legislation is at some
Legislation that everyone here
should be proud of.
Is this through forward and it
does require officials.
Stockholders are odd.
And to be to respond to the
people that elected us to be
here. So why do we want to move
forward with this?
Try it again.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, General lady. Yes, we are.
Um this this bill is to be able
to clarify the language that is
in the current government
Conduct Act, as requested by our
state Supreme Court is asking
for clarification and certain
it's also an opportunity for us
to roll many of the requirements
through the Federal Hatch Act.
Thank you for the clarification
and thank you for Mr Speaker.
Thank you for the invitation to
be part of this legislation very
proud to sign it with you, Mr
Speaker, and I am very proud.
And I'm sure everybody here will
agree that this is something
that is simple and needed. Mr
Speaker, and we will make
transparency and make our work.
And our job here more trust. We
will respond to our constituents
in a better way. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Debate gentlemen from Otero,
Representative Block. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Before I ask the
general lady to yield I would
like to just point to masons and
pursuant to Mason's section,
114.
Two. I wish to be referred to as
a gentleman, Mr Speaker will the
generating a yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I kindly
yield to the gentleman from
whatever
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Thank you for this
piece of legislation.
Uh, my first question here is
regarding page
Five.
We're at the bottom of Page
five. This is new material.
Mr Speaker, General Lady it
talks about
Employee believes or should have
a reason to believe that the new
financial interest will be
directly affected by the
legislators or public officers
Official Act. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm wondering with
this new provision directly
affected Do we have a definition
in the bill for that?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. No, we do not.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker in
general lady, would you then I
guess. Give me what you're
envisioning your intent with
that verb Ege directly affected
Do I have to literally be
handing being given money for an
act or what do we define that as
Mr Speaker, General lady? Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So as a non attorney
interpretation. General person
from Otero. General men Sorry, I
apologize for that is that
Uh, your employer, it would not
be. This particular section is
not as an elected official or in
a state employee. Is it an
employer who is employing that
position?
To specifically
Negotiate.
Given their state position.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady because they see on
Page five line 2221. This is a
legislator or public officer
during the term for which they
were elected. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady with this included
legislator
Let's just say someone says, Oh,
John, I like this bill you're
sponsoring making amendment.
I'll give you money. If you make
the amendment that would be
clearly at the goal, right? Mr
Speaker, General Lady would that
So thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. Yes, This
is existing language. We just
moved it around in the bill. But
yes, it would affect a
legislator if they were
receiving monetary for the
exchange for a vote. All right.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. So then my next
question would be
Can indirect consequences of an
action.
Then leaders someone being
considered.
Directly being affected or
affecting something, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from motor
I'm so sorry. I don't understand
the question.
Of course, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I'm wondering regarding
Let's just say an indirect
consequence of my official
action. This specifically talks
about direct
Direct affecting.
The legislator or public
officers official acts So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm
wondering if it's something like
a gray area.
Would this then be affected Mr
Speaker Generating
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentlemen know it has to be
a direct effect.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General lady,
so I guess.
My question is if we're speaking
in code, right, like if someone
says Oh, that's a very nice
district you have there.
Would be the same if something
happened to it. If HB 151 didn't
pass or what? I don't know what
that bill is, But would that
count? Mr Speaker? General Lady?
it's not direct is an indirect
kind of threatened.
As long as you wink when you say
that you're good. Yes, Mr
Speaker. The wink is implied. I
believe
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from a
terra, I believe that that is,
uh, covered in other laws as it
is a direct, violent threat.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General General waiting so
I'm trying to think of other
another.
Way to say this That's not
regarding current laws that are
on the books, right? Let's just
say
Like I have a favorite
veterinary clinic in town, and
they're up for
I don't know. They asked for
some some money in my junior
money or something, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady and
They know that I have a adorable
blue tongue skink, which I
actually do Have. It's a cute
lizard, Mr Speaker, General
lady, and they know that my skin
needs the best care that it can
get. So if they get this deserve
P they they imply to me that
they will take extra care of my
blue tongue Skink.
Next time I take it in. Mr
Speaker Generally would that
Then count as indirect and would
that then be included in this
legislation. Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen. Um, I look forward to
our debates. Gentleman from
Terra to be able to talk about
ethical situations. Um, I will
say that, uh, a clear
A sample would be that you
provided
Financial
Ah Capital outlay to this
veterinary clinic, and then they
awarded you with a contract of
somehow.
And that that would be a
violation.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally I just want to make
sure we're covering our bases,
right? I appreciate the the
candor here, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Um
I'm just going to continue here
and look at what constitutes a
person or business relationship
within the framework of this
legislation, and I know I found
it earlier. I don't know where
the new languages
Let me see Mr Speaker. One
moment, please. Okay, Mr.
Speaker. I found it's on Page
five where I was.
All right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady it talks about online 14 to
15.
A legislator or public officer
or employee has a personal or
business relationship shall not
use the power of resources,
etcetera. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady does this include
of Let's just say I own stock in
a company would that be a
business relationship for this
new definition? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker General pursuant to
hold for a moment, Mr. Speaker.
I'm happy to
So thank you very much, Mr
Speaker, and and thank you,
General met gentleman for
waiting. So if you had stock in
a company that was part of a
general like money market that
this would not pertain, But if
you were getting stock instead
of cash as a monetary gain for
your vote
Or interest than that, would
you Mr Speaker and thank you,
General lady, So
Regarding this new language.
What if I already own a business
that is, let's just say I'm a
realtor, right? If I'm a
realtor, and I'm voting on
legislation that affects
realtors, would I then have to
conflict myself out of that
vote? Because this now says, I
have a business relationship.
Mr. Speaker. Generally, we some
thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank
you, gentlemen.
Um, no. The actually state
legislators are exempt from an
enormous amount of, uh, the law
that is in the government
conduct because we are sent here
by the people to represent the
people so teachers can vote.
About education. Realtors can
vote about real estate.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General Lady and I I think
that's an interesting point. You
know, teachers are I think
they're the only public
employees that actually can
serve in the Legislature, which
I find
Interesting.
Um, Mr Speaker. Generally, I
think state employees, right
state employees, Mr Speaker,
General lady, But I also think
Let's just say as a realtor.
There is an inherent conflict of
interest or let's just say
something else. Let's just say
I'm a barber, okay?
If I'm a barber, I served in the
Legislature. I cut hair and
there's a bill to deregulate
barbers and potentially save my
company.
Thousands of dollars. Mr
Speaker, General Lady
Are we saying that there is an
inherent conflict and they're
they're they're by voting for
the legislation. I would still
be okay with the voting for the
legislation that could directly
As this legislation says
directly affect my business, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
I thank you, John. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen.
I am.
Uh huh.
I am confused by the double
negatives of the question, but I
will clarify and say that if the
bar if you are a barber and you
vote to deregulate barbers, you
will not be subject to the bill
that is being presented in front
of you today.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general lady. So then I guess
I'm wondering about
Who this applies to right, Mr
Speaker, General lady because we
say here
On page 4 to 5. It does not
apply to the governor, the
attorney general or any other
elected state or local
government. Official.
For whom law enforcers provide
security. But who does this,
then affect Mr Speaker? General
Lady? Would it just be state
employees and any public office?
That's not a legislator. Mr.
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you
gentlemen know that is
incorrect Breeding of this bill.
it is exempting.
Ah!
It is.
In and we can it is exempting
elected officials and state
officials who are receiving
skirts. Security detail, which
include the governor and the A G
s office and other state
officials who require law
enforcement for going to a
personal event.
In a state car with law
enforcement. It does not. This
whole bill doesn't is not
exempted by that classification
of an employee just that one
portion
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, So on that
portion, then we're going to be
talking about
Vehicles owned by the state.
Right, Mr Speaker, General Lady
starting on lines 24 through
unpaid forward page five lines
123. That's merely about
vehicles. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, it says
owned or leased by state agency
or local government agency. All
right. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So if I
was a district attorney in a
rural county
And let's just say, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I had a state
vehicle that I was driving from
a deposition from. Let's just
say, Santa Rosa to, um
Course. Stanton.
New Mexico, Mr Speaker, General
Lady and in the middle there, I
had lunch with a donor of mine,
but I took the I took
The car with me because I had to
go from one place to the other
on my lunch break, Mr Speaker,
General Lady with this not apply
to this would I be in violation
if I had a lunch meeting with a
campaign donor while using the
state vehicle in anyway, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
I think you Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. We, uh
this that incident is covered in
other laws. This is not that
Um, I believe that when I was
studying public administration
at U N M. We covered that like
23 years ago. There are other
states statues that cover the
use of state vehicles for
personal
Um like lunch. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. Yeah, I I wouldn't know
what happened 23 years ago. I
was like, four years old at the
time, Mr Speaker General leading
but
Um
Right here. We're talking about
any room or building reserved
for exclusive use of a state
agency or government agency. I'm
on Page four. Now it's 20 to 21.
Any rumor building. So, Mr
Speaker, General lady that says
any room, So would that include
here at the Capitol? Because I
know there are many political
groups.
That come in and out of the
capital. And it says any, um,
are building reserved for
exclusive use by a state agency
or local government agencies. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
I know here at the Capitol. We
have it. But at the annex we
have let's just say the
secretary of state and that's an
inherently political
Place to do business, right? We
have to file papers there and
stuff. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
Would this. Would this apply to
that? With the supply to the
Secretary of state? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General Gentleman.
I'm I'm not sure what will
apply.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady
So on Page four, when 20 to 21,
it says
Cannot engage in political
activity in any room or building
reserved for an exclusive use by
a state agency or local
government agencies. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. Let's just say I
reserve the conference room in
the secretary of state's office
for the Republican Party of
Otero County. We want to meet
their right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Would this now ban us from using
that office since we are a
political entity, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. No, You cannot
do that.
But in the roundhouse as our
speaker often refers to as the
People's House, the political
groups that may come here they
are not state employees or
elected officials. But in the
scenario of you having a
campaign meeting in the
Secretary's estates conference
room that would not be allowed
in this bill.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady that
clears that up for me, and I
appreciate it, So I'm just I'm
just kind of understand. I'm
trying to understand what this
means, right? What specific
political activities.
Are prohibited under this
legislation, so
Mr Speaker, General Lady it. I
think it talks about political
activities, But I know we talked
a little bit about this in
committee. I know we can't talk
about within committee on the
floor. But Mr Speaker, General
Lady
And my my question would be
regarding a C three c four
organization. Let's just say, C
four organization or something.
That's a nonprofit that has
inherently political work.
The nonprofits inherently
political. Let's just say they
elect
People who who, like chocolate
ice cream or something. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. That's a
political position that the
nonprofit is taken. Does this
extend to non profits with
The ban on political activity.
Mr Speaker generally
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Mortara. I'm not clear about
your question.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I'm happy
to repeat it so
This is
There is an inherent well there.
It says that there is a
prohibition on public.
States right here. Political
activity.
With public resources. Right?
So, Mr Speaker general waiting
if a nonprofit does political
work, such as a 501 c four
organization, they do things
regarding elections, For
example, Mr Speaker General Lady
with that be prohibited as
political activities per your
bill. Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. That question is
still not clear. I will just
state that a nonprofit is not an
employee of the state or elected
official. And that's what this
bill is covering. Understand? Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm
trying to understand if they put
an elected official
Public employee engages in
activity with a nonprofit on
state time with state funds.
Will this then prohibited that
if the nonprofit is political,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentlemen, as stated on page
three lines six through nine.
This is directly engaged in
support of or opposition to a
candidate for elected office.
Not chocolate ice cream. Okay,
Mr Speaker, General lady.
Alright, Let's talk about
candidates for political office.
There's a nonprofit. It is
called Emily's list. Emily's
list is a four organization that
has a political action
committee. But they are a
nonprofit and they elect
Women who support abortion as
candidates. Mr Speaker,
generating this Let's
hypotheticals are fine, but
let's let's try to keep it to
the bill and two hypotheticals
that are not calling out
institutions, Organizations or
private individuals. Please, Mr
Speaker, Point of order.
State. Your pardon Mr Speaker,
according to Mason's page 73 to
79 section 92. I have a right as
a member not to be interrupted
during debate, Mr Speaker.
Certainly.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will
continue.
Mr Speaker, General lady. So
regarding your bill, I'm going
to be very, very clear to what
the bill states.
What mechanisms are in place to
ensure compliance with this
restriction on political
activity. What kind of things
are we going to put into effect
to ensure that this doesn't
happen? Mr Speaker generated
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Matera, I we have a process in
place where you can file
complaints, and this legislature
has been able to follow that
process to the ethics
commission.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
General lady so
Regarding the
So I guess the answer that I got
would be it's is it complaint
based, Or is there a check and
balance every so often? Let's
just say, Mr Speaker.
Copy machines are checked to
make sure that you were not
copying political materials,
Things like that. Are we going
to have both? Or is it just
mostly complaint based? Mr
Speaker, General lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Gentlemen. There is not an
operational procedure in this
bill.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, So
Would would. Then these be
reported to the secretary of
state's website, Or which
website would we be reporting
this to? Or maybe it's even just
in person we print out of form
and give it to our to someone
locally, who who is the
recipient of the complaint? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from a
terra, the Ethics commission has
a process.
In place for you to file
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So
okay. The ethics commission
would be the ones that determine
this.
Violation of political activity,
And Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
see that we have raised the
The fees.
In the bill.
Can you just go over what those
fees were changed to from the
current statute? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Currently the statue is that
violations of this government
conduct act would be, uh, $250
automatically per violation, and
now it will be
Um, at the discretion of the
hearing so they can be as little
as a dollar and as much as $5000
per violation.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
in General ladies, so if there's
two violations, and someone is
found guilty of both, that would
be $10,000 maximum. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Generally,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So
then regarding, um violation
Does this include social media
activity, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Of the individual using Let's
just say a Twitter account from
an official source. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm not
sure what present up provisions
you're talking about. But this
is about state owned and state
employees and elected officials.
I'm not aware of the state
owning a social media site.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I guess it would be regarding an
account. I know that. Let's just
say, let's just keep on picking
on the secretary of state,
right? She has a
Official.
Account that says New Mexico
secretary of state and it's
passed on from from Secretary of
State to Secretary of State is a
state run account. Would that
then be
Would that then be under this
provision in the bill about
political activity? Mr. Speaker
if they
If the account
Posted something political to
advance a candidate, Mr Speaker
General 80. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you
gentlemen. For that
clarification if it was to
advance a candidate yes, that
would be in violation.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, that kind of
cleared up.
What That meant for me regarding
social media. I wanted to make
sure we had both social media
use of vehicles use of printers,
you know, so it's full spectrum.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
We? We talked a little bit about
enforcement of this, and it's
based upon
Complaints. Some Mr Speaker
General Lady does the ethics
commission now need more funds?
Or any more new resources to
properly administer.
The statutes that we would then
be passing with this
legislation. Mr Speaker, General
lady. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. For
Matera. There is no
appropriations in this bill
requested.
All right. Thank you. Mr Speaker
and General Lady. I don't have
an hour in front of me. That's
paper. But thank God for the
Internet because
Legis is your friend.
Especially if you're a freshman,
so I appreciate it, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, it says minimal
According to the F I R.
A minimal cost to the ethics
commission. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
I'm assuming. With this new
bill, there will be more
Complaints. I hope there's not,
but there might be more
complaints. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, How will they absorb the
new complaints if it says there
is minimal?
Fiscal impact, but there's also
no no appropriation with this
bill. Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I do not agree
with your assumption that there
will be more complaints. The
purpose of this bill is to make
sure that the complaints are
able to be prosecuted and and
hearing and being able to help
people accountable. This chamber
has passed this bill to provide
the public to know that we are
about transparency and
accountability.
Mr Speaker. General Idea I would
be inclined to agree with you. I
believe that it's important to
have accountability and that's
why I feel like there needs to
be mechanisms in place to hold
folks accountable because I want
to make sure that the ethics
commission does indeed have the
proper amount of resources to
adequately
Go after bad actors and then
hold folks accountable. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
I
I am. I have a hard time
believing that this does not
have a larger fiscal impact than
just minimal.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, have
we spoken with the Secretary of
State's office regarding her
role in administering this?
Piece of legislation. Mr.
Speaker generally, Mr Speaker,
uh, gentleman. I don't agree
with your premise that the
secretary of state overseas
The ethics commission.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
agree with you. I'm saying let's
just see if she has a referral
that has come to her office.
Of an improper political
conduct. She has to forward that
to the ethics commission with
that not include the time
necessary to fill it out a
complaint and submit it, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, So I
guess there would be an inherent
cost to the state if that
happened. Is that correct, Mr
Speaker Generating speaker
Gentlemen, this the government
conduct act has been, uh
An operation for many years.
And this process of filing
complaints have been around for
many years. This bill clarifies
the the language so that
hearings and legal proceeds
could be able to find conclusion
because of the clarity of the
language.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I appreciate that. So then
let's just say somebody is not
in compliance. They are fined
$5000 through the ethics
Commission. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Can you tell me if this is
not paid at a certain amount of
time? Does this accrue interest?
If the violation is not paid Mr
Speaker Generating or is this
just referred for criminal or
civil court, Mr Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. This bill does
not, um, pertain. This bill does
not contain any operations
measures.
Such as you're saying, I'm sure
that you'll be able to find that
on the Ethics commission website
on how to be able to find a bill
and what the process is.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady. I'm just I want to
make sure that that is
recoverable. If it's if it's a
violation, so I will reach out
to Mr Ferris and the folks at
the ethics commission. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady I know
this is included. This is
creating a new
Provision and statutes. So do we
have any limitations and his
statutes of limitations
regarding these ethical
misconduct in the bill, Mr
Speaker?
So thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, there the current
statute of limitations has
remained the same. This bill
does not
Um, affect the current
Statute limitations.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, Do we have an idea of what
those are? Because I know we're
creating a new provision in the
in the section and I want to
know. Let's just say I
accidentally tweeted something
five years ago and let's just
say I was elected official five
years ago. They want to come
after me. How long do they have
to do that? Mr Speaker? General
Lady I know Traditionally
federal, like federal infections
are about five years.
State can vary. I'm just
wondering. Mr Speaker, General
Lady. How long does the person
have to file the complaint of
misconduct? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
General, several statues or four
years.
State ethics commission and
administrative process or two
years. Okay, Thank you, Mr
Speaker, generally so after two
years
If someone wanted to file the
complaint, they would not be
able to with the ethics
commission. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I would
once again refer you to the
ethics commission. That is not
the purpose of this bill. Thank
you, Mr Speaker Relating Well, I
do want to know the answer to
that. If you're expert does have
it. I would appreciate it
because it is relating to your
legislation regarding political
activity.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
do want to make sure that it is.
indeed the two years for the
ethics complaint. And do we know
if that is in rule or statute,
The statute of limitations. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, Can you
answer that for me?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And I
thank you, gentlemen, this
The Ethics Commission Act
defines the statue of
limitations. That's another
piece of legislature.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so you said that
Ethics Commission act is that
correct?
Yes, Mr Speaker. And yes,
Gentleman. Okay. Thank you. Mr
Speaker in general Lady. I
really appreciate that answer. I
think it's important to know.
Where it is, and I'll go looking
in the statutes and I apologize.
I've read your bill backward and
forward. I just have not read
the actual statute. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I will
continue here so
I believe we talked about
conflicts of interest in the
legislation.
Mr Speaker. I Mr. Speaker. I
request order in the Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
So a conflict of interest is
that defined in your
legislation. Mr Speaker
generally.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No, it
does not.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady is that new
language conflicts of interest.
I know it's in my notes
somewhere. Could you point me to
a page where we're talking
specifically about that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General Man, I'm
you're asking me if there is a
place in the bill that refers to
conflict of
Interest. Is that correct? Yes,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, if you
could aid me with that, I'll be
continuing to look in my copy
here.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I will
just keyword. Search it in your
bill.
Mr Speaker. I have no conflict
of interest statement within
house Bill, A
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
Thank you for that. So
So there's I guess there's no
definition of the conflict of
interest. So if I had one as a
state employer, an elected
official then I believe Mr
Speaker, General Lady would
already be covered.
Under current statute.
If it was a conflict of
interest, since I believe it's
not in the new new legislation,
Mr Speaker
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Mortara.
House Bill eight.
Only does three things.
It brings the Federal hatch Act
into our state.
It raises the penalties on
violations and uses clarifying
language on what is of monetary
value. When you ask
Or offer
Vote.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Yes,
but and I appreciate that. So
the last one you mentioned that
would not have played a
legislators, though, right?
Because there's an inherent
conflict of interest. Correct
Unless it was like I give you
money. You vote this way, if it
wasn't like that, then
legislators would not apply Mr
Speaker, General Lady, my
understanding that correctly.
Mr Speaker. Could, uh, the
gentleman from Otero repeat the
question, because I don't
understand the question. Of
course, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. So, you said regarding a
Something in exchange for a
vote.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I will
wait until you've conferred with
your expert.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentlemen from Matera. That
conflict of interest isn't used
as a phrase because more
specific language is used to
define what is prohibited.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and I see that like
on Page seven, Section five.
It's already a statute, but it
says state agency shall not
enter into a contract or action
favorably affecting a business,
etcetera and then on the bottom
here, Page eight in halfway
through the page on page a line
14 we say a state agency or
local government agency, so, Mr
Speaker
General lady. I believe that
language on Page eight, then
would just be clarifying that it
is a state agency or local
government agency, not just the
government as currently stated,
Mr Speaker, general Lady. Is
that what I'm understanding?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Mortara that is clarifying
language.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and we spoke a
little bit about the Hatch Act.
Mr Speaker, General Lady we're
saying this is codifying it in
state law. Can you just give me
some information about the Hatch
Act?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, What kind
of information would you like to
know? Mr Speaker, General Lady,
just a quick summary of the
rudimentary facts regarding the
Hatch Act and what they would do
in New Mexico what it would
change to be differently what it
would change to make New Mexico
in compliance with the Federal
hatch Act. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
The purpose of this. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen. The purpose of this
bill is to make sure that we are
in compliance with federal law,
which prohibits elected
officials while they're in
And using their
State or federal funded offices
uniforms.
And engaging in political
activity that will oppose or
support a candidate.
Does that? Answer your question?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady as it does so.
So I'm kind of baffled that this
wasn't already currently in
statute, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, so right now, currently
since this is not in statute, I
could go.
Use public funds to help elect a
candidate. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I am
not an attorney, so I can't give
you legal advice. But I will
tell you I too would like to see
it in state statute as well. And
that's why this is the second
year we carry it and I am so
proud that I'm from a chamber
that passed it last year.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady and yeah, that's
that's pretty glaring to me that
that's not currently in law, Mr
Speaker.
My eyebrows are just going
higher and higher every time I
think about it, Mr Speaker
generally so wow.
So
All right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady does this also include I
know we talked about state
employees. We talked about
elected officials Does this
include contractors with the
state of New Mexico who are not
Employees under current
State law, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. No.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General lady,
but I guess
They would still not be allowed
to politick under the state's
dime, even if they are a
contractor with this lie, Hope,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, would
that be correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen in it, they will not
be covered under the current law
that is presented from you.
There are other laws in which
you can look for such
Coverage.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, So also, I think
it's important if we're going to
be changing a lot to tell
people. This is the new thing
that there are some kind of
educational provision that we
that we include Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I know we don't
have an appropriation.
In the bill for this, But Mr
Speaker, General Lady, will this
include an educational portion
Will the Ethics commission will
be sending out literature
materials to elected officials?
Mr Speaker, General lady to tell
them they must get into
complaints.
I thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, gentlemen. Once
again, this bill does not
contain operations of it, but I
think your suggestions are
excellent and I will bring them
to the attention of the ethics
Commission. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady. Thank you. I wish I had a
floor amendment ready for this
Because I would be putting money
for education. Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, uh,
Maybe I'll call Rick appear and
see if he wants to write an
amendment real quick, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I'll
continue here, though, while I'm
waiting for him.
Mr Speaker. Generally, as you
can tell. I've done my homework
on your bill. I think it's
important. I think it's a very
important and Mr Speaker,
General Lady. My my question
about the transport.
I've elected officials. I
believe in committee. I can't
talk about committee on the
floor or whatever, but I believe
it said that legislators were
not covered.
Under the provisions on page 4
to 5 regarding the
Vehicle owned. Let's just say a
security detail.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So
it's state elected official.
Attorney general or governor,
but it would not apply to any
legislators. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, we've
covered this section already and
it clearly states that the
vehicle and as elected official
myself, I do not own
I do not have a state owned
Ordell state leased vehicle. It
is not cover the occupation or
the elected official. This bill
says that if you are using a
state vehicle, or at least
vehicle
Um, government vehicle and you
have law enforcement detail than
that You will be covered.
No matter what your position, Mr
Speaker, General lady, Thank you
for that. But it does not apply
to the Governor. Attorney
General, do they do they both
have a security detail or
they're they're allowed one. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
I guess it's implied. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Right. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
General Lady with this also
extend to the lieutenant
governor.
As well.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, if he
is using a state or
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
I appreciate that. I think it
might be important to clarify
Which elected officials
Are included because this is
other elected state or local
government officials. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I guess,
local government official might
be a sheriff, because they are
they get they get a car.
I would hope
From the state and then the
lieutenant governor. But Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I'm
trying to figure out Let's just
say that state land commissioner
Does she also get a state
vehicle, Mr Speaker and with
this provision apply to her, Mr
Speaker. Uh,
Gentlemen, I do not know every
position who works for the state
of New Mexico or is an elected
official. Whether or not they
have a state released car.
And we will not make a list of
all those occupations in this
bill. Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Thank you. But I see
respectfully that we have listed
the A G and the governor. So if
we're going to go that far, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I don't
see why we don't include all the
folks that are included, so they
know they're explicitly
included.
To have this security. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Why did
we choose to explicitly not list
those offices? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It is, uh
My understanding from legal
advice that we
Try to avoid lists.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
I I like that. I will. I will
hold you to it. I don't really
like list either.
In my opinion, Mr Speaker.
But I really appreciate that
answer.
So, Mr Speaker General lady we
talked about. There's not much
here for education because it's
it's it's. It's a
It's under the ethics commission
to educate focus on this, and I
think that's important. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Is there
any kind of other
Resource is that a state elected
official could utilize
To know that they are in
compliance or not in compliance
with this other than just
looking up the actual bill once
it passes, Mr Speaker, General
Lady Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I
don't know.
All right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I'd be interested in that
because I know we have a lot of
elected official friends in my
town and my area who would be
very interested in if they apply
to this if they don't apply to
this, and Mr Speaker, General
Lady
I'm continuing here about
enforcement actions.
And and the documentation that's
that's under the ethics
commission that would be
included.
But I just want to make
explicitly sure that we are
being as crystal clear as
possible in the legislation to
ensure everybody is covered.
That folks are not going to be
Bucking this like I want to make
sure 10,000 bucks or 5000. Bucks
is enough. Mr Speaker, General
lady. So how did we arrive at
that Maximum figure of $5000.
And is it punitive enough to
discourage corruption in
government? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
I believe it is. That is why we
have presented this bill. Okay,
Mr Speaker, General lady and I
know I mean, I get that, but as
elected officials, we raise a
lot of money for a re election.
Right? We know how to raise
money. Some of us do some. Don't
Mr Speaker, General lady, but
$5000 in this day and age with
this economy and this kind of
inflation
I am scared if we don't tie this
to some kind of C P I
That in the future, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady will have to come
right back and rewrite the
statute. So Mr Speaker, General
Lady didn't Why did we not
choose to tie this to a C P. I
Thank you, Mr Chair and and and
thank you, gentleman.
So it's easier to set a penalty
rather than to attach it to his
CP. It's easier for training and
education, which I know is the
value of yours that we have a
set flat rate.
The current rate is $250 per
violation. Nothing lower than
that, and nothing higher than
that, And it has not been
changed since 1995.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
Thank you for that. 1995. I was
too
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. Appreciate it. So going
back here on page? Uh
What am I looking at? Mr Speaker
generally. Oh, regarding a
pending cases pending cases
under the ethics commission, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, So if
there's a case pending and let's
just say during the same time
that the cases pending with
ethics commission this passes
and goes into effect on
I guess, 90 days after sessions
over because there's not an
effective date. But Mr Speaker,
General Lady once this passes
Because into effect, and there's
a pending case with ethics
commission.
With this in any way change the
pending cases.
If this goes into effect, Mr
Speaker, I'm kind of asking.
Does it go retroactive in any
way?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. That is a broad
question and difficult to answer
specifically, But I will say
generally, no, it will not go
retroactive.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General ladies, so it won't
be retroactive.
It will increase penalties,
which I actually really agree
with. I think that's important.
Mr Speaker, General lady and I'm
asking these questions because
I'm
I'm a person who likes to vote
on legislation that I've read
that I understand that I've
thoroughly vetted in committee
and on the floor and I want to
make sure that this body
continues to be deliberative and
its approach to legislating and
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I will
continue to listen to the
debate, but I am inclined to
support your bill is supported
in committee and I appreciate
your call to have
Increased penalties for some of
these
Horrific things that no elected
officials should ever do. Ever
period. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I'll stop there, but I
truly appreciate this
conversation. And it's debate.
Mr Speaker and thank you.
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Gentlemen. There's further
debate. The gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from barn Leo and
Sandoval. Yield, please?
I yield to my colleague, Ms.
Speaker General Lady. Let me
refer you to
Page six, Section four.
Where it appears that paragraph
a lines.
22 through 25.
And down.
In the page seven through line
three have been struck. Is that
Accurate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
And and thank you, gentlemen.
Yes, it is. It has been struck.
What? That What That paragraph
did was
Specify a penalty.
So what? My question is
Now the penalty, Mr Speaker. I'm
sorry, gentlemen. I didn't hear
the question. The question would
be since that paragraph strikes
the penalty.
Is now the penalty for this
activity.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General person. I disagree
with you that it strikes the
penalty. It is language that was
struck. That is restated below
that.
There is a penalty there, so
currently it does not have a
minimum. There's the bill in
front of you does not require a
minimal penalty. It has a
maximum penalty of $5000.
Currently we have a minimal
penalty of 250. Thank you for
that. Answer. Mr Speaker.
General Lady feel moved down to
the next paragraph.
Where the official is not
disqualified.
If they financial interest to
the public officer.
Is proportionately less than the
benefit.
To the general public. Can you
tell me what that
Proportion is defined as
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. This is existing
language that we are in there is
in the current statute right
now, But, um, just, uh, overview
of the language is just more
than that's what that languages
but it is current. It is not
part of the new
Bill.
Mr Speaker in General 80. We've
eliminated as
A
Fourth degree felony.
As part of the
Penalty process.
And now are relying on a $5000
fine.
To discourage the activity
described in this paragraph.
Is that accurate?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. So it is correct
that it got rid of the that it
did strike the fourth degree
penalty, but it does have a
misdemeanor and has a federal
Ah!
Before, if it does insert a
federal
Felony.
Sorry. A felony.
Ah, for the most egregious
violations like the quid pro
quo.
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
With proportion not defined.
And I'll give you for example,
we just passed the $10 billion
budget.
$500,000 is of little
consequence to this body. And if
if a public officer had made a
deal
Which resulted in them
benefiting
To the extent of perhaps $5000
on a $500,000 deal, or $25,000.
On a $500,000 deal without
proportion being defined.
It would be pretty easy.
To see the cost benefit analysis
favoring
Making the profit.
Can you see that circumstance?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes, I
agree that our current statute
is only $250. And that is why we
have presented this bill today.
To be able to increase that
penalty. Um, to be able to, uh
I actually have a penalty and
understand that it is has new
minimum. It's 50. It's $5000 per
incident. And so if there are
multiple incidences, and they're
often are, it is more than a
$5000 penalty. Miss Speaker
General Lady I would submit that
striking
The fourth degree felony made
this more likely to happen
rather than less likely. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you,
General Lady for your answers.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's
further debate the generated
from Eddy and Lea,
Representative Brown. Thank you.
Mr Speaker With the lady from
Bernie, Leo and Sandoval, please
yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I kindly
yield to the lady from Eddy and
Lea.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that, Mr. Speaker in general
Lady couple of years ago, maybe
five years ago. I approach
Council service wanting to adopt
essentially a state equivalent
of the Hatch Act.
And I was told I didn't need it.
Um, the governmental conduct act
covers what we need to cover, so
I'm actually rather glad to see
this bill. I think there there
is some
Good value in this bill, so I'm
going to support it for that
reason, Mr Speaker and generally
but
In eight of the bill. I have a
little picky thing I'd like to
bring up and it's on Page three,
Page three of the bill.
Starting at line six.
This is a paragraph I and
general lady, I have read that.
Sentence about 15 times trying
to really understand what it
means. And so I don't have a
floor amendment, but I'm just
going to suggest Mr Speaker if
you would pencil in what I'm
going to say it would really
clarify
That sentence. So, Mr Speaker
and General Lady
I think it would help if it
read, um
And this is in quotes, political
activity and quote means
activity to benefit or oppose
the campaign of a candidate for
elected office. After the comma
there, I would insert the word
A. The article a
And that would continue a
political party and I would use
a comma after party. That's an
Oxford comma. And I know council
service may not like it, but I
think it it's part of the
clarification.
And then after the word or just
before the word organization, I
would put in an A M. And then I
think it's an easy to read
sentence. Mr. Speaker, General
Ladies, I just proposed that as
I hope to help the bill a little
bit. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, General lady. Uh, we
want this bill to pass. We want
to be able to communicate to our
constituents that we are a
transparent
And accountable Legislature and
I, uh I am very happy to listen
to your suggestions. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. General Debate generated a
close
No further debate. Sorry. That
was my part. That's your part.
Mr Speaker. I move that house
Bill eight do now pass.
We're on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee. Substitute
for House Bill eight. The vote
is now open.
The voters are closed by a vote
of 66 in the affirmative zero in
the negative House Judiciary
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill It has really passed this
house.
Generating from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker.
I move. We go to that order of
business committee reports.
Objection. It is so ordered.
Clerk to read.
Mr Speaker, your government
Elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 182 has had
it under consideration. Reports
with recommendations do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
De Wanda Johnson chair, Mr
Speaker. Move adoption We earn
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
180 to all those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Suppose Nate the eyes have it
coming? Reported opted.
Mr Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 210.
Has had another consideration.
reports. Same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair Move adoption
Adoption of Federal Committee
report on house Bill 210 All
those in favor and I ate the
salad community adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Joint resolution.
10 has had it under
consideration, reports say with
recommendation that it do not
pass that that house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution 10 do pass.
And then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair?
Mr Speaker.
And also to
Move adoption
You got me there were an
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report and House joint
Resolution. 10 buddy, Favorable
community report on how is
government Elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Joint resolution 10. All
those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
All those opposed NAY, the
subcommittee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
181.
Has had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair Mr Speaker Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee reporting husband 181.
All those in favor signify by
saying nine.
It was Nate have a committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill
192 has had it under
consideration, reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
Appropriation and finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson
chair Move adoption adoption of
a favorable community report on
House Bill 192. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
I was supposed to meet the
report adopted.
Generally from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker. I know we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Seeing no objection. It is so
ordered.
If you have any more bills,
bring them up last call If you
have any bills, bring them up.
Mr Speaker. I'm moving to go to
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business.
See an objection disordered Your
lady from Santa Fe and all those
other beautiful counties. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. We are at the
moment Everyone has been waiting
for house your House Judiciary
Committee. Mr Speaker will be
meeting at
Six o'clock.
In room 309. We will be doing
three bills to gun safety bills
in the oil and gas changes. Um
Dinner will be served. Thank
you, Mr Speaker members
generally from towels. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your house rule
Development, Land Grants and
cultural Affairs Committee will
meet, um, at least nine hours
after Judiciary Committee ends
or nine AM whichever comes
first. I think you meant to say
an hour after the committee.
The Lady from Rio Arriba son the
while in Santa Fe, and also from
Towers representative. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your house
Agricultural Second Water
Resources Committee will meet
tomorrow morning in room 315 at
nine o'clock one hour after
judiciary ends.
Gender lady from Britain earlier
presented talk. Maybe he'll
thank you, Mr Speaker, House
Transportation Public Works in
Capital Improvements Committee
will be meeting in room 305 at
9:30 A.m.. You're welcome.
We get to sleep in extra 30
minutes after judiciary.
Gentle.
Generated from Braulio presented
under and Arnold
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee will be
meeting immediately after floor
in room. 317 members take note.
Financial disclosure forms, so I
hope you turned him in by five
o'clock. It's 545 so
If you didn't turn it in, you
better run up there and beg for
forgiveness. Young lady from
Berlin.
Thank you, Mr Chair. House
Appropriations Committee is not
meeting this evening. We will be
meeting two members take note.
Gentlemen, from your lady from
Berlin. Mr. Speaker. I am
planning a pink out on February
14th. So if you have pink and
you're close to home, go get it.
If you don't it's an excuse to
go shopping and we want the men
to wear pink to even if it's
just a tie. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Will wear his pink suit.
And that his hair pink
Alright, let's go back to the
lady from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
Introduction of legislation.
Objection is ordered.
House Bill 301, introduced by
representatives Ream Duncan
Hochman, v. Hill, Lundstrom and
Allison and act relating to
water, creating the Future Water
Trust fund creating the Future
Water Project fund, including
the Future Water Trust Fund in
the permanent funds invested by
the state investment counsel,
making an appropriation house
Bill 301, introduced by
representatives Ream Duncan,
Hawkman v. Hill, Lindstrom and
Allison.
House Bill 301 twice by title of
Ginger Main pursuant to Article
four, Section five B one Order
president referred to the House
agricultural, said Gas and Water
Resources Committee then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 302 introduced by
representative Sorry, Nana and
act relating to the military
providing exemption from state
licensing requirements for
childcare programs or facilities
licensed or certified by the
United States. Department of
Defense or United States. States
Coast Guard Expanding the list
of protected classes of the
Human Rights Act to include
military status.
Amending sections of the 1978 to
add space force to the
definitions of armed forces and
uniformed services that involve
programs and services for which
members of the armed forces of
the United States are eligible.
House Bill 302 introduced by
representative Sorry, Nana as
well, 302 have been read to us
by title is dim German pursuant
to Article four, Section five B
two House executive message 49.
Order printed it referred to the
House labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee, then
the House government Elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 303, introduced by
representative Serato and Act
relating to Social services,
creating a pilot program using
federal temporary assistance for
needy families block grant
funding to provide economic
support in the form of monetary
stipends to New Mexico.
Residents participating in the
pilot program requiring
participants to be enrolled in
certain work First Workforce
training programs.
Providing for participant
eligibility criteria and
processes to approve workforce
training programs for specific
industries or fields, providing
definitions making an
appropriation House bill 303,
introduced by representative
Serato 303 have been with us by
tunnel is Jim German pursuant to
Article four, Section five B one
order printed and referred to
the House Labor Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee.
The House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 304, introduced by
representative Chandler, an act
making an appropriation to the
office of Superintendent of
Insurance to assist certain
small rural hospitals to pay
such surcharges for coverage
under the medical malpractice
Act. House Bill 304 introduced
by representative Chandler has
built 304 health minarets was by
titlist Roman pursuant to
Article four, Section five B one
order printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee.
The House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 305, introduced by
representatives Paragon in
Luhan, an act relating to
property prohibiting a homeowner
association from assessing a fee
on the sale of a lot or real
property by a lot owner in the
association's development.
House Bill 305, introduced by
representatives Paragon in Luhan
305. How many twice by title is
ordered up, printed and referred
to the House Rules Committee.
House Bill 306, introduced by
Representative Chandler and Act
relating to hospitals, requiring
financial transparency reports
from corporations doing business
in New Mexico as hospitals or
providers of management services
for hospitals that seek the
benefit of monetary caps on
damages provided by New Mexico
law requiring the superintendent
of insurance to publish reports
making an appropriation.
House Bill 360, introduced by
representative Chandler as well.
306 7 minutes was by title is
order not printed and referred
to the House Rules Committee.
House Bill 307, introduced by
representative Ladder and Act
relating to state agencies,
changing the composition of the
Border Authority and the
executive committee of the
authority, providing that the
Border Authority is an adjunct
agency separate from the
economic Development Department.
transferring personnel and
duties of the border authority
from the Economic Development
Department to the border
Authority.
Amending and repealing sections
of the Border Development Act,
making an appropriation house
Bill 307, introduced by
representative Lara 700 was by
toddlers Ginger main pursuant to
Article four section 51 Order
printed end referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 308, introduced by
representative Lent an act
relating to general obligation
bonds authorizing the issuance
and sale of capital projects.
General obligation bonds to make
capital expenditures for senior
citizen facility improvements,
construction and acquisitions
for library acquisitions for
capital improvements and
acquisitions at institutions of
higher education, state special
schools and tribal schools and
for public safety. Radio
communication improvement
statewide.
Providing for a property tax
levy for payment of principal of
interest on and certain costs
related to the bonds requiring
approval of the registered
voters at the 2024 general
election of the state, declaring
an emergency house bill 308,
introduced by representative
Lent
Is this the one that gets five
committee referrals?
How's your 308 Haven't been read
twice by title of Jim German
pursuant to Article four section
531 order printed and referred
to the House Taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 309, introduced by
representative Town
representatives Townsend, Brown,
Montoya, Martinez and Duncan.
An act relating to public
emergencies requiring that rules
orders or other directives
issued by government entities
pursuant to the All Hazard
Emergency Management Act. The
Public Health Emergency Response
Act, the Riot control act or the
Energy Emergency Powers Act that
close certain businesses or
facilities and that include
exemptions for some businesses
or facilities shall also include
exemptions for facilities
operated by religious
organizations that are exempt
from taxation pursuant to
federal law.
Amending, repealing and enacting
sections of the enemy s a 1978.
109 introduced by representative
Allyson Brown, Montoya, Martinez
and Duncan.
House with 309 Remember it to us
by timeless order now printed
and referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House Bill 310, introduced by
representative to assess and act
relating to tobacco products,
allowing for the imposition of
administrative penalties on the
employee or on the employees of
licenses for certain violations
of the Tobacco products Act.
House Bill 310, introduced by
representative Terrazas, how's
your 310 have been read twice by
toddlers or not printed it
referred to the House Rules
Committee.
House bills.
1314 and 15 introduced by
Speaker Martinez.
House bills. 1617 18, introduced
by representative chasing House
bills.
2311 and 312 introduced by
representatives Opinsky.
House Bill 313, 314 and 315
introduced by representative
Lane House bills 316, 317 and
318, introduced by
representative Townsend.
House bills 319 and 320
introduced by representative
Herrera.
House bills 321 and 322
introduced by representatives
small
Has built 323 and 324,
introduced by representative
Diego's House Bills, 325 and
326, introduced by
representative Ferrari.
House Bill 327 and 328
introduced by representative
Guillermo Romero, house bills
329 and 330, introduced by
representative McQueen.
House bills 331 and 332,
introduced by representative
Johnson.
House Bill 333 and 334
introduced by representative
Thompson.
House Bill 335 and 336
introduced by representative
Chandler.
House Bill 337 and 338
introduced by representative
Alkon House bills 339 and 340,
introduced by representative
Ortez House Bill 341 and 342,
introduced by representative
Lenti.
House Bill 343 and 344
introduced by representative
Hawkman V. Hill.
An act relating to the public
peace, health, safety and
welfare.
House bills 1314 and 15
introduced by Speaker Martinez.
House Bill 1617 and 18
introduced by representative
chasing House bills, 2311 and
312 introduced by
representatives Opinsky House
bills 313 314 315, introduced by
representative Lane House bills
316 317 and 318 introduced by
representative Townsend.
House Bill 319 and 320
introduced by representative
Herrera.
House Bill 321 and 322
introduced by representative
Small
Has built 323 and 324,
introduced by representative
Diego's House Bill 325 and 326,
introduced by representative
Ferrari.
House Bill 327 and 328
introduced by representative
Guillermo Romero.
House Bill 329 and 330
introduced by representative
McQueen.
House Bill 331 and 332
introduced by representative
Johnson hospitals, 333 and 334,
introduced by representative
Thompson, House Bill 335 and
336 introduced by representative
Chamber
House Bill 337 and 338
introduced by representative
Alkon hospitals, 339 and 340,
introduced by representative
Ortez.
House Bill 341 and 342,
introduced by representative
Leant and House bills, 343 and
344, introduced by
representative Hawkman, Vol.
All those bills twice by title
House Capitol Outlay Request one
through House Capitol outlay
request 70 were introduced by
the members of the House.
Any other bills.
Done.
Gentle lady from Berlin.
Mr Speaker.
I moved the house stand in
recess until 10:30 a.m..
Thursday, February 1st.
Members. Thank you for a very
productive day. Um, special
thanks to a R.
Leadership teams on both sides
as well as all the members for
robust debate. Um and, uh
Also to all the members for
their patients as we work
through one heavy, difficult
build the budget, which is
always a big, difficult bill.
As well as through House Bill
eight.
Um and also glad for the debate
and open.
Conversation and discussion
around the rules and whatnot, So
I appreciate all of you. Thank
you for a great day have a good
evening committees and we will
see you tomorrow the house will
send in recess until 1030
tomorrow morning.
