Then we can. We can move forward
in a way where then we will work
towards that to be timely and
efficient and get through this
last two weeks of the session
and everything A couple of my
colleagues and I are very happy
that we're awake at this time of
the morning, and so we're very
grateful that you're here as
well. I'm very happy about us
doing this. We've had a couple
of conversations to make sure
that this goes as smoothly as
possible with our respective
committees.
And then coming together, so
that as we move on this tax
package that we are able to get
this through all the questions
and concerns and comments are
made and that we can get this
submitted to the governor before
the end of the session, and
before chaos really starts
setting in, So I'm really
grateful for this and and thank
you to all the staff who are
here and those who are going to
present today.
And help fill in that
information. So thank you, Mr
Chair. I appreciate this and
look forward to the discussion
today.
At this point in time, then I
would ask that if you can
present and the
Agenda for today is that we all
have a one sheet page in front
of us. They would go down the
list. And then after we've
exhausted this list, and we
would come back with questions
and comments if there are any
and then
How's that? Well, Good morning,
Mr Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Michael
Torres, chief economist at
Legislative Finance Committee.
But during the session, we
primarily staff you all on the
tax committees and with me today
or other economists Brendan Gray
and Jennifer Fabian, and we're
here as nonpartisan staff. So
here to answer questions on
primarily fiscal impacts and go
through this list, as the
chairman mentioned.
But we also have other experts
here with us, Pam Stokes from
Council service and mark Chicken
from the tax policy department
at TRD, who can hopefully help
us answer questions. And with
that, we're gonna go ahead and
start with the House proposal
and I'll hand it over to
Jennifer.
Good morning, Mr Chair, Madam
chair and members of the
committee. I'm going to be going
through very quickly through the
house proposal in order on your
sheet and just give you kind of
a recap of what has been
discussed in committee this
year. Maybe what was discussed
last year? Um and and kind of
brief everybody so
Webcast Audio is working here in
the House chambers and so once
great
So Mr and Madam chair
Starting with pit brackets, so
The largest component of the
House package is adjusting the
pitch brackets and this bill we
have heard in committee this
year. It was in the tax package
last year in this form at the
end of the conference committee.
So this bill adjust income tax
brackets to increase
progressivity and target rate
cuts for working families. These
proposed tax brackets do not
impose a rate increase on any
income bracket and targets rate
decreases at the middle and
lower ends.
Um, and this world decrease
taxes for all taxpayers.
Moving on to the rural
healthcare practitioner Credit
This component of the tax
package will add over 5000
healthcare practitioners to be
eligible for the rural
healthcare income tax credit of
$3000.
Which more than doubles the
current number of participants.
The credit is non refundable can
be carried forward in the credit
does not sense it and I will
note the score on your sheet
does not include Vice chair
woman's proposed amendment to
include nursing assistance that
would likely cost kind of back
of napkin about a million and a
half.
Um, extra dollars for that
component.
The third piece is the angel
Investment tax credit. This
extends a sense set on an
existing credit for investments
in the state.
It would extend it from 2025
till the end of 2030. We did not
include This is not included in
the tax package last year. It
has not been heard in the
committee this year yet, but it
was heard in the committee last
year. The year before, And the
year before. I believe this
credit is not refundable but
also can be carried forward.
Moving on energy storage tax
credit. This was included in the
package last year and this would
enable energy storage facilities
to be included in RBS, um at the
local level, and it would treat
energy storage facilities
identical to renewable
generation and a little bit
different from transmission
projects, but bring it into that
eligibility.
And that was sponsored by
represented Chandler last year.
So the next one is a new bill.
This is a fire recovery tax
credit. This was not in the
package last year. It has not
been heard by the committee this
year. This creates an income tax
credit to compensate for the
construction of homes destroyed
by the calf Canyon Hermits Peak
fires. It's capped at $5 million
a year. It's non refundable tax
credit, one for one for the cost
of rebuilding a home.
Moving on to the childcare
provider Grt deduction. This
creates a grt deduction for for
profit childcare providers on
contract or receiving grant
funds from E C. C D from the G R
T.
And that was included in the
package last year.
Moving on the Medicaid
renovation. Gerety deduction.
This creates a grt deduction on
home renovations like grants and
in shower bars for those on
Medicaid.
There's no sense that on that,
and it was included in the
package last year.
Moving on to some of the revenue
raisers in this package, so the
capital gains deduction. This
sponsored by representative
Chandler.
It repeals the 40% capital gains
deduction currently in statute
and instead provides for $2500
deduction.
It retains the current 40%
deduction for the sale of New
Mexico businesses up to a
million dollars to make sure
that those who invest in New
Mexico can protect their
investments, and that is the
same as it was in the conference
committee negotiations last
year.
And lastly, this, uh, corporate
income tax rate change this, uh,
makes corporate income tax flat
at the highest rate of 5.9%.
Um, this was not sponsored on
the House side. This year, it
was sponsored by Senator Worth.
Um It was in the package last
year and sponsored by, um
I believe represents Chandler
and representative Harper last
year. Correct me if I'm wrong
with a single sales provision,
the single sales is not included
this year in the House package.
And with that
That is the House package.
Ultimate book or be moving on to
the Senate Now, Okay, so Brendan
will cover the Senate package.
Good morning, Mr Chair. My name
is Brendan Gray economist Lfc.
Um, same as Jennifer. I'll be
going through the Senate
proposals in order on that's on
your sheet so you can follow
along there.
First is the armed forces
Retirement Pay tax sunset. This
eliminates the sunset on
military retirement pay income
tax exemption up to $30,000 and
ensures that the spouses of
military veterans also received
income tax exemption.
This was part of the tax package
last year.
Next is another bill that was
included in the tax package last
year. The energy storage tax
credit
This would enable energy storage
facilities to be included in IRB
negotiations and treated the
same as renewable energy
generation and transmission.
Next is Senate Bill 119 flat
corporate rate. This was also
included in the tax package last
year.
This replaces the current two
tiered corporate income tax
structure with a flat rate of
5.9%, just like Jennifer
mentioned.
Um, Next is Sanibel 117. The
special needs adoption credit,
also part of last year's
package, and this simply
increases the special needs
Adopted child tax credit from
1000 to $1500.
Next. We have a Senate bill 171,
also part of the package last
year, the teacher supply
exemption.
Which creates an income tax
deduction for school supplies
purchased by a public school
teacher up to $500 in texture,
2024 and increases that to 1.25
through 2028. Next we have
another provision was included
last year Senate Bill 58
geothermal
Energy generation.
Credit. This creates a pit and
sick credit equal to 1.5 cents
per kilowatt hour of electricity
generated and and has a cap of 5
million for both pit and sits on
aggregate cap of $10 million.
Um
And both the House and the
Senate version amended the whole
remove the hold harmless
provision for local governments.
Next is Senate Bill 40
Geothermal heat pump credit.
This is the same version last
year with a higher cap. Last
year's tax package had a cap of
8 million. This has attacks
aggregate cap of 32 million. Um,
as a reminder this creates a
credit for 30% of the costs.
Of installing a geothermal
ground coupled heat pump up to
$9000. Per next. We have the
dyed diesel grt exemption. This
is Senate Bill 118.
Also included in last year's
package, and this creates a grt
deduction for the sale and use
of died special fuels from the
gross receipts and compensating
tax when those fuels are used
for agricultural purposes and
the sunsets in fiscal fiscal
year, 30
In the last two. We have two
provisions that were not
included in last year's package.
First Senate Bill 121 the solar
market tax credit
This does three things first. It
increases the aggregate cap of
available credits for solar
system purchasing installation
from 12 Million to 30 million.
Second it allows provides for
tribal leaseholders to be
eligible to receive the credit.
And lastly, it allows taxpayers
who are eligible between 2020
2023 but who did not receive a
certificate because of the cap
to reapply and provides $20
million for that supplemental
opportunity.
And then Lastly, we have
sensible 181, which would add
subpart F income, which is
certain types of foreign
corporate income to the New
Mexico tax base and aligns New
Mexico's tax code more with the
federal tax code.
So that covers the Senate. Um
Portion and I'll pass it now
over two. Is he for
Thanks, Brendan. Thanks, Mr
Harold. Just wrap it up here
with a couple of clarifications
If you look at line, 12, this is
the sum of just the House
proposals the cost for the the
House proposal.
Line. 25 R, Of course, the sums
for the Senate proposals but
because there are proposals that
are duplicated in both, uh
packages
The total online 27, which is of
both Senate and House excludes
any duplicates. So it's only
counted once and as you can see,
they're slightly over the $200
million allotment, as provided
for in House Bill two passed on
the House floor on Wednesday, so
some changes might need to be
made in order to get that to fit
the allotment there.
And I'll make one other
clarification here, um, line
1821 and 23 those three
proposals that's the special
needs adoption credit, the
geothermal heat pump and the
solar market tax credit. All
three of those are refundable as
currently written, and so would
need to be included in a
separate package in order to
Avoid triggering any line item
veto or or not, depending on of
course, the Supreme Court case
that's currently being decided.
So those three I would highlight
for you all is maybe needing a
Thank you, Mr Chair. Sure, we
the house heard this version of
an E V tax credit. Earlier this
session, The governor introduced
this bill. It was sponsored by
representative Bachmann V. Hill.
And it is a much larger, even
tax credit than was included in
the package. Last year. Last
year, there was a cap of $11
million for both TV credits.
and, um, kind of residential
chargers.
This does not have a cap, so it
grows to over $50 million in the
out years. Um, it allows for
about a $3000 credit for the
purchase of an electric vehicle.
It also includes used vehicles
at about half the rate $1500 and
those credit scaled down over
time to try to keep the cost a
little bit lower.
But that's really the difference
from the E V bills that we saw
previously. It's also refundable
and transferable so that when
you purchase a vehicle, you can
do cash on the hood. Basically,
sell your credit to the dealer.
They give you a discount on the
car, so that would also be
beatable. So we would need to
put that in the other package,
if included.
Thank you very much. And at this
point now move to the committee
for questions and or comments. I
will. I'll begin here and then
we'll just flow this way. So I
see. Thank you, Mr Chairman, and
I actually just want to ask a
question on the line. 22, the
dyed diesel grt.
Um
Last year's numbers showed it
about 8 million total, and this
is showing 38 million total.
understand why this is a
deduction. It's not a
Well. There were two parts last
year, One was General fund and
one was local.
The two combined were about 8
million and all of a sudden now
it's 38. I don't know where
those numbers came from, so
those could be explained.
Absolutely. Mr Chairman, Senator
Brandt. Um, last year, the LFC
estimated the 4 million of the
General Fund, which is about 8
million total as you mentioned,
um, using data that to us
illustrated how much dye diesel
is consumed specifically by
agriculture.
We've had conversations with the
tax and Rev. Department and this
was a concern noted in the LFC F
I R last year, but there is
really no way
As currently written for the tax
department to verify
agricultural use. And so the
concern here is as written
actually all dyed diesel sales
would be would receive this
deduction. So if there's a way
to, you know, satisfy the tax
department's concerns and make
sure that we can narrow down the
use of this deduction
specifically to agricultural
purposes.
Then perhaps we could get that
number back down to the 4
million to the General fund.
Promise. German, um
You may not know this but died.
Diesel legally can only be used
by agriculture.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt. We've
had conversations with a diesel
wholesalers who tell us, you
know, construction off road
vehicles that use diesel could
also be purchasing diet diesel
again. Legally, they're not
supposed to. And Mr Chair and
Senator Brandt. You You bring up
a great point, if if it is
legally only for agriculture
than the full amount would
Received the grt deduction of
the 40. Perhaps Senator Brandon
over exactly. We went through
earlier that the print dog glad
to have you let's go to Peter
Worth.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you to the two chairs for doing
this in this format.
Ah! Died. Diesel was one on my
list as well. The other one line
21 geothermal heat pump last
year as introduced, Was it 16
million. Now it's 32. I also
Seem to remember that we lowered
that amount in the final bill.
And so I'd like to understand.
Uh, on geothermal and die
Diesel.
What we can. Can we put cat?
What can we put caps on? And I
think certainly these two are
areas where we can gain the
number targets. So I think these
are areas we can working, but I
just want to understand.
That if we can limit the
geothermal heat pump credit
And then how do we get the
number? Obviously, the dyed
diesel. You've had the
discussion about the policy
piece, but
Is there a way to also
Kind of reduce the amount of the
deduction, perhaps so that we
get it into a $10 million range,
which I think is would be
excited, visited with Senator
Baca and he talked about
Sure, Mr Chairs.
Better. All right, I will take
the geothermal heat pump
question. So the way this was
worded in drafting last years,
it was two caps of $8 million or
one cup for 16. So it was one
total cap of 16.
This year, the way it was
drafted. It was pretty clear to
the lfc that
It was a $16 million cap for
each pit and cit.
So it kind of doubled during the
negotiations last year, that
kind of total cap of 16 was cut
in half making so that option is
So just to comment, Mr Chair. I
think that's certainly a place
where again to make it
consistent with the bill Last
year, it would be an $8 million
number or we could do 16. But
that's a place we definitely
have room to adjust, and we can
in the Senate amendment that has
this well.
Um, those are really the two
areas that I had questions.
Thank you, Senator Worth moving
down the line center.
Thank you, Mr Chair and real
quick going back to the House
proposal on income tax.
To work on the middle. The
middle sector. Can you guys talk
about that? Just a little bit
Because I really don't remember.
H I don't remember what Who's
Bill That was, But if you guys
could Senator so last year, it
was brackets. But then
Tax. Uh, percentage is flat. And
And Mr Chair. Thank you. Thank
you for that. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr Chair with regard
to the E V proposal, um
Coming from representative
Hawkman V. Hill.
I am concerned that it's still
in the same form. At some point
We had a conversation Mr Chair
about.
Trying to make it more. Um
You might call it progressive in
the lower income people might
benefit in some way in a
different way than higher income
people.
I spoke with the sponsor after
the meeting Mr Chair and had
hoped that we might increase the
amount for used vehicles as a
way of addressing that, and I
would still like to reiterate.
Um that's a concern of mine. At
least Mr Chair. And lastly, I'm
just going to voice my concern
again that we're not
Looking at the top brackets and
adding additional progressivity
into our income tax. Um
Policies. So thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Reverend. That our
To my left anyone else?
Thank you, Chairman. Um
I want to first just say thank
you to you and Chairman Shindo.
I think this is a really great
idea.
Especially as we're trying to.
You know, have a Senate tax
committee that is
You know, essentially aligned
with the House Tax committee
that we would come together.
And has at least one meeting
like this. I think it's super
helpful, so I would just want to
Uh, this gives me an opportunity
to ask him some questions of
some of the Senate bills that I
might not here, right? So
Um, just going down the list
just a couple of questions.
Chairman. Um I'm looking at the
pit brackets line Item three.
And it looks like we have
Roughly half an impact in fiscal
year 25 and then the full X
Is that a function just of where
the fiscal year hits? We're not
phasing in this.
That's correct. Thank you,
Chairman. And is he that that's
helpful.
Um
Uh, my next question is the um
Richard WrestleMania before we
talked about this is the real
healthcare practitioner credit
We talked about adding some
groups of folks that can qualify
for that. But there is also
another important part changing
the hours.
So folks could have the
equivalent of no vacation in
their year and also a little
definition. Is that still
maintained in this? Yes, Mr. So,
Mr Chair and represented Harper
that is in the original
proposal. He adopted that from
you last year. Um, and it is in
the in the package.
Excellent, Mr Chair, and
Jennifer. Thank you for that.
And that was to be fair. That
was years of Jennifer Jones
Idea.
But not all of them. We need
some of them around during
Christmas to, um
Um
Let's see. And then Senator
Brandt and asked My question
about the diet Diesel and
Senator Worth asked my question
about geothermal heat pumps, so
Yeah, that was kind of
surprising The big jump.
I think we all agree that should
be at least
Reduced down or corrected
instead, and there's more of
what we had last. Um
We have not heard yet. Line Item
seven. The fire recovery tax
credit bill. I have some
questions about that, Um
Maybe just one quick question,
Mr Chair, and so I I understand.
There are federal dollars that
are coming to help these folks
rebuild our houses.
This is
Just a credit for G R T that
would be charged on the
construction or what is this?
Thank thank you, Mr Chair and
representative Harper. This
credit is actually on the
Total construction cost less any
Funds received from FEMA or the
federal government to help
support them. So if there's a
gap between the cost of the home
that they construct and the
amount that they get from FEMA,
this would be matched or the
credit would match that amount,
and it's only against tax
liability. It's nonrefundable
and only carry forward for up to
three years. So even still, the
full amount may not actually get
back to the tax.
Busy. Thank you that I think I'm
catching this now. So
Um
Okay. I'll have more questions
in the committee when we hear
this, but
And I think, um
Mr Chair. Just maybe two more.
So just just to be clear in the
house portion of mine item 11,
which is the corporate income
tax change.
House Bill 216 ludes, removing
the bottom bracket and single
sales factor. So that is part of
the proposal. But I don't
believe it was scored here as
part of that proposal to 16. I
know that's distinct. That part
is not included in how Senate
Bill 119.
Um And then, Mr Chair, Um
Maybe just a comment. You know,
as I'm looking through this and
comparing it to what we did last
year, I mean, it makes sense
that a lot of the items
In here what we saw last year
and, uh, Chairman I remember
speaking from that, especially
in a short 30 days, it would
make sense to not try to be
included here. So I get why we
have
A lot of that.
Um, I do know that some things
that are missing are
G R T rate reduction.
Motor vehicle excise tax being
sent to Rhodes. Liquor excise
tax going to treatment
prevention programs.
Um
I think we all agree. Those are
good things important things.
But those were also the
expensive limited to a roughly
200. Why we might not be
considering those but
I do know that this is when I
look at this the real reform
You know, is perhaps pit
brackets.
Um
Capital gains and single sales.
Um the rest of these are are
good, right? Like the rural
health care
But Chairman I'm just I'm a
little. I guess I'm just
expressing
English for this feeling. It's
there's a German word called
Fell schmear.
Which is a sadness for the world
as it could have been. Thank
you, chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Harper. Let's go to Speaker
Martinez. Thank you, Mr Chair.
There's also a few of those
words in the in Spanish
represented Harper. But we won't
see those.
He didn't hear me. He's another
chit chatting in the front.
Ah, thank you, Mr Chair, and and
Mr Chair and welcome senators to
the house floor. Please leave.
Clean up after yourselves.
Senator Brandt like that suit
color too. I almost wore one.
Thank you. Well, first of all, I
want to express gratitude to
both committees for doing this.
This really, I think reiterates
and
Reinforces the spirit of
collaboration between House and
Senate.
Bipartisan, bicameral.
Um, transparency, right so that
we don't end up. Um and you know
very last minute late night
meetings trying to figure these
things out. Um, so I'm
appreciative of that. I do want
to just
Uh, think the house team for at
this point, including the fire,
recovery tax credit, and there
are some amendments being worked
on, and I appreciate technical
work that needs to happen. Um, I
also want to put in a plug for,
um, a similar bill out in the
Senate. I don't see it on the
list, but hopefully we can get
incorporated at some point that
Senate Bill 174.
Also dealing with fire recovery.
And the reason I bring this up,
is, uh there are so many of us
in this chamber or in this
legislature rather
For whom those fires were really
devastating, Right? And for some
of you, both of these tax
credits are really families in
Um
And I think
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Time of unprecedented
Previn. New inflows to the state
to
Question the need to raise tax
$70 million plus and 17.
We've got
All the money that we can spend
now.
We've got in line item number.
Sick. Excuse me. Line item
number five, the angel and over
and over again. We've heard him.
Re put into
New endeavors and state we
Need more risking their dollars
Trying Madam vice chair That
would be line number 18 the
special anyone, the geothermal
Madam vice chair. This is a good
question, and I should highlight
that we have an error on this
sheet lines, 16 and six. They
are labeled as pit but they're
actually grt industrial revenue
Madam vice, her happy to get
You want to flag Mr Package, You
learn a word, including oil and
gas, and they were all
requesting carve outs and
exemptions. And I just think
person I just will let the body
no here that I do, but I think
the lessons learned at really
made me committee. We had an
exemption for
telecommunications.
And then literally my fans,
saying they wanted more
Again if we don't end up doing
sales to issues, Finally Mr
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Worth the proposal is, I believe
it's called the advanced energy
production tax credit. It's a
bit of a mouthful. Um, it is a
companion to a federal tax
credit that was passed as part
of the inflation reduction Act.
Excuse me to Referral Revenue
code, which provided to people
who manufactured and sold.
Certain products and pardon me
in the statute.
So this credit that the governor
proposed is to
Help with the capital costs of
creating the facility that is
going to then produce the stuff
that will qualify for the 45 X
credit, so it's doesn't include
used to equip
In manufacturing facility that
will ultimately
Mr Chairman Senator Worth? I do
believe there is a bill. I, um,
have been in
Thank you, Chairman. Um
appreciate Senator Big. Uh, big
fan. I do want to, interestingly
for a carve out for also just to
say
This is a an
Critical key factory. We do
Senator Briggs.
General Worth and
See what moves forward with it,
Chairman. Anything else, Dad?
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you all for being apologized.
Quick breakfast with leadership.
This morning. And, uh, so thank
you. Chair and for
Stepping in and so forth, But I
appreciate again. I think this
is a good way field have an idea
of what's happening on both, Uh
houses and chambers and so
forth.
And I appreciate, um, the we've
got a couple of embryos. We
heard one bill yesterday to on
on the
On the, uh for service payment
receipts, moors and I know that
I just want to put that out
there.
We had some discussion because I
think we missed some, uh from
last year's bill on some of the
health care providers and so
