Yeah.
So.
Worcester.
It's.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well
as we are
on the generally leave from
don't you know they'll go and
look at jones lead us in today's
evocation.
Let's pray
father thank you for the many
blessings you give us every day
thank you for the opportunity to
serve the people of new mexico
we are grateful for your love
and patience with us your
graciousness toward us were
today as we make important
decisions for the people of new
mexico we ask for your
supernatural wisdom and your
vision for our future give a
strengthen mental clarity as
we work our way through the
remainder of the session we
thank you for our guests that we
have here today father we asked
your blessings on them thank you
for the safe travel to
hear to sound affair and we ask
for the same as they depart.
Wow we just was great brussings
and the rest of our day here
today thank you mark and jesus
name a man.
Jitterly from a terror percent
of vincent with the pledge
religions.
Ac retain secretary
jillian montes senior class
president big dogs
are not working senior class
vice president welcome
and is could is special guess
welcome
mister chris of resilience
adviser welcome
to andrei could is assistant
principle welcome
and that we have a very proud of
father among them as well edward
topic or straight director for
instead of him and father of a
more cabit welcome.
Thank you lady announcements
generating from earlier percent
of thomson thank you mister
speaker I have two shadows today
with the seal there are founding
members of the account you youth
organizing committee and this is
tory deader
from east mountain high school
she's a senior and we also have
westley clum from both high
school um who is a junior and
they are both founding members
of that group and please welcome
them to the house fantastic
welcome to the house.
Announcements delay farm done
over center ferrari thank you mr
speaker I just wanted people to
take note that they received um
a free golf pouse to some of our
major goving
contributors and sponsors from
some country section and also
the amateur golf association and
send country golf foundation and
the sancountry golf house was
created several years ago by
allied partners in golf from new
mexico and west texas with the
express mission to grow and
support the game of golf in our
area so those of you who like to
gov would like to learn to go
please take advantage there are
some really great places to go
in our state thank you and as it
given even if you're a bad
golfer like me
well we keep working on it rate
mister speakers right it's
everyday struggle the struggle
is real.
German from donator
representative letter thank you
mister speaker today and for an
over your desk you should have a
little black bag with some chili
in it from southern new mexico.
If this is a courtesy houses or
thirty four thank you to my
colleagues open them up take a
smell and that is the smell of
southern new mexico thank you
mister speaker I can't smell
that I don't have any general
and thank you though.
Announcements we've got a we got
a couple of memorials undec.
We're gonna introduce one first
then go to third reading on that
one generally from earlier
percent of chasing.
Minister speaker I will be going
to that order of business
introduction of legislation
objection disordered.
The.
Mr speaker I asked to hold out
quite there yet we're we we've
got to introduce the other one
first sorry.
Us memorial twenty three.
Interest by representatives
jones and terraces a memorial
proclaiming generate twenty
fifth two thousand twenty four
and i'll go county damn in the
house of representatives.
House mobile twenty three
introduced by representatives
jones and process as moral
twenty three hundred minutes was
by titles or not printed in
place and the speaker stable
lady from earlier and
presentative chasing.
Mrs big room would be good about
order business announcements in
the cellaneous business
objection it is so ordered back
to the general leading from.
Juliana from
yani would never said johns.
Banking mr speaker I asked
unanimous consent that house
memorial twenty three be removed
from the speakers table and be
made the next order of business
seen objection it is so order to
let the record affect that
election necessary for placing
house memorial twenty three or
final passage has been taken in
it is now subject to debate
amendment and our substitution
that you're lady to explain the
memorial.
Yes thank you mr speaker i'd
just like to
highlight a very special
occasion this will be the first
visit of delegation from hedalco
county to the house of
representatives and because of
that we have a memorial to uh
celebrate hedalgo county day
here in the house
her daughter county is the
southern most district and his
all gocan is the southern most
county in my district and in new
mexico of course we are the
proud boot hill of new mexico
and uh many of my constituents
are here today including quite a
few students from
lordsburg high school and
animals high school.
And the clerk supposed to read
argument lady yeah we can either
introduce your guests now or
after the memorial too like to
introduce my guess we have
guessed on the restroom
i'd like to introduce emily
going of it she is and you could
stand down only please executive
director of leap economic
development specialist welcome
employee.
Vanessa haines director of the
chamber of commerce.
Glenda green mayor of the city
of law experi.
Soon how fairly teacher words
for high school with leadership
sponsor
roxan occurrency
budget.
And albert dears whose chief
nursing officer at her dog on
medical services welcome yard
welcome to the house.
Clerk to work to read the
memorial.
The.
House memorial twenty three
introduced a representative
jones and torrosis a memorial
proclaiming january twenty fifth
twenty twenty four her daughter
county day in the house of
representatives whereas the city
of lordsburg the village of
video virgin and the dargo
county are the southwestern
gateway to new mexico and
whereas it argo county borders
arizona and mexico and was
creative from the southwest
portion of grant county in
nineteen nineteen and whereas he
dogo county was named for a
mexican patriot and roman
catholic priest miguel hillargo
ecostia a leader of the mexican
war of independence who was
known as the father of the
nation in mexico and whereas
sadogo county was the home of
cherry coa patchy chief john and
whereas during world war two
dollar county was designated as
a bombing arrange for pilots and
training.
And remains of the bombing can
be seen today and whereas hidago
county is known as the boot heal
of new mexico posting two goes
towns a geothermal generating
plant.
An abundant opportunities for
bird watching and hiking and
whereas the connector divide
trail begins in a dargo county
with this trail had a crazy cook
mountain and whereas hidogo
county is rich and minerals
including copper and gold and
some abandoned minds can be seen
today.
And whereas the new mexico
institute of mining and
technologies players training in
research center is in hedargo
county and whereas dogo county
includes two incorporated
communities the city of lords
berg and the village of verdint
and unincorporated communities
anymore carton city rodeo
players franklin and windmill
and whereas it all goes county
has two public school districts
the animals public school
district home of the panthers
and the lords burg municipal
school district home of the
mavericks.
And whereas hit all go county as
home to world championable
writer owen washburn and sports
shooter thai bensley who
competed in the nineteen eighty
four in nineteen eighty eight
olympic games and were as the
city of lordsburg was
incorporated in eighteen eighty
on the route of the southern
pacific rare.
And whereas the city of lords
berg is a side of new mexico's
first airport and is also
recognized as a place where a
portion of new mexico state song
was written and were as the city
of lordsburg is the county seat
of adogo county.
And whereas the village of
verdint previously known as
richmond was incorporated in
nineteen sixteen.
And whereas the village of
verdint is the northern
agricultural hub of dargo county
and the pictures keiler river
flows through it.
And whereas he dogo county has a
fascinating history and as a
unique part of the american
southwest.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house representative is the
stated mexico that january
twenty fifth twenty twenty four
be proclaimed hidable county day
in the house of representatives.
And be it further resolved that
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the mayor and
members of the city council of
the city of lordsburg the mayor
and members of the village
council of the village of and
the hidden go county board of
county commissioners.
Is there a debate on house
memorial twenty three the
gentleman from me.
And catering representative the
losses thank you mister speaker
with the generating please.
A yield thank you mister speaker
you know a I am so glad mister
speaker that we have he double
county day the first one and
that we were able to do that we
had a conversation about all
maybe two three weeks ago the
importance of uh of having
something to highlight what each
county and and he's always
didn't have one so i'm glad that
they they were able to according
and and come here now mister
speaker that's a beautiful place
out there in in his album I only
have one one precedent there
which is the village of burden
which is a farming community.
And and so it's it's a beautiful
place of europe you know there's
a lot of miskeath is that's all
i'm gonna say but it's so it's a
the people are very very kind
very very good I missed the
charter of restaurant and those
only that live there understand
what i'm talking about
are in cranberries is kind of
bothering me a little bit and
the and some of these are are
are they're struggling like
other communities for lack of of
labor participation
some of the school districts
again
like animals work on a forty
work week uhm the
uh they have two ghost towns if
you're ever traveling through
there don't just blink and miss
it so make sure you stop and and
and see that some of those
things tell i'm always in and
out of there because I on the
funeral director done in that
southless area and i'd love to
go to to large birth and I have
a story about the colon divide
trail because we always have
hikers that start there all the
way down from the bottom and
work their way through there and
there's a little dead spot there
were sometimes struggling at
water or from you know as you're
going up to hill coming out of
it all into grant county where
the connel the right trial
continues going.
There's all spotted that there's
no water and so I was dra- I was
I had left a funeral finished a
funeral in a moment driving up
the hill and I see one of these
hikers and I kind of felt bad
for him but mister speaker I was
driving my hurse
and so he was surprised that I
stopped to give the hitch hiker
arrived to the next stop but he
said I will never forget you
know that day but look i'm very
very proud to see that they're
here i'm worried my maverick
color today for you guys and so
and uh the the panthers uh i'm
sorry but I were my green tie
next year for you
god bless you thank you mister
speaker thank you generally for
for us co sponsoring this to
wonderful legislation.
Thank you general gentlemen as
well for the debate on house
memorial twenty three.
See none generally too close mr
speaker I would just like to say
yes the way uh representative
trust is described her dog or
county I have to add that it is
a beautiful but huge county and
a not much population but the
people there are exceptional
they are an amazing example of
community and the fact that
they're here and they brought
such numbers with them on such
short notice twelve hour round
trip it is it is not an easy
thing to to accomplish but they
are a great example of working
together and that knowing how to
get things done they have a
pioneer spirit and I think that
that they they just uh we can
learn a lot from them I believe
I was able to visit with quite a
few of the students this morning
from lordsburg and I think I
believe they're up yes they bear
up in the gallery now okay
but anyway I visited with the
students from lorisborough high
and also from animals high and
they are here to advocate the
maintaining their four day per
week school school schedule they
are testing money to the success
of that schedule and so they did
speak out on that and I was
really encouraged to know that
they're eager to be involved in
the process of government here
so I just want to say welcome to
all of them i've so appreciate
you being here and i'd like to
say that everyone
wait I missed one thing you have
a bag of goodies and you also
have an invitation and I I can't
read it right now I don't have
mine in front of me but there is
an invitation for an event
tonight we hope you all will be
there and happy her dog or
county day thank you mister
speaker I think usually would
you like to make a motion so we
can vote on the memorial.
Unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative there's been emotion
to show all members in the house
present and voting in the
affirmative scene objection it
is ordered we are
we are i'm final passage of
house merial twenty three the
vote is now open.
The board is now closed by one
of seventy in the affirmative
zero negative has memorial
twenty three has duly passed
this house congratulations.
Into all the students from the
lords burger words work high
school mavericks welcome to the
house stating council members
twenty six of them will got the
responses brian congressman
michel commission we also have
students from animals high
school goal panters get give
heard the superintendent to
welcome to the house
representatives.
The.
On announcements we're going to
go to the gentle lady from bunia
a representative.
Thank you mister speaker I ask
unanimous concerned that house
memorial to be removed in the
speakers table and made the next
order of business you know
objection it is so ordered
mr speaker would you get me to
that point the record reflect
that all actually necessary for
place in house memorial to one
final pass which has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the
memorial thank you mister
speaker house memorial to is to
celebrate the community food and
farm initiatives and toward
ending hunger and strengthening
are the statewide foods system.
And with that I would like to
um
introduce people on the rostrum
and the first is done a gun
solicitors.
Thank you.
And are just required donya
works alongside fellow mentor
edward consultants to guide
young farmers to live
sustainably and gain can sierra
of the land that her family has
home for many generations
currency is what I meant to say.
And um
let's see our next person is
matal carasco
he is the program coordinator
and he received the sowing
change of ward for organizations
engaged in creating sustainable
food systems and project feed
the heard and just briefly
projectly the hood uses cultural
food ways as an organization
organizing tool to mobilise
communities to great place based
regenerative food systems.
Welcome to the house
the next award is for dominique
loud and heard of the land award
for outstanding leadership and
farming and ranching and the
acama ancestral lands can
conservation core he's the farm
coordinator and
they aim to spur a movement to
restore local food systems
through agriculture seed in
traditional knowledge they're
based in akama they recruit
acomma youth ages 17-25 in
immersive in olistic approach to
revitalizing accommodate systems
to the house.
Next is hell go garcia garza
she's executive director of
agricultural cooperative network
and she received the heart of
the land award for outstanding
leadership in farming and
ranching the cultivating better
leo county grow the growers
program and uh it's a
comprehensive beginner farmer
training and business
acceleration initiative designed
to attract new and emerging
farmers into professional food
production.
Congratulations and going to
welcome to house.
And next we have jose hosene
louise or tc moon he's a farmer
and he received the living land
award for outstanding leadership
in land stewart ship he's from
dixon new mexico and he
cares for the farm in land and
is a water sake yes steward walk
into the house also is.
The.
Next is polling power and for
the good she received the word
for good food for new mexico
award celebrating farmers
markets the astech market
farmers market and the market
director manager.
Palling has me energy as tech
farmers market since two
thousand eight and jointly with
casey macune since twenty twenty
and they are honored to
represent the as tech farmers
market which is truly community
collaboration between farmers
and vendors and customers
welcome to the house and.
We have also just to announce
quickly the gold and chilly
awards to beth fair she received
the award for k through twelve
schools.
And l leader municipal schools
alicia edwards
also received the golden chilly
award for k through twelve
schools for healthy kids healthy
communities coordinator
and the silver consolidated
school silver city new mexico
and sandra carpenter in andrew
martinez the gold and chili
awardy at the christina can't
early childhood center and they
are here with us welcome to the
house thank you all
right in the heart of house
district eleven in downtown
and they do wonderful things and
your neighbor is a farmer in he
won a golden chile he's a golden
chilly awardy from desert very
farm and santa fe and we need to
thank andrew for the wonderful
salad that he provided a lot of
the vegetables for that that he
grows hyped upon itly and he's
the first in the state of new
mexico to hydroponically grow
uh vegetables and fruit I
believe so thank you to
all of these awardies and we
also want to think are
legislative hunger caucas for
supporting the funding for food
and hunger priorities and this
year they're asking forty three
and a half million to make hold
the healthy universal school
meals and a hundred and eighteen
million to build robust food
system for senior schools early
day care emergency food
assistance and far and food farm
and agriculture article nearship
thank you mister speaker thank
you generally to yields ransom
guess in the gallery random plus
we've got the new mexico ground
coalition healthy kids
department of health program
members new mexico for an
agriculture policy council
members from the table and
foremers and project feed the
head walk into the house.
Thank you mister speakering
could the clear please read the
memorial to read.
House memorial too introduced
pay representative from a
memorial declaring january
twenty fifth two thousand twenty
four new mexico food and farms
day in the house of
representatives in celebration
of community food and farming
initiatives toward ending hunger
and strengthening in the
statewide food system whereas
new mexico food farms day
celebrates the efforts of
individuals communities
organizations and agencies in
creating a thriving local food
farming and ranching economy
while emphasising that everyone
in new mexico should have access
to fresh local healthy and
nutritious food and whereas new
mexico food and farms day
celebrates the following two
thousand twenty four word
recipients a the good food for
new mexico word celebrating new
mexico's farmers markets as text
farmers market pauline powell.
The selling change award for
organizations engaged in
creating sustainable food
systems project fee the hood
mateo karasco and zia martinez.
See the heart of the land award
for outstanding leadership in
farming arranging.
Acciments ancestor lands
conservation corps xata miller
and dominique cloud and
cultivating bernalio county grow
the growers program mari simbana
for another county open space
and helga garcia garsa
agriculture agricultural.
Cooperative network like osa.
D the growing the future award
for new or young farmers are
ranchers chicago farm down
dongles allies new mexico are
sake association low summary
door is farmer training program
e the living land award for
outstanding leadership and land
stewartship dream new mexico san
antonio they'll rio ambudo
hosilities or tc when use and f
the new mexico grown golden
chilly award honoring all
schools senior centers and early
child care centers that purchase
new mexico grown and raise
products from farmers and
ranchers.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of new mexico that
january twenty fifth twenty
twenty four we declared new
mexico food and farmers date and
the house of representatives and
celebration of community food
and farm initiatives toward
ending hunger and strengthening
the statewide food system and be
it further resolved the copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the board share of farmer
table and the governing
committee chair of the new
mexico food and the agriculture
policy council.
House memorial to introduce by
representative from is there
debate on house memorial to
general lady from
the violence and the phone
thousand percent of it.
Thank you mr speaker where the
general lady ill i'd be glad to
yield
a
representative I stand in proud
recognition of one of my
constituents who say artism is
who is a real leader of our
agriculture for young students
in our valley he works are with
many of our local farmers he
gets students from the area who
are attending northern new
mexico college to go work on
these farms to learn the
business to become hopefully
agricultural and to renewed
everything the future and he is
a big leader and now in the
north and I use my constituent
he does amazing things in our
community I can't tell you how
many boards he shares on he is
actively working with students
every day of the week and we are
in debted to leadership like
this in our state and I would
just like to bring his his
standard please as they said I
bring him attention to him in
our district and for the state
thank you
they could delete the welcome
thanks for those comments for
the debate later from something
thank you speaker with the
general lady yield
yes I yield to my m to the
general lady thank you I too
send an incomplete support of
this antis to echo
urgent lady from your rebuild
santa fe as a words and in
knowing mister
and I have made and I know his
passion behind all of our
passion I just like to say in
support and what we do in south
here with our unity forum and
our farmers market here in
supporting all these efforts and
being participants in everything
you're doing in everything that
all of our growers in all of our
our farmers in our state are are
doing to enhance an improve then
nutrition in the value of our
state thank you mr speaker thank
you generally could you lady
there's further mate that you
from catcher inside us correlate
representative.
The.
Thank you mister speaker the
kindly yield.
I will gladly yield to the
general leading thank you mr
speaker and think you can lady I
just want to stand and support
this memorial you know farmers
feed new mexico farmers feed
america
um teaching that trade is a is
this is what is teaching this
trade teaching people to be able
to feed themselves these are
life skills that you can never
lose mr speaker and so i'm going
to add onto that that's exactly
why we need to have the meat
inspection bill past and get new
mexicans to be able to feed new
mexicans thank you mister
speaker thank you.
For the debate on the memorial.
Seen a for the beginning lady to
close um I move that house
memorial to do know it now pass
and ask unanimous consent of the
house that the records show that
the role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative emotion to show all
the members of the house
president and voting in the
affirmative scene objection it
is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial to the
vote is now open.
What is our close by road of
seventy in the affirmative and
zero in the native house moyle
to has duly passed this house
congratulations thank you mr
speaker.
It's good to the gentle lady
from south afraid with the
certificate.
Thank you mister speaker.
Today is at santa fe county day
and I just have a few words it
will our guests are joining us
in a state richard tradition
santa fe county is a leader in
supporting the historic and
traditional cultures and special
places that we cherish the new
mexico santa fe counting is the
home of four native american
public three cities a handful of
traditional in a headphone
traditional villages the county
is a leader in sustainability
community planning and arts and
culture the economic development
priorities includes support for
the film industry with three
film studios including camel
rocks to do studios which is the
first indigenously owned it
operated film studio we have
seven western film sites in
santa fe county
sound of a county is the home of
this way into market traditional
spanish market the homeless
over the home of the wine and
chili festival the home of the t
mile pillar trail reunity farm
world class dining mealbook and
the santa fe opera
these are just a few other
things that we are home of in
that we take pride sanity county
is blessed to be the home of our
capital city standard fair we
welcome everyone to go home and
hope you have an amazing
experience here as a legislator
a tourist or residents and
without mister speaker i'd like
to introduce or guessed on the
restroom
please go ahead thank you today
we have our county clerk
catherine clark.
And excuse me I have to put on
my glasses because I think we
have extra folks that have
joined us making sure of my
commissioners every okay this is
wonderful I have uhm
commissioner anna hamilton from
district for
she is I live in anahelm since a
district and i've known her for
many many years in the lever in
all of our commissioners and all
of our elected officials are
we have commissioner and i'll
have anna hamilton for district
for I mean district two i'm
sorry.
Houses in hamilton are announced
like we have two terrors in the
I get confused with it with the
terror how to meal myself
sometimes you apologize
we have with us today
commissioner
camilla boost amount there for
district three
we have commissioner
green just in green for district
one.
The.
And I see we have added a
great we have here we have
our county assessor I said were
metal
and are chief deputy assessor
ivan very and we've added ours
are commission our treasurer
county commissioner jennifer
thank you for being here
things got got changed out
minister speaker I apologize
it's not my original list but I
am happy to have all of our
elected officials with great
gratitude for all the service
that you provide for us for the
county of south affair welcome
thank you and thank you for your
hospitality every year for all
of us thank you and without
mister speaker we have a
certificate to read.
Clerk to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of new mexico declares
january twenty fifth twenty
twenty four cent fee county day
whereas in eighteen fifty two
santa fe county was established
as one of the first counties in
the united states territory of
new mexico and whereas santa fe
county has within its boundaries
the local government
jurisdictions of the city of
espanola the city of santa fe
and the town of edgewood.
And whereas santa fe county has
within its boundaries the travel
government jurisdictions of the
poe below have sent declara the
poe below sent all the fonzo the
public name bay the pablo pocket
and the pueble of the suitcase.
And whereas center face county
also encompasses many long
inhabited traditional
communities.
And whereas santa fe county
residents are governed by
publicly elected officials on
the sanity county board of
county commissioners the county
clerk the county assessor the
county treasurer the county
provide judge and the county
sheriff and whereas the santa fe
county government and it's
elected officials work to be
inclusive of all persons and
authorities in the county to
utilize resources to best
provide services for everyone
and whereas santa fe county
honors and promotes the strong
traditions and cultures of all
people in the county.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of new mexico that
senate county residents passed
and present be recognized for
their contributions and creating
an inclusive environment
honoring the county's diverse
cultures and traditions.
And be it further resolved that
january twenty fifth twenty
twenty four be declared santa fe
county day in the house of
representatives sign and sealed
at the capital in the city of
santa fe.
Thank you and
back to jelly from santa fe
before I go to the other
generally from santa fe thank
you mr speaker it's easy to see
why we're ranked by time
magazine as one of the world's
greatest places to visit
and one of the chosen by travel
and leisure magazine as one of
the top fifteen best cities in
the united states to visit and I
cannot be happier to be born and
raised in our beautiful county
and city of santa fe thank you
for giving me the time to to
represent our beautiful county
in our county officials and with
that I will leave it to others
to make comment mister speaker
thank you very much from santa
fe representatives of penske
speaker I too wanted to rise and
recognize our wonderful
delegation from santa fe county
egan everyone that is
represented on the rostroom
today is such an incredibly hard
worker really puts the community
first it is always such a
pleasure to work with them and
the entire county staff
are mutual priorities and I also
wanted to just compliment them
on the santa fe connect program
which is a program that is very
close to my heart um that
program has eated over eight
thousand people within santa fe
county to access things like
housing food employment
transportation and it's really
become a model program and so
the rest of the state is now
working to implement a similar
type of program in counties
in our other thirty two counties
they have disbursed over eight
point four million dollars in
federal city and county funds to
organizations and you know one
of the most beautiful things
about this program is that it
really connects all of the
organizations that might.
One person in need so I really
all of our experience here on
the rostrum know a lot about
this program it's been really a
labor of love in the product of
a lot of work from a lot of
folks over the years but
so I wanted to highlight that
program and I want to think each
and every one of you for all
that you do for the residents of
santa fe county think you can
lady
anything further before I extend
my congratulations and our
gratitude to you as well again
for your hospitality every
single year and for all that you
do for this wonderful community
and for the rest of the state by
extension thank you for your
country.
The.
Into lady from burner leo
representative chase.
Mr speaker will be going to that
or to business messages in
objection it is ordered.
The.
House executive message number
forty one speaker martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
article for section five b two
of the new mexical constitution
I am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of house bill one
eighty one a bill amending the
life and health insurance
guarantee association act to
include health maintenance
organizations as members of the
life and health insurance
guarantee association repealing
section fifty nine a dash forty
six dash fifteen ms nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen ninety three chapter
two sixty six section fifteen
respectful years michelle longer
governor message will be
entered.
Generated from birdle.
Mr speaker i'm we go to that
order business committee reports
you know objection it is
ordered.
Clerk to read.
Your health in human services
committee to him has been
referred house bill six has
added under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted elizabeth
thompson chair.
Move adoption speaker where
adoption of a federal committee
reporting house bill six so
those in favor of senate purpose
and I
was me the eyes have a committee
reported off.
Mr speaker health and human
services committee to him has
been referred house bill thirty
three has had it under
consideration reports same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
elizabeth thompson share move
adoption for an adoption of a
favorable committee important
house will thirty three or those
in favor of seen if I was in eye
opposed name the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
The.
Mr speaker you're commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred house bill
one sixty six has added under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted doring why guy goes
chair mister speaker movement
option we're an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
hospital one sixty six all those
in favor center public and I
although suppose me the ice have
a committee reported up to.
The.
Mr speaker your duty committee
to mismeferred house bill forty
one has had under consideration
report seem with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
house judiciary committee
substitute for house bill forty
one do pass respectfully
submitted christine challenge
here.
Mister speaker moved after we
are an adoption of it on
favorable committee reported
house bill forty one but a
federal community important
house judiciary committee
substitute for house bill forty
one all those in favors and if I
was in eye opposed the eyes have
it.
There were close community poor
adopted.
Mr speaker you did insurance
committee has been referred
house bill one ninety three has
had an under consideration and
report sim with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
then referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectless medicare
steam channel chair mister
speaker movement often where
adoption of a favorable
community report in housemate
one ninety three all those in
favor seen if I were saying I
caused me.
Yes I met committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your agriculture is
secures and water resources
committee to him has been
referred house bill two o one
has had it under consideration
reports similarly recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriate finance
committee respectfully susan
care at a chair and mr speaker
move adoption we're an adoption
of a favorable community
important house will two zero
one all those in favor in public
now oppose the as of a committee
reported up.
Mr speaker you are rolling an
engrossing committee to miss
been referred house memoil nine
house memorial fourteen has had
that under consideration and
reports that same habitually
enrolled in a growth perpetuated
signing by the officers the
house respectfully submitted
eleanor chavis chair mister
speaker move adoption we are on
adoption of of federal committee
reports on house memorial nine
and has been a fourteen of those
in favors and if I was an eye
for the isabec reproductive that
direct reflect that the duly
enrolled any growth copies of
house memorials nine and
fourteen were signed by the
officers of the house in open.
Mr speaker you're in rolling in
and growth in committee to ma's
been referred house memorial
sixteen house memorial nineteen
has had them under consideration
reports that same have been duly
enrolled in a growth preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house respect we submitted
eleanor chavis chair.
Mister speaker move adoption we
are an adoption of federal
committee reports on house
memorials sixteen and nineteen
all those in favor saying if I
by say no opposing a the I save
it can be reported opted that
the record reflect that the duly
enrolled any growth copies of
house memorials.
Sixteen and nineteen we're
signed by the officers of the
house in open session.
Gentle lady from bernio.
Mister speaker and we we go to
that order business introduction
of legislation in objection it
is ordered.
Hospital nineteen introduced by
representative onion our new and
center doing an act relating to
election offences creating the
election offences of disrupting
election results and falsely
acting as a presidential elector
prescribing penalties declaring
an emergency house bill nineteen
introduced.
By representatives chase on
unargue and doing as will
nineteen have been grateful as
by title is jim to me in the
person to article four section
five b two hours executive
message thirty eight it is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in the indian affairs committee
fence the house judiciary
committee.
House bill two hundred and forty
three introduced by
representatives vincent
armstrong alan martinez dunkin
and brown and act relating to
elections amending the election
code revising the manner of
picking up ballots from ballot
collection boxes making an
appropriation house bill two
hundred and forty three
introduced by representatives
vincent arm strong alan martin
as dunkin and brown has been two
forty three.
Have been retires by title is
ordered not printed referred to
the house rules committee.
I was bill two hundred and forty
eight introduced by
representatives brown and
armstrong and act relating to
taxation removing the income cap
for the social security income
exemption pursuant to the income
tax act house bill two hundred
and forty eight introduced by
representatives round and
armstrong husband two hundred
and forty eight have been
response by title.
Is deemed remain personal into
article four section five b one
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee
house bill two hundred and forty
nine introduced by
representatives ground and
armstrong and act relating to
taxation providing for the
indexing of a justice gross
income for social security
income pursuing to the income
tax act house bill two hundred
and forty nine introduced by
catherine representatives brown
and armstrong has been two
hundred and forty nine have been
rich was my title is dim remain
personal to article four section
five one order printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then the house
taxation and revenue committee
has been two hundred and fifty
introduced by representative
block and act relating to
disabilities providing for the
installation of electronic
monitoring devices and
facilities that house adults
with developmental disabilities
providing for rolemaking house
two hundred and fifty introduced
by representative lock house
will two hundred and fifty have
minutes was by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules committee.
I was built two hundred and
fifty one introduced by
representatives dunkin taraces
londstrom and vincent and
senator berk and act relating to
motor vehicles providing that
special registration logo shall
be made is attachment decals and
standardized special
registration plates i'll be made
with the blank space to attach a
logo the pleading existing
manufactured plates before
creating attachable logos
requiring the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
revenue department to apply for
a license to use the smokey bear
image and name providing for the
issues of a smoky bear fire
prevention special registration
plate making an appropriation
house bill two hundred and fifty
one introduced by
representatives dunkin that are
assessed lundstrom vincent and
senator birth as well two
hundred and fifty one have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in referred to the
house rules committee.
House bill two hundred and fifty
two introduced by representative
of lending and act relating to
taxation adjusting individual
income tax brackets and rates
house bill two hundred and fifty
two introduced a representative
of lending.
Hospital two hundred and fifty
two hundred men read twice by
title is deemed remained
pursuing to article four section
five b one who reprinted an
affected house commerce and
economic development committee
then the house taxation and
revenue committee.
Hospital two hundred and fifty
three introduced by
representatives lent and small
and act relating to public
finance requiring certain
estimates of bonding capacity
available for severance tax
bonds authorizing severance tax
bonds for projects funded by
disputions from a new capital
development and reserve on to a
new capital development program
front making an appropriation
house bill two hundred and fifty
three introduced by
representatives lent day and
small.
Has been two hundred and fifty
three have been right was by
title is jimmed remain pursuing
torticle four section five b one
order printed and referred to
the house taxation in revenge
committee in revenue committee
then's house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two hundred and fifty
four introduced by
representatives harmeo chavez
harry garcia little and figure
out and act relating to children
requiring the children youth and
family's department to determine
federal benefits eligibility for
children in its custody apply
for federal benefits and either
act as the child's
representative payee or
determine an appropriate
alternative setting forth the
department's obligations when
acting as the child's
representative prohoting the use
of federal benefits to pay the
department for child's care
setting forth provisions for the
release of federal benefits
provided to children and legal
hesitate of the state.
House bill two hundred and fifty
four introduced by
representatives harmier chavez
harry garcia little and figure
out as bill two hundred and
fifty four have been it was by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules
committee.
House bill two hundred and fifty
five introduced by
representative block and senator
gay and act relating to motor
vehicles and acting a new
section of the motor vehicle
code to establish a special gads
and flag guns safety awareness
vehicle registration plate
making an appropriation house
bill two hundred and fifty five
introduced by representative
block and senator gave us.
House will two hundred and fifty
five have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House memorial twenty four.
Introduced by representatives
block jones lord tarasses and
reab.
A memorial urging the united
states congress to allocate
funds in attention to ensure
public safety at the new mexico
border house memorial twenty
four introduced by
representatives block jones lord
tarasses and reap.
Has a more twenty four have
minutes was by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house judiciary committee.
The.
House bill two hundred and fifty
six introduced by
representatives harmeo and
madrid and act relating to
higher education providing
requirements for colleagues of
education at public for your
educational institutions
requiring that teacher
preparation programs include
teacher residencies requiring
that curriculum for teacher
preparation programs includes
structured literacy and
additional topics requiring
articulation among hire
education teacher preparation
programs.
Directing the public education
department to a line state
accreditation of colleges of
education with national
accreditation.
House bill two hundred fifty six
introduced by representatives
hermeo and madrid has memorial
two hundred and fifty six have
minutes was my title is ordered
not printed and referred.
The.
Oh someone else memorial.
We're not up there yet and has
more than closer though.
House bill two hundred and fifty
six have minorities by total is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules committee.
As joint resolution eleven
introduced by representatives
are in yana and on your new.
A joint resolution approving
their retracession of exclusive
from federal legislative
jurisdiction to concurrent
legislative jurisdiction over
property known as the enhanced
use lease parcel on curtain the
air for space house joint
resolution eleven introduced by
representatives saraniana and on
your name how's joint resolution
eleven have been ripped was by
title is ordered printed and
referred to.
The house government election in
the difference committee then
the house judiciary committee.
House bill two hundred fifty
seven introduced by
representatives johns and
terraces and act relating to
taxation expanding a gross
receipts tax deduction for the
sale of food to include
convenience stores located at
least thirty five miles from the
nearest retail food store.
House bill two hundred fifty
seven introduced by
representatives jones and her
assess.
House bill two hundred and fifty
seven have been retired by
tireless order.
It's deemed to remain percent
article for a section five b one
order princeton referred to the
house agriculture as I guess in
water resources committee then
the house taxation and revenue.
Into lady from burnedly chasing.
The.
Mr speaker and who we go to that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous business
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker.
Gentle lady from any leave
center brown thank you mr
speaker just a a short word here
for the members of the body at
everyone's desk there is a
folder the title says fuelling
new mexico the oil and natural
gas industries impact on our
schools
mrperiod speaker and members uhm
there are names of each
representative on one of these
folders but unfortunately they
were distributed not exactly to
the member's desk so mister
speaker I would just ask that if
someone has someone else is
folder if you just please walk
it to the right desk or it
perhaps some of our staff at the
end of the uh session today as
we recess they could make sure
those get to the right place but
mrperiod speaker I just wanted
to give a highlight
according to
data from our state agencies a
number of them
have reported and we know that
thirteen point nine billion
dollars almost fourteen billion
dollars
came from the oil and gas
industry in revenue for twenty
twenty three and that is about
half of a state budget so mister
speaker in members if we did not
have that revenue new mexico
much of our government much of
what we do would be at a stand
still so I am so thingful for
the men and the women who work
in our oil and gas industry in
mr speaker I I have a folder for
a rep from bernalio so i'll just
quickly report the impact of oil
and gas funding burning your
county was given five hundred
and sixty seven million dollars
in funding from the oil and gas
industry and that's a big number
so I would encourage everyone to
get a look at your packet and um
just good to keep this in my
mister speaker thank you they
get a lady the gentleman from
a leo civil amaking lease of
once a court of allen said reps
and we got to see
thank you measure speaker.
That must speak to this
opportunity to
recognize all the turkey and
arms and all the staff in you
know we had a now break up when
the government was your couple
of days ago in on these people
stood up to forward right to
protect us you know and I think
a lot of time to go one noticed
or or we're unthankful to work
to do in order to me it's very
important that we recognize
these people you know because we
are you know we should take it
for granted to do you have to do
it and they don't and you know I
really appreciate them and you
know the house give a run of
plaza will really appreciate
that applies for the sergeants
at all I will thank you.
The.
Thank you mister speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Red folks are getting good three
year four announcements to make.
Uhm executive messages and bills
that we will be pulling out of
rules
so i'll go very slowly so people
can keep travel we've got four
of those here today.
Alright so house bill one eighty
one.
Introduced by representative
thomas.
Previously referred to house
rules committee however we have
an executive message.
He has executive message forty
one so percent two article four
session five b two and that
executive message forty one the
bill is now ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
human services committee.
Then the house commerce and
economic development committee.
The.
House will two forty two
sponsored by representative gay
eagles.
Pursuant to article four section
five b two and how executive
message thirty seven.
The bill is discharged from the
rules committee.
Ordered printed in referred to
the house government election
and in the affairs committee
then the house judiciary
committe.
House bill two zero nine
sponsored by representatives
rata dixon brown saraniano or
tests.
The.
The.
Pursuing to article for a
section five between
housing secretary message thirty
nine we will discharge that bill
from the rules committee order
printed and referred to the
house rural development.
Language and cultural affairs
committee thence the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
In last but certainly not least
house bill forty six introduced
by representatives ram vincent
and rebe.
Perceived to article for session
five b two and house.
Okay house bill forty six.
Pursuant toward a conformation
for two and house executive
message six is discharged from
the rules committee order pretty
enreferred to the house consumer
and public affairs committee
then the house judiciary
committee.
Any other announcements
gentlemen from.
Brilliant you'll give me a
thumbs up alright.
Announcements generated from
believe mr speaker i'd like to
announce that the house health
and human services committee
will meet at eight thirty
tomorrow and we will start at
eight thirty eight even if it's
in a sub committee so I
encourage you to please
be there thank you mate in room
three o seven members take note
gentlemen from uh generated from
dana thank you mister speaker
your consumer in public affairs
is going to meet probably in
about twenty minutes after we
are during member states no
gentleman from earlier
presentation rometo thank you
miss speaker your house
education committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
we got three bills so.
Eight thirty three or nine thank
you miss speaker be there or be
sponsored bob scrapings.
General lady from los alamos and
the wireless santa fe
representative thank you mr
speaker house your house
judiciary committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty or
fifteen minutes at the
conclusion of the floor session
and we will also be meeting on
saturday
at one thirty in room three oh
nine in both cases mister chair
mister speaker member state note
generated from santa fe
percentage of thinking mr
speaker you're a house commerce
and academic development
committee will meet tomorrow at
one thirty or fifteen minutes
after the floor in room three
seventeen and the agenda should
be is on the golden on thank you
members technological member
from sandwich and sent a favour
percentage of mcqueen.
Thinking the speaker of the
house energy environment and
that's a resources committee
will meet saturday at nine
o'clock the agenda will be
published shortly.
Member signal general generally
from someone making the thank
you house government elections
in the indian affairs committee
will meet tomorrow eight thirty
am room three zero five there
will be christans by ob
bring your own butter.
It's going to say thirty five
required somewhere.
It's a tough committee
sometimes.
Any announcements alright
members.
The.
All right members is a concluder
business for today committees
will go and meet to their
business uh we will convene back
here to morrow at.
The.
Eleven o'clock.
Later from brilliant.
Mr speaker i've been in the
house standard recess until
eleven a m tomorrow friday
january twenty sixth member
state note the house will send
research and eleven am tomorrow.
