Since we adjourned since we
adjourned for a little minute. I
just want to let all the room
know that the Meat inspection
Act passed the Senate yesterday.
Senate Judiciary That's a big
deal for this committee with an
amendment and it got through, so
we're really proud. You know
this skin The Meat Inspection
Act got through the Senate
yesterday I Senate judiciary.
We're very proud of that effort.
And that's a real important bill
for this kind of celebrate with
everybody While we're in
adjournment. It looks like this
may not only be a problem with
Our committee it looks like
other committees are
experiencing this too. I just
and, um, I wish we could. I wish
we could talk about your bill,
but we just can't Well, until we
have everybody back on the
On the website. I mean, on this
zoom again. Thanks.
I I just heard that it just is
up and running again.
Uh, so we do have somebody on
the zoom That was waiting, uh,
to give us input, so we will
recognize that person now.
I A PMO field services.
If you still have a comment,
please.
Comment.
And mute. Good morning,
Chairwoman Herrero Moisture,
Allison and members of the
committee.
My name is John motto and I am
the senior director Appeal
Services for the International
Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials commonly
referred to as I have No
I'm here today to share support
for house. Bill 291 is a proud
partner and collaborate with the
state of New Mexico and adopting
our model clothes, which
includes the Mexico plumbing
code that is based on our
uniform plumbing code. The New
Mexico Plumbing code includes
guidelines for rainwater
catchment systems, including
both potable and non potable
excuses.
House Bill 291 in tandem with
Mexico Plumbing code established
a comprehensive framework to
tackle water scarcity and foster
responsible water usage.
The legislation sustainable
practices aimed to fortify the
water supply, ensuring
resilience, the present and
future generations.
Additionally, the bill includes
bottle provisions that can
contribute contribute to work
for development, such as it is
the inclusion of wage standards
certification requirements and
apprenticeship programs. These
measures collectively champion
worked with development and
promoting equitable
compensation, professional
development and skill building
within the industry.
We appreciate the opportunity
offer our support for this
legislation and provide comments
to the committee. I'm available
to answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you. Thank you, sir. And
now we'll turn the questions
over to the members of
representative is
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um
I was reading C i D s well, it's
actually are l d s, um
Feedback and and C I D. How
you're directing in your Bill,
Madame chair and representative.
It sounds like C I d doesn't do
some of the things you're asking
them to do.
And so did you work in
conjunction with C i. D r l D
The state engineer's office to
get this bill put together,
Heard to my expert to address
those questions. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
representative. Um, we did not.
We were working in conjunction
with the, um Oh, who helps guide
the state in our regulation? Um,
and we did look at
The impact reports and and have,
um we definitely agree with the
state engineer's office.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
ma'am, Um
I just
Also the madam chair and
representative, the the fees you
want. There's just a lot of
problems with the bill. I think
personally that it needs to be
taken back, worked with Sid Rld
state engineer to make sure that
we're getting it right. I
I don't want to pass a bill that
needs this much work.
On it. I appreciate the intent.
Of the bill. The intent that I
don't appreciate is requiring
permitting, um, I understand.
I think I read in the bill where
your exempting agriculture
Is that correct?
Just Madam Chairman, Madam Chair
representative. That is the
intent is to exempt agriculture.
Yes. Okay. Thank you, Madam
Chair and and representatives.
So does that mean a farmer in
the middle of Albuquerque or how
is agricultural defined?
In this bill.
Madam Chair representative. I
believe that that is one of the
issues we need to address is
that it's not fully defined.
Okay. Thank you. I because
There's all different.
There's a C of agriculture and,
um you know if if you're gonna
require a permit for me to have
on my right, I'm not okay with
that.
If you're going to have require
a farm in the middle of
Albuquerque to not have a
permit. I'm not okay with that.
So there's there's a lot of
issues, so I appreciate that,
Uh,
That you're willing to work on
that, Um the other part, Madam
chair and representative is, um
Talking about the wages. I don't
know how that will be.
I mean, we're creating a whole
another entity of government
here and other requiring Sidi
rld state engineer to do a lot
of work.
Um and I I think if you're going
to bring this bill, of course
they need to be involved in
that.
The other part of the bill that
I
I'm not happy about is on Page
eight.
Uh, Section three.
Or number three, maintain a
workforce with 15% registered
with the apprenticeship program.
Do we have an apprenticeship
program that is under this or
what? What Apprenticeship
program? Madam Chair
representative, So I believe
that the intent of the bill is
under the grants portions of
somebody's to get a grant to
install.
The system that the state gets
the maximum, um, on their
investment by providing
workforce development while
systems are being installed. Um
so, yeah, there are registered
apprenticeships that that would
be able to do this. Um and
There's going to be a training
facility right here in
Albuquerque. That will help. Um
people learn how to install
these these types of systems. So
currently there's a training
system in Washington, D C.
And there's one in Chicago,
where they don't have water
problems, but we don't have one
here in the desert Southwest and
that is coming. Madam Chair
representative. Thank you so
much for that insight. You know,
Madam Chair I'm a big proponent
of apprenticeship programs.
But in Magdalena, New Mexico, if
I have to have a permit for the
village
There is not I don't want to
hire someone from Albuquerque
That's going to be the closest
place.
Ah to come to install and the
price when we add language like
this, the price of that doing
that work in rural New Mexico
Is about 10 times as much as it
would be if I could hire a local
person to do that job.
And so I I don't prefer that
language in there.
Madam chair for For all those
reasons, um
I I do appreciate.
The intent to have a
A tax credit.
For saving
For this type of thing.
But there's a lot of language in
here, Madam chair that
That really creates barriers.
For all new Mexicans, and, um
And until all of that is is
fixed. I can't support it. I
support the intent, but I don't
support this bill.
Thank you, Representative. Now
call on Rip.
Thank you, madam Chair. Um,
thank you, representative and
presenter of for bringing this
fourth, um
Back in and I'm not even gonna
probably get two year, right?
But I live in Albuquerque and I
have a cat scan. I was able to
develop that.
Through
Rebates from the water authority
and from
Um and I think that's water in
huge container and it is
absolutely amazing how much
water
You know when it rains in New
Mexico arranged hard and the
water is just pouring.
And then I use it to water
things.
Um
And it wasn't it wasn't it
didn't cost anywhere near $5000
to do very simple system like I
had.
I became as part of that I
became very interested.
Lancaster. He was the actor Brad
Lancaster.
Great.
Yeah. Brad Lancaster has has
written a book after book about
water catchment systems He's
from Arizona Haven't had some
contact with his his ideas. And
so we're I would suggest that it
would be great to do that.
One of my, um the program, then
ended up sort of going away and
I don't really has it anymore.
Ah, which I thought was
unfortunate.
But part of what I got really
interested in and I was. Why
aren't we doing water Catching,
I talked was teaching at CNN at
the time and they were building
buildings. And I was going to
the president saying, Why don't
you do this? And this and this
And they did not this ideas.
Let's say that
But
I would love to see, Um
And
But I in and I really appreciate
that you put a bill together to
on thinking about those kinds of
ideas.
But
Um
I'm sort of with representative
Armstrong. At this point. I
think it needs a fair amount,
More work and certainly, uh,
Workforce Salute Network for
solutions. I'm sorry.
Construction, real part of the
planning process.
And so I hope you will.
Keep working on this and bring
it back and I have gallons and
gallons of water, almost always.
even in the middle of the hot
drought, So it's really
Incredible.
Uh um.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
and thank you, presenters and
and thank you for asking me to
help sponsor this bill as well.
I do very much appreciate the
attempt, and I do believe that
everybody here in the committee
believes that look forward to,
um, the substitute on on this
bill, But I would like to just
kind of do, uh, an overview of
the intent of it.
So this bill's intent is to
provide a tax incentive for
Uh, commercial water catchment
personal water catchment
Governmental buildings. Water
catchment. What? What is it
actually doing?
Madam Chair representative. All
of the above.
So providing grants for
commercial, um, providing a way
for municipalities to do it and
then residential, so it's very
complex.
So this thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you this.
This is the intent of this bill.
uh, requiring these entities,
these municipalities, the the
the government buildings, the
personal homes to install water
catchment or are they
incentivizing them? Thank you,
Madam. Chair. Thank you.
Representative is incentivized.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
thank you very much. Can you
briefly tell me what is water
catchment? I know that I grew up
in, uh
I live my childhood in the state
that it rained five times a day.
And, um
And when I moved here, I was
surprised the lack of gutters on
most houses here because they're
not really used very much here.
Um and my my house is on a hill.
And I realized I needed gutters
just on the back of my house,
where the water is not running
off. What? What other water
catchment system.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you for the question. So,
um, this essentially is
strategic water solutions
reclamation and reuse. So
rainwater is one part of it.
But we can capture gray water.
Um and keep it from just going.
I have a septic system. So then
it goes.
And it goes, I could capture it,
process it and and reuse it. Um,
depending on the system for
either portable or non potable
use.
Um, so there's there's gray
water. There's condensate water
that comes off of air
conditioning systems.
And large commercial buildings
used chillers and boilers and
when they blow down that system
with thousands of gallons of
water, it's gone. We could
reclaim process and reuse that.
so there's lots of water
solutions that we're looking to
cover under as a system that
we're trying to incentivize
here.
And thank you, Madam Chair. Just
one last statement. I do applaud
the idea. The intent of this
bill. You know, um, in this
committee, um, we we all have a
shared value. No matter who we
are in this room that water is
the most important thing in our
state right now. Water, Nothing
can happen. Education.
Health. Nothing can happen until
we take make sure that our water
is protected. And the fact that,
um we're looking at creative
solutions that are do not
penalize our agricultural
community and that do not, um
reduce, uh, many of our what
makes her great state wonderful
their water use but being able
to come up with creative
solutions and making sure that
we can reuse and repurpose
The water. That's there. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
When I was growing up, we lived
on a ranch we had We lived out
in the middle, and we had a
sister thing else.
So
Those people out in the middle
of a ranch might have as much
need.
For water catchment as anybody.
Why
Would you not to participate in
this? Uh, Madam Chair
representative? I don't think
we're trying to exclude AG. I
think that we're trying to, um
not put the same requirements on
ag as we have, we would have and
say, you know, um, I think
that's our intent.
Madam Chair and
I also think that the bill
One of the other questions I
have for you, madam chairman and
expert witnesses.
What would be the maximum
Uh, water to be representative.
Madam Chair, representative.
The, Um Bill just has a maximum,
um, credit that you can receive,
but I don't believe that it has
sugar.
There's no restriction on how
much you can catch.
And and Madam chair and
representative.
So if there's a cannabis farm
Or greenhouse in the middle of
Albuquerque or municipality as
far as that's concerned.
Are they allowed to capture
water from there?
Roofs and
Water, the cannabis or not.
Madam Chair representative, Um I
believe that they that they
would be under this bill. Um
They they would capture it from
their roof and be able to
utilize it, Um, for the purpose
of their business.
And then the the
I see you're fine line of is
that agriculture or has that
commercial use? Um and I think
that would be a definition that
would have to be probably gated
in rule Representative. Okay.
thank you for that, and and
that's exactly where I was going
with it is
What is it? Is it I believe
I appreciate the intent.
I believe just like everybody
else here.
But I think there's a lot of
questions and
That will keep me from
supporting the bill like it's,
uh,
Wrote.
I look forward to learning some
more on it and my other
colleagues here on this
committee have to secure
representative
Thank you, representative. Now
representative yourself.
Madam chair. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Representative.
Witness. The one thing that does
come to mind is whenever Mimi
Stewart carried this particular
bill back either my second or
third year up here before the
House Energy Water Natural
Resources Committee, and there
was a big showing from state
engineer's office. And I do
believe that Mr Romero back
there.
Anyway, there was lots of people
involved in it.
The state engineer. That time
was John Day, Antonio and his
concern was whenever we're
talking about these water
catchment systems.
That they could not interfere
with the catchment systems that
We're being proposed.
They, the state engineer could
not support it because it would
be in conflict with the Texas
New Mexico Water compact because
it was preventing that water
from getting to our rivers that
would go downstream so we would
be in compliance.
Um
There's several things that I
have lots of concerns about.
Especially, uh,
Whenever we're talking about,
Let me find my page right now.
I've got candid, distracted
doing something else.
But I've heard all the comments
that have been made.
Whenever I am reading the agency
report from the office of the
state engineer
It is stating in Section two
subsection e of your bill.
This needs to clarify that it's
only for rooftop rainwater
captions capture systems.
So it won't be in conflict with
any other water laws that are
already on book.
It also says people might get it
miss mixed up with untreated
wastewater.
And therefore there is
contamination that would take
place along with all other
melodies that go along with it
so untreated wastewater needs to
be stricken from the definition
of it.
Um
Our state engineering seeing
these two gentlemen back here
that are nodding like this.
They're going up and down. Just
they are
Uh, we have been working for
over
I don't know how since God was a
little child, I think trying to
get adjudications in place, and
we're still working on those
because unless there is
adjudication, you know what
These people's water rights are
going to be
Taken to court.
They have to have adjudicated
water rights, and I know that
they're working fervently on
trying to get that done. But do
we need to overload them with
more?
Laws that will be enacted and
more.
Task that they have to oversee.
So there's a problem there. I'm
not saying that this isn't a
good bill.
But it's been tried and it's
been
Kind of put by the wayside.
But people just like
representative. She does get
water that goes off the roof
because you know what we do live
in an arid state.
In the past two years, We have
gotten 2.5 inches of rain at my
rent, too. So
You play with the hand that
you're dealt.
But Madam chair I'm really,
really concerned about the far
reaching effect of this whenever
we're bringing in red
regulation, licensing and then
the construction Industries
division.
Uh huh.
It raises a lot of red flags,
especially whenever
I don't want to discourage this,
but I think that we probably I'm
not discouraging it.
But let's see where else we
might be able to put this
information and get it rolling.
Madam chair. Thank you very
much. Thank you, rep. And now we
turn it to our the last person
on the agenda. Um, Michaela, Um,
excuse me, represent madam chair
members and sponsors today. I
just wanted to, um, offer some
comments at the insight,
especially from the audience
here in Paris, Cisco
Legislature, so
I also brought this legislation
forward. Um as someone who's
been on the tax. Um I don't
remember very often seeing
credits that go back to water.
And what is really, um
Really draws me to the general
idea of this proposal, is it
otherwise we're debating
potential credits about tech New
way of measuring some kind. And
while we are having significant
transitioning our energy
economy we are hardly ever in
and why I'm especially drawn to
this is because quite simple to
to collect and used to good
impact with thoughtfulness water
as it comes to us.
That being said, Um today about
what our priorities package the
capacity. It's the opposite of
appropriation. So when we passed
HB two of, um as was shared in
both the debate for HB two and
the grid million in tax
capacity, um, the floor sub
would have offered 600 million.
So that means that's the number
we're working to fill with tax
tax policy that would change the
amount so
Um, for this year, that
conversation primarily will be
wrapping up today as we, um,
work in a bipartisan unlikely
that tax package will pass out
of the house talks. Like I said,
I really appreciate what you're
before You even get to attack.
Um, Committee members will
likely to print it as you've
written it. That means that if
someone has a tax liability if
they owe taxes to the state of
New Mexico
This, um this credit by how much
they were eligible for different
than the refundable cranes and
reserve for the lowest income
New Mexicans when they actually
get like a cash.
Deposit or check back so that
that's good that you're starting
some some people coming from the
tax committee with the
refundable tax credit for
something where we don't often
have the commitment to support
so it's safer attacks
perspective. You're at least off
to that start and we can
certainly working concerns and
to make sure that you are thank
you very much representative
and, uh,
I guess, Um I would like to make
number one is thank you for
bringing this bill forward. I
think I think we don't think
enough about conservation. I
mean, the easiest thing to do.
Sometimes we over for doing that
is why I think it's ah.
Well, agrees with the intent. Um
It's a It's a very complex bill.
You know, I always like to start
with the low hanging fruit. I'm
just practical. I like to look
around and say you might you
might start with, you know, just
the catchment off the roofs. I
mean, you might start with the
individuals and and then go on
to this because you came in with
a whole package.
And, uh and I realized and I
really want to come in the
sponsors because this is exactly
the kind of thinking we need.
and and I agree with, you know
if we're going to give tax
breaks, it is agriculture who
builds assistance who builds the
water systems because they they
have to protect, you know their
their product.
And the only way they can do
that, and as a as a as an
individual who who lost I mean
are well went out a year and a
half for a year and a half
during Covid. It took us a year
and a half to get that well
drilled.
And they said, Well, you know,
you might want to build a
cistern and we just paid 30,000
for the well drilling. We had to
go down 200 ft, Although 20 ft
for 32 years, 33 years I've been
at 20 Ft. Always had plenty of
water. We had to drill down 200
ft.
And so
So when they came, and that was
30,000 can people afford that?
No. And then they said, Well,
you might want to think about a
cistern.
I said, Well, how much would
that be? Said 30,000. I go. You
know, we'll probably wait.
Probably wait on that one. But
what I want to say is, I'm very
conscious now, as a person who
had to we had to report water,
You know, for a year and a half.
I'm there. I never let the
faucet go on. I only wash once a
day. I run the dishwasher once
I'm very conscious of that. What
are use now? And I never and you
know, I should have been before,
but I wasn't and we always had
plenty of water.
So I think all of us in this
state have to start thinking now
people to think like I do now
that I actually went through the
fire, uh, to think differently
about how we use water, so I
appreciate them. You've already
said you you would adopt the
state engineers recommendations
and it needs a lot of work. We
all realize that.
But I do appreciate the thought.
Promotion. Um, May I? Oh, yes.
Would you like to thank you,
madam? Sure. Yeah. We want to
roll the bill to work and they
called you recommendations and
go back. Maybe like you Sisters
Law, but definitely I don't
wanna Madam chair come back,
like, uh, sales said come back
in 20 years and nothing is done
so hopefully we will
Continue working on this, um,
growing up. Also in this in the
destiny two. Thank you so much.
So if you are okay, we can We
want to roll out field and
certainly, And thank you,
Representative Dolan. Thank you.
Expert witness. Thank you for
bringing this bill forward and
I'm I hope we see you again.
Madam chair. Do I need to make a
Madam chair. Do I need to make
motions? Okay, Madam chair. I'd
like to make an announcement if
I'm a real fast, sure.
I have two groups of kids today
is F f a day here in
The state capital, The People's
House. Keep that in mind, young
people. This is the people's
House.
First off. I have the Dexter if
members of the Dexter F F a
chapter here if they in their
advisor would stand up and
introduce yourself.
Okay? Yeah. Members of Queen
over stage, right?
I'm Ana Hernandez said. No
objection. Faith chapter.
And Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is trade,
White Secretary for Dexter.
Everything chapter.
Okay. Madam Chair also from the
RTC FF fe if their advisor and
members would stand up and
introduce themselves
Madam chair and members of the
committee. I am Mr Branson. I'm
one of the three advisers of the
members of the committee. I am
Madison.
And Madam chair. I'm also seeing
three members sitting right up
here in the second row with Joe
like to stand up and introduce
yourselves, please.
We're hanging, okay? I didn't
We're hanging. Okay. I did okay
with the advisor from Hagerman
and the students from Hagerman.
Please stand up. I didn't see
y'all come in on Parker.
Madam chair. I am so proud of
these young people that are up
here. All of these FF fe members
that are not only here but are
going to be visiting with us
today, and they are future
leaders in the agricultural
industry. It's very important.
Let's give them a round of
applying
And I choose what you want to
know how proud we she ate you
coming to the Legislature. We
love f f a day. It's so it's so
exciting to see that capital
filled with our future leaders
And you are always welcome to
this committee. And I hope you
come back again. And I hope you
come back in the future sitting
as members around this body,
Thank you very much.
Okay. Thank you, everybody and
thank you, representative Bazell
for that, And now I will call
representative Christine Ortiz
to present her bill.
Members of the committee.
May I just say something before
I start before I explain the
bill.
Very quickly. I'm I'm so proud
of these young people behind me
and in front of you that they
They present themselves with
Professionalism and I think that
they actually understand the
rules of really, really proud of
them. And thank you very
impressed. Thank you, madam
Chair members of the committee.
I'm here today to present House
Memorial 33, which is a memorial
that asked
Okay. I'm so afraid of these
mates. Madam chair.
Representative Matthews. They
They confound me to be to be
quite honest, it's bugged and
recorded.
Will it? It'll zap me if I say
something inappropriate. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So this this
memorial asked the Department of
Agriculture to convene a working
group to consider to look at
data related to a pollinator
protection plan. Um, I have a I
have my expert witness here with
me. Melanie Kirby, who can speak
a little bit more about the
history of of this memorial and
why we are bringing it here
today.
Hi. Good morning, Um madam Chair
and representatives. Um, very
excited to be here. This is my
first time sitting at the table.
So, um I'm a born and bred new
Mexican, though we are cousins
to to federally slept, Uh,
pueblos.
Um, I have actually been a
professional and, um, decided to
come back home after learning
from various speed keepers
across the country and started
my own farm, which is now in
Taus County, and that will
actually be celebrated to
interrupt. I didn't get your
name. Melanie Kirby. Melanie
Kirby. Yes, ma'am. Yes, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Yes. Um, In addition to that, um
after being in the field with
farmers and land stewards around
New Mexico because I am a
landless steward, meaning that I
don't have my own land. Um, I
needed to be creative in how I
access to Lance's for my bees.
And so I'm really appreciative
of the larger community raised
bees, especially in in a very
arid state.
Um, I went back to school in
2017 and got my masters and
Entomology. So I also um and
eminent apologized and I also
serve as the extension educator
and pollinator specialist at the
Institute of American Indian
Art. And last week I was
actually appointed to the
National Advisory Board for
Agriculture, Research Extension
education and economics as part
of the USDA, So I'm very proud
to be able to represent New
Mexico and that capacity
And I'm a little nervous, so
I'll quit rambling, but I wanted
to share a little bit of history
with you about, um this sort of
effort. So in 2014, there was a
presidential memorandum that
came out of the Obama
administration calling for a
federal strategy to protect
pollinators.
In 2015 the e P A. Then put it
out as a call to all the states
to develop their own pollinator
protection plan. And if we look
at as time has gone on because
that was 10 years ago,
Basically, um, there's about 39
States now that have pollinator
protection plans 31 actually,
that actually have them.
And eight that are in the works.
New Mexico has yet to get one
and to develop one
And it would be quite, um quite
a thing if we were if we were
one of the, um the New Mexico
Beekeepers Association actually
was part of a working group that
was set up from New Mexico State
University. There was an
extension agent, um about 67
years ago who had set up a
working group to develop one.
She then actually transferred
out and moved to a different
institution, So the effort was
sort of
In limbo kind of tabled for a
bit.
In 2021, the Beekeepers
Association of which I am a
board member and also served in
different capacities on the
executive committee.
Decided to to re invigorate that
initiative and so over the past
several years since 2021 a lot
of work has been put into the
working group at that time
included EPI. A members included
farmers and included pesticide
applicators, and it included
beekeepers and this was from
across New Mexico.
Um, last year was our first
attempt at trying to bring this
initiative forward. We had
Senator Bobby Gonzales sponsor
House of Senate Memorial to that
effect, and unfortunately there
were some health issues so it
wasn't able to actually be all
the way. Um, heard, um, and
very, very appreciative. So this
effort is actually something
that has involved in M D. A from
its inception. Um
They're they're very willing to
support a working group and to
help manage that working group
where we bring diverse
stakeholders into the group to
help
The New Mexico Beekeepers
Association does actually have a
plan, but we consider it a
working draft, meaning that it
could be adapted, amended,
edited changed. It just serves
us as a starting point, and it
was modeled after actually
several other states who are and
the mainly Washington state
actually had a really good and
so I'll leave it at that in
terms of the history of it, But
we're here today to see about
Um, getting this questions.
Thank you, representative. And
now I want to turn to the
audience in favor of this
legislation.
Sir.
Yes.
Totally this year, but in the
past when it comes up
Um, well, um Some of those were
seen at the table and then not
being so prescriptive in the
report.
In adopting the beekeepers.
Allows everybody together.
But I do represent Tiffany.
Anybody else in favor anybody
else supposed seeing? None will
turn it over to the committee.
Oh, excuse me. We have somebody
on Hello. Thank you, Madam
Chair. My name is Sapporo Nefesh
and I am the registered lobby
for covenant pathways and
experiential farm in the
checkerboard area of the Navajo
nation, and we stand and strong
support of the pollinator
Predict Protection Memorial.
Without pollinators. We have
very little food.
Thank you very much.
Q. Is there anybody else? All
right now alternate over to the
committee.
Madam chair. Thank you very
much.
And I appreciate this bill. I
really do.
Again.
Made me Stuart carried this bill
and it was a bill. How many
years ago? People out in the
audience. You remember this was
going on, and she had a group of
young people in here that we're
also supporting that at the
time.
One of the concerns that was
brought up that I did. A lot of
research on was the neonics and
I'm not going to say the whole
word, but it's
It's somewhere in here. I just
saw it saw it.
Thank you. So on page two of
this handout that we just
received. Yeah, it's on page two
of it. But that is pretty bad
news for the bees and beehives
and everything else.
Um, also the varroa mites. Those
are pretty lethal to the bee
colonies as well.
Uh, conservation by our farmers
and ranchers.
Those are the ones that are
really helping these and
It's we
Rely on those honeybees to help
pollinate different plants.
They love alfalfa blooms.
They really do they? My
grandmother used to have a
couple of beehives. This is
Many years ago over six
How far how? How? How long ago
that has been
Around our particular area of
where we are in the heart of
abundant
Of growth happens down there. We
do have
Be masters if you want to call
them that
That if there is the threat of
these hives being hit, they do
Take measures to protect those
bees.
We do understand the importance
But sometimes a lot of these
measures are beyond our control.
Extreme drought plays role in
it. Wind plays a role in it.
Um, if it's too wet at all, but
I do support what we're trying
to do here. Whenever Ms Rivera
said that she wants to work a
little bit on the word worded in
your memorial. Are you going to
take that to heart? Madam Chair
representatives? Oh, absolutely.
Okay. I love working with makes
sense for this. You know, I look
at this as a
You know, um, nonpartisan effort
to protect the very species that
ensure I like to eat like honey
like alfalfa, honey, especially
Oh, honey. Oh, honey, that's
exactly right. So very tired.
Madam Sharon representative. I
think I'd love to hear it. 1
A.m..
I apologize for any be jokes,
Buzz buzz, but absolutely very,
very open to work in the
language updates, Okay, thank
you very much for that. And like
I said, Madam chair, we do have
to have Arby's in place and
butterflies as well.
So thank you for bringing this.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Presenters. Representative,
Um
Uh, I only went in my sort of
phase of the phase.
Um
And, um, one of the things I
learned was how many neighbors
Um, And so I just wanted to be
sure that
In that your bill is broad
enough.
And will be just the you know
the the movie star of the Bee
industry but the others because
I think they're very
I'd like to respond. Madam Chair
and representatives. Thank you
So much for the comments. Um, a
couple of things and and one
just to sort of
Um, clarify what? Um,
Representative as L had
mentioned the bill that Senator
Stewart had brought forth a
number of years ago and had been
considering doing last year was
very different in that
particular bill was more focused
on regulating of pesticides,
which, as reality has it.
Cannot be overseen by the
Legislature. That's actually
board of regions, so this is a
very separate initiative. Um and
then to answer your question
about the pollinator species.
Yes, you know, there's about
4000 different kinds across
North America. New Mexico boasts
about 2000 of that 4000 were
inner city about 1400 of those
are bi species.
Um, honey, bees are one of those
1400. So you're absolutely
right. They're not the only
pollinator species and I
actually referred to honeybees
more so as the exploited poster
Children of pollinators, but
they really do serve as a
gateway to start to learn more
about pollinators, but they are
serving as the, um, Additionally
we have over 300 species of
butterflies. And then you
counted how many different
species of birds we have, and
moths.
Flies, Wasps bats, You know,
even some mammals are also
pollinators. So you're
absolutely right and within the
verb age of the memorial, we do
preface that we have a lot of
New Mexico Beekeepers
association obviously are is
composed of a myriad of folks
who are working with honeybees
in particular, but a lot of them
have interests in different
pollinator species. And we have
to think to that.
Um, what's also keen to know and
I believe New Mexico Department
clarification But the statutes
as they are right now only
require certain scale or size
within our state to register.
That number is 11.
That's not sounding like a lot
of professional beekeepers,
however.
The hobbyist sector ever since
2000 came into the media, or
CCD, as it was referred to a lot
of different people decided they
wanted to help that that meant
they should become beekeepers to
Um, with that we've seen a huge
increase of hobbyist beekeepers
now in urban centers. Those
numbers we don't know how many
that is, but I can tell you it's
over 10,000.
So when you look at how many
people are acting majority of
people keeping bees yet a lot of
their activities and a lot of
their need to learn is not being
addressed. And so what they
choose to do actually does
impact our commercial and
professional beekeeping sector,
which then of course,
destruction and security, So
there's a real need for a
working group to develop solid.
Um, steps and plans and outreach
to better serve. All of the
different folks who are
interested in pollinator
stewardship, including those who
are etcetera.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives chair
representative and thank you for
that.
You really remember very
impressed Just a couple more
quick questions.
Um Mr Trujillo indicated, are
you Are you all OK with that?
Madam Chair representative
Matthews. Absolutely. I think we
need to be very inclusive. You
know, folks that support that
industry very, very interested
in being inclusive.
Madam Chair, representative,
Presenter, I I totally agree. I
think excluding people means
then that your your laws and
your bills are are not fully
vetted. Um The second thing is,
um And I just wondered.
If
Um, you've thought of including
someone who would be
Um, focused on the impact of the
warming.
Climate.
On on your, uh on your group.
Madam Chair representative. I
think we are interested in
talking to anybody who has a
vested interest in pollinators
and and food, security and food
production, and I think we will
agriculture to give US
Agriculture Department to give
us Joseph
I met Madame share it. Um, it
seems like we have a lot of
agreement. I'm wondering if it a
little bit or where we where we
are in this process.
Madam Chair, representative
Matthews. I think that you are
right that we have to think
about how to change this, and I
will be working with, uh,
Secretary witty.
And his team and Tiffany
Melanie to come up next. This a
little broader and tighter at
the same time.
Ah, I know that we have other
people in line, but thank you,
Reverend. Madam Chair
representative. I'm not sure
what? Your flat book. This is my
tax priorities. I was gonna give
you before you left. I will take
that as well. Um, Madame Chair
representative thing here. I
just wanted to appreciate your
expert here for all her
leadership. I'm honored to
represent houses. Strictly Mac.
33 in southern New Mexico. So
just appreciate that, um, and
then Also the district includes
at the Department of AG, so just
love all the southern New
Mexico. Um, highlights coming
together in this effort and
thank you, Madam Chair
committee.
Thank you. And now
representative Samata.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
representative for bringing this
bill forward.
I can't help myself since we
have a B expert here. Can you
fill us back in on what happened
to the killer beat?
Um yes. Thank you, Madam Chair
and representatives for
listening. Um, yeah, This is a
really good question, actually,
because this is a part of the
outreach and, um, historically
speaking, you know, a lot of
folks consider honeybees to be,
um, exotic sort of imports that
were brought in when, um, you
know, additional immigrants came
to this country way back when
And if we consider, you know
when these folks were coming to
this country before it was a
country, you know, they didn't
know what was going to be here,
so they brought seeds. They
brought sheep. They brought
horses, which were reduced to
have their own horses here. Um,
and they brought bees with them
as well. The Spanish actually
it's not fully recorded, but the
Spanish actually brought them. A
lot of people don't know is that
when I species that are here.
There's actually a lot of
different what we call substance
and so very similar to humans.
Um, there are some that have
grown up in different parts of
the world. Um, they're also
melting pot. So as people cases
they brought the bees from their
areas, which were very much
acclimated. So the Iberian bees
which came from Spain, which
refers to Italian bees up Ismael
Ifrah caucus, Tico from the
caucus mountains,
So Harry insists. I mean, I
could go on and on, but there's
a lot of different sub species
and as they came over, um you
know, when people started to
move westward, they were
different races of bees. So in
1950 was actually there was a
Jeanette was based in Brazil. He
had gone to Africa, and it's
seen these really industrial
honeybees that we have in Brazil
are they're there, but they're
not really productive.
But he had seen these ones in
them and breed them. And so he
did, and, um, who knows whether
they were accidentally released
or purposely released, But they
were much more highly
aggressive. And the reason for
that is some of these bees live
in places and so they develop.
They learn and especially
hunters, so they learn how to
eat different kinds of flowers,
depending on where they're at,
and that's what's really allowed
them to be able to expand.
And be in all parts of the world
pretty much except Antarctica,
right? And so in the fifties
they were accidentally released.
It took until the eighties for
them to actually get and they
came into. Of course they can.
But, interestingly enough, New
Mexico is a really interesting
came into the Rocky Mountains,
which comes right through our
state.
And so then they actually went
over towards Arizona and
Southern California and some act
because it's warm right?
Um Africanized, honey bees or
killer bees or what? We also
just refer to some aggressive B
strains. They really are
actually more tropical be so
they do well in warmer climates.
Um, but they hit the mountains
and they actually couldn't
actually deal with our
elevation. So, interestingly
enough here in our own state we
actually do have some aggressive
be presence, which is actually,
um, we did and express my
gratitude if it was one of my
first grandson got from the New
Mexico Department of AG.
And brought a researcher in to
do some genetic analysis of
Arby's across the state. She did
65 samples. I took her all over.
This was in 2014. And what she
found was that, um, pretty much
south of I 40 there was some
presence, but it's more present
in the Southern counties. And
once you get up to l A, they're
not present.
And that is actually really
relying upon managed colonies.
So beekeepers play really
significant role in preventing
some of them are paralyzed at
this point, so they live out in
the wild and they consuming a
bunch and then versus trying to
store it and then make it
through the winter, So there's
still around, But we're very
lucky that beekeepers across our
state have been really I
That they work with.
That was a long answer, but you
can get me talking all day if
you're not careful. Thank you
very much. Madam Chair and
representative, Madam chair. I
could just imagine going into
this young lady's house, and she
has a boxes of and boards with
me. He's pinned up on him and
stuff. I'll tell you there's a
lot of honey. It's very sticky.
And in
My wife and being in in our
family. We, uh
We eat, honey with our
And people go over it, and they
see his point, honey on the
enchiladas, and they're like,
what in the world are you doing?
But we have a big keeper in Fort
Sumner and not by the honey by
the case. Very, very good,
nutritious and healthy Food.
My concerns. Uh, madam Chair.
And and presenters are
How
We do these? In the past couple
of years I have sold both my
farm and my ranch and semi
retired, so
That the farmers
Are some of the most, uh
Well.
Mannered to take care of their
lands. And and I
There might be some mistakes
that have been made in the past,
and we might be making some
today but your bill
Addresses these things to find
those checks and balances.
Your memorial. I'm sorry. Uh,
And
I appreciate that you're
You will bring it. It's not just
The AG community, the farmers,
the chemical companies that
produce and I think that they,
too, are good stewards of the
land.
And and they want to do the
right things. And as we go
through this and
I look forward to
To help him with it and and all
support the memorial.
But I'm really really glad that
that if these people get a seat
at that those are all my
comments and questions.
Madam Chair. Um, thank you very
much for bringing this bill
forward and thank you.
To, um
Are always intelligent, despite
exhausted, uh, sponsor and and
and I just wanted to look
forward to
Seen you participate in your
community and a lot of different
ways. Thank you. And I'd like to
kind of wrap this up by saying I
knew I'd learned a lot today.
Remember, that was my opening
statements. So representing our
test, I'm gonna thank you,
Manager members of the
committee.
Thank you, Um
We will be working with Tiffany
and the department to, um
changed language that's
necessary. And with your
permission, madame. Sure. We'd
like to come back on Tuesday to
to present those changes
quickly.
Yes.
I think
Oh, well, I just met him, so I
think it makes more sense.
