we do have with nonvoting
members we are able to have a
quorum.
And so we are able to move
purpose and expectations and
then we'll get into discussing
the work plan will finish off
with public comment before we
get to that will make sure that
those of you are up in the
gallery if you want to make a
to the introductions because
there are some folks that are
unfamiliar faces to me and so
I'd like to get to know more
about you so what I would like
to do as well and with
district the counties or
counties you represent how long
you've been in office and and
maybe what you'd like to bring
to this committee so Senator
Griggs let's start off with you.
I represent Senate district
thirty four I live in Alamogordo
district thirty four covers the
southern part of Terrel County
you guys over there very often
anymore but
you know this committee this
committee for rural New Mexico
is really important to give us
opportunities to bring issues
and the opportunities and
hopefully we can have to to grow
and prosper there the rural
community show there's several
things on the agenda I'm looking
chair good to be with you today
my name is Susan her I'm I
representative from district
forty one which is really the
central north part of the state
how we and how we help built
this infrastructure that we need
in rural New Mexico it's it's
it's a huge issue and it's a
lot of money Valencia County
district seven half of let's see
County mostly the east part this
and which is a small town my
most of my life gone for ten
years and I only lived in little
tiny towns I don't think I could
ever live in the big city so I'm
because the two that I between
blend in Lawson this they're so
different and our and so and
then our surrounding areas have
so many different needs that I'm
Martinez I represent district
twenty three in Sandoval county
which is the northern end of Rio
small family business up there
so economic development is very
important to me
because I know the struggles
with some of the small
opportunities for success for
the small business someone's
interests me thank you thank you
Representative right thank you
madam chair my name is
representative bill remote
since then I've been looking at
where do we get excess water
from.
And across the United States
there's one river that has
it and then also economic
development is a statewide
initiative not just in
Albuquerque thank you.
Thank you.
Albuquerque's nineteenth
district to teeny tiny district
in southeastern Albuquerque but
it's very densely populated it
committee with check a ghost in
the in the on season
I was really interested and
excited to see that a lot of
times the economic challenges
we can tackle those issues
together thank you very much.
Thank you Representative please
say your name again because
names are important but names
are important and we want to
make sure that we get those
New Indian or you need a new
engine nor New perfect and in
our new and I will offer
tutoriales as as asked think
thank you senator Tom and it's
good to see you.
This is the what's the question.
We're just doing brief
This committee the economic and
rural development policy
committee I guess I'm in the
right room you are in the right
road to such an up I know you're
This is my seventh year in the
in the Senate and
Very interested in economic
development.
Is a big part of my job when I
was a city manager.
we are doomed it's too late to
change.
To the by the year.
going to change made the record
make the changes we need to make
in order to survive hello I
highly recommend it to everybody
section off here and then move
back over here.
Good afternoon George mills I
representative will McKinley and
San Juan counties and that kind
of glances Gen David but to some
that to to get our local film
guys is a great addition I think
we ought to look at supporting
I'd like to look at the number
of jobs created by local
economic development and how
many jobs across the state with
high and how we can a target.
those areas with high poverty
and low job growth
priority is is how minority
preferences work we're seeing
what happens in other states and
some of industry and how they
use it against us but New Mexico
doesn't do it the same way as
other states and and we get beat
throughout every region has
every regions a little different
Los crucis to Clovis is
completely different Ray want
milk cows and she's over there
one lately the paperwork is very
monotonous and and the
compliance is very this getting
it colleges how do we gonna get
those calls programs up and
think that's that's really I.
late really like to see
something on targeting
you know transmission.
New Mexico is going to generate
a lot of power we're putting
long transmission lines through
Mexico but that's that's a
revenue stream that we should be
looking at New Mexico for
economic development for local
governments as they put in solar
and community solar and revenue
you madam chair thank you center
let's go to Representative
Roybal Caballero and we'll go to
Senator Stefanics after that.
Good afternoon madam chair vice
Bernalillo county and this is
I've been on this committee
since my first term so it's
eleven almost twelve years and I
I I want to continue to share
the expertise and knowledge that
I have as a community economic
developer and planner which is
alternative streams of revenue
for our state we have already
examined what the issues are
what the problems are now we
long term sustainability so
that's my continued goal and I
look forward to having these
discussions and I also have some
input on some of the items that
I know we'll get to that on the
Senate district thirty nine
parts of six counties Bernalillo
Lincoln San Miguel Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia I do have
a rural emphasis in some of my
side of the highway has it so I
don't understand some of the
disparities and as we've seen in
the newspaper the many millions
our pharmacists are hurting I
continue to for focus on that as
well as health care in the rural
areas I was another committee
and they made sure that we
get through a meat packing meat
processing bill we need to
continue to make that successful
thank you very much if I'm
correct Senator Stefanics the
offered to pay for half of
setting up the entire program
here in the state once we meet
the standards we do have a
veterinarian on board somebody
Good afternoon madam chair vice
chair and committee members and
an advisory and all of our
guests here I'm Representative
our rural communities
a lot of the things that I'm
very focused on and working on
have been mentioned but
particularly in the energy
sector and looking at the
RTO and transmission expansion
for energy evolution as
mentioned by chairman
cultivate economic development
in our state is going to be one
of the biggest issues and one of
the biggest discussions were
going to have I think that these
are the focus is that I've been
employment for use this is gonna
be a huge topic of conversation
policy states are already
developing their own policies
related to what that workforce
population and that that is the
biggest growth that we have in
our state so how are we going to
be unique in the sense that
we're going to attract or keep
they're affected and so
child care being a major
component of that that's what
I've heard back from my own
constituents and I've heard this
participating in nationally also
is a mental health matters task
force which is looking at the
worker mental health and I think
that this is a huge issue and
we're worried we need to rise to
also looking at a behavioral
health components in our
workforce thank you that's that.
legislature since two thousand
one on this committee often on
for over twenty years and what
I'm looking for in this work
but I'm not sure I see it so
maybe as you go through it we
can we can talk about what was
highlighted from there I'm also
very interested in following
we're state money is going in
invested and I think that we
need to have some say in where
it goes so that that's one of
the issues I also was curious.
meeting of the of the interim
but my hope is is that anything
that is going to be coming
forward that the committee would
have plenty of time to review it
changed or worked on or whatever
but my hope is is that we get a
chance to look at it and and
have a real good overview thank
you very much thank you and just
on that today so I appreciate
that and and we do have paid
family medical leave as a topic
of discussion in this committee.
And what I will request is that
So that we have a almost a full
month to look over that
legislation.
So we'll make that will make
that no okay I'm gonna go to
Representative Matthews.
in Albuquerque which is on the
far northeast heights of been
Representative there since
twenty nineteen when I was
appointed to represent a member
continue the trend line.
So has the put that out there
who would want to put that out
there.
that I when I practice law I
practice a lot of business law
Representative businesses I
Representative
a lot of small businesses and
I'm a real advocate for small
nonprofit and I think nonprofits
are kind of an overlooked part
of economic development because
of for nonprofit to be
successful it must of course
make a profit.
then C. N. M. sorry not CNN
and in the business department
and I taught contradict
entrepreneurship of Business on
other business courses and from
people who are a lot of times
maybe some.
Our judgment errors when they
were young and then come back
after realizing the flipping
burgers is not going to be where
became my heroes are and I'm
very interested that they get a
fair shake last thing I'll
mention is I was involved in
connection with the family
you will like a bill by
September and we will do our
best to have a bill thank you
thank you Representative Alcon.
believe for fifteen years I
don't remember anymore.
And my thank you more than
anything else with us in this
hit you with everything they've
got up their mind it's hard to
focus on something so my idea is
that I think I'd like to listen
and see and then I'll see where
we can go forward thank you
welcome to everyone today I was
excited to be part of this
committee
I am a former city planner
in Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county and I worked in economic
development
and planning while I was in my
and how we build a workforce
that attracts people industry to
New Mexico is missed in that in
that whole realm of activity the
other thing that is very
important to me and and that
think the other part of this
that's really really important
to me also is infrastructure
you know how does our
infrastructure money
but somehow we seem to be
missing the boat on that and so
infrastructure is very important
as to how we build our roads how
of telecommunication
infrastructure so that's those
are the areas that are important
thank you Representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair.
north have for Roosevelt all of
the block all of ground loop in
a little touches on Miguel
County.
I see in my district the rural
But we also is there and and
political area.
And.
I look forward to working with
this committee.
And see how we can support our
time and somehow we need to
spread the wealth of the state
of New Mexico to those rural
towns like I mentioned in and
help them out and keep them
representative Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair and glad
to be here today Representative
Montoya from San Juan County.
Mexico enters from Colorado
comes into San Juan County and
then exits to Arizona.
any any discussion about water
traditionally of jobs or have
been around extraction which the
direction that we have taken is
away from extractive industries
and I was looking at the work
mentioned earlier about how
instead of just
Having money go to departments
and then allowing those
departments to make a decision
transition act and promises and
investment that was supposed to
be made in San Juan County for
leading the charge had to
For legislation that force we we
were able to pass just to make
sure that displace workers were
able to get money that was
opportunities I think it would
be a good idea for us to maybe
go backwards a little bit and
look at the energy transition
act and maybe.
Take a look and see how.
Then why and then in the future
how do we make sure that when we
put forward plans about the
direction of the state to make
our credibility to to some
degree is is is at stake I'm I
know that something that just
happened this last week
The jobs have been lost their
What what we have potentially
done in the end extractive
was met with protest from the
Navajo Nation and had to
relocate kind of a victory lap
for closing down sections around
Chaco canyon my wife's family
minds this is a taking this is a
minerals taking they have the
minerals in the ground but they
cannot develop them and so
I think we have to if we're
follow through.
And and and more of that's going
to be coming our way so there's
gonna be a lot of communities
that we have counted on for
years and years to provide
sure that we take care of those
counties as well I'm we don't
want just to to to have them
around when they're producers
and then just ignore me after so
that is a kind of a passion of
Other than just shifting the tax
burden to the rest of the
citizens we need to come up with
answers for employment I do also
support small business but in
I would I would hope that that
would be a big part of this
discussion thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Senator
Diamond thank you good afternoon
Madam chairwoman my name is
crystal diamond I represent a
emphasis really highlighting the
needs of rural and frontier New
Mexico so has my neighbor
Senator Hemphill and after
redistricting we've kind of done
economic development needs of
rural New Mexico remains a
priority I'm also excited to be
in this committee and not just
because we discuss good things
for New Mexico but also because
tune in or attend these meetings
that our time is no more
valuables in their time so thank
you very much for that thank
you.
everybody else does especially
and I think more so being that
we're a bedroom community to
Albuquerque the largest area but
my district is exploding because
restaurants breweries and
distilleries as a former
restaurant worker and restaurant
runner
This is something that's near
and dear to my heart the
our New Mexico's in a great
place for energy production and
we should really figure out what
that looks like for the next
forty or fifty years
and with that is also population
growth there is we will continue
to have the short on workforce
unless we can figure out also
is we just don't have people to
fill the jobs of.
Thank you so much thank you
Representative Representative
little.
Thank you chairman
Come down from getting here so I
am so pleased to join this
committee and I'm looking
forward I thought it was quite
an X. let me back up so hi
represent house district sixty
Representative Herrera Hernandez
has made a point of that is
there's a lot of development
that's looking to be established
I see this a to the proposed
items to be discussed is
extremely expensive and I am
certain pieces all of it
actually but I also see if I may
add very briefly as I know will
get to it but
For over thirty years with rural
and tribal areas of the state
it's really wonderful to see
some of the opportunities that
helpful to examine indigenous
filmmaking the storytelling in
the film makers perhaps looking
at recommended funding for job
training and support for film
touch is an issue that touches
many different interim
committees.
Is in relation to jobs and
poverty and food and securities
as we know
and of the issue of jobs already
being scarce in rural areas of
the state our families are
already experiencing issues
surrounding food insecurity and
to address this issue
especially for the families that
are impacted by this issue so
Romero and Senator Shendo so
Representative Romero the money
saying do you want that the
requirements of your
introduction and you get these
okay rural what you district
I sorry for the second.
think when we look at what the
potential is I I Representative
little touch on some of it we're
looking at how to allow tribal
governance to.
area about what gets used as you
know land for development for
even first for solar so we want
to be kind to interests and and
The folks who can't afford to
live in my district right now
it's very very difficult it's a
long standing issue but moving
forward how it is that we can
create that affordability not
just in our local area but
I'll get stuck in that traffic.
Between the serious XM and
messing Francisco anyway I
Senator Benny Shendo represent
Representative rural areas I
think we're all in the same boat
about how do we expand economic
development in in our areas but
in for particularly for
something that in in my district
A saw mill that's two very well
there's a lot of forested areas
that we have and all the large
lumber mills and all gone but I
think in hema as we've been
New Mexico that not doing the
old large scale in operations
but looking at something a
little different a really would
like for maybe I know it's at
because there's no hotels and
the but if there's a way that I
I think our tribal really to
host at least some legislature's
at a different time not any of
these calendar but we can put it
least maybe a day visit by you
know representatives or or
senators if they want to learn
more about that project because
of the there's lots of places in
northern New Mexico that could
opportunity for presentation on
that in our tiles meeting.
I think so.
I I think so and then also
the big sawmill that
muscular used to have it's huge.
But ours is you know not very
it's it's it's not about the
huge industry that once existed
is well how do you create this
micro economies and so that
people can live in those
communities but still thin our
All right I haven't seen anybody
else walk in so vice chair guide
us.
Thank you madam chair I'm during
Vegas district to fifty two down
in the southern New Mexico I
there's some diversity there I
am have been in the legislative
for eleven years six of those
years I was in leadership this
bumpy start at times I was a new
chair learning it but I
committee as a whole got me
through
we had more fun than I think any
other Canadian and we learned a
I met with senator Hamlin we I
think that this is the work plan
has doubled since you and I met
pretty ambitious
which is which is great because
I think that there are a lot of
people are wanting to put some
we could really have some focus
specially with economic
development I think there needs
to be some balance between
employees and employers we need
with our businesses how to to
talk to our our it schools on
how to make sure we're getting
the education out there I think
daycare was mentioned to making
big piece of that so I'm really
excited once again to be on the.
Committee to co chair and when I
around very good well we'll pack
a lot in looking for just let
you know.
Thank you I sure appreciate you
my name is Kerry him when I
representative district thirty
and then goes all the way south
and includes part of Santa
Theresa but John buddy you know
San Miguel mesquite they've
although a lot of rural
crucis green chamber of commerce
and we talk about the importance
of locally owned businesses but
also ways to help them reduce
reuse and recycle because we
know that when they are reducing
they're already reducing their
waste to the recycling the re
using things they're getting
things that they don't have to
buy again and and so it's lovely
organizations that will advocate
for that but we don't have a
whole lot of organizations
except our folks who understand
our rural businesses in our
small businesses to be able to
do that so it's an honor to be
Just let you know I just want to
go ahead and have that started
today
when we have further meetings at
future meetings we will be to be
doing the introductions but I
appreciate all of your service
and your time away from you
your commitment to wanting to
help not only our state but our
rural communities.
Couple of little bits of
housekeeping again a reminder.
Just put this in in the back of
because October will be our last
meeting and that is when we will
approve or endorse built at that
time as a committee so that's
just something to kind of
have a question about how to
fill these out
we've got Martin over there
who's going to go ahead and
answer those questions because
Senator Diamond and I both have
same questions earlier about do
Through your suggestions in your
introductions Erin has already
been taking notes but this is
obviously a draft work plan she
will take notes as we continue
bit some other housekeeping
through October we will have
additional for meetings and
locations throughout the state
what I try to do is a chair and
and Representative guy was some
I do try to be respectful of
your time but also our
presenters time because most of
the time those folks are giving
up either their day either pay
or time away from work or time
away from their organization I
presenting in our committee and
giving up their day let's be
respectful of their time
secondly let's keep our
questions to the topic at hand
have you wrap it up just to
trying keep on time and just as
a background I used to work in
public radio I talked to a clock
for living so that's why I've
got this hypersensitivity about
subject and this is not meant as
a means of censoring you but
more respecting the time taken
by our speakers in our committee
members member of the
presentation topics that have
been requested making sure the
investment in the topics that
affect your particular areas and
your constituents and I'm
grateful for your feedback and
your comments and your expertise
that you will bring to this
I would love that.
Thank you madam chair I am Erin
Bond Research Council services
I've been here since twenty
fifteen often on permanently
Senator Martin Fisher staff
attorney with the council
service.
Thank Nico.
All right any questions before
we get to the work plan.
All right buckle up buttercups
let's go we're gonna go ahead
and pull out the work plan and
two notices requesting your
preferred topics and locations
both of those things were
considered in developing the
work plan myself vice chair guy
goes and Miss bond work together
to accommodate as many
Got to come up with an easier
way to say that but the E. R. D.
P. C. will explore discuss major
areas and specific issues
affecting economic in rural
development and policy and so at
this point what we can do to be
and so you're welcome to raise
your hand if you want to go
ahead and speak we have had some
comments already on broadband
Senator Stefanics talked about
that but if there are any other
take down that information.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
for okay have none before that
I'd just of all that that okay
thank you thank you yeah let's
go ahead and take a section by
section otherwise we're gonna be
flipping pages all day anybody
development as it pertains to
telehealth in expanding.
That out to the rural parts of
the state
I think that's a challenge that
those parts so I'd like to see
if that could be addressed okay
we can we can we can include
that.
Just a Senate committee set did
you want to.
That's been put.
Twenty provides a hundred
million dollars for broadband.
New Mexico just figure I heard
is we need to billion dollars.
for broadband big headline like
is a big deal that's.
That's pennies compared to what
we need so maybe we can have
someone talk about.
broadband one second costs and.
What's the what's the future
look like and house House soon
we're going to get that much
money.
Thank you and those are.
is critical and in some cases
life saving.
so I appreciate that yes
Representative Matthews.
wait supposedly with I dare
devils in there they can find
broadband throughout the entire
state they did receive state
and I'd sure like to know.
Hey if they've made any progress
to being able to provide
affordable broadband.
There's an article about their
table the other day and said
that the fire was the answer
this is the the division was
really just a half **** answer
Thank you for that.
Any other expansion
Representative tell me again
your name and it's going to take
you know I I I I'm doing this
I have some questions and I
would like to hear more about
any plans or what would go into
what would be required for and
broadband internet access to be
a utility services like water
New thank you.
I will give it to you.
And you know a new and we're new
am I correct on that I promise I
All right.
Moving on we are now on
statewide local economic
development initiatives they're
three points under that any
additions to that.
Senator Representative Matthews.
Madam chair during the regular
session or during the sixty day
session
development never showed up and
of so we didn't have any input
from them and I noticed that and
some of the governor's vetoes
there was some.
Talk about where they're not
showing up and what we should
infer from that if anything.
Representative Fernandes.
whole state based on where need
for jobs are instead of just the
rural because speak into the
microphone and more thank your
guises Mike's are different here
potentially also opening up that
up to middle or.
Everybody in the state based on
the job needs and companies
coming in and like if we need
infrastructure to create jobs we
reaches out to our presenters
she can say these are the topics
that the committee wants to have
addressed.
K. we can.
little
Questionable I guess is to where
transportation and infastructure
fits in whether it's economic
transportation because many of
our roads will attract
you know new businesses and I
think that we definitely need to
Transportation infrastructure
and revenue committee we can go
ahead and put that under impact
of real systems on state and
and as a former city planner the
those are the things that I'm
looking for sure thank you thank
you Representative Montoya that
I see you have your my colonel.
if.
I have no idea I know this this
is already getting heavy but
that is going to be a big topic
for transportation.
I thank you.
I'm advisory on that as I am on
here so I would suggest you talk
to the other but will look into
that.
Thank you.
Anything else on statewide local
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair as during
my introduction we
I mentioned the the.
and G. I think we're both kind
of relating to comment.
I think there there might need
to be a discussion since we're
talking about small business
here
I'm a realtor in San Juan County
and it was difficult for me we
my wife and I handle Senator
transactions to sell
national box stores coming in
and back feeling but just
recently I was in Espanola
talking to some local business
owners there and they were
talking about how.
six privately owned restaurants
in Espanol only one has survived
so in this discussion of of
COVID
are COVID reaction in New Mexico
might fit here because we're
asking people to take a risk and
open businesses up again.
And
Well anything that was low
that could have been in a
smaller.
A smaller business we shut them
down and forced everybody into
on on COVID thank you thank you
and I do want to point out the
because Aaron had asked me about
this the catastrophic Business
relief fund is something that I
set up in Los crucis with junior
donation clause and this is for
any type of catastrophe that
would happen to a business that
could potentially shut them down
like immediately so Senator
believe which hotel and and all
renovation tax credit to show
this past session Senator
Hemphill ran a bill.
through the through the economic
development department there are
numerous communities across our
state who have enclosed malls
or help Division she goes into a
home can be but the mall itself
is not show our our when I show
her bill I thought that this
so just wanted to mention that
and that's the that's the idea
behind have in malls there when
we have the the discussion so
focus on our have a discussion
about the issue for those local
small businesses a creative.
Industry and the through the
economic development agency we
going to need to
fuel that that the funding for
that division and how we can
state with that gig economy and
how.
And where were you were you
looking this is under small
businesses correct okay.
Yes I don't know how it's
concerns in there I'd like to
maybe.
Find a place I don't know
exactly where to put that but
find a place that we can talk
about that under the for small
businesses.
And just some economic
economy as well in through small
business and and
And private ownership show so
I'd like to.
I'd like to see were and that
would be.
businesses and there's we have a
Hispanic chamber and maybe get
some get a good opportunity for
them to get in front of us.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
just update and run by the New
Mexico finance authority of I
think it would be instructive to
see if those laws are being paid
to flourish Dr and hopefully
still exist.
Thank you very much.
Senator Williams.
Thank you madam chair in you
know one number do the the
businesses are started and how
they break into that next level
in that minority preference or
that preference level that New
Mexico has the other thing is
I'd like to see like J. W.
get them J. typically get them
some relief and wage relief as
they move up and down any other
businesses start that I think
need to buy to be available for
for a lot more smaller entities
hello the construct construction
business relief fund is but it's
kinda interesting
and then recruitment retention
paying eighteen then somebody
comes to they're gonna want
nineteen or twenty and you tell
me can go to McDonalds for
eighteen in the state well just
won't work or I'm I want twenty
to go here and this is a factor
we we got to stop that right in
order to make a small business
whether maybe is a janitorial
business has state contracts how
do they keep that level of pay
under their contracts and keep
it is very difficult that
sometimes because you have
employees that may come for
small amount of time and they
don't realize that the sick
leave if you're not there for
some amount time if they don't
employees pay that we paid out
on our side you build up so many
sick days we're just gonna pay
you out because it's hard for us
to track half an hour for every
taking a day off or something
you need these are sick leave
and then it's rate anyway but we
need to burn through that and
developing open a business how
how much how ready is that site
you open a restaurant in Los
crucis and open a restaurant is
probably two hundred thousand
dollars now by time put stove
and fire suppression and
Even the even the food trailers
how do we get over that to make
them a little bit independent
and in those opportunities in
sight reading just to get them
prepared for that thank you
madam chair thank senator Munoz
Representative Roybal Caballero
businesses as they apply to
workforce development and others
on other matters that interface
other departments at interface
perhaps that would be a good
thing to have a discussion maybe
have a panel discussion and have
them discuss with us how they
are interfacing on these issues
how they're reaching out to the
communities both the employee
the changes in the laws that
have occurred over the past
years that we're meant to
actually improve employee
employer relationships thank you
communities are handling set
readiness so couple tricky as a
program that goes in and they
have a database of right at
sites that are ready or close
ready I would want to know how
are different and which one of
those would be more.
Which one which one of those
would be more beneficial for us
Thank you sorry I get really
deep when it comes to say
readiness.
Representative Briggs.
Thank you madam chair one of the
arts and you know New Mexico is
pretty famous for arts and I
have to disclose I'm in that
business but I think that it's
important that we talk about art
other other sections is talking
about the creative industry
economy.
Thank you thank you anybody else
on this particular topic topic
for local and small businesses.
year of bill HB one sixty six we
ran as Senate bill of the like
with senator Tom in on working
save for New Mexico and I'd like
about that absolutely thank you
thank you.
You'll find that Aaron.
Okay.
Anybody else before we move on.
Representative Matthews asked
about some of those things.
Any other suggestions or
additions to the section.
Yes Representative Lujan.
from the federal funding that we
got but understanding where the
fraud was and where we are in in
that process of recovery and so
section I'm also being aware of
the time we got about twenty
more minutes and I would like to
try and stay on time next
economic impacts of adult use
cannabis.
that Aaron had already added the
snap requirements.
Piece to this thank you okay
thank you.
checks and I'd like to have a
conversation about that and
impacts economically with it and
you need to have those in place.
Thank you.
Fernandes sorry I'll stop
talking virtually
can we talk about if it would be
beneficial for our state to
break certain percentages like
all the other states to for
their adult use cannabis into
and if that would be beneficial
for our state because currently
we don't that right.
Thank you thank you thank you
venture I would I would say we
Thank you.
All right moving on to
opportunities available for the
film industry the outdoor
economy in creative industries.
already a.
Articles being written
projections that a lot of this
retailers are going to go out of
business so that's going to be a
challenge.
On that note in Los crucis one
And and we're seeing that you
know and that will be a a
conversation is that you know
we're seeing a lot of
dispensaries opening up and
what's happening is that there
are people who are investing
their life savings in this but
dispensaries because people are
not taking it seriously.
So I appreciate that.
okay now back to the film
industry the outdoor economy in
creative industries anything
else on the.
Thank you madam chair I can say
take this committee very serious
thank you and I would say under
Subsection B. economic economic
little talked about that I think
that's a great idea especially
the storytelling that's been
something that's been like
getting a lot of coke a lot of
coverage right now.
Sierra.
the big good film credit
legislation so in fact is more
more states
Offered film because what what
effects it can have in New
Mexico.
if there was any over payments
made in the in the last couple
years to the film industry and
then again to touch base on that
Austin to LA in the state the
those in the industry because
that's what's really.
Hindering our growth my
understanding from the film
industry in New Mexico is to to
get those people can build those
another state to do those and we
do have the film institute
through done in a community
college in New Mexico State
University and I think that's a
really good you know because we
need to cultivate need to grow
appreciate that.
Anything else under the film
industry outdoor economy
creative industries.
Any other additions to the.
Representative Lujan is our we
part of this conversation thank
you we we will
in the southern New Mexico union
Pacific has opened up and at
trade school be there for the
to get a presentation from union
Pacific as part of that and will
look into to labor as well.
Representative Montoya.
they're looking to potentially
put a a a rel into the area
where they have Navajo
agricultural products.
land they have dedicated to the
form and they have all that
water as I stated earlier coming
through San Juan County but
having to truck in in truck out
would then help them with the
issue that we talked about
earlier about the jobs leaving
the Navajo Nation and so this
would be the tension Lee high
paying.
because of the partnerships that
have been developed out there
and so we we will have a
presentation from from them down
in southern New Mexico and I
think that might be something
that.
Yes Representative Briggs.
I have so many comments madam
chair
so as I think about
is not as prevalent in the
smaller areas but like Espanola
has its own transit system now
so I don't know I'm not the New
Mexico we do as well we have the
some mention regarding that
well.
it's a airfares err flight out
of Los crucis.
One anyone that added to the
committee okay so a flight out
of Los crucis.
Okay we're almost on.
economic generators Senator
Stefanics you see the state
state meat inspectors
there and the reinstatement of a
meat processing plant.
Anything else added to this
tourism agritourism kind of
business opportunities and I
think would be helpful to have
that discussed also okay.
state of New Mexico and we have
been successful with that having
some help from the federal side
also and it would be nice to
have our state climatologist
give us an update on the weather
and so that everybody can
understand how the weather's why
the weather stations need to be
put in it's a tool to help with
thank you K. Senator Stefanics
and Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
sure if it was passed in the
past sessions but there has been
Jams it cetera so I'm not sure
if we ever pass that bill but if
not we might want to stick that
in here I think that's that
Act a couple years ago I
remember getting a lot of emails
on that one.
Representative Lujan.
technologies and economic
development where we are where
we need to go what incentives we
can be looking at to encourage
section Representative panics I
have that just reminded me we
might want to have the young
farmers of involved somehow I'm
doing a presentation there is a
regional chapter for this
perhaps they do we have the
infinity youth farm which is
doing incredible work and the
agriculture to the network they
do a lot of that thank you.
maybe we could get some update
from the forestry your or
somebody as to how we're
looking to make those situations
better in the future.
and ranchers and he learned how
they're affected with.
Thank you.
Right anything else on farming
for mainly our livestock
producers was the lack of
veterinarians that come to New
Mexico and that's how it's a big
issue especially on rural New
Mexico and and I know that it
additionally as a follow up of
Representative Zamora one of the
specific issues of our livestock
centers around a wolf livestock
loss payment program and what
that would look like a state
level they do do it is federal
level but you pay for presents
meeting if we pay you certain
because of it but I think that
would be an interesting
conversation to I know it's
already happening to many of the
cattle groups just to kind of
listen to that conversation as
well.
Think we we try to get the
Lubbock school of veterinary
medicine to come and speak
because I think that was the
closest one for eastern New
Mexico.
we have had some conversations
about that but if there are any
other additions.
Representative Robert Kelly are
using we've been waiting a long
time for this one thank you
sixty five passed both houses
almost unanimously and I've met
recently met with a group of
affordable housing developers
Such as solar such as Assad geo
thermal and others on in their
homes so that they can become
affordable from the very
Mexico tech it could also be
available to present as well as
the groups that were there
present to present in both
houses thank you thank thank you
projects coming on board to
perhaps we could hear about that
but the community solar program
that the PRC is administering
apparently is having some issues
know you and I see on different
sides of the spectrum we had
blue hydrogen production to this
as well and can we also add pink
which is done with nuclear small
modular nuclear reactors that
might be something in the future
Well yes that's a pricing.
If there were so many so many
different meanings so that while
okay.
Representative had at a thank
village of question to they're
doing at green hydrogen
a big green hydrogen project in
the north so I hope that we can
have them come in and give that
suggested that it's one of the
it's item be.
Sorry.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair I just
used and looking at the grid
modernization and so the
regional trans mission
organization just a one on one
on that the budget the economic
benefits so that I think that
integrate to so in
infrastructure greatest assets
including transformers we know
the transformers are big issue
now in federal topic and we need
Thank you madam chair just
there's a couple of things we we
talk about in a the development
of renewable energy industry
Is the Bosch the drives the
economy for the entire state.
show.
Could we discuss how to
do that and if we get to know
what ideas are out there in case
your opportunities to do that.
then madam chair the the next
might benefit from blue
hydrogen.
Which.
Also could deal benefit center
Representative Montoya is part
looking at that because it would
look like if we if we have
opportunities for hydrogen right
now the the mean green is the.
potentially have a bigger
opportunity in areas of
potential and gas so that would
that would be my my thoughts on
those two thank you madam chair
Okay moving on educational
institutions and economic
development.
authority yes ET I think it's an
important thank you for talking
about job training and C. N. M.
programs and that kind of stuff
I think CTE is the beginning of
the semester we went to see tech
be what that one in Hobbs is but
you know we need one in the
metro area to absolutely
fascinating yes Representative
Romero thank you madam chair
curious if we might be able to
education are what what what is
happening with that would love
to understand more about the
impact thank you I do not done
in a community college has
already seen an increase because
of the opportunity scholarship.
about their relationships to the
educational institutions and
talking about trends employment
trends career opportunities
etcetera thank you we'll give
I'd I'd just like to talk about
the advancing and looking
implement over use in policy and
we're what that how that
combines it into workforce
solutions PED ATD maybe having
well in our schools and I think
something that came to mind
in those early under the small
businesses with hotels and and
such some of those
Worked with PED in local school
districts with the use and and
getting them involved in the
work force so I think that that
would be really good
presentation as well.
teaching entrepreneurship it
central at the C. N. M. a
substantial number of my
students were individuals who
were out of prison.
and the relationship between
job I can get and so I'm not
quite sure how that fits in here
but I that is a something I
think we should recognize and
try to be supportive of.
brewery and distillery industry
needs we do have some contacts
to the state Representative
Hernandez we're talking about.
In Silvercity in Deming to do
I know I know folks there too
yeah.
I appreciate that anything else
on the restaurant brewery and
distillery industry needs.
Some of this is overlapping from
who owns a restaurant in Capitan
and all of the economic
Incentives that are coming
through the both from the
federal government during the
restaurants and bars in terms of
employment in terms of how the
incentives Justin work to.
Yes please representative madam
the liquor license for important
stuff has really affected or not
affected the restaurant industry
as a whole I mean it was such a
massive change to everything
Take the opportunity
Representative Hernandez.
this is completely not
twenty year plan and what we're
doing and how we're targeting
workforce development.
Like there's a list of stuff
that we want to do for the next
twenty years what we think's
gonna happen and how we're
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
One of the issues that came up
during the session there was a
through nonprofits
have to pay the additional wager
provided additional benefits but
are unable because of the way
the state contracts work to
bills passed what often happens
is there is a reduction in the
number of people who are
providing things like home
health care of developmental
attorney general's office
I I just.
I think in interim committee our
topic of on that issue and what
Minimizes is a problem moving
forward of would be very useful
increase that was being proposed
at that time was a hundred and
one point four million dollars
over three years so this is a
huge economic.
we talked about earlier was how
these larger companies locate
and they choose other
communities and I think that we
sight reading us education crime
reduction and how it sort of all
related to each other and how
what they look for when they're
A company or or other types of
companies industrial that you
know if they're looking for
also on that in terms of
reshoring and attracting
companies to New Mexico for the
supply chain and so you're both
on the same page about that will
Okay lastly economic impact of
federal installations that
something that Senator Griggs I
know that you'd suggested
because of the presence of
Holloman Air Force base and
Semenya's thank you the space
you the federal space.
Army when they called the space
they just started face force
southern New Mexico and you
realize that a lot more
Maybe the staff could reach out
to them and and see with their
federal plans are and see what
it's gonna look like in New
Imprint lots of it.
All right anything else on this.
All right this is a very
many of those as I mentioned
before we'll try to make sure
those topics are relevant to the
locations so that our presenters
don't have to drive too far on
the lovely task of not only
going through her multiple pages
of notes but probably the
webcast again to make sure.
That we get everything
effects of the of the cannabis
use by youth and how that.
Is affecting youth employment.
The two quick comments just one
applaud you for your ability to
run a meetings on time.
Maybe you could give a workshop
to all the other chairs and.
these economic development
committees in Albuquerque invite
out of town guests to come in
and tell us.
Why we're not doing so well you
get the chamber you got the
alliance.
There's a theme that all these
outsiders come and they say well
you got you got high crime for
schools not enough skilled
workers and poor leadership.
address the root causes of what.
Why we're not doing better
economically okay.
See I have to disagree.
We have a like it thank you
don't want to put on the agenda
we're still friends okay I I'm
I'm glad especially since you
said all those nice words about
how are in the meeting.
Have a motion to approve the
work plan as amended based on
all of the topics as and vice
chair do you want to make any
see this as is how there are so
many different factors that we
all know from our communities
that are impacting how are
economies thrive.
take into our communities that
will help improve them and
that's why I'm grateful for the
make up of this community of
this committee and the
conversations on the topics that
committee meets in the interim
that we try to bring up what we
didn't bring up before so if we
don't get to that I know that
vice chair guy goes we can
certainly work on that again
got a lot to plan and so once we
get that finalized work plan
than what I will do is start
setting up the schedule and I'll
talk about that in just a minute
but at this point if I can get a
Representative have a all in
favor of the work plan as
amended state I.
Anybody opposed.
Thank you Santa.
You're like it's been a long
day.
Only three thirty.
All righty so that work plan is
approved as amended I appreciate
that Erin will send out the
And so with that so we do have I
appreciate all of your input and
your thoughtfulness we do not
have any public comment so we
will not have that just to give
L. G. B. T. Q. businesses will
certainly expand on that given
the conversation
also will be at C. N. M. that is
our host site so CNN will be
hosting us both of those days
Representative Erin will be
following up with you about
quorum so given that we do want
to make sure that we have enough
spaces so if we have this many
people there would be absolutely
you have any other comments just
a question madam chair
is that going to be live
streamed because I'm having knee
surgery July third it will be on
are things that will have the
agenda printed out and so if
there are questions that you
want asked.
my calendar as
correct me if I'm mistaken
please I see this September
meeting is going to be held in
Silver City September the twenty
that's being held in of Los
crucis and Santa Rosa of they're
always going to be complex with
other committees really IBM I
feel for the person who has to
In Santa Theresa will also be
worked into Los crucis.
Okay
