Letters.
Tim can you hear us.
Themselves.
If you want to go hidden jason.
He's just walking in
give him two seconds
where to make an entrance.
Remember.
Present.
Here.
And.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right
motion to approve the agenda.
Some of mr chairman.
There's a second.
Second.
I'm in favor.
Let's have it.
I.
Call for approval of the minutes
from may third twenty twenty
three meeting some of mister
chairman
as second emotion.
Thank you.
Of favor.
I.
Mentioned it's approved.
The construction cost over and
updates angel.
Thank you mister chairs will if
you recall the water trust
forward last year in april
approved the balances for the
twenty twenty one cancel
projects and the satisfied from
the water trust one hundred and
twenty twenty two to help on
communities that were awarded in
those years for a possible
shortfall of their construction
cost now um we've.
And in one of the processes that
we have is once we had a cars to
overrun we would reach our
technical partners the
environment department to make
sure that the entities have gone
out to bed and that there was a
a construction past overrun and
we would take that to the
internet fay board and bring the
update to the water transport so
that's what we are doing right
now we are bringing the update
we have the first one is we have
redarting which you domestic
they went out to bid in april
and for the distribution of
their line replacement the
lowest bid came in higher than
what was what they had available
the association requested five
hundred and forty thousand
dollars in additional funds to
complete that project staff
again with concurrence with the
environment apparent
construction programs bill
recommended the additional
amount of that five hundred and
forty thousand dollars this went
to the new mexico finance
authority board in the authority
approved that recommendation of
that five hundred and forty
thousand dollars going in as a
hundred percent grat and that
happened in may.
The desk only have is the real
decision they went out to bid in
may.
And they received in order to
receive the best pricing what
they did is they were awarded
phase one in face to with the
water trustpoint and so they
wanted to combine those two
visas to see if they could get a
better pricing or what landed up
it happening is phase one what
they had available for phase one
had an overage of two hundred
and fifty thousand six hundred
and eighty six in order for them
to complete that project so
again the fee staff with
concurrence from construction
program spirit recommended that
additional amount this went
before the finance authority
board and the finance authority
board approved that two hundred
and fifty thousand six hundred
and eighty six additional
funding coming in with the ten
percent long company don't
compone it and that came and or
that happened on july
so right now if you look at the
bottom half there are the
current balance and we these are
all the twenty twenty one
projects we haven't seen the
twenty twenty two haven't gone
out to bid yet so these so to
date we had three projects
almost domestics coming in with
cost over runs in the twenty
twenty one set aside and
currently we have a balance of a
little over one point three
million for the twenty twenty
one and the full bounce of the
three point six for their twenty
twenty two and with that mister
chair this is just an
informational item but I will
stand for any questions.
The.
Thank you and you're does anyone
have any questions regarding
those like those items.
We can move on to an agenda item
number five the twenty twenty
three water projects one award
second iteration.
Consideration of approval of the
words and thank you mister chair
so i've also a title or um you
also have the big spreadsheet
that you know hopefully there
will be a little bit easier for
you to follow but this is the
second iteration for the twenty
twenty three awards now the what
are project finance act just a
background providers that the
finance authority make loans in
grounds recommended by this
board and authorized by the
legislature so this year in the
twenty twenty three cycle we had
a hundred and twenty five point
two million that was available
most of which came from seven
tax our notes issued by the
state board of finance I may
third this for awarded forty
seven projects in the amount of
one hundred and twenty three
little over hundred and twenty
three billion seven of the
applicants cannot be awarded and
certified due to not meeting
regular toy compliance we had
six that had the eal compliance
in one had an office of the
state engineer regulatory
compliance so basically due to
the timing that the project
review committee submitted the
recommendations to the board and
the board's decision on may
third the board extended a
compliance deadline for those
seven entities until july fifth
two meet that regulatory
compliance at the book the board
postponed the funding decision
of that remaining balance which
is a little over two point one
million until today's meeting I
may thirty first the animal fee
staff was informed that the city
of carls bad was returning there
are twenty twenty three award
they were worried is seven point
one one seven billion one
hundred and seventy seven
thousand six hundred so
following the water trustworth's
decision on the seven projects
staff priorities the project in
the order determined by the
project application evaluation
scores and available funding
adjusted you know that those
scores were the ones that were
happening last fault.
In addition to the remaining
balance.
Staff included the returned
award for the city of carlsbank
so we just have a quick table
that shows what the second
iteration coming in for the
seven projects was it equaled
nine point three million the
recommendations that we are
making is a little over three
point three billion and then we
have a balance of six point six
million eleven thousand one
hundred and thirty two the
project of your committee has
reviewed and concurs with staff
recommendation staff recommends
that the five projects on the
attached spreadsheet for funding
in the twenty twenty three
funding cycle we also recommend
that the remaining balance of
this six million dollars be said
aside for construction past
overruns for those twenty twenty
three water trust board awardies
so if we look at the
spreadsheet.
It's a little bit clear on what
we will we are recommending
these are the seven projects.
And if you could pull up the
spreadsheet please these are the
seven projects that we're
looking at um the ones again
they are prioritized by the
scoring that was done in the
fall so we are recommending that
the watershed as the the the
remaining watership which is the
same one so what a conservation
be awarded for their five
hundred thousand el by water
alliance this was the only one
that had office of the state
engineer complaints issues we
are recommending their ill
filled tank replacement in the
office of the state engineer has
cleared that they are ready to
move forward and that in the
amount of four hundred and
ninety nine thousand six eighty
three we bypassed roman water
sanitation district they did
some in their twenty twenty or
it but they are still um behind
their twenty twenty one audit
and they submitted their twenty
twenty after the the deadline of
july fifth the next one we have
one of eastern mutual domestic
they are we are recommending
four hundred and forty thousand
the requested amount then we
have the city of sound fees two
projects they disamither twenty
twenty one audit unfortunately
they still have their twenty
twenty two that is outstanding
then we have the city of anthony
on their first flood prevention
at four hundred thousand dollars
and then we have to buy past the
city of damning unfortunately
they are still they still have
not submitted their twenty
twenty two audit and the final
one would round up with the
second city of anthony for one
point five million and without
mister chair I will stand for
any questions.
I think it's ways to set aside
six plus million for cost of a
rent.
And in today's climate so I
think it's a good recommendation
there are any questions from.
Then angela what was the reason
in for carl's bad returning the
funds so correspond stated that
the um weren't not ready to uh
take on
have the financial capacity to
oversee the project basically to
take on a loan so they declined
they did say and it was the
marine in the mayor said that
they were at this time that they
didn't feel comfortable and so
the they did say that they would
be coming into the water trust
board in the future so.
Yeah.
Their debt capacity and what
they can afford.
That's what they believe the
finance authority looked at
their decapacity and did the the
financial structure and it would
be the sixty forty the
city just said we're not ready
for it.
And how critical was that
project do you recollect I don't
know.
Thank you.
So mister chairman just to make
sure I understand everyone that
met regulatory compliance.
Um and by that I mean submitted
all their audits met the eo
compliance from round twenty
three will get funded correct we
will not have bypassed anybody
for anything other than the
executive order compliance
everyone else got funded that is
correct.
So that uh it's unusual I think
it's due to a ton of money and
but we don't we don't see this
very often so I want to
pass on that moment and so then
at the end of the day with the
money that wasn't awarded
there wasn't used for carls but
that all gets uh is now made
available for projects solely
for twenty three that's what
we're recommending sold for
twenty three cost overrun bucket
is now a little over six million
dollars and will that get added
to over time if people don't
meet the readiness to proceed.
Uhm uh.
Requirements in the fall if they
have funds left over with will
this be the only amount of money
for a hundred and thirty million
dollars of projects that's a
good question the readiness to
proceed deadline for the twenty
twenty three is that the ending
of september so I know we have
one community that is going to
be asking or or saying that they
they're not sure they can beat
that deadline and we would be
asking for an extension to meet
that deadline but that's I think
that's perhaps what you know if
those come in we will definitely
bring it to the board for that
consideration as member russell
said because of the amount of
awards that we have.
Uh that cost overrun and will
probably be a lot greater.
Yeah.
And that would bring the whole
total of fifty two projects that
this board awarded in the twenty
tw.
The.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
They will entertain emotion to
accept staff approval.
Reconditions some
member server second second.
Thank you.
All in favor.
What we carries.
Next we uh consideration
approval of resolution and
certification of several tax new
bonds in addition to additional
call.
Uh just for a terrible good
morning mr chairman members
I but leave in front of you this
is by the way that paperwork
portion of the agenda so don't
everybody get too excited and I
believe on your board h
oh i'm sorry I think it's
fifteen but let me my numbers
are wrong.
And on page fifteen you have a
resolution for your
consideration and adoption with
this resolution does is really
clarify the action that you just
took the resolution makes
reference to the action that the
sport took in may.
Whereby you certified the need
for the severance tax bonds and
the projects to the state board
of finance
with the with the resolution now
does it have the additional five
projects which are is attached
on exhibit a uh certifies that
the phones will be used for
those projects and also that
those projects comply with law
so that that's all of the
compliance and the other
regulatory compliance that staff
spoke about so that's really it
i'm happy to stand for any
questions and we secure approval
in adoption of the resolution.
Any questions from the members
for mister.
We want to be legal here.
Approval of the resolution mr
cherry make that motion thank
you
thank you.
Mr charles second there.
The.
Hi.
Okay resolution is here by group
thank you mister thank you.
The.
Yeah.
To note in seven water transport
project management policy
recommendations.
And you are thank you mr
cherishe bring before you the
policy committee met on july
seventeenth and they review the
current policies in preparation
of the upcoming twenty twenty
four cycle in one of the goals
and promoting sustainability of
the water systems and protecting
the investment in water for new
mexico is requiring
accountability and stability of
their water systems so this
including couraging fiscally
sustainable and sound business
practices by the entities in
arguments the last august the
water transporter proved
clearing clarifying language to
the the finance authorities
credit analysts process and this
was hopefully to assist the
entities and determine their
financial capacity to undertake
that debt and we pay the long
component of their awards and
what we found this here is the
analyst are encountered some
entities that indicated that
portions of their available
system revenues were reserved
were reserved or restricted to
purposes that may have not been
identified in their audit or
sometimes even in their budget
so staff right now to to
hopefully and that's a much
combating but you clarify and
maybe give instructions to these
entities staff arm is making the
following recommendations and
this is going to be a
specifically in the policies
under section four the financial
responsibilities of the
applicant so i've included it on
the memory of what all of
section four looks like we also
have behind it is the full
policies but what we're looking
at and if we look at numbers or
letter searched or numbers yeah
let her see the enemy in what we
have decided to make sure that
it's clear is the finance
authority will analyse historic
and or projected financial
information.
To uh determine financial
capacity to repay a loan the
finance authorities analysis to
determine cash flow available
for debt will include a
calculation of net operation
revenues for an example a total
system operating revenues less
operating expenses and less
actual contributions to reserves
established pursuit to an asset
management plan applicants hit
their demonstrated historic
capacity to undertake the debt
will be recordment recommended
for the loan portion that
provides death service coverage
of at least one point three
times taking you to
consideration all existing and
proposed debt so that is the the
the the big change to hopefully
help these applicants the next
change is we changed it last
year but we're wanting to make
sure and that is whether e is to
say systems back by rate pain
constituents and what you know
can that are that are unable to
demonstrate a one point three
times coverage will be a signed
that minimum ten percent loan
and then it will just states
that the finance authority will
not excute alone agreement until
the applicant demonstrates that
that it meets that.
And then I believe is the bulk
of the of the changes that we
bring before you on the policies
another reason that we included
the entire policies is because I
believe the policy committee is
going to meet again to make some
more changes but the changes
here will affect the twenty
twenty four cycle further more
of is I understand the policy
committee will be i'm looking at
other changes but it will not
affect the twenty twenty four
cycle at this time and without
mister terror I will stand for
any questions.
Any questions from the the
membership.
Mr chair and angela when you
mentioned revenues that aren't
reflected on their audit or
budget what type of revenues are
you referring to I think what
we've found it out is that they
are saying what the revenues are
on there but what they're
staying but they're saying or
what it looks like is that part
of that revenue source whether
it is g r t or net system
revenues part of that amount
there there may be a reserve
portion that has not been taken
out that we want to probably
look at and consider
that they do take it out for the
operation to maintenance of
their system or for what for for
other projects.
Whatever the app.
Mister chairman if I might this
would be I think the third set
of changes to our policies that
really incentivise and should
motivate strongly or clients are
constituents to get their asset
management plans done if they
have their asset management
plans done in the finance
authority as a local government
planning grant that will help
them do that if they get that
done they then put themselves in
a position to have a one of you
to only don't undertake one loan
for a project instead of loan
for each phase of the project
when they come forward there is
consideration across the board
for matches various
consideration across the board
and now this which is says your
asset management plan says you
need to create these reserves
and now we're saying we'll
consider that sort of an expense
for purposes of determining net
available cash to pay alone and
so that's a big consideration it
helps both the small and the
large entities so across the
board if you've got your asset
management plan done the water
trustport has taken great uhm
has make me great steps to
really support that decision and
that business operation so I
think this is a pretty big one
it seems small because it just
takes up this one little section
but it is a pretty big element
if they've got their plan in
place will give them credit um
for that contribution so we know
that they're using their
revenues from their operations
to continue to support their
operations and it's really smart
practice and i'm please work in
a position to make that
available.
And it looks like he is just
clean up language yes that
really is what we're saying so
the the cruxt of this is just
that item see that is correct.
So mr chair and and members and
and are just going back to
making us as so so that's just
insurance that that so when we
refer to the same management
here that also refers to um
issues or an emergencies as well
because so that's how you look
at it is arrived because I think
those are things that i'm seen
at the local level more
emergencies than I could have
ever possible imagined and so
i've had a week account for that
and they do agree that we need
to get that peace and and just
encourage communities to get
their asset management plan and
then other cases that could be
other things what I think about
like what we deal with another
port to make me around any other
long component rate through the
fixed assets that the required
by another funding agency is
that current as well
mister tremen i'd like to take
established that so just to make
sure I understand it yet to the
extent that they have created a
repair and replacement fund or
emergency replacement phone door
operating reserve and that's
called for from their asset
management plan yes any
contributions they make to that
to any of those reserves that
are noted in their asset
management plan will we lack
consider them as funds available
for debt service so that's what
that is and then the other part
is if they've got planned to
debt that is to say that they've
applied they've been approved
for other debt we make sure that
that's also taken into
consideration that skirts I
think that kind of gets to the
issues that gallop brought up
last time though the finance
authority took a second look at
that and has made a different
determination based on the
actual revenues they're going to
pledge versus what was showing
in their audit so that that
issue got taken care of
separately from this policy but
it's certainly gives us
additional comfort that the
board that the water trust board
wants us to take into
consideration their planned
activities as it relates to new
loans perfect thank you.
Any other questions for enter.
Great
exactly we need to uh.
Call for.
A motion to approve the
recommendations from from staff
on changes to the water
transport project management
policies
mr chairman i'd like to make
that motion if you member of
towards the second second.
In favor.
Alright.
Mr chairman this is truly
maintenance could I ask that you
speak into your microphone a
little bit more loudly everybody
else I can hear I don't know
about others on the zoom that
you're a soft spoken person in a
little bit hard to hear.
Okay can you hear that better.
Yes thank you.
Thank you for that
k uh
motion in the second.
And
and also
an approval so that.
That uh uh moves us forward on
to a gender item number eight
angela.
The.
So thank you mister chair.
The twenty twenty four water
transport application cycle
started.
So it started began in and july
seventeenth with what we have
the notice of intent and that's
basically to find out who is
interested in applying for the
funding.
Now when we had when I bought
did this
memo we had eighty two
applications since then we
actually had or notice of intent
we have eighty five notice of
intent for a requested amount of
little over three hundred and
seventy five million.
So there is a huge
interest.
On this now this year the
estimated available funding is
about a hundred and thirty three
million.
And we have their fifteen
percent cap by policy is that
at twenty million so we do have
a couple of entities that the no
I had
in that twenty million.
So staff will be providing
training for all the applicants
next week on august fifteenth
the application actually the
online application will open on
august seventeenth through
september fifteenth
and again those the applications
would be reviewed for the entity
and project eligibility and
evaluated by their project
management team and we just give
an idea of what that evaluation
will take place it's a nice to
know that out of these eighty
five applicants we have you
water districts and water
associations we have some new
minister paldies that we haven't
seen and we've had more minister
poweredly you know we have a
regular you know clients are
they come but we also have more
minister penalties that we
haven't seen come to the water
trustport they may have been
awarded early on maybe two
thousand eight or earlier and we
have them coming back now so
eighty five at three hundred and
seventy five million.
Um yes so
and again I was to chair
we're looking at
the
just so some of those are the
the entities that in this is to
look back and i'm going to kind
of jump and it'll be explained
on the next meeting we did
notify those entities that have
previous older funds that from
twenty twenty two and older just
to let them know first of all we
notified all of them
that the application cycle had
to begin earlier because of the
finance authority legislative
oversight is going to request
the board to have those veteran
projects at the beginning of
november we also.
Reached out to those entities
that had older projects to let
them know about the preliminary
target to meet that and um
depending on how many
applications actually submit we
are looking at project
presentations from this board or
at the next meeting and we have
in october third and fourth we
have it is the two day because
of the eighty five applications
we want to make sure it you know
assuming that all eighty five
are going to be applied and so
at this point we have it as a
two day and with that mister
chair I stand for any questions
i'd if this is just a
informational item.
Thank you angela just to comment
here is that the words getting
out that uh.
That this is a great sort of
funding for for entities and uh.
Where we hope that there are
taking steps to address their
regulatory issues in advance and
and all the things that require
for them to qualify for
application.
Uhm is there any other questions
for comments for angela mr chair
have we looked into a cloning
angel I was that something we
have funding for
part of our strategic plan
but I all know you know we don't
do this alone and obviously as a
huge strength of our program but
michael sharin and our board
administration team it this is
we see her face the most and
it's a pleasant face but there's
a lot of folks that also work
behind the scenes to make this
this work the other but we are
looking into it
the other thing that I wanted to
ask is how many of these are
expected to be designed only
projects do we have a sense from
that because that was new the
last year we was delighted to
see as many as we had how many
do we expect to see this year
for design only so if if a fake
you making us so we do have a
what we're seen is some of the
new water associations are
coming in for design only and
these are ones that we haven't
seen before um so I would say
out of the eighty five we
probably have
more than a handful but less
than ten litter communium but we
do have a lot of repeat
customers which is which is
always good i'm I did mention
minister holidays and I think
that's attributed uh the
minister police did have a
training set up we have a lot
more and then we also have our
regional managers that the
finance authority have gone to
different counties so
they have the word is out.
That we have money and so.
Been ready mister chairman
angela how many do we have any
from last year that were
designed only that are the we
expect will be applying for the
construction phase we do and
that's going to be a little bit
tricky but because typically we
want them to have the design
complete when you know before
they go but we do have
at least three off the top of my
head that were awarded for
design unfortunately I think one
of them has secured a fudding in
is moving forward the other two
uh they're working on somebody
in the reading is to proceed so
if they can complete the design
by the time the water trustport
makes the decision in april or
may of next year they will be
ready for construction so I know
of three that and she's right
that applied for design received
as a funding for design that are
looking forward to getting
construction money on this
cycle.
Thank you
the top mr chair I just wanted
to.
Yeah I really appreciate you get
the word out.
Made a difference.
As a that's great.
And am I sure it'll be a topic
for the next meeting I think
you're already kind of thinking
ahead about how we might want to
sort these and protects on based
on.
New folks coming into the system
looking for design money you
know that kind of stuff will
have some interesting
conversations along that line
going forward the other thing I
i'd like to ask to is given the
nature of interest and the
dollar amounts that people are
seeking how do we communicate
that more broadly to some of our
uh you know legislators that are
an appropriators that are
wondering about uh uh what what
what the need is out there is
that something that that we do
uh
outside of the normal process or
mr chairman is part of
the finance authorities uh
reporting to our oversight
committee or legislative created
oversight committee we regularly
report on the progress of the
water trustport it is of
particular interest to them and
so there will be a presentation
we believe in especially
on october fifth and six of just
following our two day.
Applicant presentation.
Um banana
will present what the need is
and what it looks like I
anticipate a requested required
to report to the lsc and similar
we will have that
And the oversight committee
because I know that there's
still a lot of money to be had
but
that's that's our typical
reporting if there's others that
would like to talk to the
legislature about the potential
for additional funding.
We invite you to do that
we can get you information and
breakdowns but you know my
reporting is to primarily the
oversight committee which also
has perview of the water trust
but.
Just got a common in the net
just a question frantilla I
really want to dig knowledge
where the difference at me as
in reference to the summits and
doing the tour I think that
coming to them also communities
really made a significant
difference cause I can tell you
how much has happened since the
summit in just the communication
about I think given for me just
having a refresher about all the
different things that you're
doing because they believe that
you have taken on so much more
responsibility at some of us
just aren't even aware of and so
I think that was really hopeful
and so we're seeing a lot of
those connections happen
everything from the local
government say to the small
business side such line and
acknowledge that because the
kind of funneling for me and
then I can I disseminate it out
to the individuals that are
particularly working on that so
just thank you for that because
it's it's really helping and I
think and some of that is really
strange this first time in the
economics part of it in our
small community so i'm really
grateful for that and then I
think just in reference to what
we're seeing from the black fire
and also the from its peak fire
are you seeing based on the
noise more more of those water
sheds applying and more of those
what I would call a second that
are applying for these funds and
do I have that terminology
correct so we did see I think we
thought especially with the
hermes peak we saw a lot last
year.
And one of the and we actually
in the this board actually
awarded when it beater was I
think the the last one and it
was basically you know where we
we you know it and not so much
the design but we sell more of
it last year we do have a couple
of new water sheds
and I don't not sure work area
of the
of course that the the nano I
the analyse is just a brief
summary so we don't we won't
know what exactly the project
entails until they submit their
application you know we give AAA
larger and and I was just
referencing like you think was
september of last year it's only
had a lot of flooding as the
result of the boat score in just
curious to disconnect see if
there was more reach up for that
cause at least what i'm hearing
in our areas is that there are
some so many more things that
have to happen as a result of
that floody and then there's
always concerned about what are
you doing the short term vs a
long term because we were all
expecting my sons to hit in june
and that hasn't really happened
in our area so you just never
not rate so the the talks were
is expected flooding like for
the next five years is what we
were hearing at least for area
that hasn't happened yet but I
think what we're seeing is these
little spirits of just a big
storm in a very short and then a
lot happens when it rings so
quickly and then it just calls
away but so just out of
curiosity just
mr chairman if I might we don't
typically see a lot of those
emergency things coming through
the water trash port because
again they have to have a
preliminary engineering report
done and then they have to meet
these requirements and it's an a
year long process water
transports are not a great place
to go for a mergency funding as
it's so hard to have the
planning done in advance and
it's a year along process we
don't typically see those yes
for marketing what i'm seeing is
and i'll speak to the one
specifically in my area where
you'd have a water said that now
is.
Responsible for twelve dollars
and how to we.
How do we now do that better how
to the double check and make
sure that the floor control is
there and so I think that's more
of a planning piece as you say
and so I know there's there's
been a lot of discussions and
how do we look at that from a
state perspective to ensure that
where making sure that that
flapper mention is there at
least from the planning side of
it so that we can prepare.
And then mister chairman if I
might just appreciate a
personalist comments about our
regional finance team those are
our lenders and they've been
going out into the countries
they started in some of the more
rural counties and they have
full day meetings they
coordinate through the cars and
they have full day meetings and
they talk about talk to
businesses to water should
districts to local governments
about their potential their
needs and then that's fed back
both in terms of what where do
we need additional funding and
programming as well as just
making those connections and
bringing him through to
application processes that exist
already so appreciate it's been
a big effort we spent three
years you know.
Tele communities or teletalking
with our
virtually with our clients and
to see them in person and the
whole team there's seven or
eight people that show up so
that there's enough resources to
talk with everyone that has an
interest so I appreciate your
feedback that that's working
Analyse up until the time that
they submit their application
the way it just helps us get
them registered on to the online
system so we've you know it's
any of you want to let your
community set up we're still
accepting the ni's.
Yeah.
All of all experience
and accept partial
responsibility for some of those
people coming to the.
To to you and and I want it
again recognize and
congratulatory all your work
animal in in in the average
component and I know.
There's behind the scenes
there's a lot of extra
discussion phone calls and
holding all the stuff that you
guys do.
That is incredibly helpful to
the community so thank you so
much for that work.
And the last thing is after this
mimi is just the timeline that
we're looking at for this cycle
it begin on july seventeen and
it ends with june third of the
war training that the body
training so.
Boot.
Cycles continue.
Thank you so much and the other
questions.
Couldn't hear none will go on to
proposed next meetings.
Thank you mister chair so we're
bringing our september twenty
first again we had to
bring the move of the
application cycle and in doing
that we have to move out the at
the
expectations or the
recommendations that this board
will do so temperature twenty
first the project review
committee is going to be looking
at the waivers for those that
have submitted their
applications again tuesday and
wednesday we are looking at a
possible two day project
presentations not only will this
board look at the presentations
but they will also make those
determinations on the waivers
and that two day we will find
out exactly how many
applications are on september
seventeenth and we could uh move
that accordingly sept october
seventeenth the project of your
committee will meet again and
this is to determine the
legislative authorization
recommendations and october
twenty fourth the board will
meet you get that legislative
authorization recommendation in
preparation of the enemies they
oversight on the second and
third I believe of november.
This determine it gets early
earned earlier each year.
Thank you very much.
Is there any other comments or
questions in general for.
Anyone to learn or market the
premium with the membership.
Bet hearing them thank you all
for attention in the day and we
