And these reports that we are
making steady progress.
On it we are working on and why
twenty one and to the extent
also we're going FY twenty two
we're doing now we're also
seeing and FY twenty three which
is about Santa and the intention
is not so different years and
open right now as far as the
timeline which I know is.
Most concerning absolutely
understand and the board needs
to ensure there funding is
deployed in cycle and then funds
are hello that could be deployed
for other projects I believe we
are on track to complete our FY
twenty one hundred nineteen
thirty is and then our plan is
to roll straight through FY
twenty two twenty three with the
goal of completing on screen for
an online submission the FY
twenty three on it so that we
need to make Senator fifteen.
State on ensuring that is the
big list as ambitious three
hundred and one year I think we
have the right years and we have
the right.
For the city to receive medical
we currently have a team of six
with left wing and to
educational staff Especiales and
cash reconciliation also.
So now I'm that comprise our
whole team team so they're
supporting city staff the need
with reconciliation on
information sharing the repair
line items that are being
requested by our external
auditors are raising them and on
ensuring and we're in the
nineteen in finance to our
processes to make things run
smoothly as we move forward the
support they were receiving.
An outline instruments all and
it is really helping us for it
is that we as we can we also
have an exceptional team from
car racing and that is not the
answer on it and I'm sure many
of you probably were racing and
they were with the line and
training.
Entities here in New Mexico they
understand our environment
interest in your state laws and
regulations relating to on a and
they bring a wealth of knowledge
and experience they also have
experience with entities that.
On the hind as we have in the
city and so they know how to
help us on and and more working
on the City of articles and you
are scheduled.
So as far as you know and for
the Senate already been made
there and then a number of
changes in leadership.
Including the finance director
as I mentioned I was hired in
September we are tending to hire
as many accountants and
financial professionals as we
can and we're just kind of the
thought in the everyday working
through whatever issues come on.
Taking one step forward every
day.
We are going to get to the
screen we absolutely need this
finding money for three years.
We currently have two
applications for the single and
Just a couple of folks for the
city that are here in room with
a left is of our public
utilities director John we and
then to the right.
We have the managers and players
and water department during
their heroes
And so Senator here answer any
questions that you have on the
project specifically
That to projects that are before
you and in those names are
related to improvements to the
canyon road water treatment
facility and then return to the
main point to return back to
France.
Back
on it I want to give you a
little bit more information
about specifically where we're
at as of as of right now and
this is updated as of yesterday
so I apologize that I don't have
written materials but we wanted
to be able to give you as much
up to date information that
about where we're at with with
me on it we are currently doing.
Yes so what that means is that
the auditors have serving the
population and transactions and
their auditing they're selecting
samples from that population
we're providing documentation
and interviewing and asking
questions and it's it's an
iterative process that goes back
and forth they look at the
documents down questions we
answer those find more
information on that critical
component of the city's audit is
the federal single audit which
looks and that the federal
awards that the city has
received most directly from the
federal government and then also
has passed through funding in
the state and so I think we're
we're very close to rounding up
that work for FY twenty one
which is that's a big.
We have seen or heard raising
them and has an on site for part
of the middle initial field work
schedules and gaming we hope to
me and money control review in
early June and then you know as
I mentioned stay on track to
that submission dated June
thirtieth to be on stay on here
and we hope that it'll be
earlier than that that is the
timeline that we're working and
we.
With that Mr chair and members
of the board and have needed any
questions or difference my
colleagues.
Thank you very much for your
patience.
The questions for the.
Mr chair.
We we live in a small community
and this presentation was given
year ago there's a lot of
concern.
Today that is not the case.
That are you there does make a
difference.
That you were hired.
It tracks the right we knew we
needed somebody which I.
I think that.
The team together.
So we're optimistic.
You know the funding but I do
think there's.
Play place this is the place to
get FY twenty one the first.
I hope there's a way we can make
sure there's a compromise
getting you what you need also
having you.
Mr chair Senator marijuana.
Press money off you the manager.
We should not of your making.
Really.
Getting.
Where is.
We're doing.
Very little that we're actually.
We're giving.
Orders so.
The stories made.
Two days
or so.
I do have one question
Sir for the large projects good
thirteen point five million on
your water treatment plant
improvements and then a forty
million dollar price tag for the
sandwich from a return pipeline
and I know both of these are
critical for your for your
future.
The water resource planning
needs of the question I have
given the the the request is.
Million a sixty forty split for
the the water treatment plant
and then another of three and a
half million on a similar sixty
forty split.
Give me a sense if if you if
you're able about how it fits
into your overall financial
planning approaches federal loan
application or federal grant
applications that require
cultures and various pieces like
that just so I personally know
that the you know I wear two
hats
the there's the water trust
board with the specific rules
and NFI with my state engineer
at on can also help in other
ways to fill any funding gaps as
we look forward to the next
session or other funny pieces
that might be available for us
to consider I certainly could
you.
You know that degree of
information if you can share.
Mr chair members of the board
I'm just on the water division
director and city Santa Fe
thanks for the question to put
it in context the the large
sandwich over terms of project
to with the forty forty three
million dollar price tag the way
we feel will probably funded we
have received a grant from the
federal government for up to
twenty five percent.
Match on that
And we we used in our financial
projections we do anticipate
probably taking a bond for for
that project but we also feel
that that project may represent
a new revenue stream so the
ideas maybe take a bond and then
let developers and actually have
a service that I'm on so that's
sort of the the long term plan
for that particular project on
the treatment plan we don't have
other funding
Requests outstanding at the
moment but certainly we're
always looking for for
possibilities there and I would
be remiss to not mention that we
have to a very large dam
infrastructure rehabilitation
projects as well and one of
those is eighteen to twenty
million dollar price tag for
Nichols which we're in the
process right now the on the
that were the R. F. P. E. closed
and we have several candidates
that were not but the damn
yesterday's or for a pre bid
meeting so working in the
process there and we do have one
point five million dollars in
outstanding of hopefully the
funding that we can more through
this water transport for that
project as well and then
following on that there's a
similar project New Mexico or
which is the the next
resurrection which is also gonna
have a twenty five twenty
million dollar price tag for
very similar rehabilitation so
we have these four incredibly
for our for our status because
of the large projects all sort
of hitting the books the same
time and we're doing we're
looking for any funding we can
find but aside from the federal
funding that we have secured
from their terms of project and
this water transport potential
funding those are the the the
most likely funding options are
for those projects we have at
the moment but not to say that
we of course are open to
anything else that we can.
Thank you Mr.
That just made it to the there
was a discussion in the.
The last session about setting
up a
The reserve fund for for for Dan
rehabilitation
Should see corrections that
didn't quite make it through but
I know there's a lot of interest
rate forward of flea that will
resurface in during the interim
the major components of requests
for the legislative session as
well as other components within
the the the the planning process
we suspect that they'll be
another fairly large revenue
stream for the state that
they'll be looking at of the
capitol items to try to try to
address so we'll work with you
on that as well.
The other questions.
Question.
The two projects one on higher
priority than the other.
the they're both sort of under
way already so we're gonna one
way or another find a way to get
them done and so I guess within
our time frame the canyon road
project likely will be completed
sooner because we're still
working through permitting on
the sandwich appropriations of
project so the funding actually
that we requested from the board
for that project is for
engineering design and we are
under way.
But.
I guess if I could only have one
or the other of the projects it
would be the San Juan short term
or project it's it's sort of.
Each of the future resiliency of
our water system we feel.
but certainly.
improving the treatment
processes and Cheney wrote will
be very important for us and
actually this year is a good
example of it right for the for
the last month or so six weeks
even though there's been quite a
large amount of flow to treat
we've been struggling with
turbidity
at that treatment plant that is
used to pretty pristine water
and it's been not quite
Christine and and the the the
plant processes have struggled
and as a result we haven't been
able to treat as much water as
we would like to and to get this
right this new process the
flocculation sedimentation
project that we're working on
now.
Should
Rectify that so that we have
better ability to treat water
and renewable wind of a wider.
Quality.
Mr chair which is as follows are
you seeking funding from any
other sources like the drinking
water state revolving loan fund
which has.
Right like components ended as a
result of the federal.
Monday.
I would like to know more about
that I think mostly we have I
have been looking at grants and
not loans and at the moment
and so if there are some grant
opportunities we would be
interested in pursuing those
thank you.
Shared.
Thank you for that question the
city did receive director of
funds and we are planning to
Senator Ingle.
Anyone on the.
The
Virtual thank.
Thank you so much.
Your presentation.
The two seven twenty twenty
three water project fund awards.
Federation and approval of
awards Angela.
Thank you Mr chairman so we
bring before you after since
August the twenty twenty three
able to begin.
the.
This is our last
fully staffed in awarding these
these projects so this year we
have a twenty five point two
million available for funding so
if you look at the mammal it
shows that the nine percent of
the severance tax we have that
Water transmitted Division of
four million minus the ten
percent for the education for
the opposite state engineer and
the.
Arts so right now that brings to
the total one hundred twenty
five million one hundred twenty
five two hundred one point
twenty five million.
There.
In this is is this for we
started this program we made
some changes the board this
board made some changes to the
project management policies and
this was in an effort to
basically award projects that
are more fiscal this fiscally
sustainable and also providing
opportunities for the applicants
to better prepare to apply for
construction many projects in
the future cycles so one notable
change is that the policies and
allowed a hundred percent
requests for design only
projects the and if those were
for an application specifically
serving fewer than five hundred
connections this year we had ten
applications that fit that
criteria the second change is to
provide certain small system in
those that have you within five
hundred connections and have
implemented their asset
management plans and have multi
phase projects that have been
funded by the water transport to
undertake a loan only as part of
the first phase which allows
them to be eligible for an
increase in rent on their next
phase overall this funding cycle
has sixteen applicants that
qualify for that hundred percent
grant and that's based on the
current and then you adopted a
revised policies.
It is similar to previous years
the two thousand thirteen or two
twenty twenty three application
cycles is a two part application
cycle we start in the fall with
the project application and
that's where it's used to
prioritize the we do the vetting
the scoring the rating and
ranking on on the project and
then the second base is the
reading this application that
happening in January December
January and that is to determine
compliance with relevant laws
specifically policy compliance
regulatory compliance the needle
our executive order compliance
and it's also to determine the
appropriate school for these
awards the project application
when we had it we have fifty
nine applications and that will
proposed all fifty nine
applications we're on the
legislative authorization listed
this morning approved in
November House Bill five twenty
I was on was that built it
contain all these legislative
authorization to and it was
signed by the governor on March
thirtieth the rating this
application all the applications
are the options to work on that
legislative authorization list
we're fighting to submit their
reading this application and
again that application gauged or
for regulatory or what was
review for regulatory policy the
executive board lines so fifty
seven legislatively authorized
applications actually submitted
their reading is dedication we
had shipped how we need to miss
in overtime of soil water
conservation district they did
not submit their application and
we had the young they did submit
it but then removed their
applications so before you that
gives us the fifty six
applications that we're looking.
Part of the timeline to the
application timeline is that we
have deadlines to meet
compliance in this instance
March twenty second was the
deadline to committee to to meet
that compliance at the time all
of the applications submitted
their applications are ready
seven cations were notified of
any policy regulatory executive
order compliance and they were
given the opportunity to either
submit a waiver by that deadline
need that compliance by that
deadline for remove their
applications so if you guys can
call at last the board meeting
we have those entities that have
policy compliance that the
project continuation and we have
a couple that had regulatory
compliance are met one was for
the executive order in one less
for office in the state
engineer.
So using that information
supplied to us after reading
this application we notified
that applicants who do not meet
that executive order compliance
and additional water transport
certify the funding at the time
you want to transport will
certify the funding at the next
item on the agenda the we're
we're talking about the
application requested that the
water interest of we the timing
of the compliance requirements
because it's audits could not be
submitted until after the water
trust board maintenance funding
decisions the water transport
deferred action on the waiver
request until it's meeting now
plant were estimated to have a
meeting in early August the
different deferral does not
guarantee the waiver will be
granted nor does it guarantee
funds will be available in the
event that the compliance is
made.
The following the consideration
of the waivers.
Staff discovered that we have
for additional entities that has
implied inaccurate information
within their applications the
rating is to allocations and
they were also not complying
with the executive order so
again consistent with the
executive order these important
application applications cannot
be certified as part of the FY
twenty twenty three funding
staff recommends that funding
decisions being postponed on
these applications as well until
that summer beating that this
meeting right now this brings
the total of.
What we consider different
applications to nine and if you
look on your on mental.
Page twenty this is a list of
the applications that we cannot
survive because the economy the
state with the exception of LA
water is alliance which does not
mean the offices state engineer
right regulatory.
Planning.
So with that staff using the
criteria set forth by the
policies you can buy a valuation
the meeting this applications
for the twenty twenty three
authorization list we proposed
forty seven applications be
recommended for funding the
recommended list provides
funding to the project by
project type in the order in
which they were prioritized in
the fall and is based on
available funding policy targets
and compliance requirements.
All forty seven applications are
being recommended for at least a
requested amount this has been
brought before the project in
the committee and the committee
has reviewed the list of hers
with status recommendations so
and is it with that Mr chair I
can stand for any questions on
the process.
Forward with the recommendation
staff recommendations.
Any questions for me.
Mr Chairman I don't know that I
have a question but I just think
I want to make sure from a
bigger picture that I understand
exactly that everyone
understands exactly what we're
talking about at our last board
meeting there were three
entities that we had identified
a deferral to a leader which to
introduce correct sorry three
projects to introduce we
identified a deferral to a later
date because they're reading
this applications had indicated
at least for the City of Santa
Fe that they would not be
compliant with the executive
order they will not have
submitted all of their audits in
order to be certified so we knew
that that after the board
meeting.
We reviewed we start our own
certifications at the finance
authority which we're required
to do and we found that there
was inaccurate information
supplied on the reading this
applications for these other for
entities and so we now have what
looked to be on the bottom of
page.
Twenty.
Many more.
When you try to get so there now
a total of nine three of which
we knew about six are now new to
this sort of holding pen that we
had made a decision on so what
we're recommending is that we
don't take action on those nine
but that we fully allocated to
the remaining projects because
funding is available at this
time as of their full requests
are not recommending more than
they had requested it's the full
request of their application so
as I do my little tally here
we're going to have about a
little bit two point one six
five million remaining.
Four to hold the pens right
because we started with twenty
five point two million and we're
recommending your recommending
the staff is one twenty three.
The hundred twenty three million
thirty four thousand seven
eighty five so that that
difference the delta there's
about a little over two million
two point one million so the
line projects total more than
the two million dollars that are
being made available so just to
make sure we're on the same page
that in making these the putting
aside nine projects which
frankly we have to do because we
