This is the when you guys are.
I don't.
This.
Hoping to see.
See her yet Mr.
I think we're gonna go toward.
Rating.
Thanks.
Are you.
For.
You're the high chair.
Right.
Eight.
Morning confirming that we.
Have a quorum.
We do have a quorum madam chair
this okay the restaurant
excellent.
We have a quorum and the echoes
on.
So that we're officially calling
the meeting to order at nine AM
The New Mexico finance authority
for.
So the first thing this morning
is approval of the agenda do I
hear a motion to approve the
agenda.
Some of them to madam chair
which is that we have one item
that we need to pull and that
would be.
I apologize it is on our regular
agenda number eight point one
four Taos regional landfill for.
They need to revise the request
is not able to go for this
month.
For regular dental have one
item.
Thank you for a motion to
approve the agenda isn't it
Madam.
Question banks made
by members also is there a
second thank you madam chair
second by member.
Persons.
Recording in progress.
This is been made and seconded
any discussion.
If not those those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed same sign.
of four minutes from the may
twenty the board meeting.
Trust everyone's had a chance to
review those minutes sure would
approve motions maintenance
their second.
Thanks to
may I number Suazo motion
second.
Is there any discussion.
If not all those in favor say
aye.
All post mission can.
Next on the agenda a report from
C..
Russell thank you madam chair
thank you members nice to see
you all this morning again I'm
not quite used to seeing
everyone in person but if it
continues to be a lovely
surprise first what I wanted to
do was introduce a couple of
staff members we as I mentioned
last month want to introduce you
to the the the full individuals
not just the names behind the
zoom screens of that operate the
authority last month we met
folks from a programs department
at our client services
department this month I wanted
to introduce you to our
administrative team are
administrative support team
which is led by Torrez see the
Baca Dora.
I know you heard of C. were
hiding.
Torrez just hit your twenty
ninth anniversary of the
beginning of this month which is
our chief administrative officer
and has been able to.
Meeting so many different areas
of the agency she's right next
to her is Nicole McCollum who
was our human resources director
Nicole joined us in February and
has been knocking out of the
park bringing really good
employees to the agency for us
so we've been really lucky to
have her on board
we also have an extra for Joe
Maldonado who's one of our
senior administrative assistants
Joe you probably have talked to
if you call the front areas of
front desk area of you heard his
from the voice he was really
helpful during our recovery
efforts when we were flooded
with phone calls and people
really needing help and he was
an empathetic and responsible
voice on the other side so we
appreciate him and Deborah
Deborah Larranaga who is a
senior administrative assistant
and a benefits administrator and
she's been with us for almost a
year.
If you're in September of state
close and then mark Dalton who
is our office manager mark's
been with us for over fifteen
years fifteen years and has
started at the front desk and
worked his way up to office
manager and he's been really
helpful with our new office
building a keeping that under
control so that's our support
team I also wanted to make
introduce particularly some of
the folks behind the scenes no
offense stand up our legal
department you'll have seen them
quite often our chief legal
officer Susan Pittard is back
there she is our associate
counsel and see Charlotte who
likes to hide lot of good.
Sure that is a
senior
What we call a compliance and.
In compliance it's a very large
long title get mentioned we've
title issues to.
And Chris out of it yes
and Krishan address who is our
legal system so that some of the
folks you see behind the that
you don't see that sit behind
the scenes doing a lot of the
work of the agency getting us to
where we are today sure Reese my
goodness Services are boarded
administrative.
Sorry you see her a lot in name
title so apologize you were out
of sight not out of mind and
obviously next to her is County
I guess who has been with us for
now almost twenty.
Two years twenty one years
twenty two.
In yes twenty two years so has
been keeping this board going
for very long time anyway I
wanted to make sure you've got a
chance to meet all of them and
understand what it is they do
for us
it is not much pleasure to to
finance that the doctor please
McDaniel had to resign from the
board he has stepped away from
his job as vice president for
administration and finance and
so is unable to continue on this
point he filled that position of
financial chief financial
officer of a higher ed
institutions so we are looking
for someone who fits that niche
to
to be appointed so we were
talking with the governor's
office now
you know of a little
Just seventy was a really good
member of a particular the audit
committee which has become our
hardest Committee the most
rigorous committee you see the
greatest variety of things there
so we'll be looking for someone
to help us
in that position.
we have a few of of realignments
coming as a result of some new
priorities for twenty twenty
four this hoping Adam was going
to be on
But.
One of the positive things that
happened as a as a result of the
recovery programs was a bunch of
new technology that we need to
to integrate in order to handle
high volume hi impact hi
visibility programs and that
that ultimately the tool that we
adopted particularly for the
leader program was a sales force
backed program and sales force
has become the monster in
business technology and as we
have worked to maximize the use
of enable and we're really you
know it's been instrumental in
helping us complete our
financial statements their areas
of that but it just doesn't do
quite as well that for instance
sales force does particularly in
the areas of client relationship
management so we are looking to
see the ways in which we can
fully utilize in able for what
it does best and to utilize
salesforce for what it does best
what we had hoped to do was to
do OR SO peas find our gaps fill
those gaps complete our
requirements and then switch
over to a new program the
reality is that that's a three
to four year process that
ultimately technology will have
left us a couple of times in
that effort so we really aren't
in a position to plan for
technology changes as fast as
they're occurring so what we
what we've gone to is we created
in November and operations are
innovations and operations unit
under Adam we want to give him
more band with to get that done
because in fact we have such a
short period of time in which to
really fully utilize our our
systems will continue to be
hobbling along with inefficient
technology until we're able to
really get most of our
operations front and operations
into in able I'm sorry sales
force.
So he's leading a team of four
that's going to work to make
sure that our that's what's
going into enable has a
mechanisms for ensuring that
it's complete and accurate and
has you know the the process is
to
Make sure there are no errors
and then he's going to be
working to back fill with.
Sales force those areas where it
doesn't.
So we've now moving come July
one hour to program departments
that's the communicative
development department and our
programs are water programs
group under John Brooks yield
basically handle anything that
transaction oriented anything
that deals with a client or
project will fall under John
Adams will continue to work on
the operational framework that
that these programs operate
under and will be responsible
for sort of the data and
compliance that comes out of
that so we're kind of splitting
that regardless of whether those
folks for
we're reporting to Adam or
reporting to John there was
going to need to be so much deep
collaboration this gives Adam
more time to work on the
technology side and gives John
the opportunity to really insure
that our client experience from
beginning to end is handled
professionally so that's the way
we've broken that up and we're
really excited this is a huge
effort for us and will allow us
to I think become a much more
efficient technology driven
organization which is a far cry
from where we were five years
ago even where we were really
just propped up by excel
spreadsheets a lot of but excel
spreadsheets that's how we
basically did what we did.
I wanted to
and also mentioned that our
technology which is another the
other portion of technology
that's a priority for us this
year is the
electronic records and
management project as technology
group so that our are our
projects we have I think what we
call and introduce filing about
six different departments it's
the same entity but because they
hit different departments as
they come in from an application
through to a draw we have
different information is being
collected by our percent health
and so they created a system
from which they can work
unfortunately that means we
don't always know exactly where
the final piece of information
is and if you have one entities
we shouldn't have a six into the
files so that will also work
with probably sales force in the
most likely scenario but we need
to get bring in our consultant
in to help us with that and to
figure out really what is a
record how long do we have to
keep it where do we keep it how
do we
how do we get rid of it at the
point at which it's done so that
project is moving over to Dora
our records custodian Connie
Makis who's amazing with records
will also be working then
directly with Torrez that'll all
come in
disk starting in July I do have
another portion of my report on
my trip last week with Ryan to
DC to the White House but I see
in the back of former chair
Katherine Miller who
I don't want to say you Sliq out
of town but there was she
resigned and then disappeared to
Mexico for can't I know it's.
I saw her in a coffee shop three
weeks ago like that can be.
No that can't be captured so
tended relax of wanted to could
you come up so we could say
thank you.
Our highest.
Mexico budget.
Right we came back for the
summer.
It's hot there.
That makes sense we were there
for four months five months.
We.
That's when you so get a ten.
We got you something that did
not get it over to you in time
to this out and I wanted to from
all staff really thank you for
all you did for us during the of
particularly during the COVID
you supported number of efforts
that we were.
I think.
grateful to be able to take on
behalf of the state of that
doesn't happen without the
leadership of our chair and we
really wanted to make sure that
we were able to thank you for
that and for all you did during
those years in which you are are
chair our leader thank.
Actually I think it's.
If thank you very much that is
really nice if you Marquita and
and all the staff I really
enjoyed being at the chair of
this organization is in part of
it I had been part of it before
and it was really nice to be
honored to be the chair and to
to work with all of you
especially to the pandemic
began as well did you have some
challenges a lot of programs the
state and again they're really
relied on NMFA to get that money
out the door and help businesses
and and and help all the local
communities throughout the state
during the pandemic and you just
did it outstanding job an
outstanding job I was so proud
to be representing NMFA and and
as the chair for everything that
you.
Staff.
As an organ.
the hardest thing it was not
hard for me to.
Step out of work the last day
that it was that very hard to
make the decision not to at the
chair the sport anymore I really
really enjoyed it I thank you
great great work and and I just
didn't feel like I could really
Representative the organization
well from another country.
Let alone another state so I
just at and it was great to see
Marquita I was actually thinking
I would run into anybody I think
I saw five people I knew that
morning.
Yes we see fifteen you come to
the meeting and I thought I'd
love to I'd love to see
everybody and and say hi and
thank you again and thanks for
the opportunity to to work with
you at four eighteen Cathy I'm
really happy to see you here.
Kathy and I go way back so
you've got another great board
member and chair at.
Thanks for all that you.
Thank.
Okay so the other thing I just
wanted to mention again of Ryan
and I went to Washington DC last
week it was a last minute trip
we we guess the higher if you
get into Washington a short of a
notice to attend the meeting but
the office of vice president
posted a gathering in
partnership with the department
of treasury and commerce
for the what they call the
initiative on inclusive
entrepreneurship which is
something that kicked off last
year I had assumed that we came
to the table because of our high
levels of rural population and
business owners of color to
start demographics in general
but in fact we were invited to
the table because of the
initiatives we've been
undertaking with both our state
venture capital program and the
SS B. C. I. money they have been
impressed with the the ways in
which we're trying to deliver
that capital with such purpose
to small and economically
disadvantaged individuals and
you know just conceptually being
able to offer a of venture
venture product that doesn't
rely on someone needing to
necessarily sell their interest
in the business in order to grow
and those are the kinds of tools
that we've been establishing we
had a great opportunity to talk
about what we're doing in New
Mexico I didn't think we have as
many people as impressed as they
were but they they really were
quite impressed the nice part
about what this group does is it
tries to use the tools that are
available to the federal level
and couple them with
philanthropic dollars to really
hit the mission so a lot of
public private focuses on for
profit
private entities and this is in
fact nonprofit private entities
that they're trying to seed
enough capital to make it of
work for the.
The private for profit company
so that was it was an
interesting twist we were among
a lot of really
Great leisure and it was it was
of an interesting time we were
able to spend time also with the
The the group that is
responsible for delivering the
SS BCI money and because we'll
be looking to apply to them to
change our focus solely from
venture capital over to mentor
capital and other probably forty
million dollars of other
strategies so that was a good
opportunity to to make our case
in person before we were
required to actually filed that
application they seem highly
supportive given our state
program and how much flexibility
or state program has the S. S.
B. C. I. capital of venture
capital program is pretty
limited so well they want to hit
like our first legislation was
what they want to hit the
targets of an alternative
venture capital program the fact
again it the guard rails of a
very traditional venture capital
programs of the same issues that
we faced with our state program
came up comes up with this
federal program so they
understood entirely what we were
trying to get done and frankly a
little jealous that we have the
tools that we have in our in our
for profit in our the state
program
so the next rate which is one of
the groups that we've been
working with our state venture
capital program is one of the
partners that's helping to
establish.
Policies that help these
entrepreneurs of color and
entrepreneurs from rural areas
All underserved businesses on
main street which they describe
as local businesses serving
customers and other local
businesses
there was another group they're
from founders first capital
partners they are the ones that
are trying to do what they call
revenue based financing of winds
of credit thing so that you can
do business to business business
to government kinds of
activities and then jump start
which is that high growth
venture capital program that we
we were really pleased to be
there and it makes it just that
much happier that we've been
doing the things that we've been
doing a while I was there I also
met with another indie Burke who
seek administrative of our US
and his acting assistant
administrator Steve Pollock we
have been dealing with
increasing of delays in closing
on our grant loan combinations
for water trust board and
colonias in particular but also
drinking water and from time to
time of PPRF.
The R. U. S. program the USDA
program
requires that the USDA give
their consent to any additional
debt taken on by our clients it
whether it's in a subordinate
whether they came in after our
first loan doesn't matter you
need to go get consent right now
we're still dealing with ones
that we ask for consent in
November of last year
and we don't have any sense that
they're making any headway so I
was able to get in and see them
right now those we've seven
loans totaling just three
hundred thirty eight thousand
dollars in total so three point
two five million dollars is
being held up by USDA we have as
we the ones that to approve last
year last month another thirty
one almost thirty two million
dollars of funding that'll have
total loans of three point eight
million and we anticipate that
they will be
The countering the same issues
with USDA we know we're not
alone this is not and NMFA thing
I'm seeing amber cable shaking
her head it's becoming
incredibly difficult so I met
with both Senator will Hans
office and are US and they seem
to think that this is a
communication issue that they're
not supposed to sign off of it
and hopefully we'll see some
progress but we have pledged to
get Senator Wuhan information
about what the state where the
status seeing it's delays so
that we can give a complete
picture and not just you know
the the NMFA's issues because it
is it is slowing up capital
across the state and a
needlessly
so that was of the other thing
that was able to do well I was
there and felt really good about
taking care of that
We had a first oversight meeting
on may thirty first it mentioned
before that we are being chaired
for the first time by
Representative joined Garrett
and Michael Padilla who sits are
now vice chair they're going to
hear of the typical things that
they have to hear from NMFA we
are required to report on
virtually every program
independently to them but they
also would like to talk about of
either and if NMFA's
contemplated roller potential
role in public private
partnerships and then also
capital outlay reform I think
every interim committee is going
to be faced with hearing about
capital outlay reform so I don't
know that looks like but I do
know that personally I I have a
difficult time seeing how will
actively participate in public
private partnerships because
it's not really a financing role
but an oversight role in sort of
a monitor of
In a P. three agreements and
that just doesn't seem like a
really particularly good place
for MFA since we are lenders at
our core
but we'll see what they have to
say they will be meeting again
at the end of July in
Albuquerque and then in
September October and November
incentive to reset Espanola and
Santa Fe respectively so looking
forward to that we had very good
Attendance we we typically don't
see those kinds of attendance
but we had I think twenty four
twenty five people out of thirty
two so for an inter Committee
that's that's huge
You'll see today on the agenda
some operate of the opportunity
enterprise of loan policies
we've done the rules the
opportunity enterprise system
it's rules and policies in the
application for that is now open
we opened it last week with a
soft opening so that we could
train the economic development
department on how the program
operates and how the application
works we'll do a larger portion
of that we've had a little bit
of experience they've been
people coming in and
registering and and starting
those applications they're all
due at the end of July so we
have plenty of time for folks to
get their application and once
the formal announcement is made
we're also providing for notice
of intent.
In that notice of intent will
allow for us to track those
projects that are not yet ready
to apply
so we can know how much money
they need where there project
will be located
you know the kinds of things to
hoping to achieve with the
projects we get it as a pipeline
generally speaking so that we
can then
really time out or subsequent
application faces the first
application be open for
seventeen point five million
dollars which is twenty five
percent we didn't want it all
going on at once because we
wanted other community the
communities that didn't really
know about this program to you
have an opportunity to develop
their project an application it
is a rigorous application of
without a doubt so that'll
opened the opportunity
enterprises board looked at the
application and really liked
what they saw so I was excited
that we were able to get that
done make thanks to Adam who
really and a big team and NMFA
but he was the driving force
behind that and then lastly are
building update we had hoped by
this month to be able to provide
you with what are the
substantial final costs as we've
been talking about we of our
initial preliminary costs are
over what we had estimated back
in November when we were making
the decision as to whether or
not to close on this on the
building
It was is that they were that
the subcontractors were looking
at
bidding their pets were based on
like fifty percent designs and
we really will get final designs
done until the end of this month
so we're expecting new bits to
come in there was some delays in
and completing them because of
you've source reports and things
like that so some technical
things were slowing up our our
design process but we still
expected to all get done by the.
End of June first week of July
so we should have for you next
month a final set a bit so that
you can
take a final review of it and
that give us the approval to go
forward so that's one month away
and
I think Senator if you make go
over into the building is now
vacant so we no longer have our
tenants there and
Will be leaving from here to go
over just take a look at it and
see if anyone wants to get a
before and after
That that is that's that's more
important certainly happy to
answer any questions.
A request.
It's not next on the agenda is
approval of the.
NMFA opportunity enterprise
revolving fund program six good
morning madam chair can you hear
me OK okay great it's great to
be with you this morning a brief
update on the back of what
Marquita provided on the program
you got the email from Adam at
launch just over a week ago on
the fourteenth Brenda buff and
Alecia are working currently
working with the clients on
potential applications missions
to the we are B. which would
then be reviewed by the we are
B. project review committee I'm
sorry I was a.
Marquita agency from me to tears
earlier with cat The
presentation of the guests to
Katherine Miller so I'm a little
bit.
We want to.
and that windfall B. R. managing
director of communications is
actively working with the
economic development department
on an outreach strategy they're
gonna be promoting the program
through their regional wraps so
these policies before you today
for approval Representative last
month in the same form in the
same draft we took them than to
the we are be Policy Committee
for their feedback and comments
and also the we are be earlier
this month we received no
comments so there's been no
substantive changes to the draft
before you lost of the review
last month the memo presents a
high level terms loan terms that
are included in the policy and
then also in your your books of
the full text of the draft
policy so I a stand for
questions welcome any any any
any questions.
For those of you searching on
your laptop that's on page
twenty six of the the a high
level overview but.
Consistent with our rules no
loan would exceed seventeen and
a half million we would allow
consistent with this statute we
would allow interest only in
stabilisation period of no more
than three years
the loan by law cannot be
shorter than fifteen years and
can't be longer than thirty
years but they can prepay at any
time so the wanted the law
requires a certain amount of
time so that and the there's not
like a five year home alone or
something but there is no
penalty for prepayment
I think the other big one is the
land of the loan to value ratio
of up to eighty percent we can
take pursuant to our Paul rules
subordinated interest in our
hope would be that we would be
subordinated to commercial bank
rural really want to use this as
leverage to get projects done.
in the loan rate is that sixty
percent of prime so I think
those are the big things that
are in this policy
that would just highlight for
anyone that's listening
Because those are you know
that's really what's going to
drive the application volume and
at what we talked about at the
so we are the meeting was that
we did not think this was going
to be interest rate sensitive
that this isn't the kind of
thing that need to one percent
loan in order for it to have
high impact the fact that we
will do spec buildings which you
know frankly owneroccupied is
what most
supported or enhanced programs
offer particularly at the
federal level you have to be an
owneroccupied facility in order
to get a USDA guarantee or SBA
guarantee so S. S. B. C. I you
have to be owneroccupied so
being in a position to
participate in the non owner
occupied facility in and of
itself makes it very attractive
the loan to value ratio of up to
eighty percent should be enough
of an incentive to have a
project go here versus Phoenix
sort you know San Antonio or
something else that's really
what we're trying to do is to
provide enough subsidy to to to
in our direction a project this
looking at two or three
different markets in particular
so all of that was really what
we thought was going to be a
more salient part of this
program and not interest rate
sensitive so the interest rate
here allows us to capture more
program earning so that we can
pay our bills because that's we
will pay our bills from is the
interest earnings on this it is
a business force after all.
and so that's that's what we
talked about at the we are be
a meeting last week and I just
over two weeks ago and I just
wanted to share that with you
they were quite supportive of
what we proposed
so.
Until we get some more real life
experience behind the projects
that apply we'll be going with
these we anticipate the overview
them again once we've seen the
first round of applications so
that we know whether or not
these are hitting the intended
targets and whether we're
getting the right kinds of
projects and and the we are B.
will be doing a similar thing
with its policy so.
Your question.
Madam about director in the this
is a new of project completely
you to the board how difficult
will it be to affect the public
to change policy as as we get
better we learn you know with
what's going on and obviously
we're going to be perfect and
get those so.
Of the policies are easy for
this board to change because it
just requires the approval of
this board rules for this
program are required to be
approved not only by this point
the fire interim oversight
committee so the rules have
we've been operating under
fairly bare bones rules that
really
mimic a lot of statute and then
maybe put in some of the
guidelines from a policy
perspective that we don't want
to vent on
But for the most part these are
fairly straightforward rule so
the policies are really what
will drive the way in which
business decisions will be made
the way in which they apply
happens through rules but the
way in which business decisions
are made really happened to the
policies so we can take a look
at those and then just muted.
Any other questions for more
numbers.
I just want to say that on a I
saw the three push out through
local chambers of commerce in
the state and the economic
development department about the
opportunity which I think it's
great that we're getting
information out entrepreneurs
and my question of mine would be
of the eight applicant to seen
come in with interest so far do
we see those coming from around
the state.
madam chair if you don't mind on
because I'm not as close to
those applications but my
colleague Brian not to put you
on the spot Brian but you might
have a better it's.
Hello everyone I have not had a
chance to see the.
I saw the the list yesterday so
I haven't really had a chance to
spend a lot of time on it but
yes we've got applications from
around the state there's a few
out of Albuquerque there's one
out of let's crucis.
so forgive me for not being
having the complete list from me
but I think we're gonna have
wide ranging interest for the
program for this first round for
sure.
We definitely expect to see the
we're we're seeing pent up
demand just by nature of the
textile receiving the email to
receiving are on it in that Rio
Grande corridor Los crucis up to
Albuquerque particularly that we
know for sure that developers
have been waiting for this
program and maybe even up to Los
Alamos that's one of the reasons
we wanted to put what we one of
the we are be to put some
limitations on the size of the
first application because we
don't want all of this going to
some pent up demand we do want
to see operative the the funds
going out to the rural
communities and in order to do
that we need to make sure that
we have you know some way to.
measure that make get that out
in a measured manner so that was
that was the hope Brian was when
it came up with the idea to do
the letters of interest as well
the notices of interest for
those that aren't ready we
haven't seen any of those yet
but I expect as we get closer to
the end of July we're going to
see people submitting those and
that will help us as I said
earlier gauge the timing of
subsequent applications but also
go back to the oversight
committee or others and say this
is what we anticipate seeing
just based on the first notice
of intent so I was really
excited to see that idea because
it'll also you know they want to
put more money into it now the
low kind of what the pipeline
looks like is here up till now
we don't have a way to measure
pipeline.
Right thank you thank you for
the response.
Any other questions from board
members.
It's not too I heard emotional
these policies Madam chair.
Second member.
Motions made I remember Sanchez
second phone number for is there
any discussion.
All in favor say aye I.
Since.
Thank you.
Consent agenda.
You go to a public Lente
committee report.
Sorry it's a it's a three minute
report.
Madam chair I think about it but
if you'd like thank you so the
public funding committee met on
June fourteenth we reviewed six
planning grants and for PPRF
projects and we have
Representative we voted to
approve all of them and then
dition we reviewed thirty one
colonias projects and staff
walked us through several in
depth that where borrowers were
below on the recommended
coverage levels and we also
voted to approve all of those
for the full board.
Any questions.
If not we'll move on to those
projects to the consent agenda
thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the board the consent agenda
items seven point one two seven
point six reviewed recommended
by the public landing Committee
seven point one was L. Prieto
sanitation district date price
for water conservation plan and
the qualified for thirty seven
thousand five hundred dollars.
item seven point two is task
County and they apply to our
program for the comprehensive
plan with the leader component
and they qualify for fifty
thousand.
Seven point three is silent
usual domestic water consumers
and sewage works association
they applied for P. R. of
pulmonary engineer report in the
qualify for fifty thousand.
seven item seven point four as
you read the county and they
applied for a comprehensive plan
with the leader component as
well and they qualify for fifty
thousand.
Item seven point five the town
of Clayton apply to our program
for metropolitan redevelopment
Act Plan and they qualify for
fifty thousand.
And the final the committee
planning fund application was
for quite County and they apply
for a comprehensive plan with
the lead component and they
qualify for fifty thousand.
I can answer any questions you
might have in these projects.
Any question.
Continuing on with the consent
agenda then chair members of the
committee good morning
item seven point seven is a loan
request on behalf of the Moines
school district was a pipe I
purchased a finance of an
educational technology note for
district wide projects the loan
amount is two hundred twenty
five thousand of which seventy
five thousand will be tax
exempt.
In one hundred fifty will be at
the disadvantaged taxable rate
applied to be the general
obligation bonds which I voters
to approve item seven point
eight is for the village of
Cimarron for construction of
park improvements in the village
the amount is a hundred thousand
dollars of which they qualify
for disadvantage funding in the
amount of ten thousand the
village will pledge their
distribution of the state should
G. R. T. which because of
coverage of seven point seven
point three nine times coverage.
With that madam chair members of
the board that concludes the a
presentation on the consent
agenda and staff recommends
approval will stand for
questions.
Any questions on these projects.
Not doing here motion on the
consent agenda the motion after
motion is made by so their
second.
Second chance.
Second remember Trujillo.
In a discussion.
Not all those in favor say aye.
All those opposed.
Consent agenda is approved.
One item of the regular agenda.
Good morning madam chair members
of the board today we have this
bill public school district but
before I begin as one welcome
legal this was the the for the
district.
Thank you Sir.
So you'll see what good morning.
So I based on the COVID and
services that are being provided
as well as a mission for the
district we do have three
components tax exempt
disadvantaged and taxable the
total loan amount is two million
dollars will be for a three year
term and the net interest costs
to be three point eight five
percent.
Hi this is an education
technology no the district will
use these funds for items such
as laptops tablets Network you
command an additional items the
strings of the loan include that
the majority Tax Court Paris for
this district R. two point nine
seven percent which is a low
concentration risk as well as
that the education technology no
is less than five years
weaknesses turn on to note the
last I was twenty twenty two it
was on modified there were two
opinions but they were not
mature weaknesses nor
significant efficiencies with
that we stand for any questions
or comments we do recommend
approval.
Questions or comments from the
board.
From our guest.
Thank you very much of the if a
to Miss Vigil school district in
the you we invest of the to
approve this transaction you'll
notice were of the terms for
less than this for three years
of one of the things is
happening the district will be
going to the voters in November
for a forty million dollar bond
obligations on the end of the
ideas that will pay off the it
took notes prior to the four
year period that's authorized by
the voters.
Questions from board members.
Not to hear a motion on this
project.
The motion picture.
This is made by members also is
there second thank you madam
chair second from members bars
and.
Any discussion.
Not all those in favor say aye.
All this posted sign.
But she carries thank thank you
so much have a nice day thank
you.
For consideration hello this
this two pages of agenda items
of a limited to thirty minutes I
believe.
So with no objections from for
our staff can I asked if we say
the voting till the ends on
these projects.
You individually.
It would be a good day.
Good morning board members madam
chair I think before you thirty
one projects that the colonias
Ford approved of four award on
may twenty fourth no these
projects similar to the water
trust board it is an annual
application and with that
application it there are some
reviewing from outside
individuals are outside agencies
so there is a comprehensive
review on their similar to the
water trust board they have been
a rated range and that is and so
by statute the finance authority
makes these grants and loans to
projects recommended by the
colonias board and at this point
we do we have eighty four point
five percent set aside from the
severance tax bonds this year is
that sixty little were sixty
seven point five million
addition to the comprehensive
review on these projects the of
policies up and and the the
vetting of the process also
considers policy regulatory
compliance we want to make sure
that the projects are ready and
the timing is correct to move
these projects forward and they
want to make sure that we have
the evidence of a complete
signing of a full funded project
the projects were recommended
for funding in the order
prioritized by category so you
have water projects be
categorized with water
waste water both in training
among their own group or their
own type the Clooneys policies
requires that each funding
package contained eight loan
component of ten percent with
the remaining coming as a grant
the policies also require a
match component of up to ten
percent some projects that we
bring before you are requesting
an additional loan in lieu of
that required match all of these
loans are structured as
construction loans which allows.
Up to twenty four months for the
projects to be completed prior
to the first principal payment
coming due the establish
processes
or as part of the establish
processes the finest authorities
require applicable what we call
additional ready needs to
precede items in order to secure
the funding keep in mind these
applications were submitted at
the beginning of March so there
may be some updates on that for
the twenty twenty three cycle
applicants are given until
October thirty first to meet
those reading this receipt
requirements.
I of the project of this year's
recommended list do not show
historic capacity I there is a
correction when we brought this
to the public landing Committee
we have four but with there was
a mistake on the spreadsheet so
the village of Tularosa added as
also not meeting that of at
least minimum one times coverage
and is part of the meeting is to
proceed process these five
individuals will be required to
verify that they have increased
revenues such as a rate increase
or perhaps a different pledge
and verify that they have the
budgeted debt payment will be
required as prior to converting
to that construction loan so
they would need that as part of
the rating is to proceed in
order to secure the funding so
again this these thirty one
projects have been brought
before the public landing
Committee.
And the colonies board
recommends the approval of these
thirty one projects listed at
for the identified scopes of
work and funding amount the
grant loan components consist of
ninety percent grant and ten
percent loan and with the
exception of the five applicants
who will take on an additional
the when you lose a match and
they'll come and is eighty
percent grant twenty percent
loan and with that madam chair I
will stand for any questions
regarding the thirty one
projects from the quality
support and madam chair Angela
has provided a cheat sheet on
page one of three of which is
the major spreadsheet that tells
you what the benefiting colonia
is of you can see the grant loan
combinations there so you can
easily spot for instance that
Columbus is looking for
increased loan because they did
not have the match you'll see if
they did not have any specific
requirements for closing for it
for basically flipping the
construction loan over the
permanent loan to you see that
in the second to the of from the
right to that column there and
then ultimately what kind of
match they provided so this is
really helpful sheet in the.
Combines very nicely to pages of
of spreadsheet forty two pages
of agenda items that we have so
I don't know if there's anyone
in particular you wanted to talk
about or if you have any
questions on the process but I
think as Angelus mention this
pretty much follows the same
process we is established for
the water trust board there for
some of the clients of the same
we found that predictability and
consistency is a major predictor
of success and so you know it's
been working with the exception
of the USDA consent it's been
working really very well for the
last and how long have you been
doing this program seven years
eight years since two thousand
fourteen yes fifteen those are
for cycle so.
we we had a lot of
Modifying of their processes
when we took over the water at
the colonias they were didn't
want to conform to what the
water transported did because
colonias are different in fact
they're not different there it's
the same program so that it's
worked this way for several
years and I think we've not had
any problems with our colonias
projects we had one problem in
our water trust for but no
problems in our colonias
infrastructure transaction so
just wanted to get that
additional colors certainly
Angelus ready to answer
questions just look at.
Representative ready.
Thank you any questions from
board.
There are no madam chair there
are no questions that would move
to the thirty one items as the
column projects as percent.
Thank you second.
Member Burke this whole second
second I of motion made by
members losses second by member
for.
Is there any discussion.
No all those in favor say aye.
Those wishing care thank you.
Next on the agenda is an update
from the economic development
committee I don't see economic
development John can you get
that a state I was which is
traveling at the time but John.
Was there.
Practice chair scared me.
The madam chair and board
members the meeting before the
economic development committee
consisted of the portfolio
report the poor for the report
is the overview of all the
private later on programs and
projects within those particular
PPE programs the ticket.
Off the top of my head there was
not any particular project that
we focused on it really was just
overview next month we're we're
pretty as we think about do it
is a more comprehensive review
of that cannabis portion of the
portfolio.
At that date chair.
Madam chair their work is coming
next is going to note that
they've they've had a pretty
easy for a couple of months and
the S. S. B. C. I. money and the
venture capital money coming
through this program this
particular committee's gonna
have a lot more things ahead of
them over the next couple of
months up to the they need the
word they did.
They've had it far too easy.
Any questions.
The committee thank you the.
Finance disclosure Committee
thank you madam chair as per
usual be brief
we fit the meat the last ones
that we did have a quorum
along with our normal of of
order of business we actually
the addition to we recommend
made a recommendation for
proposal or project capital
investment the consultant
that'll be presented to the
board here in just a few minutes
we approved an existing contract
a contract with eastern research
group incorporated for
engineering project and
construction oversight the
services.
We help through the memorandum
of agreement with the New Mexico
environment department
construction programs here for
engineering project and
construction oversight services
and we approve the issuance of
an RFP for document and data
management
this.
Storage inventory category
categorization and retention
schedule consulting heard other
notifications presented by a
concert Opperman and the
gentleman according.
Any questions from members.
You know I think we have next on
the agenda for approval the.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
before you today as a
recommendation to award the
professional service contract
for the investment consultant on
the venture capital fund program
just a bit of background so we
issued an RFP for an investment
consultant in late April the RFP
requests proposals from
institutional investment
consultants with a minimum of
twenty years of experience
supporting on alternative
investment programs and
including venture capital and
private equity expertise and
with minimum assets under
advisement of five hundred
million internally we have
constituted a new new.
The venture capital investment
committee that new committee has
been tasked with internal staff
oversight of on program
implementation including policy
development approval
transactions for recommendation
to the Economic Development
Committee on and support on
monitoring of investment
portfolio transactions the
intention is that this
investment consultant will
support that process that
internal venture capital
investment committee in addition
to the Economic Development
Committee and the NMFA board as
needed
on the scope of services
outlined in the RFP includes
policy development and peer
periodic review of that policy
evaluation of potential
investments including due
diligence support on investment
recommendations and performance
measurement and portfolio
monitoring and reporting.
in terms of the RFP process so
as I mentioned that was issued
in
late April we received two
proposals and those proposals
were scored according to the
evaluation criterion you see
here on page two each category
you to the four categories was
was rated equally
we then also heard the
evaluation committee which was
comprised of five members of
staff could presentations from
both offers in mid may
and here you see the high level
qualifications of the two firms
that submitted offers the first
Makita investment group on they
were and established in nineteen
seventy four a firm with over
forty years of experience
all they do is provide
investment consulting services
and they currently advise
clients on a one point seven
trillion in assets they are in a
C. C. R. I. a registered
investment adviser and they have
offices throughout the US on the
west and east coast and also in
London on the count one hundred
thirty five employees including
fifty fifty six dedicated to
private markets on investment
strategies.
and they serve a broad range of
of clients across the state you
know endowment funds on
foundations and also large
institutional
I said asset owners are the
second offer came from a bureau
capitol there relatively smaller
firm in New R. Fuhrman sept in
twenty fourteen currently with
fourteen employees and based in
Los Angeles on they are also an
SEC registered investment
adviser and currently by just
over five hundred million and
assets and they primarily work
with foundations and public and
private sector clients with I
would characterize them as being
more oriented towards impact
investing where Nikita's more of
an institutional asset manager
also with impact investing
expertise so they work make you
work with clients that may or
may not do impact investing of
the of our works with clients
that only do impact investing.
after the interviews on it the
two offers requested estimate
best and final offers also in
terms and then there was a final
final scoring you can see here
the results of that final
scoring the Kita scored
relatively higher at eighty
eight point four and if you've
are came in at seventy five
point two these results results
were discussed both by the
evaluation committee and also
the VC investment committee
and we have brought forced to
finance and disclosure last week
recommendation to approve the
award two Makita investment
group
and I believe that that
recommendation was approved and
we now stand before you today
I'd be very happy to answer any
questions.
Missions from.
A quick question about the
number of proposals received two
seems like a pretty limited
amount of proposals what does
that look like in terms of the
number of companies that offer
the services.
So in terms of firms that offers
these services it's interest
it's it's interesting you ask
that because as you know our
program is kind of unique so we
came up with a list of over
twenty firms that we distributed
the R. F. P. two and it was a
combination of what I would
characterize as more traditional
but highly experienced an expert
you know institutional
investment consultants on that
grouping oftentimes you know
their involvement in impact
investing may be focused on ESG
public equity on not as deep in
terms of local.
Private and venture type port
programs like for developing
at the same time the the impact
investing consultants
If they don't have a broader
focus or even exposure to just
market rate investment
portfolios they also lack
potentially some of the just
investment expertise due
diligence expertise and best
practice that we're really
looking to to bring to our
program with this type of
support so even that list itself
was a combination of you know
firms and we weren't quite sure
what we would here
You know I would say we were
actually quite thrilled
to hear from particularly
someone like Makita they do have
six clients here in New Mexico
already the work with the S. I
see on their fixed income
portfolio they work with para
um you know fruit a program of
this size currently fifty
million and that's obviously
larger than the thirty five we
had last year
It's a relatively small mandate
for from like that so we were
excited about that to to hear
from them and if you've our
capital is actually done some
work in New Mexico they actually
been working with the EDD on
their assessed BCI allocation
when we waited to I I mean in a
sense even though they're only
two proposals they're two really
good examples of the types of
firms that might respond and
when we the interviews give us
good insight into how they might
you know handle our mandate and
would they be able to fulfill
the responsibilities and that
you know really support staff
supported the committees as we
would like and I think that you
know the recommendation to go
with Makita came out of came
from they have that depth of
experience the tools to get us
the monitoring and the reports
that we want to see and and also
conducting a reference check
with one of on their current
clients who's based in Oregon
and and manages a state backed
VC private equity program in
that state
if you commented that they also
have the kind of flexibility to
look at alternative programs on
date there are looking at
emerging fund managers first
time funds you know funds
investing in women and so that
gave us the comfort that a kind
of very well regarded
investment consultant kind of on
a national level basically could
also do deep work in a you know
here in New Mexico locally so.
I hope that gives it's awful the
context.
Any other questions.
Hearing then is there a motion
for approval of the award
measure would have no problems
recommending the Makita
investment group to receive the
award for the venture capital
investment until.
Russian made by members also is
there a second.
he could second member thank
you.
Is there any discussion on the
motion.
Not all those in favor say aye
all those post same sign motion
carries thank you madam chair.
Thanks member with the audit
committee for.
Okay
with our I noticed
Chair Keith members of the board
Dada Committee convened on June
fourteenth and we did have a
quorum with three agenda items
the first was the review the
full financial statements there
were no major transactions
during the month of April and we
accepted the state math we also
heard Moss Adams is the
conducted the interests of
conference for the FY twenty
twenty three annual audit and
you know as usual staff is
submitted many of the materials
required by the external auditor
and will be finishing up shortly
and.
As usual I would expect we'll
probably get or are audited in
our financial statements
submitted to the state
if not on time or if not early
definitely on time but they've
been early
Every year since I've been here
twenty twenty so.
Congratulations on that staff we
also heard
about the new office building
project and that projects at the
point where cost estimates are
coming in from the contractor
the initial estimates from the
contractor we'd like to see
refined a bit so the next couple
weeks they're gonna be working
with some subcontractors to
hopefully refine their bids and
will be coming forward with you
know hopefully a contract
approval request stuff over the
summer.
That's my report thank thank you
any questions on the report.
If not the next on the agenda is
the adjournment.
We made it through relatively
quickly this morning so next
meeting July twenty seventh nine
o'clock in this room.
Yes Madam this is a great
reinforced by some of them.
Okay fine nice thank you thank
you very much.
