Right nine o'clock
it will call call the word if
you'll be roll call
yes good more porting mr chair.
Present
number slow
member thompson
president.
This.
Yeah.
The.
Present
members
here
member.
President.
The.
The.
Here
member billing sleep.
And member russell here.
You're.
Thank you
as we kick off I want to think
everyone who joined us in person
and unzoom
I I do want to start the medium
or we get to the agenda the
little perspective right this
we're going to have correctly
from wrong around hundred
fifteen million and what a
trustpool awards
that's probably the first time
we've ever been at this level.
If you can remember me
from the beginning
we had so many years of no money
very little money so the fact
that we have what we have today
it's a big deal for a year
we don't have enough to provide
all the requests are total
requested
north of three hundred million.
Quite enough we do want to
recognize that and and
appreciate everyone applying
what that does i'm a broken
record on this as we travel to
state with our members we want
everyone to apply we want to
understand what the need is a
new mexico.
Especially when the state has
this much money we want to be
able to show them the need so we
can ask for general fund to
close the gap like these are
projects on these ar.
And this is the time that the
state has the money.
So if there's any comments for
many of the board members on
what we've seen historically
and.
Well with that do we have any
changes to the agent
mr chair we do have a couple of
changes and they will affect
tomorrow's agenda we and it's
just to add to more
presentations we have the
village of quaestor who's gonna
be presenting after towsky
valley and then we have alderado
area water sanitation district
who will be presenting after
quaestor and those are the only
changes that this time.
So
second or in favor.
I'm to approval of the minutes
any changes to the minutes.
Okay second or in favor
okay under onto waivers.
Thank you mister chair so we
have before you request a
waivers
and this is on the toilet of
course when the twenty twenty
four cycle so the water
transport cycle provides that
projects that are evaluating in
the fall based upon health and
safety factors and those that
are recommended to the
legislature are invited to
complete legislative
authorization or ready to
complete readiness applications
in those would happen in the
late winter early spring and
that will gauge the regulatory
and policy compliance will be
bringing before you today is two
k policy requirements or
items that are are going to be
needed waivers the first is the
primary expenditure target and
then ensures that applicants
expand outstanding projects is
specifically in section two
point one that's recommendation
to the legislator requires that
preliminary expenditure targets
being met at the time of the
project application the in the
twenty twenty four cycle that
target deadline date was
september fifteen that was the
deadline to submit the
applications applicants are
unable to meet that target were
instructed to include a waiver
request within their application
applications not meeting the
preliminary target and not
granted waivers by the sport
will not continue the evaluation
process every entity with
outstanding balances was
notified in july as part of the
notice of intent and the policy
requirement in the deadline date
to meet that requirement in
addition we have requirement of
a preliminary expenditure target
requirements were all applicants
are required to submit a
completed project specific
planning document for that
produce proposed project unless
they are coming to the fight to
the water trustport or planning
money the maximum amount of
funds are interest paid.
To be available in this cycle is
about one hundred and thirty
three point one million
policy applicants may not
receive more than that fifteen
percent of the available funds
so the cap for this year is
twenty million per project the
twenty twenty four cycle we have
one application whose requesting
a waiver where the planning
documents and we have seventeen
waivers coming in for the
preliminary expediture target
the project review committee has
reviewed these request and
concurs with stast
recommendation so if this time
mr chair we will go on with the
waver considerations investors
any questions on the process.
Thank you mister chair and one
of the things that staff looked
out
making these recommendations to
the project of your committee is
we're looking at their older
projects of these applicants and
could be effectively complete a
project within a reasonable time
frame so the first one we have
is our first or the only
planning a project or a planning
way for its sealer mutual
domestic water consumers
association they have one water
storage application in place the
applicant was awarded from the
local government planning fund
in june of this year for
preliminary engineering report
they're this proposed project in
their application the
association is expected to
complete that per by july of
next year though my fee staff
does not recommend approval of
the waiver request we believe
that once the per is complete
the association will be better
prepared for the next bundling
cycle and with that I stand for
any questions.
What's what was the reasoning
for the delay hitting the p or
complete because if it was most
I wanted in twenty twenty it was
just a warden though I think
they were trying to they they
were just awarded in
in june year I believe they have
to complete their parent i'm i'm
familiar with the local
government planning one but I I
just don't think they had enough
time to hire somebody and get a
for people done for their
project so just to be clear so
then they applied for the
intermediate planning plans the
local government planning
for due to the people correctly
managed here I am familiar with
the local government planning
fund rules it requires the the
the entity complete the people
within a year and then it gets
submitted for review and
approval and then closing and
that typically we've seen very
few of any happen in the year
since the pandemic started we're
looking at probably closer to
two years even if they're on the
game just it's it's taken a long
time for these documents to get
completed turned around
correctly and then closed so I I
concur with staff recommendation
this one in so market and what
is the reason for that the delay
is just staffy issues and madame
mister chairman I think it is
for staffing issues at the
consulting engineer the time it
takes to review a per and get
the comments turned around and
then honestly the consulting
engineers they've got a lot of
jobs going on and so it's really
difficult to get those pers done
in a concentrated period of time
it used to be you could get them
done
I don't know ten years ago but
it's we've seen a delay in
getting this completed
market I think.
We want to do the next
the next one mister chair we
have the city of albuquerque
they have a flat prevention
project they are in the rest are
all the preliminary expenditure
target with identified the
percentage that are required in
in this instance is seventy
percent the applicant has two
outstanding twenty twenty two
awards with the total amount and
balance one point two million
zero percent expenditure the
city currently has stepped
working on the demolition in
crap of work on the twenty two
eighty two projects like many
they have supply chain
disruptions and personal
vacancies in that delay these
two projects the city
anticipates project completion
of the filter compared by early
twenty twenty four and the
netherland park by summer of
twenty twenty four in my face
recommends approval of the
waiver request for the city of
albuquerque and I stand for any
questi.
The next one we have is the
album cookie bring your county
what are utility authority they
have three applications to work
for water conservation and one
is for water storage they do
also don't meet that seventy
percent expediture the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
one award with a full balance of
seven point seven million and
they have two twenty twenty two
a wards combined balance of nine
point one but they have a
balance of seven point seven
million in there about fifteen
percent expenditure on the
twenty twenty two awards the
twenty twenty one project if
your car is the totally pipeline
it was awarded for construction
but due to the complexity of not
only the project but of the
different funding sources they
had to go back and redesign the
project and that required in
that delayed the project they
are anticipating the desire to
be completed in reviewed by the
end of this year with a
construction beginning in early
twenty twenty four in project
completion by twenty twenty five
the twenty twenty two water
meter project is moving forward
with an expected completion of
three to twelve months that
they're looking at probably the
middle of the april may of next
year and that again depends on
the supply availability the
second twenty twenty two project
is the arcenic treatment
facility the design is
anticipated to be completed by
the ending of what should be
completed by the idea of
september with construction
beginning in january of next
year in anticipated completion
of late fall of twenty twenty
five so staff does not recommend
approval of the waiver request
we believe that with the amount
of funds it outstanding as well
as project completion
the authority will meet will not
meet the expediture requirement
that happens is part of the
reading this application and
with that is that for any
questions and I do believe we
have a people in the wheel um.
Would you like to hear from them
before we go to questions yeah
hi my name is mart or tease i'm
the chief finance officer for
the albuquerque burner leo
county water utility authority
and i'd like to
put
some more information to the
board on these three projects
the tahagele project
we are working in conjunction
with the naval nation and the to
hostily chapter
the delay in that project are
over the past nine to twelve
months are as follows the high
drawics of this pipeline is very
complex due to the terrain and
elevation changes which require
elevation changes and project
plans specifications the cost
escalation of the pipeline
construction resulted in needing
additional funding beyond the
water trustport award this
involved utilizing an additional
one million dollars from burner
leo county for our performance
as well as the tribal
infrastructure funds to get us
to the estimated required
project amount this funding
package involved additional
coordination in agreements and
the funding eneddies the
regulatory review process
for this project with more
challenging than anticipated due
to the multi just just dictional
nature of the project multiple
energies including naba who
nation epa new mexico
environment dreaking water
bureau the new mexico
environment department
constructions bureau and all
have been actively involved in
the review but the approvals
have taken longer due to the
project spanning both bernilio
county as well as the tahogily
chapter naba who lands the
project team will be bidding the
project in october so it's in a
couple weeks assuming the bags.
And consistent of the engineers
opinion
probable construction costs the
construction and draw town of
the water trust trustport funds
should begin and occurring in
january assuming that the the
remaining regulatory approvals
are received
the second project that was
mentioned was the automated
metering infrastructure project
thus far we've expended seventy
seven percent of the funds we
anticipate funding be fully
expended by the end of this
fiscal year calendar year
december
and then the third project the
volcano cliffs are sneaked
treatment facility there is a
delay in that due to the fact
that designing the large
seventeen mgd arsenic treatment
facility on the existing
reservoir and pump station site
was difficult and time consuming
involving multiple complex
issues
it took us two years to design
this project
right now the design is complete
and last weekend we
issued a rfp for construction
services on september twenty
fourth
with a thirty day time frame
which bids are due at the end of
december
and then full execution of the
construction starts january
twenty twenty four and I stand
for any questions
mister chairman I know that
member thompson has a question
but if I also.
Every can you hear me yes
okay first of all chairman of
members of the board apologies
for not being there in person I
bought
intended to be there but it's
quite a lot
can you hear me
yes
we we can hear you
all right
yeah but it's it's a challenge
to get to santa fe from macimoth
in a time but
i'm joining you virtually so I
apologize for not being during
person they'll disrespect
intended just a quick question
for angela here if
a staff does not recommend
approval of the waiver request
is that just simply mean that
the current application
would not go forward because
they had spent or had admit
expenditure requirements on
their existing grants correct
that is correct that is if the
board concurs with stas
recommendation the applications
that they have
the three applications they've
submitted would stop would not
move forward
yeah this one the challenging
one i'm not sure what the
protocol is chairman in members
of the board of if the board
recalls are last year when the
totally project was awarded I
did
raise a yellow flag and indicate
that he have had given money for
a same project and to me there
were similar in scotland and so
in order this one to tough one
but i'm understanding I just
wanted to make sure I
referenced that the I had raised
the flag on this project early
or so thank you chairman
mr chairman I I would note that
the policies that we established
for these police for these
expenditure targets.
Were to ensure that entities
were
pursuing the projects with a
vigor
we give him twenty four months
from the point at which we close
on a loan grant to spend in
those proceeds and I think that
that many cases that's kind of a
structural and I think
particularly for some of these
projects it's really a
strategical where you factor in
the supply chain disruptions and
some of the labor issues that
have been delaying our ability
to contract these appropriately
staff is doing exactly what
staff should do which is to make
recommendations based on the
facts using the policies they
have in front of them and so I
don't take issue at all with
steps recommendation I do think
perhaps though at this time we
have late team requests in front
of us there are some indication
that perhaps these policies at
this time maybe two rigorous and
I you know I don't think i'm
overstating it by saying if
albuquerque earlier county
utility authority is running
into issues given how well run
they are and how well staff they
are i'm not sure who else is
going to be able to do it so I
would just note that for this
particular issue
I don't think that the
applications proceeding on would
stop the progress of these
projects as if they were a small
entity they have enough man
power and ability to complete
the project so in this
particular instance I think that
our policies might be failing us
a little bit and would
respectfully
suggest that we not concur with
staff's recommendation but that
in fact we grant the waiver
member so I agree this is not
something.
The additional comments we
mister chair and and delicious
so that I am clear so if we look
at the applications for this
round if we look at the albert
her debate on the list that you
provided for us here so the
continent the continuation of
the arsenic treatment facilities
is that fourteen minutes the
continuation of this particular
projector is this something
different it's something
different so the three projects
are the three applications that
they've submitted are
in their own bubble if if I will
on the twenty twenty fourth
we're looking out of these
waivers are older projects this
is the twenty twenty four cycles
who were looking at twenty
twenty two in older projects
that have not been expenditured
so mister turn I don't let me
restate the question because I
think I misled you so so I
understand from the past but
moving forward this twenty
twenty four application that's
on our list here that says
arsenate treatment facilities
this would be the construction
portion of what was the previous
awards is that correct I not
sure I
know that's not correct this is
murder tease again this is a
different site the new
application is for another arch
sneak treatments facility in a
different location so this would
be a new application that we're
putting forth in the twenty
twenty four
requests so mister churn and
july maybe you can answer this
question for me so are you
currently compliant or not
complaint with the environment
to requirements.
We just receive compliance for
the arsenic treatment from new
mexico environment department
that was the challenge that we
were facing is all the
regulatory requirements to get
the project going for a
construction so at this point in
time both projects to hardly and
the volcano cliffs location are
in compliance okay and in one
more question for the new
application which you have on
the list for fourteen million is
that one complaint or not
complaint
so this would be a design and
construction application so this
would be a new facility are
similar to the volcano cliffs
which would we have to go
through the same process but we
were seeking design and
construction for that
application not just
construction.
Confused by what the difference
in.
Sorry
about the cookie flood
prevention we would say.
It doesn't look like either will
fin.
One above it is a little close.
Mr chairs so I think what staff
is looking at in what we
received is the back of
documentation from albert cookie
burn a liel is that these
projects that are outstanding
would not be completed until
twenty twenty five but it looks
like they've moved up their
timeline a little bit so that's
where we are going
then and I guess the only other
thing is I generally agree with
probably giving.
Seemed for the questions that
you want to again make a note
when we get to emotion the item.
The next one will bring before
you is the set of regional
meeting domestic water
association they have a water
storage project in place they
also do not meet their seventy
five seventy percent on their
mary expenditure target the
applicant has an outstanding
this is a twenty twenty award of
two point three million with a
balance of one point nine
they're about sixteen percent
expanded the twenty twenty
project would have been
completed and would have
actually improved completed the
improvements to this system due
to the increased cars the
association engineer broke out
the project into four phases to
be able to construct usable
phases within the construction
budget and that's with the
twenty twenty first the base
beer fees one was aboarded in
august within two completion of
the project by early february of
next year staff recommends
approval of this waver requires
it and I stand for an.
The next week will be you is
crange pinto solid water
conservation district they have
two water shared projects or
applications in place they also
don't need the seventy percent
preliminary expenditure target
the applicant has two
outstanding twenty twenty one
awards with a balance of seven
hundred and ninety thousand
about thirty four percent
completed
or expenditure excuse me the
district has contractors working
on both the projects and they
entered completion by november
twenty twenty three which is the
expiration deadline for these
project staff are for the
staff recommends approval of
this way to request it and I
stand for any questions.
The next week bring his eastern
new mexico water utility
authority they have a water
storage project they have the
preliminary target as thirty
five percent because this is a
state sponsored project the
applicant has a twenty twenty
two award of fourteen point five
million with the full balance
remaining the project is jointly
supported by federal funds the
project was delayed because
there is an increased mandatory
federal requirements that they
had not anticipated the project
has been deemed urgent by the
office of the state engineer
that this time staff recommends
approval of the waiver request
for eastern new mexico and I
stand for any questions
question.
The next time we have as el
retailer regional water waste
water association they have a
water storage project they do
they do not meet the seventy
percent preliminary target the
applicant has a twenty twenty
one award of one point two
million with a current balance
of a little over nine hundred
and ninety seven thousand
they're about twenty one percent
expenditure project was delayed
due to the difficulty securing a
construction contractor they
have received a bids the
contract has been awarded and
the anticipate completion by
january of next year staff
recommends approval of the
waiver request and I stand for
any questions.
The next and we have the city of
gallop they have a water storage
project they have a preliminary
expensive target of seventy
percent the applicant has an
outstanding twenty twenty one
award of seven point seven
million with a current balance
of seven point two a portion of
this twenty twenty one award is
part of the nab will galip water
supply project the other fortune
is for my wells
were the city
erin if you could thank you
sorry
what a supply was for the city
the city was forced to drill
more water while to provide
watch to the regional system
which delayed the project the
project is moving forward within
it is patient project completion
of may of next year staff
recommends approval of this
waver request and I stand for
any questions.
The next we have is on a county
they have a water storage
project as well they do not meet
the seventy percent explanatory
expediture target the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
two or project award of three
point two million with the
remaining the full meaning
balance the twenty twenty award
was delayed from closing it did
not close until february wary of
this year in that was due to
additional environmental and
cultural cultural resource
permits that were required from
mexico department of
transportation the issues have
since been resolved as of august
the project is moving forward
with expectation of funding draw
downs within the forty six
months staff recommends approval
of this waver and I stand for
any questions.
You give me a little bit more
specifics what specific project
this is in what area luna county
this is I apologize I don't have
the
or mr chernagella he's sitting
in the audience to speak and
tell me which specific project
that is for luna county
so you don't have to look like
please you could just tell me
i'm i'm just trying to remember
which it was because i'm not
remembering it this week so the
morning members of the board
dated daily
we have two products that are
already funded
for the twenty twenty two
projects around walk out yeah
area with readers and trying to
draw for for control essential
stated that was just a work that
worried those in february and
we're going right to proceed
this time.
We have.
Thank you.
The next when we have mister
chair is the middle real grand
conservative district we have
they have a water storage
project with the ease seventy
percent primary to a narry
expenditure target the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
two award of seven point one
with remaining balance of little
or six point six million so
they're about seven percent
expanded due to the irrigation
season which is from november
two february the project was
unable to start until march of
this year the design is complete
the project has been awarded to
construction to a conservation
contractor in the anticipate
substantial completion by next
year by march of next year staff
recommends approval of this
waiver and I stand for any
questions.
The next we have is pinya
blacker water ins sanitation
district they have a water
storage project also not meeting
the seventy percent expenditure
target the applicant has an
outstanding twenty twenty one
award it's a hundred and sixty
five thousand with a crime
balance of a hundred and sixty
two thousand it's about two
percent expenditure due to staff
turnover the design contract was
not executed until twenty twenty
three it is anticipated that the
final design will be completed
by february of twenty twenty
four this project is for a
design only so staff recommends
approval of the swabor request
and I sound for any question.
The next one we have is
realistic to domestic water
consumers association on their
water storage application they
don't need the seventy percent
preliminary target the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
one award a little of a million
dollars with a current balance a
little bit more than nine
hundred and seventy eight
thousand at about two percent
expenditure the project was
delayed due to securing
easements and lead times
associated with construction
materials the project is
anticipated to be completed by
january of twenty twenty four
staff recommends approval of
this way and I sent for any
questions.
The next one we have is the city
of sanity they have three
projects two or one or
conservation and one is a water
storage or excuse me to have
three applications they don't
need the expenditure target of
seventy percent the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
two project to work one point
five million with the full
balance remaining due to the
delay in submitting their fy
twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty two the city is unable to
see through the funding on the
twenty twenty two award staff
does not recommend approval of
the waiver the fy twenty twenty
one award was completed and
released by the office of the
state auditor the city and his
piece the middle of their twenty
twenty two added by december of
this year be early december and
with that I sent step does not
recommend a rubble in I staffed
questions into addictive here
from santa fe like they'd li.
Mr chair members of the board
and I think through your time my
name is jesse roche i'm the
director of city center for
water and I also have here with
me and we oaster who is the
finance director for the the
finance department of the city
and we would like to withdraw
the waiver request for the one
point five million and also
withdraw any any claim to that
funding and turn it over to the
general poor so that we can move
forward with our twenty twenty
four.
Mister chairman just to make
sure I understand that twenty
twenty two funding which has not
been able to close because you
haven't pretty seared it that
project you'll continue just
with other funds how will that
project get completed that
project has begun in is under
way and we will continue to work
on it with our own phones and we
have an application for the
twenty twenty four funding cycle
to help us with that same
project okay so if you withdraw
intelligence to make sure i'm
clear if they withdraw that
funding if they no longer they
turn back the money does that
eliminate the need for this
waiver and they would therefore
meet the policy target and be
able to apply without moving
that is correct so if they
remove the twenty twenty two
award as in you turning it then
they they don't have any
outstanding balances okay and
angela just to make sure i'm
clear with those dollars the one
way five million dollars would
be then use those dollars to
cover cost over runs from
projects that we're seeing from
twenty twenty two
I would probably recommend that
to the board at the next meeting
if you will
make recommendation
thank you appreciate the
clarity.
The next when we have as the
southern sound of all county erm
flood control authority they
have a flood prevention project
they do not meet the seventy
percent implementary target the
application has an outstanding
twenty twenty one award of eight
hundred thousand and eight
outstanding twenty twenty two
water of one point one
million with a combined
remaining balance of that one
point two three I shouldn't
mention that the twenty twenty
one worth they just submitted a
reposition so they're
outstanding balance is now
eighty thousand but they still
don't meet that preliminary
target in on the twenty twenty
one project they are pending the
final close out documents that
were only looking at the twenty
twenty two award in august they
were awarded or they awarded in
august a notice to proceed that
is beginning by september of
twenty should have been a the
little letter part of september
anticipates about ninety percent
of the funds to be expended by
january twenty twenty four staff
recommends approval of this
waver request and I stand for
any questions.
The next we have is the city of
summon part also with the flood
prevention application they do
not meet the seventy percent
preliminary expenditure target
yeah kind has an outstanding
twenty twenty one award of a
hundred and twenty five thousand
and twenty twenty two award of
two hundred and twenty five
thousand are with about to buy
balances in expenditure twenty
five percent the twenty twenty
one project is an especially to
be completed by december earning
the twenty twenty two is how is
expected to be expendited about
seventy nine percent by the end
of october of this october staff
recommends approval of the
waiver request and I send for
any question.
The next week was the city of
truth or consequences on their
water storage application they
have a preliminary again they do
not meet the seventy percent
expenditure target the applicant
hasn't outstanding twenty twenty
one twenty twenty award of six
hundred and forty one thousand
and twenty twenty one of seven
hundred and fifty the combined
balances is about twenty three
percent expenditure expended the
twenty twenty project went out
to be a due to increase cast the
project was repackaged to
accommodate the available budget
is anticipated that the twenty
twenty project would be
completed by february the twenty
twenty one a project was awarded
for plan design and construct
though in this is of the country
damn the verification of the
ownership in overall
responsibility of the
maintenance of the damn required
research from not only the
office of the state engineer but
from blame which delayed the
initial planning the planning is
complete and the design is under
way within this paid a
completion by the ending of this
year staff recommends approval
of this waver request it and I
stand for any questions.
The next one we have it is the
last but certainly not least we
have the union the yanu mutual
mister water consumers
association on their water
storage project they also don't
meet the seventy percent
expenditure target the applicant
has an outstanding twenty twenty
one award of one point seven
billion they're about seven
percent expenditure twenty one
project was a twenty twenty one
project was to complete the
improvements to the water system
due to the increase caused the
materials and labor the
association is seeking fronts
from this cycle to complete the
remaining fees the association
anticipate project completion of
your twenty twenty went award by
a february wary of next year
staff recommends approval of
this waver and I stand for any
questions made it thank you
the additional question
he has been move forward to an
approval will make sure to
capture santa fe and earlier
mister chairman and I would just
note that the memo has numbers
of three point one the three
points in the agenda itself
actually has four or so when I
make the motion I would like to
make the motion to approve
staff's recommendation for item
for
one time so forth weeks.
Yes work weight one.
Let me just say it this way let
me make a recommendation that we
deny the
way or four point one and that
we approve the waivers for four
weeks to through four point one
seven and note that work wait
one three was withdrawn
take a second second i'm in
favor hi
i.
With that mister chair we do
have the start of our.
Presentations.
Mr chairman
of this
times and good.
Excuse me but I
couldn't hear that last walk
vote name may be a little bit
late here so I apologize but I
just want to make sure I
understood the action that I was
just taken
so did we
approve the staff recommendation
on the waiver request for
albuquerque burning leo county
the item three point three
no we did not
okay recommendation on
that
required just record my vote is
in favor
will be
is it i'm i'm sorry mister is
there in favor of staff
recommendation or of the user
yes book is that correct when.
That was a yes
it was a yes vote along with
everybody else
thank you
mister chairman before we get
started on what appears to be a
marathon agenda
I really want to appreciate the
work that's gone into this by
staff and frankly the applicants
and other review team this is a
lot of work this is as you
mentioned early or record number
of applications worried a large
amount of money and so I want to
just highlight both angela and
sharon michael underhood who
were in the audience but we also
have seven other staff members
you're supporting today's
activities so a special things
to our it stuff uh holland
brenda into a board
administration staff and legal
staff were all here serious
michelle personal down on the
phone I like there's a ten and
i'm a face to first here today
angela is the star of the show
less as as is appropriate but
there's a significant backup
group helping her today and I
just really want to think
everyone
market your point this this job
doesn't get easier for them as
we continue
and and I do build it.
What we just approved will only
grow
mr chairman the easier this
board's job is the harder their
job is
so
thank you
so mister chair we will start
with the presentations for the
audience you will be introduced
by earth
you will be introduced when you
start your time or you are given
three minutes once you start
your introduction please make
sure you identify who you are
preserved who is presenting you
have three minutes to
present your project and in
those three minutes
sharing world stop you and call
time and then afterwards the
board has the opportunity to ask
any questions
please so
if please be courteous to do
your other presenters and if you
were not as any remain on mute
or
thank you and so with that
mister chair we are tall the
city of alba kirki on their
floor prevention projects
john st hunt storm in dream each
project.
No.
Chairman work actually even the
structure section manager.
On the street.
Located.
Neighborhoods better
economically it's socially
disadvantaged that original
development in the area was on
plans.
Greed have no
elevat.
The city has had to describe
right ways there is very flat
which is soft space that was
problems and increases the
differen.
Property that we're using
obtains funny and the department
of universal development has
been granted use of the
property.
Yeah.
Our second slide shows a math
that shows the car full ability
to flooding in the area
highlights deficiencies in the
current system street planning
that occurred to start the
search charge stronger.
The project.
Sorry project well address
priorities
of the strong drain improvements
as no.
Practice.
Down into broadway the third
priority is.
This project which will draw
water off the broadway through
it.
Relations.
The
emergency over flow from the
gravity park which is the
southern park well well over
flow accident are compensation
so we're not expecting any blood
waters of things.
The.
Thank you selling this to see
you again yeah
just a couple of questions so is
there any treatment.
So both parts will h.
Yeah.
Into these areas.
So are both of these problems
will be draining the.
Okay well that will
broadway so it's a lot of a lot
of water that were provide.
So are you currently as a local
government having to deal with a
lot of the
issues around fighting with that
and having to mitigate that yes
so we've had.
You know our hopeful in the
areas for my.
So this property that you know
early significant.
The.
As it was laid.
This.
The next one we have is linking
county for their mega creek box
culbrid on their flood
prevention project.
There's.
The.
Yeah.
Good morning german board
members
county road superintendents
i'm also.
Basically is a.
Several years i've been there
and.
Faster than I do
a board members good morning yes
so today we are respectfully
requesting one point one nine
million dollars on the final
permitting and the construction
construction management of a new
convention structure on the
magazine this morning to create
bicycles the fair grounds the
north facilities and south
facilities is the only access to
get to the south facilities the
existing cover is under size
short it's a maintenance I
challenge its aren't going cost
expense of a channel and the the
water said is massive it drinks
thirty four square minutes it
has a carrying capacity of ten
thousand cubic fee per second
jeff and and other local
officials have explained in the
kind of process we did a master
planning
update last summer and there are
their stories where that
channels running for during
during the grounds event or
during the the rodeo we met.
And folks are stranded on that
south side it's a real need for.
Eighty perce.
That the village of capital
would be benefited the grounds
itself is is used and many in in
many facets including an animal
evacuation
and mention the fair grounds and
then it's a smoky bear rodeo
which is one of the largest o.
The scope improvements is a
concrete box over or cells
measu.
Channel enhancements so that
water that does come down that
channel can either go underneath
the road about thirty four
hundred cf.
That concrete box over the
additional six thousand off or
about fifty six hundred would go
over the top of the road the
roads design to convey that so
it's a combination of a
convenience structure a.
As just mentioned it does have
this support of the
commissioners other community at
some.
And it's up already the plans
are at ninety five percent the
environmental resource surveys
have been complete complete
encourage including cultural
and.
And this is the first.
Came before this ordered asking
for funding.
And maybe eric you could answer
this question for so on the
paragraph's property does
disbloody impact or water source
directly that writes water.
No man doesn't have effect on on
the actual resource in the w.
A surface r.
I just have a comment on this
one you the city's ninety four
the cities have chose to self
insure themselves in what we're
seeing stay wide is we're
dealing with these issues the
hardware the inefficient way.
And we see it right our cities
and our counties work together
to clear it that means our staff
is out there.
The.
The.
The next one we have as mackinly
county
and their superman cannon road
canny road forty three drainage
improvement project on the flood
prevention the county county
good morning everybody
appreciate your time and give it
as the time to speak about this
our project below is a anthony
if you could
introduce yourself
sure
thank god sorry about that
anthony jim is junior accounting
manager but mckinney county
this project is a project that
would be working on for a while
it is
to help us really fight the
floor you should that that
occurs in that wash and the
erosion of the crossing that's
cause cause of to use
alternative routes and make
often route to to go along we
will work on this super corner
for several years we've had
several other projects funded
through a different funding
now this is the next part of the
funding is to
increase the existing
infrastructure age
to expand it life as I go
mitigate environment and core
impacts
it is also a priority to provide
a drainage of structures in and
those crossings
as some email and i've seen
wheat
very bargaining
a presentation on our bridges
and water areas and water
funding issues we've had in the
state a couple years ago
and this is one of the biggest
ones that we have that drainage
for that order is massive
so are ideas to tackle that
piece by peace with funny of
continue to help us.
Manage those structures and the
argue with some funding
recognitions of child fight that
but in that area
is the top already we part of
the us i'm recording your years
on a dream of master plan a few
years ago
so it's just another step in and
moving that forward
as you could see this is a
continued project
with the which includes
construction insulation of a
twenty inch art pipe three
hundred eighty
long across gives a big wash
which improved out the
extraordinary
convergent the prosperity world
food additional up and
downstream grange improvements
and minor road work to sure
shape save passages for all
transfers a bit
of vessels but during the month
soon see them gives them peak
washington experiences so giving
us sight never get strong run up
and cause a lot of buddies you
saw this project will help
mitigate the out of flooding in
that area
and I just for any questions.
The next one we have is southern
soundable county the royal flood
control authority on the
reparian pond led mitigation
their flood prevention project.
Chairman members of the board
i'm and the administration and
the operations director first
gafter
so there's a lot county royal
float low control authority
the project we have before you
today is what we call the right
period upon construction project
we're requesting one point one
five million dollars for this
project a current estimated
construction cost is about three
and a half million will be
obtaining either federal funds
are using our blood funds to
cover this project
this facility is currently
completely designed in sitting
on our shelf waiting for the
construction funds to become
available
it was originally identified in
the early two thousand and part
of a master grain each plan
that was developed when the rust
hospital which is kind of the
left hand side of the mac
i'm the drawing now on the lift
hand side was was being designed
and constructed
okay now is toward the bottom
so it was ready to identify that
drainage plan it's part of a
series of drinking facilities
that are working along the black
royal starting probably about
eight miles north of the air so
long the northern boulevard in
your rancho comes to this
convergence point and it goes
across answer boulevard
as shown in the drawing answer
boulevard has roughly fifty
thousand vehicle trips per day I
was recently informed as well
like the fourth busiest arterial
in the the metro area
at least that's what I was
pulled
in the hundred year storm the
current box covered under and
for boulevard will top and it
will flood over the top of
venture board bar beard that
intersection of west side and
answer
in addition it'll flood down
through the area this identified
there as the village which is
currently.
Going through several different
business commercial adventures
through the city where you're
planning zones
the diagram that was just moved
to on the screen shows they
could lay out that we have here
it's three pounds
it paused wider out of the black
royal it also called water is
currently repeating along the I
concrete channel along the side
of unsure they're drained a lot
of the commercial in in
residential areas on answer
has a shown is a at three point
configuration the first point
will fill up overflow to the
second part over float to the
third point the water quality
issues that we did replace with
flooding in the area with our
flowables and greeces in oils
will be handled with ported
risers coming through these
facilities and will be taken out
all the flowables and between
the three pounds should
definitely reduce any of the
other countries contaminations
stale stand for any questions
now.
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman time again
yes can you do it we can hear
you
coming down
I just have one question what
what's the construction of the
parliament's
they're going to be dirt in
maintenance with rock society
in
large rip websiting with the
concrete upspille way that goes
back into the channel in
addition to the ponds where
putting was called great
structures in the black royal
itself to ensure that it does in
a road or or be carriage from
any overflows from the pines so
it's a dirt dirt sidings with
rock armoring and still ways of
concrete
I see it in the dirt areas to
the do you encourage plants to
grow or or do you or is that
checked
green life or is it being
encouraged
i'm i'm sorry
we do like to have natural
meditation grow along the sides
of our are dams and facilities
other my board is very
strong when it comes to wanting
to if i'll trade and keep things
as much natural as possible one
of our kind of dictators that we
try our best not to do concrete
channels we do dirt channels so
that we get their fortunationing
and keep it natural however if
we get larger plans to constant
compromise the damn faces pounds
will have to remove the the
large woody stuff and you keep
it down to smaller natural
meditation that that's how we
operate in maintain our
facilities.
And further
when the water do you anticipate
the water standing in the plans
for a long time
do they try do you want well
indeed to renew out as it to
natural evaporation
does our work
no service need their state
engineer heads requirement on
drainage facilities that we
cannot keep watering on for more
than ninety six hours I do not
remember exactly how long we
expect water to stay in these
pounds but it will be definitely
less than ninety six hours there
is a what we call a ported rise
or it's
structured that keeps the global
both out for going through the
pipe that there are their pikes
at the order the bottom of these
facilities that drinks it back
to the channel so they brain a I
spent rate
the constant rate goes out which
helped everything downstream
from getting giving flooded
because of the the way we drain
it at that conscious right
understand that it's very
interesting how will all works
that's all thank you very much
thank you chairman.
The next one we have is a city
of someone park on their complex
water quality flood control
project
good morning chairman and
actually thank you great job in
the previous
waiver request we want to thank
you for getting that accrued
this morning we have i'm sorry
my name is from the city
as well as mr
public director.
V flow control facility that you
see here's a a really unique
opportunity for the city of
someone park it is situated in
the municipal complex which is.
Geographically centralized
within the twenty square malcity
limits it is a one of the
amenities that is serving for
regional flood control but in
doing so we are taking advantage
of the realistic by utilizing
open recreational spaces or
fields in this case we all
generally in this area if you're
familiar with someone park it's
really by sected by the mexico
two seventy three
the water she dominates from the
west and moves its way eastward
towards the real brand them
which is in this area described
as a low real grand water base
and right to everything that
goes into a regular then
recharges our grandwater becomes
very crucial
so again this project outdoor
recreational elements are being
used to really capture surface
run off safely handle that run
off treating that water as we
heard in the prior presentation
and then re introducing it into
a robert and the so it has more
than that the beneficial use of
the twenty thousand residents
that are
actually residency of someone
park it actually benefits the
entire southern banana county so
I will positive and you have to
answer to questions.
Thank you guys have a wonderful
week thank you.
The.
That would conclude or a flood
prevention projects now we're
moving forward with the
watershed and we have the next
two or a clunch also in water
conservation district on there
is twenty a basin and the
greater real grand
though i'd like to just combine
these presentations my name is
I am the district manager of the
clothes and filled so on water
constitution district and
mountainer new mexico the
assented base on water charge
health restoration in monitoring
courts during committee has been
working together since two
thousand and three
most of our partners have been
with us since two thousand and
five we have recently added the
new mexico department of
homeland security and emergency
manager because we've been able
to secure since we submitted our
proposal on september the
fifteenth we've signed an
agreement with the homeland
security or five hundred
thousand dollars in the mail
hazard mitigation funding and
that will go on a couple of
projects that are
a little closer to the east
mountain because we're trying to
prevent a fire from starting
down an hour area and getting
into that is mountain area that
so heavily populated in um
and close to all kirky
we've been very fortunate to be
able to secure that money it's
taken us about three years so
we're looking forward to
starting the product sometimes
soon we have enough projects on
board we have all of the
projects applications for more
than end up money to expend this
money.
We have been very fortunate with
our monitoring are on the stands
to bait and we use swca
environmental cut the
consultants but we also have
some students that go out and
help us with the monitoring a
specially on our project that is
partnered with
the sibling national ports and
those kids or mate they make
presentations to my board on a
yearly basis on the greater real
grand water should alliance
we have fourteen total water
conservation districts we work
both in the upper water chat and
in the repaired areas on this
protects all of our repairer
projects were prime to go back
on it yearly basis and do
resprout treatments
and we've been fairly successful
that with that
we've been very fortunate on
both of these projects to bring
over it and over ten million
dollars and rcs regional
conservation partnership program
money
I just recently signed an
agreement with
an rcs
for another nine hundred and
sixty thousand dollars and this
is all we're trying to do all
branch management of four stand
improvement
because our major our major goal
is to try to get some of the
beditation off of the are off of
our range lands and also off of
our
forestead areas to hopefully
prevent
a wildfire like we saw this past
year and a half ago up in the
northern part of the state
though
we have enough.
Projects on this one the this
money will be expended this
we have projects almost ready to
go so we're just
looking forward to moving these
two projects forward
I will stand for any questions.
Mr chairman I have a question d
this is market with how do you
decide whether to apply for
funding for this project from
the water trust board versus now
the new legacy fund
I haven't I haven't looked into
the legacy function
so market I guess I I haven't
made a choice but I would I
would ask other water should
folks but you're the only one
presenting today so you got the
question i'm trying to
understand the difference
between these programs and don't
really have an understanding so
I think appreciate your your
response and I will I will look
into that and see if I can
figure out what what the
different in the two areas of
funding are
market
the the legacy funds aren't
available until apply twenty
five one for one thing
and secondly I don't I don't
know that they're going to be
projects like I don't know that
it's going to be set up like
that because what how it set up
is to capture
and I know target speak to this
too but to capture pro you know
existing statutory obligations
at various agencies game and
fish department agriculture
emirate etcetera how within
program area so i'm not sure
that this that it could be the
same kind of thing like that
there will be programmatic
dollars set up like this so
there will be through the
department of agriculture for
instance we'll have a.
Statutory programs and it I
don't know that anybody has
completely built out how they're
going to operate with these
funds yet so that's I mean
that's a short answer thank you
thank you thank you
they got three of the
mister chairman and to market
his point so I think this is
where I see working for the
council governments we just have
a lot of confusion rate about
what that bill is intended to do
so i'd like to make a room
recommendation that whenever
you're ready to roll out that
program if you could come to our
weekly meetings with our federal
state partners in the clogs to
help to seminate the appropriate
information to those entities
that are within our
jurisdictions so that we have
better understanding because
they were just having a lot of
mixed confusion and then in my
presentations last week to
legislative internet committees
the refuring the referring local
governments and these districts
to the span that may be
potentially isn't going to be
the appropriate the needs or so
I think that would be extremely
helpful.
It sounds terribly go on to
albequerque bringleo county what
are utility authority they have
the next three
presentations the first one is
the advanced metering
infrastructure project thank you
angela this is martyr or tees
the chief financial officer for
the albuquerque bernileo county
water utility authority
the advance meter meter reading
infrastructure project
excuse me will
look at approx me fourteen
thousand meters in the second
selected cycle routes throughout
the service area that will be
retro fitted with am I like snap
devices customer benefit of the
ami devices consist of
streamline high bill
investigations detection of
tampering with meters to protect
the customer accurate
information faster customer
service and flag and alert
continuous usage ami flex
devices are part of the larger
communication radio network in
the ratio the ratio network
communicates water usage hourly
this funding request is two
million dollars with a
contributed match of one million
dollars
next five.
The aquifer storage and recovery
asr known as a s r we currently
the water authority currently
has an existing
drinking water large scale
recharge price project that
consists of one direct inject
extract well and one for does
zone charge well treated sam one
chama surface water is injected
into the two wells adding the
water to the occupier where it
will be stored until needed to
meet the customer demand during
peak demand months this project
will expand the recharge
capacity at the drinking water
large scale location throughout
the addition of two s r wells in
the associated convents piping
since this is a new sr well will
be part of the existing project
the water authority but will be
modifying existing permits with
new mexico environment
department and office of the
state engineer to add to the two
new wells by storing sam on
chama water in the ground the
water thirty reduces the amount
of water loss to evaporation in
surface water reservoirs and the
water is readily available when
needed during periods of limited
surface water supply
the water authority has said a
goal of forty eight thousand two
hundred acre feet of water
stored in the ground each year
throughout a s r project this
proposed project helps the water
thirty make progress towards
that goal we are requesting
fifteen million dollars and will
contribute one point five as a
match
next side.
The last project is the arsenic
treatment facilities
arsonic treatment plants are
required to put a existing
wealth backed into full project
production and make more
efficient use of these existing
stranded assets by installing
archnic treatment facilities at
these existing reservoir sites
we take advantage of our
existing welfare well collector
piping that are a delivered
well water to these research
sites in can subsequently remove
the slightly elevated arsenic
concentrations and deliver this
treated water immediately to the
water delivery transmission
system the water authority has
elevated many of our stranded at
well absence in identified
several facilities including the
thomas welfare santa barbara
well filled and yell wells as
priorities for arsenic treatment
to provide potable water in
areas of the city where it can
be utilized more efficiently we
are requesting fourteen million
and will contribute one point
four as match and I stand for
questions.
Mark on in regards to the water
metering what is your percentage
of water loss
currently.
My apologies I don't have that
response readily available but I
can get that to angela
added curiosity if that's going
to reduce your percentage of
water loss it definitely well
yes and more accurately read
those meters as well and this
software also if helps the
customers identify water loss as
well by utilizing the eye
software that that we built with
the am I devices
and just another question we're
not in the where these are
meters are going to be replaced
is that is that a lower income
neighborhood or is that just
it's just a mix income level it
it's a max it's throughout the
service area thank you.
The next to a presenter is the
town of the lighter on their
gravities to a layout fees to.
The.
Good morning there or good
morning chairman members of the
board with madness and sunburger
into doing part of from america
leader
and my clear kim summers
so
this is faced over large project
for at least letter and reuse
these lines currently
it might never do a diction say
very lead.
So anyway
face the we're currently between
there.
Be it opening and better word on
face one for these project waste
letter and reuse.
Based her as well where you're
asking funding for
early two point six million
dollars the
banks go with this project will
be adding from a passive answer
to an active treatment system to
the generate
quality of flower that suitable
for reuse never
also in lued to a little bit of
expanded piping on this project.
Ever said for our next they stay
on the line which will expand
out into the rest of the village
for collection for this.
We are a member of the eastern
mexican letter utility authority
will be resaving water from that
project hopefully in the next
few years then
we want to be as conservative as
we can with that resource in
reuse the maximum amount of what
are possible to
reduce the load on that system
as well and i'll stand for any
questions thank you.
Mr chair in my or can you tell
me how many households were
benefiting with face to.
Approximately a hundred to a
hundred and five I believe will
be the.
He left presenter is the city of
farming ten on their water
treatment plans one two in
distribution system.
Thank you
mister chairman and members of
the board good morning my name
is david cyprio the community
works director and i'm here to
just give you a couple of backs
to argument the application that
we've already submitted the
first thing I wanted to point
out was that army tends
treatment pledged genuinely
served the region it's more of a
regional plan than it is
a plant just for farming dinner
in fact as you see here we have
the existing contracts totally
eight point eight two million
gallons a day and our actual
average used just for farm again
is only at seven point eight
seven million gallons a day so a
true regional plant if they're
ever was one and
the other thing i'd like to
point out is not only do we
supply
over fifty percent of the water
we produce to the region outside
the city limits but also this
water that we produce
serves a majority of the load of
modern population so
we feel this project is is
something that is very
beneficial to the entire region
and to the low and modern income
population slight to you please
like to
just sharing that the upgrades
are necessary to keep the region
supplied you you can see their
list of
the items that jake of the
engineering has
created in their review our
plant it's a tired plant both
our plant one and two
are due for redo.
And we're also trying to comply
with
the intention the heart of
the
overcornation so we have a long
geographical brown out town and
so we want to put in for a
distribution system some
chlorine injection points so
that we don't have to have high
levels of pluring at the
beginning so that the end it has
adequate residuals so
that's when you see in here that
we want to
do some work under distribution
system that's what we're
referring to
treatment plant or rather the
the project is trouble ready for
our treatment plant one and we
in order to be regulatory
compliant the two items you see
here on slight three is the
backwash system a design
we
okay we've not been able to
fully deliver
a recycle water we we actually
end up taking it straight to the
treatment plan
and with that having my time
expired of all concluded answer
any questions.
So could you tell me the number
of beneficiaries for this
regional project
yes it's about fifty thousand.
Thank you
the next two presentations are
going to be with the lower real
grand public water works as
authority.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the board i'm karen nicholson
the projects manager for the
lower real grand public water
works authority
on the first project are video
water treatment project
our project engineer robert
story is on the online meeting
so he can chime in and correct
me or had anything if he needs
to I will try to brief we're
requesting seven hundred and
eighteen thousand dollars to
relocate and set up an a rehab
and arsonic treatment plant that
is skid mounted from our desert
sand system up to our via delrio
system via delrio is a
subdivision that we purchase the
water system for in twenty
sixteen and we've had ongoing
drinking water state revoving
loan fund projects up to upgrade
that system the system I has the
wells produced a lot of iron and
manconnies and we're starting to
see arsenic details at levels
starting to be a little
concerned about
in these wells so the type of
system were going to relocate is
an iron removal system it's a
culation filtration plant that
is skid mounted
we have some capital outlay
funding for this project and
we're using some of the
remaining drinking water state
revolving funds
to for the building that's
housing this project
i'll let roberts add anything
he'd like to and but before I do
I would like to draw your
attention to the amount on page
two of your hand out it shows
both locations and particularly
i'd like to draw your attention
to the excerpt from our water
master plan from the u.
Hydrogeologics study that
talks about how the increased
ground water pumping in the
messy of alley is very hard on
the water quality and causing it
to decline this is relevant to
this project and also the next
when i'll be presenting.
And so there's the third pages
just some photos of the area and
then if robert has anything to
add to let him chime in.
Can you hear me all right yes
the only thing I have to add is
as it including to include it to
the treatment by scared on this
include tank to kind of a buffer
take a small one to
the wells can pump to that so
that the pressures can be
stabilized as they go through
the treatment skid so that the
discard will work with this
facility as opposed to original
location.
That's something I had to at.
Thank you.
Our next project is
ourselves valley service area
water system regionalization
project with me is mount harmson
project engineer from
houston
we completed the swatter master
plan at the end of twenty twenty
one it's a very comprehensive
document
that initially was funded with
water trustword funds a long
time ago we began this plan
and did some of the early
elements of it including the
hider geological study that I
mentioned in the first
presentation and so we're
looking for five point six
million dollars for this project
and i'm gonna just hand it over
to the engineer let him give you
the technical subscription good
morning
german
this is really a vision to
expand the ground water use.
We have to deal with texas and
years ahead we wanted to expand
that.
So this is really the west
master development is
exploratory well expanding that
ground water use in that area
which is really making a
computer gation district a
partner not a competitor in this
recognizing that to utilize all
the ground water that we have
out there that may be slightly
grackies perhaps we'll ring that
area where we're not in the flip
print cultural users this will
really open that area this is
the first well the pipeline in
the tank just be the first phase
of a multiphase project that
we're make this an entire
compeasant.
The planning is under way right
now we are built up your land
management state land office
both into these permits leases
that need to be acquired for
those are in the way right now
because we know that time we
don't want to be in front of you
so that's under weight currently
as we speak
with that open
mister.
What.
Yeah.
And and so and your.
That level will probably be that
eight hundred
maybe maybe a thousand ends on
what that and that's okay we
understand that make the case
but we'll have the footprints to
be able to deal with that with
any kind of.
Mister apologize for the
confusion we have other since
plugged in and turns out the
strips are
trying to make sure that our
computers don't go out of this
the question I have is your
project scope includes per but
you've already started the per
so what do you actually asking
for funding on looks like some
of this is already underway well
we're
we are starting the pr
some right away word
in the least this yes that would
we are paying for would be our
contribution toward the
match on both of our projects we
would request a loan in lou of
match for anything on met okay
and then I guess the second part
is that's all this is a big
scope what we just heard from
nineteen entities was two years
is not enough to complete all of
this now appreciate you're
getting a jump start by starting
the per but
this also includes construction
of a well house in transmission
lines can that be done in a
twenty four month period.
Given the fact in our underway
with the beer land management.
Currently so those applications
will go in so that's the really
biggest unknown as far as the
actual constitution designed a
construction of these facilities
in a twenty four.
So mister chair to just you know
go along with marquita's comment
so so what is the completion
date for the per
completion date for the PE r
will be early twenty twenty four
meeting that will have that in
that january private time frame
applications will be under
the l and lease will be applied
for you will have the
understanding of what the book
print would print those that we
need as well as the state land
office which is where the water
leases will come from where the
ground what are we would be
actually
thank you and then I just
comment to carrying and your
staffing board because in my
years a working water you guys
have done an amazing job to
really look at the
regionalization and as we move
forward with a lot of these
mental domestics and the
challenges were having a rumble
in
the part of that how we continue
for it in the registration where
we're doing one in our area that
is kind of mimicking and wait
you started many many years ago
and then if it's been easy so I
just want to compliment you in
your diligence in your chinacity
to continue with part with
stream right for a lot of these
comma
so they're doing an account and
thank you.
Yeah.
The.
The next presentation we have
the next three presentations are
with the city of sanity.
Hello mr chairman members of the
board thank you for your time I
have a few comments on the first
one which is canny roadwide
attribute plant improvements
my name is jesse roche and i'm
the director of cities and if
they water.
So the candy road water
treatment plan coagulation
population instead of are the
first treatment steps for water
once there and location and
settlementation or flock said
infrastructure canyon room
whatever treatment plant was
last upgraded more than twenty
years ago and needs to be
replaced either current tube
settlers will be replaced with
more efficient plate settlers
create more effective water
treatment
the more efficient flock said
process is expected to increase
the range of water to be over
which can you road water
treatment plant can effectively
operate and also
result in an increase in the
maximum production rate at the
plant
as we face shorter and higher
intensity spring run off as a
result of climate change the
ability to treat more water of a
wider quality will help us
provide system resilience and
we're requesting seven point
seventy five million dollars
from the water trust board
towards this fourteen million
dollars estimated project
and without.
Mister chair could you please
tell me the number of
beneficiari.
We serve approximately thirty
five thousand residential
accounts approximately eighty
eight thousand residents.
Okay
and I should also mention that
i'm i'm joined by emily oaster
finance director on zoom should
there be any questions related
to financial matters are that
the next project that i'll
describe is the nichols damn
repair project
the nichols damn which was built
in nineteen forty three is
ninety one feet high and six
hundred and twenty two feet long
and stores approximately six
hundred and sixty acre feet of
water it's a high hazard damn
due to its location upstream of
santa fe
the intake structure removes
water from the reservoir into
the outlet conduit to be
released downstream and the
outlet conduit moves the water
through the damn
the intake structure was redone
in two thousand sixteen then in
two thousand eighteen seepage
into and a long the alec condo
it were identified as potential
failure modes for the damn
due to these potential failure
modes osi downgraded the
condition of nichols from
satisfactory to poor in two
thousand and nineteen and this
proposed work will address these
separate related safety concerns
are the new alley condo it will
include a continuous hdp paper
grounded into the old outlook on
it the new outlet kinda will be
pressurized which will allow for
future hydropower generation at
the plant.
And we've just signed a contract
for this work and hope to have a
complete by twenty twenty five
we're requesting five point five
million dollars of the total
estimated nineteen million
dollar project costs from the
water trust board in the twenty
twenty four funding f wife.
And with that i'll stand for
questions.
Contact you.
That's for construction that we
do have a hundred percent design
in the contract we just signed
us for the const.
Okay thank you if the third
project is a same one charmer
return flow project
so approximately two thirds of
our drinking water is used
indoors and reaches the person
rare water reclamation facility
our our way swatter treatment
plant near the san frairport
this project will take the
portion of this water that
originated in the colorado river
and was brought into santa fe
here the sandwich home return
flow project and return it to
the real grand
it's the project is designed to
reclaim or use that city
sandwich i'm a water by
returning it back to the rear
grand just below the buckling
direct diversion for
indirectory.
Climate change in institutional
over allocation threatened to
reduce the amount of colorado
river water available to the
city and in the face of this
potential supply reduction in
the ability to make what
colorado river water is
available to ask up to three
times further is our most
important single step from a
water resources perspective
we're currently in the
permitting and design phases of
this project and hope to have
the project complete in the next
four day years we're requesting
two million two million dollars
of the estimated three point
seven million dollars in design
costs from the water trust
board.
The total project costs is
estimated to be around thirty
five million dollars of which we
have received a federal grant
for up to twenty five percent
and with that I will.
The.
Mrperiod terror since you the
mutual domestic was not approved
for their waiver we will for
gold their presentation and the
next one up would be eastern new
mexico water utility authority.
They're more good morning good
morning mister chairman what
members like more smarter of
clovis here today in my role as
chairman of eastern mexico water
utility authority and
as much as anything want to say
thank you for the support for
the pipeline project which of
course is the the mandate of of
the eastern mexico water utility
authority this is a critically
necessary project to address the
water supply challenges in
eastern new mexico our members
are clovis can an air for space
per talice text go in a later we
will serve a population of
approximately seventy five
thousand folks with surface
water from you reservoir in
order to supplement the
declining ground water in our
area of course our application
before you today is for
twenty million dollars the
maximum that we could apply for
and are our project that that we
are applying for it is is a
little bit broader for the
design easeman acquisition land
acquisition and construction of
the eastern mexico rural water
system faces raw water one
rawader to the antique pump
station cap rock pump station
and cap ruck storage tank and I
know many of you are very
familiar with our project
and so you you know that we have
labeled the the various phases
of the project raw water of wine
two three we referred to our
capac pump station and and so
forth but roward water wine
would be there the focus for for
this funding however it's
possible that we can use it in
in the other projects or the
other pieces of the project that
we mention here I water one of
course is the pipeline that
begins at the interest structure
that's already in place at the
reservoir and it extends
approximately thirty miles and
is forty two inch diameter pipe
I will take the
convenience system to the.
Near to the base of the cap rock
where the cap rock pump station
would be located
secondly in in priority for this
funding we would apply it to the
rawader two project which is
again forty two and stamina pipe
and makes the ascent of the cap
the integral station if we go
back to the reservoir above the
already installed intake
structure is where we will have
five vertical pumps that that
will pull the water out of the
four bay shaft that it's already
there and and push it to the
capruc pump station
the cap rock storage thing so
once we make the ascent we it's
necessary that we have a million
to two million gallon storage
tank on top of the cap rock and
from there it's gravity flow
into.
So that's a that's a quick when
I understood i'm on the time
limit that could be the best
today for a mayor to get
something in and under the time
limit but appreciate the
opportunity to present but
sincerely on behalf of all of
the residents of clovis can an
air force based texaco per
tallis and a letter we are
grateful for your continued
support for this critically
necessary project and i'd stand
for any questions thank you.
Okay so totally unrelated but
this is always been a.
So I know you built that.
Yes ma'am there is a maintenance
in your question I know you
weren't closely with our
administrator mr land of our
tate and wanted to mention that
mr taga is here today he's are
administrator we also have our
support services officer jack
when bowings here with me
supporting as well me on this
today or rather i'm here to
support them there they're the
the ones that are getting things
done to answer your question
yesterday is ongoing maintenance
there is quarterly maintenance
schedule that that
that is executed on at the
interest structure and and very
recently we just receive a
report on this but the the
screens there that are submerged
in the antique structure have
have some issues with with with
with moving them and and and
what not and and and so I just
say that to to answer your
question yes there is ongoing
maintenance that it takes place
yeah it's just it period.
You know I regret not seeing
every piece of this I i've only
been around for a couple of
years on this project now while
I have it was generally aware of
it as a resident close better I
have become
very enthusiastic about the
project in the last couple of
years as I understand that the
the critical need thank you for
the question any other
questions.
Just at a curiosity only do like
can you tell me how how long
you've been working on this
project what what point was the
inception of this this beauty of
the regionalization
i'll try and keep it short a day
this this project this project
was.
Was really born in the
completion of the canadian river
compact in nineteen fifty the
courageous visionary leadership
of past new mexicans and and the
leadership of new mexico back
then you know after the
conscious damn was in place the
canadian river compact was
negotiated and it was made clear
that the state of mexico would
have free use of the canadian
and all of its tributaries above
the conscious and below the
conscious thankfully would be
able to store two hundred
thousand acre feet of course
that gave birth to that.
And it was in the late nineteen
fifties that the enabling
legislation came about in a five
million dollar appropriation the
first of its guy and the state
of mexico invested in built the
ute damn and an established
reservoir and so that's really
where it began and you know
since then through the
water commission various members
municipalities and counties have
pay a reservation fee to reserve
water allocations from you
reservoir all of them
I forget the total number of
them now but of all of them
for this get air force base text
copertalisa later as far as I
know how the best plan for how
how that actually take delivery
of those allocations and it was
in the very late nineteen
nineties around two thousand
when the leaders of pertalis and
and cloves really got serious
about how how will we get this
critically project completed and
it took about ten years and in
two thousand nine the project
received federal authorization
and with that of course the
seventy five percent funding
making this possible it was in
two thousand and ten that the
new mexico legislature inacted
the eastern mexico water utility
authority and with that pleasure
fifteen percent match and so you
see our funding structure is
seventy five percent that
fifteen percent state again
thank you this is where the
state in mexico's primarily met
that fifteen percent match and
then of course at least ten
percent on us member
communities.
And and so then it was
really it really picked up pace
in
twenty twenty one with the
federal infrastructure of bill
which injected a lot of funds at
the federal level into this and
has those funds started to flow
in the state of a mexico big way
and helped with.
Painful moves locally in order
to come up with the ten percent
so it's really just in the last
few years that that we have
ramped up and engaged in all
fees as of this project and
provided funding continues to to
flow we could have the project
completed by twenty twenty nine
and maybe twenty thirty and
delivering water within a year
or so after that and I can't.
Just my compliments to you mayor
in your staff for again the
tenacity because we've been
working on one in my region for
thirty years and you have high
school and goes dormit and then
it comes back up and now we're
kind of like you were at that
point and I think it's just its
leadership and collaboration on
my compliments to all of you
interest really what is a a
great project you know and early
in my career which you know it
i've been hearing about it for
over thirty years though so it's
just an amazing
point to be at congratulations
thank you so much effectively.
Do you have a question I see
that your projects are being
federally funded a bigger
portion than before and with
outcome some strings relative to
the federal requirements and you
know the buy american build
american kinds of things how
much is that eject either in
kind of increased cost if there
are any or delays in projects if
there are
administrative mister worter can
talk about this in in greater
detail than I can but i'll do my
best answering it it's more the
latter the delays
you know
and and so what we see happening
then when we have a
a timeline on expending uh money
that's been appropriate to us or
granted to us through water
trustport you know when the
contractors that that we award
the jobs to are having to
nation navigate boba and and and
that that can create delays in
that king read some pinch points
for a certainly and we are
working with our partners that
bureau rack to you know talk
about you know give it maybe the
possibility of waivers in some
cases I when we for example
cannot find the the the pipe
that we need constructed in the
in the country and so forth that
answer it really doesn't I just
want to make sure I understand
the first part you're not really
seeing cost increases in your
construction i'm going to write
that down because that's not
and I don't know how long
actually
actually I wouldn't want to be
on record
because because I think it does
increase you know any delays
equal increase cost and and so I
think there is increase cost
that they were seen because of
the american build american okay
and yours is one of the few
projects that is of a certain
size you were so I think that's
of a certain size where you can
get major efficiencies from
bidding large projects and at
one point my recollection was
that you had about twenty five
million dollars was your scope
of a construction project is
that still the size of project
you are trying to let at any one
time.
So we're currently under
construction on finished water
one which is the fifteen and a
half mile portion that extends
north from canada for space
where I mean junction barters to
the greater area where the
proposed treatment facility will
be that that phase of the
project alone i.
And when we talk about these if
i'm answering your is that that
was your question so when we
talk about
the faces of the project that
that we reference that we would
use this water trust board fund
award for should we get it raw
water one the portion that goes
from the reserve war to the base
of the cap rock at thirty mile
transmission line that's forty
two minutes and diameter that
phase is approximately one h.
And my could ask you for
remembering all of these numbers
and good at numbers and would
have done about half as well as
you said
make it thank you for your
presentation.
I would just ask that if you
guys are.
Thank you
for other things
who certainly will.
Mr german board members thank
you so much
the next presenter is the city
of gallop.
Good morning
and members of the board
my name is mark de polly
consulting engineer for the city
of gallop and the marine city
manager or had other plans and
they couldn't make the meeting
but they really want express
their appreciation for all the
money that the water trust board
is given the city of gallop in
the regional area over the years
for naval gallop project
as part of that guard the city
of gallup has to replace a lot
of the lines that were put in
an early nineteen hundreds and
this application is for
replacement of the cast iron and
we call it in led and a
pesbestic cement and the old
ducked aliar and pipelines gap
is a real road town and in
nineteen hundred gas iron was
that was that was the pipe of
choice
since then there's been about oh
i'll be a hundred and hundred
and twenty five thousand feet or
forty miles
in between night ninety one
excuse me night the nineteen
hundred from the central about
nineteen sixties and then is
this line these lines were as
cast on pipe wasn't popular
anymore and they started
replacing the line of specter's
concrete seemed and all doctor
and pipes
this application again is to
represent move a little bit
faster we've had a program that
replaces a line but the faster
the better and in addition to
our cast on our lines we have
galvanized iron lines that were
used for services so if there
was ever a lead in copper
problem galk seems to be right
in the middle of it so the
replacement cast are in pipe and
program that the city has were
trying to accelerate this
applications for seven point six
million dollars hopefully we can
get a big portion of that done
the total estimate of cost is
about fifty million the city's
been spending about it million
dollars a year so far but it
hasn't made a dent.
What the city does in order to
stop the this they they can have
more of reactive approach by
installing bowl so when you get
these breaks because the lines
do break
the valves there make a short
amount of vals but reface the
lines proactive we want to get
him replaced it also helps a
laden cop rule if we can get
these pipes replaced but and
remember what happens with the
local standard pipes that the
joints are filled with lady and
also off the cast on pipes the
due snacks do the services were
led so we actually have a lot of
led joints and lead goose next
on pop of it
so the third so that bursting is
to be reactive replaced online
so we don't have breaks help
bled in copper rule out perhaps
of help help the city with that
so we can we can we can buy by
this the painter the copper rule
and then the next product
proportion is going to be
blending the surface water
the city
there might be a problem or
there could be a problem without
the proper inhibitors with the
cast on our pipe believing with
the surface warrant which is
expected be heard about the next
several years
so that's kind of the
application that we have if
there's any questions or
anything i'd be glad the answer
all in regard to naval gallop
projects and we're talking about
that with the three county the
application
mr
and mark in your part point
presentation you have in there
when your sources of finding as
bedroom congressional
and my assuming correctly that
you've applied for that
congressional
direct spending request and if
so what was that dollar amount.
And so the the federal
congressional applications I
think they're limited to a
million dollars
on the application we've we
filled him in for the full fifty
million that we anticipated to
be but I think that the of the
application was only for a
million one point three million
exactly sure but I know it
wasn't more than two million
so mister chairman they know
that most recently in the
congressional direct spending
request there is really no limit
and so I know moving forward
that those decisions have
already been made as to what's
projects are will be for it for
consideration with dollar
amounts on the for the federal
congressional side it'll just
now depend will be forwarded to
the new budget whether that's
approved or not so i'd be
curious to know
has anybody from the
congressional let you know if
that federal request is moving
forward
yes we have got the one point
three million dollars and I
believe it was from senator
luhan and my behind him and
remember that there was a there
one of the requests for one
point three was moving forward
yes so
so when we talk about the one
point three million is that
subtract it out of that or is
that additionally money you need
on top of what's already in your
power point i'm just going to
confused about
the right so what the way we
have the money set up is with
the water trust board we would
rely on the one point three
million dollars for a twenty
percent match
the instead of a thirty win go
to the loan or to the
grand portion you would be we we
rely on the federal for the
match portion
so mister terry market may
believe that fire if I know the
congressional request that
directly goes to epa.
Okay good that's at least my
understanding that i'm working
on so I just I just want to make
sure
on this when so is an example we
received any pa congressional
request that was awarded in my
twenty twenty two repairedly
getting that award it now in
twenty twenty three and it was a
platform in twenty twenty one so
I just want to make sure that it
isn't because you any delays
were anything like that to just
be connected about moving
forward that it doesn't affect
your project in a way that
because when I understand the
way we're doing having to do
congressional is that once
you're awarded then we have to
do an application to epa and
some of those challenges at
least for more and we've had
many but we're finally kind of I
think because it's one of the
first ones right we're kind of
sorting through that so I think
that's all really helpful
that you're appreciated that's
good to know any any help we can
get with those federal
appropriations or those those
are designated finding spending
and I was application to be
great we will pretty appreciate
it so just to confirm you have
you have the commitment from the
center look on for another one
point three million
right right which we would use
for the matching funds for this
breath application
thank you and who who was
talking i'm sorry I did we don't
know and that who is that
talking so mark this is prisoner
loo settle hyper seller sorry
about that I
think you okay
additional questions from the
both mister chairman I have a
quick question i'd like some
clarification in the
presentation it talks about
the delay of the not galloped
water supply project pipeline
making this a more immediate
need for the city.
And I want to just clarify in
fact that this project is going
to be needed regardless of what
happens with the never hook out
pipeline this is going to be
needed if that comes online and
twenty twenty six it's going to
be needed if it comes online in
twenty thirty six these are
right
correct that this that replacing
these hundred we have lined a
hundred years old that need to
be replaced for numerous reasons
but yesterday the matter what
happened with the water supplied
we need replace the lines thank
you I just wanted to clarify
that
I guess my question total budget
cost a few years ago
when we did one of the in.
So is this fifty million.
We've you know it's a big based
on just the inflation that we're
seeing in the cut construction
industry supplied way out
playline issues everything
getting more refined estimates
it went from thirty to fifty you
know and a lot of these lines
are underneath burning to
northern railway I forty and us
sixty six and the cost were
boring and to replace his like
you can train now probably
the cost for that just went up
not at all not exponential but
it's one of severely.
Welcome
our next presenter is luna
county on their coop designing
construction project.
Already mister chair members of
the board I thank you for your
time in your consideration today
my name is stephen parker I am
in engineer with stantac and we
also have mister david bailey he
is the director of the road
department for luna county
and honestly this project is an
example of the challenges that
miss per so a mentioned that
they are water small water
utility is here in the state
line accounting or the people's
water coop is a small water
sociation just northwest of them
in new mexico it was originally
constructive constructed in
nineteen ninety six and really
it's had a little to know me
since the time of construction
the service connections were
installed with no backload
preventors so every single
service connection is a point
with a risk of contamination
this doesn't comply with me
reggie regulations and it is in
it is a help and safety risk for
the consumers and the people
i'm additionally they've
received multiple violations
from enemy the recently varying
from not testing too quite
simply not having a certified
water operator and all this put
together with this association
really an uncertain situation
and their need of intervention
leader county has currently
taken over management this
system and proactively has done
a preliminary engineering
important environmental report
looking at the options for this
association
the call up can't operate on
their own the county isn't
really a worry utility and
doesn't want to be
and so ultimately the sea of
demu was going to need to be
involved with the ultimate
solution and said the proposed
project here includes
distribution system improvements
that are necessary to keep the
system running a transmission
line to connect the association
to the city of demand system.
And then ultimately after
construction the associations
ownership and management will be
turned over to the city of
damning for them to go for with
operation
the county and the city will
need to coordinate together
to be able to pull this off and
that initial coordination is
already been started ultimately
there's minimises the risk of
contamination for the
association users
by connecting to the city of
damage it ensures ongoing
operation and maintenance at the
system and ultimately and the
grey has benefit is that the
residents will go from being in
an uncertain situation not
knowing what's what happens
their water supply to having a
safe and reliable water supply
and with that we'll stand david
I would also like to have that
on in the one slide where
mentions that loan account has
taken over the administration in
the main this the day
what that means specifically is
that we have had contact with
city of damning as far as the
but I have now gotten myself
certified to be an operator i'm
sorry I water sampler and seven
of those violations
the last fifteen months have
been five have been cleared the
other two administrative due to
time which I can go back in time
but we have taken over the
responsibility.
So terror and thank you for
presenting on this particular
project first and when a
complement county i'm so when I
started my career we were
already having issues with
killer farm the water people's
co op in the early nineteen
nineties and I was involved in
that initial assistance to that
water people's co op so I want
to see that this is when a
probably in my region whether
the most no income disadvantaged
neighborhoods reversing in my
region
it is a colonious does needed
area and I just want to really
complement the lune county for
moving something like that for
moving forward just because you
typically do not see counties
taking on water systems and
wastewater systems in this case
I think we didn't have much of a
choice but to do what's the
right thing for the people even
I want to compliment when
account in the commissioners
were doing that so
I also understand the challenges
around the volunteers and I
think we're seeing more and more
of those kinds of issues with me
to domestics where we can't find
the volunteers to actually do
what's required we're not we're
having telling just with water
operators again complementing
your david for really taking
that initiative and I see this
is a a great project can you
remind me of the number of
households that were benefiting
in the killer farming
chair and so there were the
system was built nineteen eighty
six as even mentioned with
eighty connections but there are
also more in that area that are
part of the killer colonials
that's over three hundred
potential residents right now
and it would expand even more.
And against my compliments to
all of you for again leaving
some of those those non
complaints issues and thank you
for the wonderful work that
you're doing for some of the
most economically.
And that would just have one
little thing at the end that and
told construction is complete
will still be the administration
in the functioning operators
until the city does take it over
if they do that's the eventual
golf in the meantime i'll be the
operator once i'm fully sort and
mister chair and david I believe
that is the recommendation in
the p r is the primary
recommendation is for the silly
of damage to take over and I do
believe that you do have
confirmation from the city and I
mean that they will.
The.
Is this community loca.
Outside maybe roughly two miles
north me listen to miles north
of the city line.
Two miles
so mister terman I guess I have
a question if you were taking
this honest line of county and
you don't have an agreement a
written agreement with the city
of damning to take on this
project
has thought his luna county
committed to operating this
owning this assets for the life
of the loan on this
well I think the the entire
project on the cities continue
to approval to take this one
because the construction to go
down to the city line is almost
two without the city actually
taking their.
But it really is a function.
There's no more cooperative
completely walked away in the
operators and temperatures they
did have contracted the los
groups they also quit for the
last eighteen months open zero
sampling of water that's why we
have stepped in at this point to
they got least a water quality
standards
in the hole to project.
So I guess they have outside of
having a written agreement to
show you today we have a ten.
Mister chairman I just want to
make sure I understand the
applications by luna county by
the point at which we make
funding wars are refund england
and county are you the ones
completing the construction or a
refunding damning
who are refunding in this
instance so if if the awards
were given funny construction
for loan accounting to complete
the construction once
constructions complete and we
have the lines in place in the
city of damage and do their
scata meters for remote controls
testing and in metering and then
they'll take it on to their
system so mr chairman want to be
that person but i'm gonna be
that person so when we make a
words we make a words with the
understanding that there's a
loan component and so who's
paying back that loan account
thank you appreciate the clarity
some that I was going to be my
comment that was my
understanding that luna county
is communicate to
incurring that loan in pain that
that up until it's paid and then
then then said he did we will
take over of the operations and
expenses from we forward but on
account you maintain a month.
That is my question.
Got message here I have a
question this is member garcia
good what it what is the total
request that amount for this
project
that is at two point nine
million
thank you.
You know
thank you
the next presenter is middle
real grand conservacy district.
Yeah.
The board my name is alicia
opens and i'm here with
i'm the engineering and mapping
manager at the.
I'd.
I also have actually martinis
for.
Formula some of these projects
through the grant process
so we're asking for ten million
dollars for our suit based two
of us the coral ma.
And this is a continuation of
the funds we received from your
last year for
which is
generally to line about a mile
of this according in canal in
sicker new mexico i'm
construction will be completed
by march of this year for phase
one and will be you shove
already for phase two next next
year I sagram in canal is the
main irrigation.
And they're over twelve thousand
irrigated acres in this area and
there are a southern most
division meaning efficient use
of the water they have is key.
Um this project will reduce
waterless by keeping and by
minimizing the seapage through
the canal.
For a farmer's downstream it
will also
be more a create more of a
reliable irrigation delivery and
we can move water quick.
Water to move at higher velocit.
All of these put together
promote economic development.
Again we thank you for your time
and and funding of our our
previous prior to.
Project that we.
The.
The next presentation is a pinya
blanco water satisfaction.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the board my name is
jody garcia was satermiller and
associates
the president for pena block a
water and sanitation district is
at clinic this morning as you
know these most of these
these co ops and mutual
domestics are volunteer boards
and I he's delivering babies
this morning but he is trying to
make his way on to the
presentation i'm in a fill in in
the meantime
so the project that we're
requesting funding for is for
construction of a project that
water trustport helped our fund
the design of with last year's
request it's
one point six
six point three miles of
replacement water line basically
replacing old undersized water
lines to address concerns of low
water pressure during peak
demand and eliminate a bunch of
water line leagues and
breaks
in sections of the system where
they see a lot of that
it'll also improve our
protection with additional high
dents and i'm sorry to water
lines
as I mentioned the phase one
there this is the base one of
the recommended alternative
identified in the PE r which was
complete in twenty twenty two
and the design was full ended
with water stressful capital
outlay funds
there have been some
construction funds secured from
capital outlay
and then the last fight is just
aim
stolen the extent of the project
so with that very short summary
has been for question.
The.
The.
Only expressing her is realistic
and we should do message water
conservative association
and again this is jody garcia
was sorry miller and associates
the last president was busy with
babies this president taking
care of his his health early
parents this morning and was
unable to make it but sent his
since here appreciation for past
and future support from the
water trustport this request is
four a hundred and ninety
thousand dollars for design they
have a mile a water line
replacement and an inner
connection with the neighbouring
penitentiaries go mutual
domestic water consumer
association
they're currently collaborating
that that whole valley there are
real luco panyasko road dark
death and then maybe eventually
union deliana are talking about
are talking about
collaborating and and
investigating regional patient
i'm sorry miller recently
completed AP r and yosko that
looked at the engineering side
of those inner connect
and the communities are are
working towards
doing the physical connections
as well as working on the
visual association
so this project is for the
design
i'd imagine we're going to be
back in front of you in about a
year
to try to secure funding for
construction in this project so
with that brief summary I stand
for any questions that you may
have.
Mister chairman of a question
brand angela with this qualify
then or the design only grants
that we've put into policy last
year possibly I I think they're
I mean we'd have to look at the
criteria that they have but more
than likely if it's less than
the five hundred connections and
should be how many connections
for this community
hundred and forty seven yes they
they should be eligible we
believe
okay thank you.
Later.
Mr the next one we have is the
city of truth or consequences on
the wider line replacement.
I got my missus chairman and
members of the board my name is
near them to water we swore
director for your search
department
we are here asking for
our project involves a design
constructive boxing six miles of
our waterline to replace our
failing infrastructure we have
some very old water lines in our
town we have some that they'd
back to the nineteen thirties we
have as best of lies we have
cast in lines and there are
failing right now as we speak I
have a list of active leaks in
the number about twenty five
actively ethically in town.
I have a pro of four
german that they're so purpose
is to fix water leaks from the
beginning of their shift to the
to the end of the shift this has
been
a very taxing on our department
on our budget in our own man
power and we are trying to
replace these lines
as one of big projects
in twenty twenty two
we had a report four hundred
leaks in our system
with it estimated twenty million
dollars in loss of water so we
have affected our
public schools we have to be
schools in town elementary on
middle school in a high school
that at times that the school
desert have had to let us go to
home because we had to shut the
water down or repairs we have
had
patience in our local hospital
that had to be flown to last
cruces again because of repairs
that affected the local hospital
we have several
nursing homes and a very center
also that has been affected we
are ending to some help and we
want you be proactive and
replace these lines as soon as
we basically.
A couple of questions so in my
understanding correctly that no
design has been
started in or completed i'm not
in this portion
install can you tell me
how long you've been dealing
with these water breaks because
by remember at least it's been a
few years that you've been
dealing with this kind of are
the city has been dealing with
it for at least about four five
years I was hired on in january
and they have just gotten worse
it's a big you know this year
and then also it are these
improvements
going to be affecting or in the
location aware of the new
hospitals going to be built
we have several eyes to rock the
city that we would like to
replace obviously this is just a
portion of it but we are
targeting a certain areas that
have the most leaks that that we
have on we have collected some
data we feel that those areas so
you prioritised exactly where
where they need is correct for
that okay and then.
Can you tell me what it what the
existing infrastructure is is it
clear papers that what it is we
have a variety of pipe out there
I we have
cast online that just recently
this last week have been given a
lot of problems we have is best
off lines and very fair pc lies
that uh tend to be breaking more
easily and what is your
percentage of water loss I know
you said twenty three gallons
but what is what is it
percentage we have estimated
about twenty seven percent I
believe
i'm sorry I apologize market
actually from welcoming company
so if I might correct
and then i'm also hearing that
interesting that there's
proposed healthy and
subdivisions is accurate there
are some more subject which is
coming up in town correct okay
and what and what do we are
these also in these areas that
is any of that going to impact
any of this
these breaks are impacting every
single corner all our community
and i'm assuming that your
system is looked
yes it is looked we also serve
the village of williamsburg and
their their is a same line so
that's affected.
And then are there are there any
complaints issues with either
your sanitary survey or
with any other environment we
have not hired any compliance
issues we do have my myself
survived operating operator is
precisely and two others and we
like to make sure we keep all of
that up to date and and what
kind of burden is this putting
on the financials and
operational costs of tier
seekers just based on the number
water breaks that just seems
extreme so what is your what is
your monthly maintenance
if I could put a
cost on it work or spending
monthly maybe
fifty to sixty thousand dollars
and in repair parts and.
And so how is that affecting our
our budget is better bones right
now we are not even halfway
through a quarter maybe into our
operating budget we're already
bear bones in there are meant
power I mean it takes all our
man power to be out there well
thank you for the the for the
responses and all I can say is a
bless you for the work that
you're doing because then that
is easy
it's just a constant thing are
pretty much uncalled twenty
first happened
thank you for your work thank
you.
I just want to clarify your
engineer said see completed the
hyperallican now since of the
system.
Great and what's your timeline
on how long it's going to take.
W.
Yeah.
Contract in place to do that
currently we do so we would we
have
right yeah and and so what
portion of the sixteen mo.
I don't know a breakdown on the
what that would be.
Do you have.
Would you kindly provide that
was yeah or maybe it's in the
budget.
What source
then
some I believe is federal money
from
is it coming development but
grant money or is it other it's
a congressional
sure about that I like that
information as well
it's progressional congressional
twenty twenty two.
Can you remind me the doctor
the dollar amount from
and what is the timely forgot
for expenditu.
So just go to curiosity
sorry
to just additional questions in
regards to candidate that money
be used for the design so is
that what you're intented to use
the hundred for the design.
The.
Additional questions i'm sorry
how much was the federal funds
one point one point.
Requesting fifteen million.
Thank you.
The.
The next presentation is
renewing the annual mutual
domestic.
What are consumers association.
Mr chairman members of the board
this is your regards
again
thought that perild garcia was
going to be in the room with you
today but
is the operator for the system
so must have been called away
the projects there is before you
continuation of the project that
was previously funded by the
water trust board there were
actually two
to separate construction
projects previously funded we
had hoped that the application
from two years ago was going to
complete the improvements needed
but with all of the cost
escalations that we've all seen
over the last three to four
years there
the bids for the completion
project came in quite a bit
short on this request an amount
of nearly one point six million
is intended to complete that
project our hope is that we'll
be able to secure those funds in
time to add that work by change
order so that we don't spend any
more money on engineering to be
the project again
no project is going to the last
phase of this project is to
complete the connection of
infrastructure between the two
discrete water systems that
exist now
a new water storage tank and I
dedicated for a line to the new
tank as well as distribution
system to connect the previous
basis that started on the
downstream under the system
so with that I will stand for a
question that you may have.
Thank you hodies duty
by jury hey so this is the final
phase this will complete the
whole system is that what you
were saying
that yes that's the hope we had
hoped that the last project was
going to do that but the bids
came in significantly higher
than we had anticipated we
talked about rebidding it but
everything is just so high these
days we haven't seen a rebid
project come in lower yet in the
last about eighteen months so
the association is
was definitely disappointed but
hopefully this this money should
complete the project yes so
you're going to combine this
money with the previous award
and then and that's phase for
that the hope right I mean they
they have an existing project
that they've just begun the
construction on instant the hope
is that the timing will work out
that we can add this by change
order.
Right.
The next presentation is for the
village of logan
and their canadian river high
plane crossing
good morning everybody I hope
you can hear me my name is
rodney paris on the build
administrator for the goals of
logan fairly new in my position
and it's an honor to build a
present to you today also
they're in the room with you are
being with them be five
who's been our engineering for
the
p r on this this project what
we're asking they for is two
point two million dollars to
replace or have a redundant
system for the existing canadian
river crossing logan currently
is is divided by the canadian
river which of course there's no
no small
john the the existing pipeline
was was put in prior to that
area next end of the village
best we can tell it looks like
that pipeline was built in
nineteen eighty four and as
extremely sensitive and has been
identified on our honor fixed
ourselves as as a high risk it's
high risk mainly because of
several aspects is
in the in the crossing of course
we know if it breaks we can't
fix it that is the only way that
we can supply water to the south
side of logan we also supply
water to the village of san home
which is across approximately
nineteen miles away
a hundred and ninety five
residents there as well as as a
portion of logan that is on that
side of town and the ute lake
granting you blake airport
communities located in a role
incorporated not part of logan
and quite county
this is extremely important I
took over this position a few
months ago and prior to me
taking over everybody had told
me about what a what a nightmare
the canadian river crossing was
and I can tell you my daily fear
is that that line breaks and
we're not able to supply.
Water for firefighting efforts
or anything else to drinking
water to those other communities
that depend on us into our own
residence and so with that I
turn some of the specs over to
our vein if he could help me on
here
thank you mister paris
mr chairman members of the board
thank you for this opportunity
my name is arvine potalon with
with pacific slashing v five
with a consulting engineering
firm help supporting the village
of logan on this effort
a little bit about this
specifics of the project so if
if awarded these funds will be
used for design and construction
of approximately eighty two
hundred in your feet of ten inch
water line of transmission line
approximately twelve hundred
feet of that will be a case and
underneath the canadian river I
do want to mention that we have
completed a preliminary
engineering report and that was
completed a few weeks ago and
this project is number one on
the village of logan's ic
we are requesting for two point
two million dollars for design
and construction and this is a
major concern for the village of
logan and san honest so are
our interest is to get this
project completed quickly and we
are exploring a design build
options as well so thank you
very much for your time.
Do you know so i'm sorry I am.
Yes it is okay so you'll be
boring correct yeah this
particular crossing is a within
six hundred feet from the
location on result.
Thank you.
The agenda i'm here to four
though mr chair I would because
we've already let the other
communities know that they would
be presenting on wednesday so if
you'd like to do a resist until
tomorrow at ten o'clock that
would be I believe appropriate
is that correct dan brian
I think so is there anyone today
to mars agenda that's here today
that would like to present I
don't know I don't know the face
is well enough.
I guess would like to come up
with we've got time but mister
terman i'm gonna say there have
been use of which we've been
kicked out of this committee
room because we went past the
six o'clock or six thirty time
line there have been times and
we haven't had lunch and so or
clients at the end of dealt with
some hen report members so I
really appreciate this more but
for approaching an afternoon
enough
an afternoon off first
I was going to
get the end of the day
I withdraw my comments.
So mr chair we bring before you
this hortellis on their two
projects
the german board i'm going to
share of the utility should
director for the city of hotels
I have with me susan basinger
she's my public works project
administrator in a fortunately
this will be her last trip with
us
she has chosen to move on to
other things
the first project that we have
for four years our water storage
improvement project this will be
a reabilitation and renovation
of the line street tank and take
battery this is where we'll be
accepting the water from the
pipeline project of the tank is
was built in the fifties early
sixties and it enveloped shape
but it's time to go in and do
some reservation work on it so
that we can have it useful into
the future this will be four a
this will be for inspection
upgrade on the electoral system
and controls coding of the
inside of the tank ring in the
palms and all of them hoping
inside of the facility of
standards and excuse me and also
replacing the coronation.
With that day
is there for any questions.
Sorry
sorry to really don't sorry i'm
gonna I think my question is
answered this is the underground
yes this is the coverage
we just renovated the other two
texts so this is the left this
will be fees three of the old
per this is phasing one of the
brand new is completed last.
You know in the analysis
obviously the hotel is
proposal tell us about your what
right telespot water for tax
obviously seeing the initial
request.
Right now to we are on stage
three water restrictions
we went into that at the
beginning of summer or well
filled us declining that it has
been for years where our part of
the overlaws unfortunately in
one of those sections where it
is declining in with a with
their continued pressure that we
have on it the city is growing
we do have a larger population
based now that we need to of
course this is one part of our
uh
project with the iphone and the
in our part of the world waters
becoming a very very serious
issue since we want to water
restrictions we have been able
to take the demand pressure off
the welfare for this year with a
very successful without our
citizens have been great without
but moving into the future we
don't unless we that with the
second part of the suspect we're
going with that and if we don't
have a new sources of water in
our portfolio then we're going
to we're going to have some
serious setbacks so this will
allow us to take the water from
the reservoir and be able to use
it for the foreseeable future
we're looking for at least a
forty year agreed to the tank
and hopefully longer than that
and water and waste water
have been huge parts of our icap
over the last fifteen years i've
been there for fifteen years
working on that particular
planning document and I have
seen some large projects
come information consistently
number one and number two our
water storage and welfare
development these are critical
vital projects for community and
we have made a long term
commitment to ensure that those
day on the type of oliver
planning documents are strategic
planning and are comprehensive.
When does the eastern new mexico
water line start to help your
community twenty twenty nine of
their earliest projected as they
stay in there presentation we
also included that and both of
our application packages for
your review the soonest they are
assuming that they will have
actual water.
Just the request that we have in
front of us today.
Initial requests work for I
think a total of any email the
actual project cost as it stands
today is one hundred forty nine
million dollars.
Just.
Her water quality is still very
good we're not really having any
problems with that we're
constantly testing it of course
in our part of the world water
is his heart but we're not
having any water quality issues
we do maintain the welfare best
we can't we want to the the the
type of flow that we're using on
so we try not to overdo any of
the wells so we've got actually
been able to back off on the
amount of earth has been
produced and also amount of sand
that we're seeing.
With regards to my understanding
you have
four current walls no actually I
have forty two okay
until you're seeing a decline in
all of them album that's over
the last several years
the percentage of the claim
depends on the world but what we
do as we try to classify it
across the well filled overall
different sections of the
whirlfield decrease of different
rates we have a very large
welfare sixty four hundred acres
of societies of it
overall from last year to this
year we've only seen a drop of
about hundred and fifty gallons
of minute but that was
significant enough of for us to
put us in the situation since I
started we've seen a decrease of
about sixty percent and that's
been since two thousand
so mister chair and so have you
seen so have you done a
hydrology study for that area
yes okay and what is th.
Right now we have a a pr that
was done by dbs
very comprehensive one for the
for that area and what that's
what the next application is
forced for moving into an area
that's further east towards his
texas dateline itself moving
into areas where there's no
irrigated a
very rough country there's a
hope that they're some pools
that will be profitable as far
as water production there will
give us the ability to bring to
get between today and when we
have the supplemental water
coming in from the author
mister turns on how far away is
that the further for the water
is missed by singer said it's
projected to be around twenty
twenty nine twenty third but how
far away is the and the land
that you're looking at enough
for its adjacent to us yes ma'am
but it seventeen and a half
sections of land so that's where
the project the next project
starts becoming very complicated
right now we use our welsh upon
straight to our tanks
as we move further way it
becomes prohibited for that so
the project naturally it's
larger we're going to be looking
at completely redesigning or
well field in our idea on where
the
thought process on how we move
that water to tell
require booster station and your
transmission buried electrical
it will be a c.
The potential depth of the water
will
that would potentially be
drilled there too many
drawn to red bid in our part of
the act before we go to ride
better where we are going from
about a hundred and forty feet
to two hundred and ten depending
on the subservice theology also
in areas where we have the the
larger same dunes
under the depth of the world but
that's that's funny when we were
there
so mister thank you for ringing
that tour attention I did not
know that you were having these
can issues number one with the
number well that you have and
you're still dealing with this
kind of level of manager with
water and again that's just an
indicator of the different
things that were seen around the
state room amongst water in just
how so many of these communities
have had to maintain their water
and waste water at the top of
their captain improvement plan
and some of the challenge that
i'm seeing from my area is just
that some of the projects that I
started on in the north early
nineties and two thousand some
of them are not really lasting
their useful life so what we
might ask and typically what
might have been a forty year
life received half of that in
some pieces less
so that's that's quite a
learning to me because I don't
really want to talk about help
they are but when I see things
like that
is just really an indicator
thank you for bringing that to
attention
mr chairman one last question
what has been the if any what
the impact of economic
development or that sort of
stuff in your communities are
result of these water issues you
focused on the health and safety
which I appreciate but
that's a big project in your
after you have revenues to pay
back some of these as far as the
economic development what we're
trying to do is minimize the
impact to that by insuring that
we have water for the future
what we've asked people to do to
this point so forth is not what
are you yards with the
sprinkler.
Not wash your cars about what
she drive was your house is
those kind of things to be very
mindful of waterloss and that's
been very very successful as
going to take an aggressive
stance moving forward and yes it
will take
it to take an aggressive rate
structure to to handle that
moving for with the prices that
were seen five years ago it
would have been half this or
even less ten years ago it would
have been a third of this and
then yet into with the the new
bray chicken restraints and
those kind of things
construction cost guy rocket we
can no longer put the electrical
lands overhead they have to be
buried that increases the cost
in some cases by sixty four now
to mention the fact that it gets
down on when we can actually do
the work how we go and do the
work those kind of things they
will also be working with the
state land officer they've been
great to work with this but it's
again a process and it is it's
definitely it's definitely going
to be difficult moving into the
future but I think we can do
water is final for economic life
we have wonderful really
relationships with university
there main campus branch is
located in tell us that usually
around.
Then we have a permanent result
kind of water caught population
estimated between thirty five
and thirty six hundred people
and then we have our regular her
tallest
scores businesses things like
that and we we have about twelve
thousand people it's weight
every year with the american
community survey data but that
is our regular population we
have an industry park we have a
hospital complex that is
expanding
beautifully in things that work
from cradle to grave we have
just added on memory care red
structures are are being
improved
per tell us as set to grow if we
can actually manage to last that
period of time that is so
critical to getting the ute
water
if I may have one thing to we
have as you may know we built a
new waste water treatment plan a
few years ago with a completely
functional reused pipeline
system we are able to fully use
the plant now and we're using
that reuse water for a number of
things everything from
construction to our separation
and we're using that for the
irrigation there is reality so
we're we're doing everyone our
population is doing everything
they can to maximise the use of
that and economic.
Okay thank you
if you want for the next
welfare.
I sure that that week we did
touch on that project quite a
bit the next one is as we talked
about moving
to expand our welfare it'll be
for planning design and
construction of this we have to
do
several surveys on state land
before we can move forward
cultural archaeological
biological then we're going to
do our geotech and your physical
tests on there to try to locate
the areas where we want those
wealth so also let us start the
construction of that boost to
take her booster station and
take battery
so that we can more efficiently
if we tried to put a well down
hold it was moving water twenty
eight miles that would be that
would be better difficult to and
what his falls for is the
literacy.
Oh sorry spent quite a bit of
time talking about this project
with a less if you have any
other questions i'll be happy to
answer.
Thank you when I might may be
good spirits when you come from
a real community like that is
that you're not going to lose
any economic development you're
right existing because we start
talking about some of these
commercial businesses that
you're talking about like the
memory care like the hospital
ineral areas that's our biggest
fear right that we don't lose
those economic opportunities and
those jobs really have because
we can't provide a basic need so
I think that's another
criticality we have to keep in
mind and these businesses are
they're coming in our during a
fantastic job of making sure
that they're water if issue they
are using landscaping that is
using natural elements and
plants it it's a beautiful
single system between that
business community are residents
and our leadership.
Investigating
thank you.
Mr chair we will recess at
eleven fifty three is what I
have and reconvene tomorrow at
ten am
thank you
that well the state force
you come.
I'm not sure well but
thank you
street
okay you take care
