It wasn't when the one switch.
Really
people
can see
That would have been offered
some
water now for
five years or something you know
I some mister
tuesday yeah.
And mention.
Yeah yeah yeah I thought I was
in his court
I don't have to remind you
we still
such a busy retailing.
Yeah.
It's hard to get more.
Yeah.
I know I don't know.
The.
Yeah.
On the class
right she we get going to stop
cost me new york.
Yeah.
A present.
Present.
President.
President.
Present.
Alright.
Thank you.
All those in favor
I
post.
Any comments.
Second mister check membership
thank you member to heal
those in favor I
post.
The revisions to the evaluation.
Will turn it right to mister mr
brian do both thank you
thank you sir
chairman
members of the committee
I am brand new often managing
director of the community and
economic development program at
another thing i'll be brief with
the background and overview and
get right to it or item for
today is the discussion of
potential revisions to the o e r
project application in our be
evaluation production policy.
The purpose of the opportunity
enterprise revolving fund is to
provide funding for the
commercial real state that
develops economic development
here in new mexico the orf is
designed to prioritize project
applications demonstrating local
support and financial need each
project application is scored
across four areas as described
in the memo contained in your
ord book within these
four impact areas there are
fourteen criteria that are
evaluated and scored they're
also in your book.
Um the prioritization policy
stipulates that there'll be a
concentration limits designed to
ensure equitable distribution of
enterprise assistance awards
crossed the state
the initial round of seventeen
point five million dollars was
one fourth of the total
capitalization of the program
as context for today's proposal
the summary results for round
one scoring
the mfa received hundred and
thirty one increase thirty three
complete applications the seven
projects listed in the chart in
your book
all scored above the sixty point
thresh.
Some scoring observations
relating to the proposed
revisions are the six person
scoring team for around one
comprised staff from both msa
and and I mean
they shared several observations
suggesting potential changes to
the prioritization policy and
project application that might
up to my scoring towards the
types of projects intended by
the sponsors of the pro.
So i've got three observations
i'd like to share with you
while speculative development
projects were well represented
in the applicant pool for around
one applicant questions
regarding future business
occupants were challenging for
speculative developers where
future occupants have not yet
been identified those projects
therefore appeared weaker in the
job creation and industry
categories which carry more
scoring weight
many applicants cited high
interest rates from other
potential lenders as
justification for the but
foretest where this criteria is
actually seeking to identify
projects lacking sufficient
sources of.
And finally the sizing of the
round at seventeen point five
million and the concentration
limits on individual projects
and per county in the prior
decision policy who is immediate
constraints in pipeline nineteen
of the thirty three applications
received were from urban
counties bernalio dona and santa
fe projects in those three urban
counties represented eighty two
percent of the total demand for
capital received during round
one
these observations were shared
with the oerb parcy committee
where there was an in death
discussion about the proposed
modifications so the proposed
revisions for the prioritization
policy include additional
definitions to clarify the
meaning of enterprise
development projects rural and
frontier locations additional
clarification on the types of
projects highlighted by the
sponsors and act emphasis on
prioritising projects
demonstrating local support and
financial need
removal of the concentration
limit on industry
moving the but foretest out of
ranking criteria and introducing
it as an initial step qualifying
eligible projects before
applicants receive access to the
full application
clarification of requirements to
demonstrate community support
and finally strengthen the
weight of rural front your
projects with the five points
from the but for test that was
removed from criteria this also
takes overall weight of project
location and economic
diversification up to thirty
points and reduces applicant
need and readiness down to t.
With respect to the project
application form and related
procedures staff recommends the
budget foretest as a pre
qualification section that
applicants must pass
the but for test prior to
receiving the full project
application as well as adding
the project application
category for applicants to
select the relevant type of
project from a menu clearly to
find.
More clearly tractoring the
application underwriting and
monitoring process
a recommendation as approved by
the oeb policy committee is that
we are recommending the
revisions to prioritization
policy and project application
for the consideration and
approval of the oerb today mr
chairman board members my team
and I are pleased to answer any
questions at this time.
As part of.
Mister chairman when we at the
staff level when we consider
policies for this funding level
we we consider it a one time
appropriation unless there's an
ongoing appropriation or your
mark that's identified in the
legislation we treat all of
these programs.
And so you know the rules from
the very beginning both on the
finance authority side and the
policies from the our beside
left the opportunity for a large
economic development project to
take as much as a quarter of the
funding
at this point at staff is not
recommending that you change
that number
it is in line with the policies
and you know there is
significant potential that could
come from one investment of
seventeen the n.
Potentially enough to equal
amount the amount that might be
generated from smaller projects
so at this point staff is not
recommending that you change the
amount available for any single
project obviously that's a
decision that you will get to
make
and we are not recommending any
changes to the way in which you
have currently outlined your
concentration limits we think
those were designed quite well
from the beginning and you know
the hard part when you have
limited funds and high amount of
demand is.
Believe that the geographic
concentrations the industry
cons.
Well established and I know that
the committee certainly
discussed that because there
were additional recommendations
made
to the policy committee but
ultimately this is the one that
was supported and and staff
concurs that this.
The.
I don't believe the actual
amount was discussed I think it
was I I to characterise the
discussion at the committee
level not to speak for the
committee members but it
certainly it was discussed that
an additional appropriation
would be highly
ideal because we saw so much
demand in just that first open
application with the short
period of time and limited
marking we saw ready demand for
the product so I believe the
committee felt felt an important
that additional appropriations
be made and certainly the
finance authority would concur
that the demand is there and
that's more to the point of you
know but until that gets there
we would not recommend any
additional changes to you see.
We
and no.
This.
Committee member for.
Which I can ask a question
related to that based on the
thirty three application.
I guess what kind of.
Mr chair
committee members of the.
The outreach for the program
and I believe this is through
the legislation in the policy is
the responsibility of any dd
we've supported them with
our internal processes like our
website and
public communications press
release but primarily the
marketing piece is I think well
done by the network of field
reps that enemy dd has as for
the split with.
Urban and rural believe that in
the memo and.
If I may help brian I have the
I have fair
mitched mister chair and board
members this is alicia the
program administrator on this
project I have eight world and
six front here
as a split the rest were urban
so a pretty good distribution if
you consider it relation to
population
that I think that the message
was was out all across the state
into the the frontier areas.
Thank you
one question that I am
it seemed to me and maybe this.
Excuse me
the urban projects were higher
dollars.
Which makes sense
what kind of resourc.
Mr chairman of mentioned there
are two different things that
play their one is you know how
you get to the application
process and I believe that we've
put the right resources and
dedicated sufficient resources
to help individuals get through
the application process when an
application comes in the first
thing that happens or request to
apply comes in is that a lease
caused them makes contact with
them and they have from the
beginning of a person they can
call should they have any
difficulty with the technical
systems of the way in which to
act you know answer the
application so we had a personal
touch despite it being you know
a highly
computerised application system
there was a personal touch from
the outset so that people knew
who they could contact so I
think that that part was there
relative to outreach sort of a
technical assistance outreach in
advance of applications we did
not really have much of an
opportunity after the
application was designed and and
we were ready to go forward to
do a lot of outreach I think now
we understand where some of the
pain points were for some of
those applicants understanding
how to answer questions when you
don't necessarily know who's
going to be in your facility
there are there are ways in
which we can now help them we've
seen of experience is given us
we can see see ways in which
outreach
being more proactive can be
quite helpful to those who did
not have ready feasibility
studies and did not have you
know higher levels of project
proposals in their back pocket
when the application opened so
we are we've we're now armed
with more information that we
think can be useful to both the
economic development marketing
folks as well as through weapon
ours and online technical
assistance to help them
up be better prepared to
complete an application.
Mr but I would I turned up right
in a moment but I would not that
he said that there were
difficulties for those who
didn't know who they're
applicant they're a potential
tenant was going to be
but there are ways to say we're
building it in a place that
zoned for acts it's being
designed for a grocery store
which is going to have this kind
of general wage limits so that
you can interpolate an
extrapolate you know what you
know you're planning to build
and who you think is going to be
in there and I don't think that
there was enough guidance given
in retrospect for those kinds of
applicants so we I think that
that kind of data the user or
best you know best estimates
given certain data points I
think that they would have
scored better should they you
know how they know and some of
those things so there was a lot
of blanks where there could have
been
some estimations that would have
been you know highly educated
guesses or estimates that would
have.
Yeah I would just
mister chairman members of the
board I I would that the
refinement to the community
support
section I think is going to help
applicants to tell their story
better.
In the first round we weren't
really distinguishing a quality
wise qualitatively between a
letter of support and actual
like public meeting where maybe
at a city council or town
council really came out in
support of a project and now we
are separating the types of
documents that are being
submitted to really indicate
a high level of community
support as well as a question
now about zoning as to whether
or not a the selected property
is currently already zoned
correctly so that they don't
have to get into a public
process that can be very lengthy
and so that helps with with a
readiness but also just how the
story that
the property is ready to go so I
I think that
some of these solutions are
going to help move the the
process forward into round two
and hopefully the the the next
three rounds and I I believe
elicia may have some additionals
missing
mr chairman and bird members I
guess i'd like to add that
adding the but for as a pass or
fail basically and explaining
that up front to them and having
a applicant to take that more
seriously it seems as though a
water scored low in that section
because they just put a
we need this for cheaper money
and we know we wouldn't want to
pay high interest rates and some
of up didn't even answer it i'll
address didn't get points for
that section so taking that out
of the ranking system and
putting it as a pattern feel and
we are digging more in
independent to that piece and
adding it to adding the points
to for terror whirl I feel also
will help
these at kids understand what
this program is geared towards
and that's all I want to mention
thank you
and I just like to add.
Mister chair
the the but foretest being
changed the way it's proposed
I believe and i'm trying to sort
of manage expectations here
may result in less completed
applications
but I would then speculate that
they would be higher quality
better prepared applications.
Score better and that we would
be presenting
projects that are really ready
to go so in this net next couple
of rounds this me slow people
down
in that initial step of house
fell but for but hopefully we'll
have really great.
And mister chairman the statute
requires that the finance
authority before we make a loan
make the determination that
there was insufficient funding
to complete the project without
without the
money in place so it is a
finding we have to make before
we can make a loan which is why
we're eager to not have a number
of projects that may be really
quality projects moved through
the system come through our
financing system and then
ultimately have a determined
that we can't make that loan
because in fact it'll lower
their interest rate what it
won't make the difference about
whether or not the project gets
completed and that's you know we
don't want to take folks through
what could be a three month
process and ultimately find out
that that's not a project we can
do so for their for their sake
and for frankly our staffing
sake in the board sake we want
to take that out of.
Might res.
We just asked that one question
mister chairman so they'll be
given sort of a pre application
that talks about but for and so
they'll have an opportunity to
focus on one question and not
have it be one of twenty that
they have to answer so we think
it's as a lease you mentioned
it'll put them in the right
framework for why it's important
that this funding the available
to them and so one question they
could put more time to it and
it'll it'll be a better
representation of the project to
start with.
Mr chairman that's right so you
once you answer that and we say
yes that mean there's reasonable
grounds to believe that this is
necessary to complete the
project then they'd be given
access to the rest of the
applications what's the same
application but the they're
great and you're there looked at
twice first for that first
ultimate question if they're
getting no there then we just
don't ever.
Any other questions.
Motion.
Always in favor
any post.
The.
Okay thank you.
I may need yeah
mr herman don't feel like you're
look at parties.
Yeah I wondered about it
okay thank you for that
assurance good morning everybody
uh mister chair and board
members and other people that
make this meeting happen
and those who have joined us
virtually my name is write her
mandama managing director of
credit I have a few touch points
to this program
I was I have the privilege of
being part of the scoring team
we have three three colleagues
from ed sams team and then ron
crews in alicia who's added some
value by her perspective and
myself can stitute the scoring
team and before I
briefly touch on this
informational memo by way of
update i'd like to mention a
couple of things to your
question earlier about where
we're there deficiencies and
some of these rural and urban
applications and it wasn't
strictly in that category some
of the urban applications fell
short in these areas as well so
areas such as appraisals of the
property
environmental
in many cases we know that that
can be a counter arms and a lot
of applicants hadn't had no
indication that they'd even
considered that at that point in
time
raising the question about
readiness and how to use.
Business plans
if this is a spec property and
you're going to go seek tenants
it would be helpful if you had
thought some about market demand
if you're in a role market
frontier market in your building
aspect space anticipating on
attracting a tenant what's your
support for market demand why do
you think you're building
actually is.
And then the pro former the p
and l pro former
and your underlying assumptions
as to market rep rates
occupancy operating costs those
kinds of things you could just
delineate between the people
that had done this before and
those who had not and from a
technical assistant stamp white
you know I think we can help
people we can guide people but
whether or not through the
process and the time constraint
they can go address those
deficiencies you know that's
sort of outside of our ability
to control that but that
hopefully adds just a little
more yet.
Some of the things that we saw
on the frontier.
If there's any questions on
there the unhappy to take him
now or i'll get to my report.
Well just through the exchange
of
here's
the the given take the delaysia
is really the authorities and
and the joint programs
representative of
you know she we all had lab
periodically and we go through
the applicants and we point
things out in she's excellent at
building a relationship and she
communicates that
some are in a position some
applicants are in a position to
respond and others just say you
know I i'm not in a position to
be able to do anything but I
appreciate the information we
have certain that we also added
this is round one they'll be
three more rounds so
you know it if you're lacking
some of these things you have
time you might not have time in
round one because you're scoring
deadline is coming up but but if
you're intent on your project
you know you'll help yourself if
you resubmit and round to
address and east efficiency so
it's just through the
communication.
The smaller pri.
Yeah.
I think you know without I mean
we didn't really
try and create
a data driven
correlation but my guess is your
spot on yeah for the reason to
you mentioned you know what a
qualified or experienced
developer is probably not
looking at rural and frontier
markets and probably not looking
for smaller projects because
you know it's it's a tougher
market to navigate even for the
experts.
It's just less it's more fraught
there more hurdles overcome
all the more reason that we need
to do the best we can to help
those.
So
you know it's just a feature but
but we.
And mister chairman i'd note
that those things are um we look
at them in the first part of the
application to determine
readiness we don't actually use
them the valuate them until we
get to the financial application
so we're not you know we're
doing some penciling out about
whether or not it's a feasible
plan generally speaking but when
we do the core underwriting in
the second application that's
when we really tear into you
know how well that feasibility
study was established.
Mr chair yes I would like to
have a little
to the answer regarding small
projects so too of the seven
that were put forward that
scored sixty points and above
two of those projects were under
a million dollars.
Fit within that small
application so two of seven is I
think pretty good that small
projects are represented already
in what.
I think there is some of the
larger question of you know.
They performed I think pretty
well in the first scoring room.
And one of those city different
was pretty sophisticated
applicate
just for
reasons that probably were
pertinent to their project act
or their p.
Experience that they'd garnered
in their.
And then the other small one was
also a very strong applicant
but in a business not related to
real estate development but but
they showed that they understood
the elements of a space
improvement to their building
that they presently occur.
It's it's not a direct
correlation if it's a small
project
those both happened to be in
urban markets.
But they were small inside.
There's a lot of variables.
Well in terms of actual hands on
technical assistance i'm not
sure they either enemy.
Is staff to do that but there is
a great network of free
assistance.
It's probably three good.
Yeah.
Score pr.
Two large p.
Also.
For businesses
that are just need help right
whether not.
I would recommend that they take
the time
now to be preparing for round
three and around four.
You get there the business plans
and they're their projections
and you know go through that
checklist of documents like.
The property.
And ready.
The.
I don't think that there was
formally.
I know that there's been
discussion about the system.
I'm not certain.
Our regional rector generalists
you have to comments that rick
made just a moment ago would be
far more beneficial to the
developer.
I think there needs to be some
specific.
Something
specific to this program
since you've been having these
conversations I reached out the
person that overseas.
Obviously
just
they're not going to be actually
speaking the web would you
probably this needs to be and mr
chairman of the finance
authority worked with them the
regional reps at the beginning
to understand the program and
the elements of the application
and how they'd be scored we did
a present it at least one
presentation for it
associations chambers of
commerce so there were some
general outreach about the
program we did not have the
experience we have now to really
be that helpful other than to
explain how the program was
going to work and then what
happened next because it's brand
new to everyone i'm how the
policies were going to be
interpreted so that was the
general focus of the first
outreach we are now in a better
position to provide it better
information on our website about
how to get prepared for an
application what you really need
to have before you start and
application and more detail
about how things will be
considered you know is this
going to be enough for community
alignment you know we can put
those in faqs have them
available or people when they're
looking at them on the weekends
we have people available
obviously during the week to ask
those questions to but we didn't
have the information we were
faced we were working on the
basics
I I think there should be some
effort to.
Yeah.
The.
Mr chairman I think with this
change the policy will be making
the amendments to the
application and then opening a
notice of application we would
try to work again with the train
the trainer and web hours will
go back through that initial
include speedc and score and
west so that they have a better
understanding we know when we
did training sport other
programs that we operated during
the recovery that that was a
very helpful it was helpful to
train them in advance so we'll
make sure they're included in
the train the trainer comments
before the application opens
I don't know that we have a next
probably would be after the
application is closed so that's
likely I can't do my dates here
but i'd likely going to be at
the beginning of the calendar
year at the end of the
either at the end of this
calendar year at the beginning
of the next it'll take us you
know six weeks to get through
that application.
Mr chairman I want to make
certain that we have enough time
to both make the system changes
which I don't think are going to
be too difficult but to get the
educational information together
and on our website and to get
training scheduled that's where
I think we're going to have a
little more difficulty obviously
november offers a good
opportunity for us to do that
and then we'd open our
application after that's been
made available
so i'm i'm thinking that we
would open it in mid november
seems like
likely time.
Okay mister terman will make
sure.
Any other questions comments.
Going to set out a proposed.
Yes we'll look at our current
meeting schedules
and see when we can make that w.
Well those in favor
I
you everybody
to visit our attending virtually
have a good day thank you i.
