The.
Present.
Present.
The.
I.
I.
Thank you very much
practicing
that would immediately I also
want to welco.
Yeah.
Building update.
I've heard of medi.
Increased amount.
Item six point two is.
Originally these.
You'd l.
Therefore staff.
The.
Who has a plate.
The loan.
And the town will receive the
loan at zero.
The pledge revenue.
Point four.
On the ninety th.
For the village and.
Yeah.
The.
Are they helped by financial
costs
and the respect of equipment
this requirement will provide
twenty five thousand.
We have your.
Members of the board the next
pi.
Added to the drinking water.
Included in that.
The.
Additionally this board may re.
Disadvantage communities can.
Really disability.
The.
What a system at seven thousand
population of.
Our partners at the environment
department collecte.
So the potential is for higher
months of.
Comments that I have.
Mexico finance authority bird so
are next drink.
State revolving loan fund for
lead service inventory as the
city of farming ten and our
project total amount today is
one million five twenty eight.
They loan.
Revenue over water utili.
A coverage is five point.
Six.
On the this.
This line.
The.
Is.
Our coverage is.
Madame chair members of the
board.
The authority plied to the water
state revolving fund for a
financing amount of one point
one million dollars.
Thirty thousand three hundred
dollars is will be a twelve year
term two years construction the
net system revenue of the
waterfund will serve as the
pledge they expect the
courageous one point four nine
times and this project ranks
number seven on a product and
with that staff recommends
approval when we start for any
questions.
Morning madam charinboard
members so which you see here
present for you is i'm done and
a mutual domestic water consumer
association and this is a
drinking water state revolving
on fun requests and this pr.
This photo term.
And the coverage for this
request.
And this request has a principle
for given.
On the revenue that would be
utilized for the.
And this specific drinking water
project.
And this is the first time that
this project has appeared before
the board stuff does recomm.
So.
Our financial adviser robert
bought so I do see him on camera
i'm not sure.
But we do have myself in rock
should you have any questions so
see another account.
We have a short five year term.
Our net interest cost is to be.
And i'm page.
The fun funds will be used.
We do have.
Most recent.
Request today.
Is for our higher equipment
public works equipment and also
public works projects this loan
is for five million four ninety
five the size l.
The.
Four seven times is our debt
service c.
And the this does as I noted
does fall within our policies.
Owns revenue has positive
historical performance.
Have the swabor request this
loan also has a contingent
interse.
In line with another one we
have.
Gross receipts r.
Again on modify twenty twenty
two on it zero f.
The.
Thank you madame chairman so we
do have our financial advisor
for this loan on soon as well
about dads and he.
So the especially.
During this past november twenty
twent.
So there's thirteen schools
within the district or multiple
improvements district wide for
those schools and I do have an
page one.
We tried to provide a less that
too long but within the twenty
twenty two to twenty twenty
sixth five year facility master.
This is our first request it is
ten million dollars.
Yeah.
And staff does r.
Board we have self central
southwest authority who applied
to the people out for the alone
amount to three million eight
hundred twenty five thousand it
will be a ten year term they do
qualify for a portion alone at
two percent
interest rate for their mhi
status the per germany will be
net system revenue the coverage
will be what.
The purpose of alone which is
listen I want on page or fifty
two is for the expansion of the
corollators are landfill this
land for just financing includes
planning construction and
engineering costs I will note
that this longer come before the
border back in october and
receive approval for the amount
to three million three hundred
thirty thousand
due to communications with the
authority they did ask to
increase that amount to cover.
That increase would be four
hundred ninety five.
And in increase that.
Shanks alone include that this
new land filled out for on a
tribute service for its
community the project will also
help the authority to continue
to provide cleaning.
This loan i'm sorry this
attitude is to you this last
audit in twenty twenty two it
was on modified within
outstanding zero findings this
again is the second time this
project comes before the board
and myself and mister eriker
again just after a new questions
on this project.
Cloud car missile school
district made insurance come to
the prepared for a long amount
of two million dollars they do
also qualify for this language
running as your percent based on
their mind you'll be a twelve
year term the expected interest
cost will be two point seven
nine percent general obligation
bond will serve as the pledge it
will have a one times coverage
the eve dished the receive order
approval and twenty november of
twenty twenty one or four
million dollars for projects
throughout your district on page
one sixty three I provided a
list of those projects they
intend to use the funding for.
Strengthen the slow and include
that the total says valuations
for the vet for the dishead has
still gone over the past five
years major taxpayers equal five
point twenty percent which is a
little concentration risk I have
also listed the defeat guarantee
as well witnesses the dishes to
any twenty two audit contains to
repeat a significant
efficiencies which has appeared
and previous audits the district
has provided a correct of action
plan to address these items
that ask him to hear it was in
twenty twenty two it was a
modified those two findings I
have listed for you on page one
sixty four
it contains a two signature to
signa.
With that staff does recommend
approval and I do sense pretty
questi.
Man and chairman board members
but you see present in front of
you for me to read ranking
service he district and this is
a pp twenty twenty four
equipment loan request and they
have a tax exempt long
requesting is for three million
two hundred and ninety four
thousand three hundred eighty
four dollars in its for a seven
year term and it has a three
point seven eight percent
interest cost and the coverage
is three point six eight times
and that's what the one point
three times coverage requirement
so the middle rear grand
conservacy district has applied
to the p per f and it's to
purchase multiple quantities of
heavy equipment medium equipment
and late equipment on their
respective apparatuses the
middle rear grandconstruct is
replacing all of this equipment
because it's well beyond its
useful life the proceeds will be
used for but are not limited to
the items that you see listed
there in your board material
their own page one seventy seven
for you review and the district
has pledged its nets to since
revenues of security and
repayment for this I am strength
included for this request that
equipment will assist the
district and providing ongoing
services and this are own
project also has a healthy debt
service coverage of three point
sixty eight times when it comes
to weaknesses there's not a
report the fiscal year twenty
twenty two but it was unmodified
had zero findings and this is
the first time that this project
has appeared before the enemy
board staff does recommend.
I'm just just one please what
was the amount
madame chair and both yeah thank
you I see it okay yeah thank
you.
The.
So madam chair and board members
which you see here's for capital
minister school district and
this is a serious twenty twenty
four general obligation bond in
its an education technology not
and they have a loan request for
three million one hundred
thousand dollars this is for a
five year term and has a three
point sixty nine percent
net interest cost and the
coverage is one point zero times
as required you don't notice
that this project has a tax
extent disadvantage tax exempt
and tax belonging to long
components capital municipal
school district has applied to
the p per f to finance the
purchase of education technology
equipment for district white
projects the justice has one
elementary school one middle
school and one high school and
the loan proceeds will be used
for better not limited to to the
projects that are listed in your
materials and it's on page one
eighty six in your work material
free review strength include
that the education technology
notes are short term financing
with final maturity not succeed
five years as well as the
upgraded technology are is going
to benefit the students also
major taxpayers do equal one
point four six percent of the
total assessed valuation which
reflects a low concentration
risk of the tax base and the
majority of those major
taxpayers are utilities and
infrastructure businesses for
that specific community when it
comes to weaknesses and under
report the fiscal year twenty
twenty two are it was unmodified
and has zero findings this is
the first time that this project
has appeared before the animal
board staff does recommend
approval and i'm happy to stand
for any questions you may have.
Yes I paid two hundred of your
meeting materials
is a summary of our our report.
As you can see we met on tuesday
december fifth then the members
listen were present
we had reports from inenement a
staff that
uhm talked about the various
loans and their current status
and I tell you they they get
into the weeds and pretty
impressive group
that presented that day also the
venture capital program will be
presenting for your approval
today with the committee's
recommendation a ten million
dollars investment in the
advance to mexico limited
partnership which is mission
driven finance
which is an innovative
venture capital fund that makes
loans with creative structures
so it's kind of a need deal it's
not just principle and interest
it can do interest only payments
or event driving payments and
some things which you'll hear a
presentation here at a moment
there's also a recommendation
also coming to the board today
for a revision to the eventual
capital investment policy and
then finally we also had another
round of new market tax credit
card.
That was
presented so
it's gord to present it to the
committee to
our report and i'll stand for
any questions.
Madame chair members of the
board it's great to be with you
today before are you as a
recommendation to commit up to
ten million dollars to advance
new mexico which is a new fund
on that was created by a mission
driven finance on i'm going to
give you a bit of an overview
some highlights and also why we
think it fits really well within
the venture capital program and
them going to hand it over to
ethernet samsung he read.
And conducted due diligence and
he's going to review the
diligence process and some of
the strengths and weaknesses
that they would like to br.
And then really excited to hand
it over to lauren graton and
stephen noons
one of the co founders.
They are here today to present
more about the strategy that
they've developed specifically
for new mexico small businesses
and also their organization and
their plans.
And so in in the cover memo just
some highlights of mission
driven finance they were founded
in twenty sixteen and there an
innovative impact investment
manager the manager number of
the spoke in inclusive capital
strategies that are really
designed to fill the gap between
philin traffic capital and
traditional investment capital
and mission driven finance has
been working over th.
On the capital landscape
research that was conducted we
presented the conclusions of
that report.
Not report next street
identified five different areas
of what they called a capital
gaps capital needs of early
stages and small businesses here
in new mexico mission driven
finances focusing on what was
characterized as the missing
middle growth capital gap that's
where a small businesses arm
aren't able to
access affordable financing the
products that they need to fit
kind of in between two large for
what local cdfi's angel
investors and friends and family
networks can provide and our
smaller and on different terms
and what our local banks are
able to provide so they're
really focused on that missing
middle
gap and that fund.
To small businesses
that look very different from
the traditional provider.
The.
In terms of the the program fit
so you can see here makita
scored this proposal stronger
very strong on four of the five
i'm mission objectives of our
program mission driven is going
to be targeting in particular
entrepreneurs from underserved
communities that's defined in
the investment policy it covers
rural entrepreneurs and
entrepreneurs from communities
that have been systematically
denied access to capital and so
we see that is a very strong
benefit on there's also
hypotential for sector
diversification and some of the
other strategies that mission
driven managers and other
another states and other
ecosystems they've deployed to
construction companies and
educationals educational
services housing development and
social assistant sectors so we
know that those are sectors that
really aren't targeted by
traditional venture capital and
investors
we we did want to highlight on a
couple more things on two o two
the fee structure of the fund so
it is AAA two twenty two percent
m.
Relatively standard for a
venture capital equity phones
two things I wanted to point out
the carry in this case
is ten percent but on an
additional ten percent is only
possible if they are deploy at
least two thirds of the capital
to businesses owned by
underserving.
So it's kind of it's that's
actually unique and son of most
traditional investment funds
have incentives that are aligned
with financial returns in this
case the manager has an
opportunity to earn an
additional carry on if the
achievement and impact are
objective and that is.
On the other thing we wanted to
bring to your attention is while
two and twenty is fairly
standard for venture capital
equity funds on private credit
funds can have lower management
fees on we still believe that a
two cent management fee is
appropriate this is a smaller
fund it's a bispoke strategy on
and you'll hear more from
mission driven they're really
trying to offer affordable
financing and they're doing that
at the at the detriment of a
higher financial return for the
strategy managers typically rely
on those financial returns to
help cover operating expenses so
in this case their intentionally
trying to keep on their rates
lower for new mexican borrowers
and as a result we think on a
two.
The.
I did want to raise this
recommendation comes with
request for for two two waivers
of parameters within the venture
capital investment policy on so
the first highlighted here is on
on concentration limits for
funds focused on new mexico
businesses written in the policy
is that nmfa cannot be more than
sixty percent of t.
On and in this case we've
mission driven has really
developed a boat the spoke
strate.
On and it's very possible that
this could be what is called a a
fund of one we may be the only
investor on in this fund on that
does give us arm from a legal
perspective we will have on
a controlling posit.
On in funds where we would have
other lps on and part of the
reason on
this fund is structured this way
is it mission driven finances
seeking to raise the match
capital from private investors
on two different ways on so they
are looking to raise.
Investors are filling throughput
investors phil and thropic
foundations and institutions.
And we know that those investors
typically take longer on in
terms of their internal
process used to make investment
decisions on so mission german
proposed an alternative arm
means of raising the match
they're going to be working with
mission driven lenders and on
our transaction basis they're
going to be raising capital from
other lenders and deploying that
alongside fund investments so
every investment from the fund
is is going to be matched but
instead of it being matched from
an in
side by side investment in the
fund it's actually going to be
matched by other mission driven
so it's kind of a unique two
pranged approach if it's armed
successful they could end up
raising them the wonder one
private capital match if they
can attract additional lps
but they recommended this
approach so that they could once
the fund is closed
start start deploying.
On and so because of that it is
possible that we could be the
only or i'm s.
The second waiver would be of
the gp commitment so that a a
very standard requirement for
traditional vc funds and that's
that members of the general
partner are committing.
And their personal capital
alongside
the investor capital and that's
too aligned interest because
this is not a high finance.
A vehicle or strategy we believe
that that is less relevant and
we believe that.
For what th.
The.
The.
Madam chair members of the board
I think though that's that's the
extent of what I wanted to
highlight here i'm gonna pass it
over.
Members of the board great to be
with you again i'll going to
keep this very brief and because
the mission driven teams here I
won't cover the overview but if
you have questions after their
p.
Or for me happy to answer them
in terms of our due diligence
process mikita conducted our
standard process which I went
through and in detail last time
so i'm not going to do that
again this time but.
Party background checks multiple
reference calls etc we had a
really for some discussion at
our investment committee and
determined that this product
that's being offered today is a
reasonable
would be a reasonable investment
decision for investors such as
yourselves that are focused on
impact and are able to accept a
return a differentiated rate
return.
In terms of the strength and
weaknesses of the opportunity I
thought that was the other item
I would like to just highlight
for you
ryan mentioned the fees for this
opportunity are high relative to
you other credit funds we think
that's a we think that's a a
concern but it's also
appropriate in light of the size
of the fund and the fact that
they're going to have a pr.
Working on this one at least
half time but.
Really important part of making
the strategy successful.
I did I should start with the
positives which are
the fact that this one is going
to serve on an underserved
market there one of the things
that we you know when we start
to to do this project as the
look for funds that were doing
what this fun is doing in there
aren't any and so
that it was highlighted in the
next year report but also
something that we have to had to
create and so that's been a a
process of the last few months.
They've been well willing to
work with us to create this
really custom solution to meet
the needs it's going to invest
in diverse sectors of the
economy so there are loans being
made in certain sectors the
economy but as ryan mentioned a
lot of the loans will.
Parts of new mexico there really
don't have acc.
From traditional banks are from
even from micro lenders.
Um and finally the mission
driven team has actually done
this bef.
From this team in other markets.
On the
considerations for you I
mentioned the fees the other two
would be that mission driven has
other products and is not a
hundred percent focused on this
product we thank.
And then a lastly there is a
minimal track record for a
product like this as I mention
they have.
And they've done this in other
places but there's not an
extensive track record of.
I stopped there and stand for
questions.
Of the board.
Um i'm worried grating enjoying
this mention.
Context.
And i'm too of four others a
little bit of a summary about
the firm and and as I shared
when I was here in the summer.
And intentional impact.
As.
We have now sir passed.
All supporting inclusions.
About nineteen million of that
has been.
With high impact small
businesses across.
All of these business.
Our approach.
In like.
This all across the country
as as evidenced here and so this
is as even alluded to it is.
Understanding.
Our team is represented here we
have an intentionally.
Off your board packet this is a
finding fr.
That ryan reference across the
continue of capital we spend
time over the last twelve months
with our partners in deep
partnership with organiz.
Businesses across new mexic.
New mexico and then conducted
several focus groups directly
with businesses repre.
The current ca.
And where there may be ope.
Through that one of the gaps
that we want to highlight that
is sho.
Which is to say that for small
businesses that are.
Family member whether it is a
seat and.
Unfortunately often a credit
card or from an online lender
there is a growing ecosystem.
There is also an existing
commerci.
As well as for businesses.
Through programs like the new
mexico finance authorities
venture capital program a grain
venture ecosystem where there is
a major gap i.
And where the commercial financ.
Providing.
And we've heard a lot of
commercial.
That gap because we believe.
A large and thriving business.
Page two hund.
What it looks like and as you
heard representative collins
speak to what what it often.
Our philosophy and deploying
this missing metal captol is
it's not a one.
There are often period.
There is often eventually.
Particularly f.
Until they.
Many different.
To ten in the board packet talks
a little bit about the strategy.
Million dollars that we have
that deployed through seventy
humidity of loans we have
supported boat small businesses
as w.
We embrace a very inclusive
approach to underwriting and
that has at resulted in being
able.
Perhaps most proud of.
Most of our portfolio.
Responsible custody enough
capital i'm and to work a l.
He won in the board packet talks
a little bit about how we think
about impact and you.
However there are additional
elements that we.
But.
And then lastly.
Businesses through the products
and services that they are.
Access.
The.
Yeah.
As much waiting.
Twelve talks a little bit about
how we think about providing and
pricing our capital we are
intentional about bringing.
And so.
Within this venture program we.
We we take the philosophy that
we want to provide a product
that is aligned with where the.
Reductions potentially in store
for next year and we hope for
that.
To support.
But generally where are our
product is we take a similar
philosophy to community
development financial
institutions or cd.
We don't want our borrowers to
be shopping between us and abo.
Yeah.
This market camp can always
bear.
We feel like app in the market
and one that can set.
I'll pass it to learn to cl.
As.
Established trust and.
Attorney.
By designing intention.
So that.
We design.
Having that and.
Already that I don't have
capital yet like you to wait um
just.
Yeah.
I've opportunities.
Services.
And.
But we do have other p.
I.
Absolutely.
And.
That is
funded by.
Adding to.
That may not.
Hi i.
Yeah.
Madam chair members of the board
before you are on a set of
recommended changes to the
venture capital investment
policy
all highlight in three different
areas and really buy on large we
think having worked with this
policy now for a couple months
on a few investments on just
relatively minor.
Art refinements on and and and
and highlighting
uh.
So first on in the mission and
diversification objectives of
the program were recommending
emphasizing on the focus on
sector diversification of the
state's economy that's implied
by a lot of the narrative in
that section of the policy but
we'd like to
emphasise it by creating one of
the five bullets you know
specifically around that then
it's also very much in line with
that mission in diversification
objective framework those five
can rankings that that makita
puts forth when they look out a
potential investment opportunity
so that's the first on
a part of the the red lines that
you'll see on that next is in
the the match requirement that's
really just some wording
refinements around where that
match capital needs to come from
in the case of if it's a steep I
have funded investment on that
those are private investors and
in the case of.
A sbci
that it's that it's also private
c LCS.
And then lastly
in kind distributions on that's
highlighted under the list of
standard terms on that are
highlighted in policy so it's
it's just a list of of what's
included but we think it's
important to have income
distributions being something
that we're not planning to
accept so for example what this
means is on once a fund ends the
life of the fund ends were
expecting cash distributions
from gps on from the realization
of their investments or in the
case of a credit fund like mdf
on repayments on loans on in
some cases if a gp mentor
capital managers unable to exi.
They will look to give that
position directly to the lps and
the fund on we that is not
something that animal fa is
really looking to do we would
prefer that on gps
return return.
So it's it's better to have key
terms like that at least
highlighted in policy it's front
clear to potential gps we would
be investing in funds that
they're managing on and so
that's that's that third.
And i'm very happy i'm not going
to go through the red line just
in the interest of time.
Madame chair not this round of
revisions they were really more
internally driven from
implementing the policy and
refinements we have yet to go
back as you know earlier this
year.
Rules and program objectives
overall on so we have yet to a
formally officially do that on
and also at this point based on
what we've seen in the market o
staff is not at this time
recommending any additional
revisions but we feel that you
know this policy you know and
monthly o.
I.
The.
Yes good morning
madam chair.
Thank you.
So a manager and board members
which you see before you
prioritization of ranking of the
new market task credit
application for around thirty
one.
This around with supported by a
number of outreach efforts to to
recruit applicates to the
program and through seminars web
and also
our reached by the regional
finance manager team
at the
this particular around is a
round that was up into both roll
and also a metro applications
this around and.
Was open for a forty five days.
This the new market test credit
ranky processes of a process
that in our innocency policies
these policies provide a two
step process of which we review
applications the applications
were reviewed by three members I
have member from economic
development department a member
from our advisory team from
baker tilly and a staff member
at the the finance authority the
the rekin process is based on a
hundred point in which the
application is scored for
application readiness
for job creation
also for a community impact is
support and export and based
revenues and and job creation.
And new capital investment
the second part of the financial
review that's staff and we'll
take is determined if the
project needs how moderate
readiness and that means they
project that is ready to move
forward and is shoveled ready
staff has conducted due
diligence calls and and have
concluded that there are three
projects that are ready to move
forward and and scored
adequately this thirty this
thirty first round made
available at ten million dollars
of allocation that came from
there a word of the twenty five
million dollars allocation that
we receive and october of
twenty.
The three projects they were
move afore with are louisiana
pepper roses southwest and
favorite cosmetics that all met
the sixty point threshold and in
also met the criteria of
moderate readiness.
This rakin had ten projects
nine percent is ten projects
were twelve that applied
as the twelve they reply one
within eligible due to the type
of project and the location at
the project.
So with that matter chair that
is update are the ranking and
with the next step is at the
videota be bringing fourth of
these three potential
application and next couple
months so with that stand for
questions that recommend
approval.
Madam chair I think I I think
roll projects that meet a five
million dollar criteria are
pretty hard to find and and also
in a specific since the with new
market task credit this is his
tracks are
are
our designated by the US
treasury to outline you know
what now metro role vs metro and
you know we rerained two issues
like
for example a community like
cuba new mexico which is
obviously a town that has
because this room here
consider urban in the new market
task credit program and so we
ran into issues like that also
again we got a fine good rural
project that are ready to move
forward and so what we're going
to do in this next round in
round thirty two is a focus
primarily under rural areas
because we do have a role
requirement with the twenty five
millio.
And mr chairman member swise or
I told the agr.
Sure a matter of chair remember
a weller so what we all do is
look to phone timing a dollars
out of this.
And then we will open up another
round to
hopefully attract different
projects and as we just talked
about rural projects you
complete.
And so
you know it is
the program it is you know
unique and as you guys will see
in january
you'll be shocked in r via some
of the presentations that's
going to come before you and you
you'll you'll remember this.
I.
May take advantage of the pause
in pass.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Also apologize to my colleagues
if they suddenly
see them appear on their desk
is.
Would good morning for the
recommending his oscar other
biggest cheap financial officer
i'm usually accompanied.
By our controller norman will
stick it but he is off on a very
a deserve.
Ah disturbing from that so i'll
be making the presentation by
myself
as is the practice
at least for last few years we
present to you on a quarterly
base.
And so this report covers the
first three months of the year
it which was very slow actually
compared to what it was when
it's been for the past thirty
months or so there was a little
bit of a pause a little bit of a
give us no chance to
take a breath here are the most
urb
its in terms of our operations
it's construction seasons
requisitions coming in for
projects and and that's really
where are our time goes the only
other spike here in this case
this year was the work that we
did for the venture capital of.
That was that really
represented.
The biggest point of activity
otherwise everything was was
pretty slow based on the
information of the our
experience the first three
months
have you reported we're a well
in budget were within budget in
terms of the authority that you
gave us the only areas we're
thinking based on the
information or the experience
with the first three months is
to
adjust are non operating
line items including revenue uh
interest rates were much higher
than what we had a
budgeted for and so we're just
in that the other thing is
that we knew in september was
that we were product going to do
only about two bond issues
what happened in october and
we're thinking that'll keep us
in goods dead until the spring
at this point there seems to be
enough cash in the operating for
are in the
long fund such that if if things
just go up normal.
So that's like have to report
really in terms of our in terms
of our budget we are looking at
a bringing to you next month
what we as we usually do a mid
year budget adjustment and
forecast etc I can tell you at
this point.
White within budget we are not
going to be at this point
recommending to you have been
significant changes all um
changes it we're gonna take
place within the line items etc
could be a reality in them to
different programs into a
different source of needs which
we will highlight then in our
report so madam cheer the board
will be that is my my report on
her.
First quarter budget
performance.
Yes yes it's information
the next one yeah I will be
asking you to accept it.
Yeah.
The.
We have to follow johns shock
and are
presentations
exciting
good morning numbers of the
board for those that don't know
me i'm dan opening on your chief
legal officer welcome to the new
board members
joining us on zoom is chip pier
searching financial strategist
we also have our bond council
from solicity brad patterson.
The item before you want page to
sixty as the second amendment.
To our one hundred million
dollar line of credit that we
maintain with wells fargo bank
i'll give a brief overview that
chip speak a little bit about
the underlying peace and if
oscar has anything to add as
well and then i'm gonna walk you
through a fairly short
resolution that we can use so
that we can complete and keep
the line in place that we use we
have maintained this line of
credit it's a hundred million
dollar line of credit we've
maintained it for several years
it contains three different
components it contains a ninety
million dollars tax exempt
component that we're able to
borrow one.
And within that ninety million
dollars.
Tranched has a subtranche of
fifteen million that's on a
taxable basis that's tired you
are supplemental credit reserve
fund that we can borrow one and
we also have a ten million
dollars taxable tranches they
are all tied to what is called
the supplemental
the daily simple secured
overnight financing rate for
years it was the library but
with the removal of labor this
was in.
The reason we're here before you
today is that line expires this
month would you like to keep
that line in place and when
we're find ourselves at a
mismatch in the market we're
able to a drawn a line of credit
and then reimburse that through
when we sell bonds.
We've drawn on it I believe the
last time was over a year ago
was the last time we drew on the
line I don't think we have any
intentions chip can speak to
that about whether we intend to
drawn that any time and then
your future
what we did do this time with
the amendment is chip and his
folks went back to wells fargo
and asked them to take a look at
their pricing particularly on
the undrawn commitment fee that
we pay especially when we.
Those fargo we found working
with our financial advisor that
the commitment fee on the
undrawn amount was a little
higher than what the market had
been presenting to us whilst
fargo agreed they lowered that
commitment amount from thirty
five basis points twenty eight
which a basis point which was
consistent with going market
conditions.
We put the line of credit it's
essentially it has been reviewed
by council all parties involved
if this board approves it we
will obtain signatures after
madame chair and member nichols
will sign a few documents and we
will close on this tomorrow
we'll start go has this line
actually it was set to expire on
december eighth they understood
the mismatch in the timing of
the board approval that is
needed so they have agreed
rather than that the line will
could be considered not to have
a gap so it will be this
amendment will be effective as
of december.
With that i'll turn it over to
chip or if oscar is anything to
add for any other comments on
this and before I walk you
through the.
The.
Or thanks dan and
good morning madame chair and
bard and starking to you
yet dan basically stole all my
thunder I was going to talk
about the reduction and fees but
ding in art you did that so
i'll give you a little bit of
background that.
When we when we got this
proposal I did have our
financial buyers or pf take a
look at the recent letters and
lines are credit that they had
been involved in and they
give us a spreadsheet kind of
work where not commission be
pricing had been.
Based on that we did go back to
well spared when they were very
you know willing to make an
amendment to their pricing and
as the invention seven basis
points about a twenty percent
reduction from what we had
historically been paying which
works at the seventy thousand
dollars at a a year on that i'm.
And utilize the community so
that's yeah it's not nothing and
we do appreciate well spardos
willingness to make that
adjustment
and yes dan said that the line
is we we initially implemented
this year as a go when
the pprf would if it got down to
say five million dollars the the
find itself and we got a seven
million dollars application
we would basically have to delay
that funding that application
until we went into the bond
market again so we we secured
the line of credit to avoid that
and give us more flexibility to
sort of meet needs as they came
do
in the subject on years the ppr
has grown to the point where
slow through at the beginning of
the fiscal year is yeah fifty
sixty million dollars and
typically we start the fiscal
year now with seventy eighty
million dollars in the bang
at the start.
What that does is it gives us a
lot more flexibility so the
reason we have been using a line
a lot is that we've got more
resources to
to make warrants with but it is
still a good thing to have in
our back pocket to the except
that we do get some unforeseen
domainian that doesn't really
wind up with a easy bond issue
it's scheduled so
yeah I think that the the
process has worked and we
appreciate the wells fargo and
the relationship when they were
paid with them for several years
and so
I would recommend approval and
would stand for any questions.
Manager members of the board
before I turned to the
resolution the other important
factor of this is we we did have
the opportunity.
To go out in.
There's a cost associated with
doing that and there's a cost
associat.
Credit so we did find a
significant cost savings in
doing an amendment to the line
with wells fargo ability to work
with us and conti.
The resolution begins on page to
seventy eight it is very similar
to past resolutions that you've
seen which contains a history of
the of the line of credit
transaction walks you through
the amendment dates that have
taken place over the past few
years and a series of
supplemental definitions the
the important pieces of the
resolution really start on the
findings on page two eighty one
which discusses the fact that
the the line of creditors in
essence results in savings and
interest costs to the finance
authority it's necessary
for the interest of public
health safety well for the
residents of the state to
maintain this line of credit and
that the maximum interest rates
are consistent.
The remainder of the resolution
walks through the authorization
to allow us to enter into the
second amendment it details what
I outlined earlier the tranches
that are available the amounts
that.
Those are all tied to the line
of credit agreement which has
the
sofa rates if you will that art
are tied to each of them.
And lastly it it authorizes the
finance authority and members of
staff to sign appropriate
documentation that allows us to
close on th.
I have nothing further on this
moon chair of stand for
questions and would recommend
approval of the second amendment
and oscar looks like it's yeah
from that thirty five to twenty
eight basis which represents a
seventy thousand dollar savings
for us annually we had a thought
that we were going to um see
higher prices this year as well
as to get the cost of you know
having to go out for an rfp etc
so by doing this we're going to
be able to save about three
hundred thousand dollars in this
year's budget which we're going
to use to fund the activity or
though the work that's been done
on the third lead.
The.
Absolutely not chair members of
the board we always have that
ability and we work to structure
our contracts and things such as
this in a very consistent and
similar fashion to always allow
us the ability should we be
dissatisfied or find that
conditions warranted.
I.
Yeah.
As I mentioned in my budget
report the summer was a very low
activity relatively speaking
number were busy all the time
but there was nothing new on you
a major programs initiated like
had been happening past two
years in fact two program sort
of kind of came to bed went to
bed over the summer or there
were no bond issues there were
no me.
Course the summer and our
financial seams reflect that I
would just point out a couple of
things a couple of miles down
for you to to to see
one air is that we are now a
three billion dollars as it
operation
we crossed into that of you if
you want to go
the other thing too is it there
were almost a two billion
dollars a loans receivable to
our loan portfolio is almost too
two billion dollars as of
september crossed into to two
billion dollars in october when
we went out for a a simple
tenious long bond a package with
about ricky bernaldio utteratory
so are explanational statement
you'll see from us you'll see as
a a two billion dollars.
Um
receivables or a blow portfolio
and a three billion dollar a
toll operation beyond that are
the financial statements who
have reflect aren't our normal
growth we are in a position
increased about five million
dollars from this point last
year all very much as a as
expected our cash is where we
expected to be and a but I
really have nothing more than to
highlight as I as up you know it
already was every very boring
summer
financially speaking.
Yeah.
I.
Yeah.
