Time out of your busy schedules
to be with us today behind tab I
on page seven is a memo and
supporting document a copy of
the application the project
application that we attend
intend to vote shortly after
this meeting today should be
approved as you just approved in
the minutes and as required by
rule
the finance there is required to
create find the forms and
guidelines for this project
application
the prioritization policy passed
in April provided clear
direction to the finance
authority as to how to structure
that application create the
requirements and
essentially structured so that
the points legislative and
policy flow with the application
the application itself is by and
large designed to follow the
structure of the policies such
that the NMED D. and the NMFA
review team as well as the
project committee can easily
follow the policy along with any
application in order to follow
along with the scoring
guidelines
the scoring guidelines are made
up of four categories each
according to twenty five points
with additional sub
categorisation those categories
are community support job
creation employment business
location and industry an
applicant need and reading this
the policy has.
Areas that make up about thirty
points that are simply it
objectively applied where the
system will provide to the
review team uh suggested number
of points in those areas of
project location leverage
capital construction jobs and
the economic development
targeted industry very objective
easy to score based upon the
answers in the application the
rest of the application is going
to be heavily evidence based the
applicants will be answering
questions providing a detailed
descriptions and yet further
having to supply significant
amounts of supporting
documentation depending on the
answers to their questions in
the application there by the the
following review
we expect to be rigorous by the
NM EDT NMFA team for the a list
of prioritize projects it'll go
to the project committee for
further vetting
the application itself was built
in a secure portal.
it within that portals where the
applicants will.
The essentially register
suggests that they have interest
in that application and then we
have a team of folks sitting
behind me that will be receiving
those interest forms and filling
out are getting access to the
application just as far as
process goes the prioritization
list will be provided to the
project review committee as a
provided I believe in rural and
policy
the further vetting of that list
and all projects that meet at
least a minimum score of sixty
and have a high or medium
reading this definition meet
that definition will be
presented to the entire
opportunities enterprise Review
Board and then after that those
projects approved by this body
will then be provided access to
the financing application.
the just a little pause there is
the staff or on my rate will be
presenting momentarily once the
financing policies are commented
on here today and approved or go
to our pool process NMFA those
policies will be used to design
the financing application for
use and early fall we're
recommending in the memo that
this first round will be open
until July thirty first I'm
anticipating a four to five week
review process review and
approval process anticipating
the first meeting in which this
body will meet to approve
project applications will be in
late August or early September
the first round we're
recommending be limited to
twenty five percent of the fund
allowing for folks that have
been prepared for this program
to launch to have access to it
yet providing for significant
amount of time for outreach to
accord  to reach our grand of
rather large state and all the
folks who have yet to hear about
this program but likely have a
very interesting projects
simultaneously we plan to launch
a project interest important to
get out to folks to share with
us the potential for projects
help with that is that we would
be able to collect data in order
to provide to this body as well
as the legislature for whether
it be for the car about or
additional requests for funding
in future legislative sessions
with that I'm happy to stand for
questions I'm also prepared to
demonstrate our go through the
application live on the screen
it's identical to the one in
your packet looks a little bit
different online as well as the
project interest for.
Thank you Mr Johnson.
Are there any questions.
So I'm.
Well I was just going to say our
our purpose of of the interest
form is two fold one is to again
give folks some understanding of
so we have some understanding of
what kind of pent up demand
there may be but the projects
aren't yet ready to apply it
will then allow us to time
subsequent application periods
so we know if there's a
significant number of projects
in more rural communities we may
wish to postpone a hold back a
portion of the fund for rural
communities at a later date just
a time better the expected
development of the applications
and our opening of the of the
fund we know that in the urban
areas in particular is as Adam
mentioned there's pent up demand
we have developers contact is
regularly find to find out when
this application is open but as
you know we want to see some
geographic diversity into this
tool this project if this form
allows us to plan that better
and get the information out as
soon as we can so that folks
have a deadline and it doesn't
sort of sneak up on them there's
there's no deadline for when a
roll up of.
Application would be made
available so our goal here is to
collect the data and then
publish an application timeline
so that people can develop their
projects with that no time line
in line.
Shift for safer Keita
I can also say that I have it
developers both rural and urban
that have been reaching out to
me and wanted to know what the
status is of this process any
other comments.
Now I just want to say I I
totally appreciate the project
interest farm I think you're
absolutely right and it works
well any of the programs that I
work with and then I think
Marquita once that time line is
developed I think and as we go
through one one cycle that will
have a better understanding
whether something worked or
didn't work and if we need to
fine tune it in some way and I
expecting that that's probably
something that we can look at
into the future as well.
Because it's.
Else.
Mr.
Our.
What but this is I'm.
Chair member because Lossky one
of the things I've been asked
about is there any in you may
have said it I could have just
not heard it any sort of rollout
plan in regards to how this gets
out to people or are we just a
question towards the website and
they can see it.
Mr Chairman I'm happy to take
that question our communications
managing director is working
right now to establish a plan
with NMED which is required by
the rule will be working closely
on first the training and
education with their regional
wraps and then helping push out
the information with them being
the stewards of that information
throughout the state.
Perfect.
Thank you.
Mr chair if I can follow up on
Jennifer's comment in that
training it would be very much
appreciated F. the cops could be
included in that training
because we are working with many
businesses as well just based on
some of the federal
federal dollars that we've
worked with under economic
development station so if we
could be part of that team that
would very much be appreciated.
from.
Representative.
Part of the part of the
intention thank.
Mr chair I did just one small
question so we were looking at
both the application and then
the proposed policy
and one of our questions was the
line target industry the EDD has
whether sort of the
identification of those
industries is available to the
public as part of the
application process looks like
there's a drop down menu as part
of the application is that where
they would select one of those
industries Mr chairman members
thank you for the question yes
that's correct there are nine
industry followed by somewhere
around two hundred different
makes codes the application is
program with all of those codes
as well as the ability for the
applicant to tell us a different
industries in addition to that
we will be including the
resources from the statewide
strategic economic plan that
also has that information right.
It's pretty hard to tell here I
appreciate for crying kids
comments because it is difficult
for us to kind of.
See how this.
More three dimensional
application more.
Well you pulling that has this
been tested and in real life.
Of the Mr chairman thank you yes
we have a significant amount of
testing that occurs as part is
as part of our development
process it will continues to
undergo final testing as we
speak before we will go live.
If you would like just a simple
business try to put stuff in
there to see if it breaks
anything so far it sample
applications created by staff
that are becoming subject matter
experts on the application and
the perfect.
so Mr Chairman member kind camp
so on the screen you can see
here in the targeted industry
section if you select one of the
targeted industries and then
provides all the next codes that
are listed in the NMED document
and that's consistent with Danny
industry that you would select
as well as the not listed which
then provides them with the
ability to identify that makes
great thank you thank you Mr
Johnson.
Any other comments questions.
I have a question.
Yes.
I'm so regarding the
applications I think that it
said that EDD and NMFA would be
doing of of betting of all the
applications and prioritizing
the list so I think you also
said those that were had
received the sixty point center
or above.
So those applications that
receive less than sixty points
this of course will not be
reviewing them.
Mr chairman I believe the way
that the rule reads is that all
applications that receive the
sixty points and
achieve the higher medium
reading this will automatically
be advance the board for their
consideration
at this the review process
before that the entire list of
application and all of the
scores that have been applied by
the NMED the NMFA review teams
will be given to the project
committee because ultimately
they have the ability to
reorganize our apply different
points at that point in that in
that process.
Appreciate the clarification
could question.
Mr chairman of the only other
thing that I mentioned again we
talked about holding back some
funds for additional rounds our
recommendation was a twenty five
percent be made available
obviously that can that target
could be higher or lower than
twenty five percent we just
wanted to offer that is.
Concentration is for any
particular County it sort of
seems no loan can exceed twenty
five percent so that was the
reason we chose that amount but
obviously if the board would
like to see.
We certainly could do that for
you know the point which we get
an application in the field
there's a number of really good
applications I think that that
is a targets that could be moved
we just wanted to find the
concept that there would be a
hold back you know we we that
hold in abeyance some funds so
that projects.
Considering it's a quarter of
the entire fund.
First through.
We should throw right off the
path
to approve go for the I think
it's good idea spread out but we
you know of course can bring
that up for discussion for their
own.
Can I follow up on on just that
that comment and one of the
questions that the treasurer had
when she was looking at this was
the twenty five percent limit on
any particular county and her
question was just about any
thought to distinguishing
between classic counties in
class B. counties in terms of
you know it might make sense to
cap it at twenty five percent
for a larger County but maybe
not you know you might not want
to invest twenty five percent
in one particular smaller County
does that make sense.
Yes Mr chairman we did not
distinguish that for purposes of
the policy which is what limits
the twenty five percent again
once we get one I think as
member Senator mentioned once we
get an application around in
front of us and find out if the
policies worked as we hoped they
would I think that would be the
opportunity for us to then open
up the policies again and just
make those final tweaks and
potentially take into
consideration that concept.
Right thank you.
The other codes.
Mr Johnson I think you guys have
put an awful lot of time and
energy into that.
I appreciate the depth of
thought that went into this it's
clear to me at least.
Yes we need to improve.
Cations Mr chairman we're asking
that to approve of the
application form in
substantially the form in front
of you and the limitation of the
first.
Motion.
For the.
Mr chairman Brian Condit here
I'll move that.
The motion.
A second.
Thank you missus serve.
All those in favor.
But I'm I'm.
Hi.
The post.
Sure this is share I I just on
the record have to say I I have
seen from voting in this matter
we have some I just want to
clarify the reasons for it the
office of the state auditor has
them independence guidelines
that we received from our
compliance.
Officer who told us that you
know until we get that opinion
from the accountancy board about
sitting on this board and having
management
influence in any of the
applications or processor
programming we'll be at standing
from voting on any of these
processes but thank you thank
you for that clarification.
I totally understand.
It.
All of the phone program
policies.
Mr Johnson to do.
Happy to turn over to my
colleague the secretary.
Staff thank you chairman far far
and members of the board here
before you today are the draft
NMFA opportunity enterprise
revolving fund program policies
can you all some of that sure
make sure everyone can hear you.
Is that better yeah maybe I can
answer to.
Okay.
as Marquita mentions the NMFA
board adopted rules that were
also approved by the NMFA
oversight committee last fall
this is the governance framework
that's the context for NMFA
approval the financing
application so this is coming
subsequent to we are B.
recommendation of prioritize
projects to NMFA.
these draft policies were
reviewed by the NMFA board last
month at the may meeting
but we are looking forward to
your feedback on this draft
and would come back to the NMFA
board at the June meeting to
approve these we would then use
these policies to craft a second
application for the financing
piece
and
And the applications for for the
financing so in terms of
highlights this memo contains
just the key terms here the loan
amount that's taken also
straight from the we are B.
policy and roll framework that
cap of seventeen point five
million.
The maximum loan amortization
the period of interest only in
stabilisation for three years
and also the term between
fifteen and thirty years that's
also in the opportunity
enterprise Act so it's
consistent with that
that legislation and other
aspects are use of proceeds
obviously we're looking at
commercial real estate
acquisition and construction
prepayment that's also
consistent with the act there's
no penalty or premium for pre
payment on debt service coverage
requirement this was proposed by
are on an MFA credit team a debt
service coverage ratio of one
point one times and not set a
sixty five percent occupancy so
they thought it would be prudent
to apply that is as more less of
the stress stress test scenario
when calculating coverage in
terms of interest rates so we
are proposing that loans will be
structured with fixed rates set
at sixty percent of the
prevailing prime rate at the
time of loan approval with the
floor of on a lower than three
percent the act stipulate that
high interest rates cannot be
zero must be higher than zero
In terms of collateral what is
acceptable real property land
buildings and equipment and a
loan to value ratio of up to
eighty percent.
There's a requirement that
applicants contribute a minimum
of ten percent of the total loan
amount in the form of owner
contributions cash or in kind
are down payments.
and consistent with our other
lending programs all loans
require personal indoor
corporate guarantees and
applicants are required to
authorize NMFA to obtain credit
reports are both on owners and
also guarantors.
I'd also like to highlight for
you in the following draft
policy
Just generally you can see after
the definition section general
considerations this just frames
and provide some context of the
we are B. process that is
proceeding the NMFA process so
lease out the economic
development objectives that are
specified in the we are B.
policy and then the specific
criteria on that would be we are
B.
laid out in the evaluation and
prioritization Policy and the
four key areas that projects are
scored based on on and it also
provides the context of the fund
concentration limits that are
provided in the evaluation and
prioritization Policy those
limits
you NMFA one approving
applications for enterprise
assistance I will need to be
cognizant of those limits I
think as we discussed or looted
to a bit earlier for example
twenty five percent of the fund
in in one county so for example
if we're receiving recommended
applications but that twenty
five percent concentration is
Matt already in a single county
we will be able to approve that
application for enterprise
enterprise assistant
On the section for covers
application requirements so
these are some of the additional
on the documents that are going
to be requested on once Adam and
his team develops that
application for enterprise
assistance these of the pipe
types of documents that are
going to be required of
applicants.
Sections for the
highlights that those
projects receiving the highest
scores from the we are be will
be receiving priority when
enterprise assistance is
allocated from from financing
round.
I think chairman far that is
what I was hoping to highlight
for you all today I'm very happy
to stand for questions sticker
C. as he a complex needed for
that who's going to be tracking
the concentration and is that
could be presented to us as a
board prior to making decisions.
So in terms of concentration
we'll be tracking that in terms
of where the funds as part of
our monitoring you know where
the fund capital sits in terms
of what's been allocated to date
in terms of approval from these
policies are guiding the NMFA
board approval of individual
applications for enterprise
assistance so I think it would
be the NMFA board that would be
taking on those concentration
limits on and where the fund
exposures stand into account
when approving applications for
enterprise assistance.
Will we be notified of the
concentrations at any one point
in time yes yes we will be
reporting that and those
concentration limits are
outlined in the we are B. policy
so if you all team you know in
addition to other aspects of the
the policy if if if it makes
sense to change those you all
can certainly do that sure I'm
just again trying to look
forward to the future of.
How to manage that process and
let's say.
Santa Fe that skip close the
limit but then something really
big comes around.
We had to go where are we.
Right Mr chairman I would note
that we'll have a team and I
communities that team at this
point so Brian Dube off who's in
the audience today is our
managing director of
Community and economic
development his group will be
managing.
The development of the oversee.
His team is there today I think
he's got to in the audience was
got policia Sanchez and then the
yes yes what it is and they will
then be able to.
Transaction we will take those
applications in the order in
which.
If we find we can't do the first
one for feasibility or that
doesn't cash flow or something
is not right we'll go to the
second on the list will report
back to.
Third on the list sure will give
you that report so we'll be
letting you know you know the
point which we hit our maximum
out any round the other.
Sure ties that stand to me it be
more efficient to know in
advance kind of where we where
we stand in the woods with
transport minimal capital report
on right stand with
concentration of industry and
County they don't have that
information.
Thank you very much Mr devote
fifteen.
Appreciate your help with this.
Any further questions or
comments.
The.
She to approve Mr chairman we
have this is an information I
okay here we we are accepting
feedback still we what we
anticipate bringing this to our
board at the end of June we are
required to consult with you and
so we're not quite sure what
consult means the legislation
but consider this our
consultation if there is
feedback we were we're very
happy to accept it our goal here
we believe the opening of
funding for non owner occupied
this.
Just really doesn't exist I.
Take a subordinated position
all.
Is I think the subsidy here so
we're not looking to necessarily
subsidize these kinds of
projects at the level that we
see some of our other subsidy of
the finance authority so we are
looking I think at this point it
would just be under five percent
in terms of interest rates but
again given the loan to value.
Grammars we still think
Program that will be a track.
Senate in these communities but
if you feel that we have missed
that target.
I'm afraid we're going to run
for the.
For the money and the money
quickly and one Mr chairman if
we have an IT project interest
formal be able to let.
That is the other on you know if
we can see a pipeline and they
want to continue to feed this
program that would be an
opportunity legislation we have
to report every year when I
believe October first that's
what that's what stuck in my
mind they're almost only there
are sometime between September
and December none of us at the
same of course.
It's probably good we reported.
We got another report.
Right if any other questions or
comments on the.
The.
The public comment.
Chairman yes the front so they
can hear you well that's okay
out to speak up it's just a
clarification Thompson I'm with
the western environmental law.
Senator just a clarification on
the concentration limits.
I think they applied to the
total capitalization of the
program and I'm wondering if it
needs to be clear that when
you're rolling it up by twenty
five percent tranche yeah those
are pro Ratta.
By the construction limits are
applied.
With the twenty five million the
rolling out first because if
they're of the whole
capitalization.
Million or stating the policy
and maybe I'll.
Get some some other feedback but
my understanding is it's on the
whole.
The seventy million not the
term.
Any other comments questions.
We're ready to ensure.
In addition.
Committee your thank.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you to staff.
It's it's the faster.
Rick.
At the very soon to work with
them to do that right thank you
very much Paul thank you she was
an increase on.
Thank you.
We've had.
Get a developed tentative three
have to pretty much
Senator that are you know that
they can't hit me up on a weekly
basis like with this work what
is.
Thanks to the staff.
Get that stuff out but K.
Parker.
As I should mention that when
they come out with the training
I want to go through that
because I said and.
Now four afternoons board and.
Thank you.
And I can give presentations or
bring.
I'm I'm of the executive
committee I can just.
Let's bring in our I can speak
about it your.
All of a.
So.
Now is the time the canister in
the work once we.
Yes.
