can't certify their funding
because they're not compliant
with the executive order so
eight of the nine can't be
certified at this time anyway
so we are going forward in
maximizing the distribution that
we have currently when we come
back in the summer whether it's
late July early August.
The remaining nine projects for
those that qualify will be vying
for the two point one million
dollars that is correct okay so
just to make sure that we don't
have enough funding for
everybody in the pool because we
are fully allocating to all of
the entities that were
authorized met all the
compliance requirements did
everything they were supposed to
do they're all going to get the
full amount of their request at
this time yes thank you just
wanted to kind of pull it back a
little bit because it all sounds
good to you get to the point
where there's just two million
dollars for nine projects and
that's that's the hard part of
the decision that we have ahead
of us just to make sure that
we're all clear that like I
respect the recommendations of
staff fully but just to make
sure that puts us in the
position of having been to
decide some really tough
decisions either late July or
whenever we meet next let's just
assume it's late July that's not
that much time for many of these
folks to get into compliance in
some of these areas so we'll
have some hard decisions then
should we go forward now.
Seven wanted to.
Thank you.
Appreciate that join.
What is the total of the amount.
Sure looks to be just or maybe
Mr Chairman looks to be a little
bit eleven million
approximately.
As we have.
Eleven million mas or menos.
Most mostly mas.
Yes.
Thank you that's for the
question from the of.
There.
We now in place to this time
frame.
I know that occasionally other
entities.
Right of reasons we just on
drugs even though that that
there might be an award so if
that were to happen there'd
there'd be another.
Actually part of money but
probably rare or not participate
at this point in time but it
that that that I know it can
happen I guess.
Maybe as I don't know Mr
chairman the most likely reason
other than being a little
optimistic about their ability
to meet their design timelines
in order to get construction
dollars you need to have
completed your design before
will allow you to close on your
award that's how we keep this
project moving so there's some
optimism from time to time on
their own folks ability to meet
the design timelines and
certainly this last couple of
years that's been an issue the
other one frankly if we see it
more with the colonias projects
that we do with the water trust
board but USDA if any of these
entities particularly the
smaller ones have loans with
USDA.
You have to get approval of a
loan from headquarters now in
Washington in order for second
loan even at a you know
different security eight you
have to get approval for the
that's eight to ten.
What we're finding is there
colonias projects which are
awarded basically the same time
as the water transport there's a
handful six or seven that still
haven't been able to get that
waiver from last year so we have
last year projects that can't
get done and I'm not sure how
much longer we can hold on to
these awards
because they're losing their
buying power by the day so that
is the one thing that's somewhat
outside the control of the
clients though frankly you know
we give them pops lady of heads
up there told in March that they
the only to meet this
requirement should they be
awarded by end of September so
they they're given enough time
but it's.
In a lot of it is in the hands
of folks in Washington who don't
seem to care that much.
That speaks to a broader concern
that we.
Funding in general with the
federal dollars I think some of
the.
You know programs that are well
established that and we're we're
we're of within RCS and.
And the.
Your reclamation water smart the
grants and those types of things
and the work.
We will on the normal timeline
but with all the
new new funds coming in session
with the I. L. and now there are
a and then the funds that have
come.
Civically for the the disaster
relief
rather than western New Mexico
from the fires and catastrophic
Watership down which is about
the loss of.
Your honor C. is in critical.
In
some cases it doesn't look like.
Yeah to said that looks like it
may not be overcome mobile and
and some cases under the
timelines associated with those
funds so it's it's.
But a challenging situation it
does.
There is a possible but
unlikely.
The fusion of funds of Bill
really a funds beyond the two
point two but
that would be a to be determined
I guess.
The.
Trying to find any
The level of hope for anything
there but but it cannot.
We may have a more flexibility
and we think that time but on
the left so the the two point
two million who.
Addition to allocate that.
If everybody's plans.
Where somebody gets complaint
with that Mr.
Hey the other discussion.
Mr chair.
What would be the process for
the applicants we have the two
point two so that remaining
amount will be the process that
does not get on funded for next
funding so.
So Mister chair members morning
typically if you're not funded
in the current cycle in many
cases.
Aside from not meeting
regulatory or policy.
We just don't have the funds
they would have to reapply so
typically we don't take that
their application for the next.
The.
Mr chairman of the member John.
Right.
Yes chair this is Jason John I
had a request from the city of
Gallup to.
Consider their.
Loan amount the we're
asking about the possibility of
a ninety ten grant loan.
Award so I want to better
understand that process for that
kind of request.
Mr chairman I might be able to
answer that so the awards the
recommendations that we make
today the if awards if you will
actually go on a the.
Make believe list but the list
goes over to the finance
authority the finance authority
ultimately makes the
determination of the amount of
loan or grant to be provided
subject to the policies of the
water trust board so the water
trust board says if you are
right paying if you are
supported by right paying
constituency you'll have a loan
of between ten and forty percent
as determined by the finance
authority so we have policies
outlined in the by the water
transport and as long as our
rewards by the finance authority
ultimately approved by the board
of directors as long as they're
consistent with those policies
it's all within the discretion
of the finance authority we
can't go outside the boundaries
set by policy of the water trust
board so I think what I would
recommend you we have some
vetted numbers in front of you
today the end of the likely
split of grant loan
but the the City of Gallup
should contact the finance
authority and we can walk
through how we got there if
there's new information that we
need to consider we're working
from audits which are fairly two
dimensional there may be
information that we're didn't
pull out in our analysis that we
can consider either before our
may board meeting or after the
fact we can certainly reconsider
that loan amount so they should
contact us directly that happens
about one or two per year the
state we see what you did but
you didn't take into
consideration the following
we're certainly willing to
listen to them our goal here is
to be equitable.
Thank you.
The two was contacted by Gallup
and I have the direct knowledge
of probably new information that
the they can bring forward and
that's the fact that that will
Gallup water supply project has
run into a delay on on the
construction of the connection
of of the facilities most of the
other three fiscal years at
least
or that of.
The Gallup regional system that
serves only the city of Gallup
of lots of chapter
Amenities and the other small
unincorporated communities in
the region they're going to have
to develop more groundwater.
Of their drilling wells as we
speaker this one and they have
plans for several others fill
the gap for water supply needs
between for that delay period
for the federal project to
connect system but they're also
building out that regional
system in a way that will allow
for the surface water to come in
and.
The plant the groundwater that
they're producing now and then
ground or becomes a reserve for
drought and so it's all
connected it's it's had to up
there
They're they're they're rate
base is the in the in the in the
context of.
The gap for for increasing that
is is this rest of the to the
limit so I think they'll come
forward with that argument and
it's it's certainly a difficult
position that go is it right now
thank you for that additional
information to get that would
not show up in an audit I assure
you so we'll you know we'll be
happy to talk with them and and
to to hear their concerns.
Right.
Very good any other
questions or comments from the
board.
I.
Questions.
Just curious as to.
Some of the.
So there.
That that.
After that.
Process.
The staff in the US.
Thirty after that they make.
That.
So.
Mr chair member terms in.
What we do is any
recommendations back to your
your
Prioritization so all of the
projects have already been
prioritized I want the.
Past R. nine passed in their
project applications on any
recommendations to any entities
you're absolutely right the
first it uses those on the need
for have to meet that line
because that's basically with
some
then we would go to the
privatization we would all all
the recommendations.
I think it is based on not only
privatization of.
We also look at the urgency of
the project based on their
replication.
And we.
To see that the screen these
what they can so there may be
some differences that may be
coming in for design construct
maybe just be ready for design.
So all of that is vetted through
what we call project management
team that project management to
make those right recommendations
to the project review committee
which are board members and then
S. as in this instance the same
process happened so the forty
seven page project.
Project review committee the
ones that look at and the
privatization and either concur
with that recommendation or make
recommendations to the.
Basically years and last.
And and depending on what we
have available what the request
asked school.
Based on.
Yes.
So that house just another Madam
chairman and.
Certainly we.
You're logged in clear.
The discussion.
The.
The.
Right here that.
Chapter.
That.
We needed affects other.
Just using we.
Offline discussion.
Right.
And there.
Question.
All there.
Home or.
I.
Position are we.
We have.
Or that.
Meeting.
Hello.
In the morning.
This.
There are.
That.
All.
This week.
I think the legislature's quite
interested in that.
Connect to the of this and they
want to play a role in.
More of a member of the.
Reserve fund concepts
of those interconnections
because they're they're just
doing it in a lot of ways and
and and we struggle with that
you know in in the
some degree in our rules here
the water transport but but
certainly outside of that the
state engineer regularly
requests for a lot of things
thank you funds are in all kinds
of different pots so all this
interlink between This Is highly
critical especially now with the
the the watershed damages and
response to emergencies and
things that will only probably
get more intense with the aging
infrastructure concerns as well
as drought impacts and all that
so so you ask for great question
something that we do that.
In a little.
We do get those conversations
and.
In order fifteen minutes of fame
in our legislative hearing or
whatever but we certainly.
We certainly could.
At the benefit from a really
intense discussion on that
during the interim period the
legislature this year so the as
a look forward to the thirty day
session that is primarily of a
financial nature honestly we can
get some some focus on that we
have the yes problems of the
capital outlay program here in
that regard so a lot of
different moving parts here but
certainly water transport is
filling a really really
important gap
particularly for rural rural
communities right now that are
suffering with the with really
for infrastructure
yes I.
Max.
The.
Here.
That.
Yeah.
A difficult.
Point especially with a number
of projects anything the the and
we can even refer you know this
question to the Mr John with no
nation anything that the
chapters can do actually the
head of the game.
Putting in their their own
internal infrastructure whether
storage tanks and you know other
types of the association needs
or whatever ahead of the
projects
that are in my opinion because
it just takes so long
get those projects completed so
if even if they're waiting for a
little while for what water to
show up with the main pipeline
that may that may not
necessarily be a huge problem
but they're they're done right
and then and when the pipeline
is available they can just look
at the so that's the other side
of the equation and we want to
Discussion Mr chairman I would
just note two things one is I'm
hearing very clearly that we
need to potentially look at some
of our underwriting standards to
take into consideration the
sustainability the concept of
making sure reserves are being
of.
Fully built and that we take
this into consideration before
we look at loan capacity things
like that so we'll take that on
of the finance authority and
make some recommendations to the
policy committee because I think
that needs to be reflected in
the policies of the water trust
board if you'd like us to take
it that into consideration on a
going forward basis we're happy
to do it but we do need some
policy you know for direction to
our staff so that will be a
summer task than for the policy
committee of the second is that
I think for fairness we need to
decide today what the deadline
is for entities to that are in
that holding pen to meet their
readiness requirement so that
it's you know we don't surprise
them part way through the the
the process so we need to set a
date for that in the
understanding that if we're
going to make changes.
Excuse me to a lot of transport
policies will need to do that
before the application cycle
opens in August so we do
training in August sometimes in
July but so you know the.
We're done for about a month
letters go out and then we start
the next cycle again so it's
really important that we have
whatever is going to be guiding
our decisions for awards for
structures to be you know in
policy before we start that
application cycle so I think we
are looking at a very early
August board meeting early July
board meeting and with that I
would just proffered that we
might suggest a you know sixty
days from today whatever that is
July this third fifth something
in there
so that we give folks two months
additional time to meet the
requirements and then we at
least have a date by which we
can say all right anyone that
met by the state we can consider
using the practices that we that
staff typically utilizes and
making these awards but I think
we need to date so I I'll
recommend one of July fifth is
just a place to start.
That was.
So Mr Chairman there are some
caveats you can provide for
fiscal administrators so the
funding can still go to the
entities
as long as it's submitted their
audits take the funding can
still go through a fiscal
administrator to the entities of
the funding might not directly.
Will there be an intermediary
that would be part of the
oversight so it still allows us
to make the award if the upstate
honors not yet made the release
the audit and we haven't had an
opportunity to review it.
Just because you have an audit
doesn't mean you still want me
to fiscal administrator we have
to make a we have to conclude
whether or not they are fiscally
responsible enough to handle the
state funding so it puts us in
that that role.
Those that expect to be meeting
their deadlines by.
July fifth yes.
The typically the cogs have
played that role.
So usually there's safe to to
ready to to step in.
Really great.
The age of the July fifth if we
were to set that date with that
work from a staff perspective
yes.
Not sure on that one for you
what steps going to be like to
live in the.
Noted to.
Right.
The staff recommendation.
Were you ready to.
So on the July fifth for the
deferred.
Or would you like to go through
the forty seven projects.
How.
This motion.
Yes.
And again Mr Chairman there's
been no modifications the amount
being requested is the amount
being recommended correct so
there's no reason to discuss
something that downsize or
upsize.
That's unusual to say that.
That's usually the large part
the conversation and the project
review committee that at this
Senator project management team.
Recommended to the project
review committee project review
committee concurred for staff
the project management.
Thanks so Mr chair the staff
with the tragedy the parents
recommends forty seven projects
listed on the branch four
hundred and twenty three million
thirty four thousand seventy
five to be awarded for the
twenty twenty three.
Mr.
Yes.
The project or twenty twenty
three.
Four.
Sure I.
There.
That.
The.
Nations of the certainly was a
piece of the.
We would the.
Look at the July the.
The
use of the word for us to make.
Mr chairman I think I can.
Yes I.
Those nine projects we
reconsidered after the July
fifth.
Date by which they need to spend
their money for their readiness
because there's still one for.
Thank I by any chance.
State engineer.
And action.
You were any additional funds we
might.
In favor.
Those.
The motion.
Right
Return to item eight
consideration approval of
resolution notification and
certification of need for
issuance of severance tax
revenue bonds qualified projects
Mr kero.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the board it's a pleasure to be
in person and to see you all
again and some for the first
time which seems odd
this is what I look like without
the dog face and it's pretty
similar.
So I apologize for that I do
want to congratulate you on
making the award I think that is
likely the largest award ever
made by the water trust board
and certainly will make a huge
difference to the citizens of
the state congratulations for
that now that the words are made
the right take questions times
which is great and that is it up
to the resolution set out on
page six seventy four what the
resolution does is certifies the
need for the hundred thirty five
eleven million plus and change
less that ten percent amount
of education that goes to the
office of the state engineer so
this resolution certifies that
needed amount for the projects
that you just awarded and also
certifies that all of the
projects comply with long that's
why the line are on the list
attention page six seventy five
so really this is again just the
red tape portion
Council so they can go ahead and
use in the notes.
So with that I'm happy to stand
for any questions.
Questions.
For some reason.
The two million and the two
million can be reallocated in
several different ways there is
a portion of the policy and we
can add potentially it depends
on how we end up with the
projects so even if we're able
to reallocate the two point one
million in August or July we
will have to go some to some
sort of notification process to
the state board of finance in
the past we've done it in
different ways really depends on
on counseling what they requests
sometimes has been a formal
resolution before the board
other times it's been nearly and
I notification that's done by
staff
so I can't really it really
address what the specific
process will be at that time
will work the state board of
finance but if the funds are not
used in this the case with any
state.
Just to be funds they revert
back.
So even if a project you will
say for example this will give
you an example if a project
begins and they start using the
funds and make this doesn't
happen anymore but they complete
the project and have unused
funds those will revert back to
down the funds so we re related
issue Mr chairman it brings up a
point which is the state board
of finance was
Gracious enough to allow us to
do this part part one part two
certification that's partly
because they're not issuing
bonds this year they're doing
notes and so the it's a it's
kind of a use it or lose it from
their perspective so they're
allowing a modified process this
year for the earmarks so we just
wanted to mention that they were
really great and working with us
to accommodate this two part of
project I also know that three
point six million of the amount
that we are just awarded is
going to come from water trust
funds so if the two if a hundred
percent of those projects move
forward and nobody's ready to go
from the from the holding pen
that money as water trust fund
money and can sit for another
year so that does not have a
time line associated with this
year we don't have to certify
the use of those funds at all of
those funds set separately and
are then available last year we
set him aside for cost overruns
so that's also possible this
year.
The questions for Mr chair.
Call for a.
To.
The resolution.
Second that Mr chair Priscilla.
Which is the second they were
hi.
Those.
The resolution thank you Mr.
Let me just the ticket note that
we would have been in a really
tough spot at all of a the.
And Smith thirty eight criteria
with that we would effective
slice and dice projects and try
to get everybody in the box so
I.
I think it speaks to the demands
that are out there for the water
transport funding process and
it'll only continue to grow in
my mind so we probably need to
be prepared or
over over applications and then
funds coming next year and we've
sort of come up with some
criteria maybe how we manage
that to in terms of prioritizing
of projects maybe maybe we got a
I I hate to you know this this
notion of of the public health
and safety to maybe be a major
factor that we would look at.
As as a criteria for the we
would have been a little bit of
a pickle at the that we had to
do that of the the as it turned
out
Or.
K. to penalize this great team
the City of Santa Fe is put
together to try to correct
their.
Sins of the past you will.
but the rules are the rules and
we're gonna move forward and
hopefully they will be alliance
this year and and and then
obviously in line for funding.
Thank you the difference on that
and your considerations so it's
hard to say no to folks but
we we certainly probably need to
think about that this will only
have the you know a little bit
more maybe next year so anyways
Mr Chairman on that note we're
typically saying no the we
almost always have far more
demands that we have your
available funding last year was
the first time in which that
really didn't happen actually
was the only time it is never
happened then this year again
you know we decide to then go up
a little bit
our policies are designed to put
the ones with the highest
priority and if we're gonna have
a policy meeting maybe we ought
to just take one more review of
those policies to make sure that
they're reflecting the needs but
there's some really good
policies that set out there
they've been if they find
consistency they take away sort
of the black box of how these
things are decided
but we're certainly happy to
have those just revisited
because we're going to those
that we expected more money next
year I expect to see more demand
for a price tag like this draws
a lot of attention.
I'm so we're happy to do that
and before we.
Your honor talk about the next
meeting I was remiss earlier on
I did not introduce staff we
have a brand new the staff
member Sharon Romero who many of
you may have a call from the
state board of finance she was
at the department of finance and
administration for twenty plus
years twenty years joined us
just a couple of weeks ago she's
working on the water trust board
colonias team along with Angela
and a player to be named a just
moved another member to another
area where we needed support so
and moving around some players
here but we are expecting to see
not only this increase of
funding at the state level but
also at the federal level and we
have four years relied on the
the strong support of the
construction programs bureau
which is not available to us at
the same level it has been in
the past so we're having to
increase our internal staffing
and even look we're got a civil
engineer that we're gonna have
to hire as well as an of for
profit engineering firm to be
our partners so just wanted to
mention that you'll start to see
more faces and will have a few
more hands with her at the NMFA
to help get through this list
but these are unusual levels of
funding in both our state and
federal and it is this is the
area where we oversee projects
it's not just loans that we make
we're we're we're overseeing
these projects in some detail
and so
Eight more so welcome to share
and and thank you to Angela for
everything that she's done for
the C. who helped to this year
and a Michael wonder hide for
all their work.
The overlay of the New Mexico
uniforms coming into the right
Mr chairman I thought about that
the the welcome and the I want
to compliment the stuff with the
a great hybrid meeting and the
I know it's always a challenge
but at the thank you for that
the.
So the.
You know propose our next
meeting it looks like it's a
recommended for on August twenty
twenty three and we want to we
want to try to do a calendar
year right now and set a date or
so we just do it by email Mr
chairman let us to by email
because we also have to get room
availability as well so we have
a couple of things we need to
for years right so we work
towards noted state thank you
for that
and then I would take a motion.
Favorite the.
Thank you.
Thank you everyone for.
