I know you know he work
I go to
make repair ran
out the learn to the adults when
you make it five minutes other
than my husband she was always
my best sim with the website and
I have to tell my such as you
will make your daughter i've
told her pick up stuff
into a requirement to like not
keep the market so what she
didn't live with me for twenty
years so so it's there is enough
of a game
The.
The.
It's officially eight fifty five
am so calling the meeting the
emergency meeting of the new
mexico finance authority board
to order we have one item on the
agenda this morning but first we
need to have a ro.
The.
President.
Is it.
Member bird present.
Doesn't matter present.
Yeah.
Thank you.
So we have a force an agenda I
wouldn't entertain emotion to
approve the agenda some
adventure motion is made of
their second second manager
motion is secondary by member
truth here
is there any discussion on the
motion.
If not all those in favor of say
I
will post it at manager if I
could just bring you to the the
printed version they are
available in a laugh types and
we have to switch them over
pretty quickly so they're am
available here should you have
any the item.
Next I didn't want the agenda um
alone application on the public
project revolving one thousand
good morning madam chair members
of the board before as we have
your your county before I start
as one of welcome mister
for the county.
So real county has come to the
prepared for lonely amount of
six million dollars it will be
for a skill nursing facility and
we have hospital the voters they
reprove all many dollars in two
thousand nineteen for these
purposes the first chance of the
six million dollars was approved
back in may of twenty two for
the first shots of six million
dollars the use of this only
before construction of the
facilities I have provided a
brief detail of what the
hospital cover and what the
funds will cover in your
paperwork if I deal.
Uh thanks for the lawn include
that the project will help to
rebuild and improve the
country's infrastructure.
Provide health and safety for
residents of the county major
taxpayers also equal seven point
two six percent of the valuation
which reflects although
concentration risk.
The.
The last computer are within
twenty two we see the unmodified
opinion there were three
findings and idea provide the
significant deficiency before
you which are dear pertained to
deficit he's a procurement in
dispersement transaction
essentially there was a sixty
thousand dollar contract where
the proper people was not filed
and appreciated it was not you
know followed as well but the
critical plan did state that
they will correct these
procedures and will have more
paperwork or the proper pick
people can place going forward
with that the overall desert
myself separately questions the
comments.
Any questions from board members
on this project this morning
manager would just note that the
public lending committee did
review this item it simply was
not ca.
A section in the agenda and
therefore didn't make it on to
the agenda but it was part of
the materials that were reviewed
both by the internal credit
committee of the finance
authorities whilst the public
thing and they did ma.
The.
Thank you for that notification.
Manager there no for the
comments that would move to
motion so need to appropriate
your second or second check
motion main second at any
discussion.
If not all those in favor say I
always supposed motion carries
thank you.
Yeah.
There is a motion to adjourn
second motions made in the
second meeting is a turn
emergency up for the record rom
of october on the call
thank you member look though I
did not that um make sure that
the records reflect that you
attend to just after you joined
right after.
The uh roll call.
Thank you.
Welcome member level to.
Hello.
The.
The.
Oh.
The meeting is called order
can we please have a roll call
for the regular meeting of the
finance.
The.
President
president
of.
President
president.
Is it.
President manager do you have a
courier.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda is the
approval of the agenda.
Are there any additions or
corrections to the agenda today.
If not doing her motion for free
motion is made by members.
Is there a second.
Second second remember
is there any discussion on the
motion if not in others in favor
of ci.
Next approval of board of
minutes of the august twenty
fourth.
Word meeting.
I trust everybody has had a
chance to review those.
And if so do I hear emotion to
approve the first minute that
you have that motion.
Motion is made.
Out my member swas always there
is.
Is there any discussion.
If not I was in favor of say I
are there supposed.
Extra report from market okay
thank you madame chair and thank
you again for accommodating our
technical glitch in getting a
really back county project
approved I know it was an
important one for them and both
the cost of the financing and
even the potential to get it
done what have been severely
impacted so we appreciate your
providing as the opportunity to
to hear that project I wanted to
start today by just um a noting
that you have a a large number
animal families here today
because of course we'll be
hearing later in the agenda our
exit conference for our fiscal
year twenty three audit so we
will we will go through the
finance staff which you've heard
from a or you've seen a couple
of them before we met them the
client services group back in
may but the rest of the
accounting group and our
director financial planning are
all here today and i'd like to
recognize them today so if I
could have you all stand up.
Um and
the last two and now do the wave
note
keep standing art on the right
hand side there and
inner do some folks join johnson
who in the front road and waving
to us has been with the animal
fa often on now for ten years
about that she's a senior
accountant and it's really
critical in our the development
of our programs so she helps
really establish some of the
controls when we implement new
programs and then they're
allowed to then be passed on to
other folks as the systems get
set up she's been really
critical particularly things
like new markets tax credits and
the SB r l e so we really
appreciate all that she does
very very much behind the scenes
real.
Now you know you make it
crystal hertalo is next she is
our accounts payable and is
really critical and keeping our
operations afloat and uh payroll
we really appreciate her
particularly that
she's been with the authority
less than a year but she's a
great edition norman will sticky
is our um controller i'm sure I
mispronounced it you have seen
him but not heard from him very
often he's are very quiet but
when he speaks as voice is quite
loud and this messages are
always really clear he's been
with us now for about five years
and in this role for about four
so he's been great he's been
setting up new systems and been
critical in strengthening our
internal controls and automation
within the a.
Uhm right behind him in the blue
shirt is looking at he's now our
deputy controller he has been
with us for about seven years I
think six I can't do the mouth
math entitles right he had
started as a senior accountant
he was special projects person
within the accounting group for
our enable implementation it
would not have happened without
lucas and now is deputy control
and assuming some of the.
Duties that norman has done
before and helping this large
organization stay afloat and
he's been really great to work
with but you don't hear from him
very often either and next to
him as money over ellis who is a
senior account maria started
with us as a temporary during
our recovery programs and
started I think full time with
us are not quite a.
Um and she works with mark
lavato in the pprf that is a you
saw I think at the end of.
I think in the july where august
sport book nor ask for a nor and
put in the flow of funds for the
end of year it's a massive set
of calculations and transfers
and distributions and money it
does that monthly for us.
Uhm
has been with us now twenty
years in august he is are
currently our
treasurer he prefers the title
investments because that's
really his love
but he really
works with both money and carmen
in primarily over.
Into the organization and make
certain that we're getting all
the.
Um scott morrison is next to him
and scott is in our
he is critical in the money that
goes out he's an accountant with
the agency so he works with all
of our senior accountants in the
flow of funds that go out of the
agency so every distribution
that leaves for a client
reimbursed.
Er so he has to wear a lot of
hats and you can imagine how
many notes he has to take keep
track up so he does a really
great job for us.
Um and he's been with us less
than a year next to him as
nearly cast the osward as she
started as a temporary in our
recovery group she was one of
the first five that we hired on
permanently when we realized
recovery was not a short term
thing for the finance authority
and she helmed that and actually
s- oversought after we lost our
recovery programs director she
just recently transferred into
the finance group and she's a
senior accountant and will work
primarily I think with the water
programs which for us is
include.
And so she is a brand new to
that area.
Bob spreadly is a stalwart
senior accountant he's been with
us almost twenty years
he started as a temporary bob
from accounting temporary and
has been watching every penny
out of the water programs since
he started with us so are
drinking water um.
State revolving loan fund which
is a federally funded program
we've not have audit findings
with that it it takes a lot to
manage all the pennies that come
in and out of that and it's been
largely due to bob.
Primarily through his
spreadsheets up until recently
the baby really valuable at.
And the behind that mouse is
that I don't have my glasses on
is that katy is that carmen okay
it's like it's either katie
kitty was that joined us just
recently she's our newest
addition to that department and
she is also in the accounts
payable counts receivable
section.
Um.
Not here today that's fine we
all busy and have lives and of
course oscars in the back and
worst brad there you are bradly
fleshed who joined us about two
years ago right almost.
You're you're half are it seems
like to
director financial planning and
he the finance and disclosure
committee here's from him
monthly on sort of the bond
outlook where the markets are
going you see him on that he is
critical to the upkeep of our
bond investment
website the data that's out
there he minds the data and
refines it so that are bond
holders know what we have.
Any trend any beautiful chart
that you see from us probably
come.
Has a significant amount of ex.
He's kind of wears a lot of hats
even though he's got a fairly s.
So that's our counting group you
will see later on some.
You'll also hear very briefly
from me about some of the
program implementations some
successes that we're seeing
particularly in our.
Community and economic
development group so I don't
want to introduce them
and I have a chart I have vice
screen in front of me so it's
hard so brian do both joined our
organization earlier this year
he's our managing director of
community and economic
development he overseas a a team
currently of three were hiring
for the fourth uhm i'm gonna
start with teresa garcia who
start with our agency about ten
years ago she started with john
um and me frankly in the
economic development group he
was she was one of the.
Team of three and the commercial
lending group and she's
currently um.
She holds up she is a backbone
of the new market tax credit
program she was the really the
only one w.
Really childhood education and.
The.
Our childcare providers in the
state thought she worked for e c
e c d she knew someone's about
the program so quickly and that
was about thirteen million
dollars that we got out out of.
Just about forty so I was a lot
of work and it was.
Sunshows who.
Sprl and was one of the first
that we.
I guess in twenty early twenty
twenty one.
Where she became p.
Directly with scott on the
opportunity and our price
program which has been.
A lot of work and a lot of focus
is she's the one that are
clients and applicants are
talking to.
Quite hard and understand the
application and so.
And then
you're not part of either
finance or community and
economic development but I
wanted to introduce michelle
**** who joined us last month
she was hiding last month so you
got to pay attention to shell
she is part of the board
administration team shares has a
team of three uh you met your
maldonalo couple months ago and
michelle joined us we have the
opportunity enterprise water
trust board colonial.
New mexico.
So I wanted to just make sure
you saw her face directly.
So that was that good half our
staff but you know if you don't
see the faces you really it's
hard to grasp how many people
make this operation work and
they really are um he parts of
that wanted to just mention that
the new market tax credits
release their allocations last
week we received a twenty five
million dollar reward that
really is thanks to john and to
research and the and the
application team they put
together which includes of
course journal
dan randecker and lin who all
worked on that application but I
was really excited I of course
typed in two hundred and fifty
six million that is not the
amount of money it's three
hundred and forty six and so you
know I was close on the numbers.
Ninety million dollars after
we're at three hundred and forty
six million I don't know what
came into members typing it with
some certainty to.
And we're really excited to have
that in there two thirds of the
awardies
were national or multi state
very few statewide entities so
out of the hundred and two
entities that received an award
only eighteen representative
state wide territory so that's
not very many we feel really
happy to have been part of that
group and ultimately you know
just under fifty percent
received awards their requests
were almost three times what
they had available so twenty
five million while it's less
than we had in some years and
we've been doing more with a
smaller amounts I think largely
do to our small bone pool so i'm
I think that's going to be
something we'll be able to
tackle but congratulations to
them.
You'll hear today on some of the
other milestones we've reached
and program implementation we
have our first to
uhm investment recommendations
coming forth from the the
venture capital investment
committee which is the internal
staff committee so the first two
one will be from a state find
and wanna be from the ssbc I
fund so we're excited to have
gotten this far and my thanks
to.
Ryan and uh suit pittered in
particular who really have
helped to get that going and
you'll hear from ethernet
samsung from mckida who has fan
our venture capital consultant
bringing them on board was a
really good idea.
Uhm.
As I just mentioned the
opportunity enterprise board met
last week on september twenty
first and made their first set
of recommendations there were
about forty applications the
separate alicia thirty three so
forty started thirty three
completed and they uh the team
of there was three from animal
fan three from the economic
development department that
prioritized those applications
using the criteria that had been
established by the opportunity
the enterprise you have to very
similar to the new markets you
have to show that you're have a
moderate readiness to proceed
and at least sixty points out of
this hundred that's available
seven made the cut um and we
will then start underwriting
those in the order prioritised
the policies that were
established by the opportunity
and our price review board
limits the amount that was going
to go out.
And the first application that
the one that hit the very top of
that list.
Will max out unless the pa-
review board changes their
policies it'll max out the
amount by.
Uhm client and by county because
there's one seventeen and a half
million dollar request
for the count for somebody
located in the city of our
current
so.
I suspect the are being has some
tough decisions to make that's
really easy to say until you see
then all these other really
great applications but we
received.
You know the seventy million
dollars in that program the
thirty three applications
totaled about a hundred and
thirty million dollars and so
you know there's no there's no
easy decisions to.
Boards that make recommendations
to the finance authority and but
that happened and then we are we
worked at the beginning of
september we hosted
standard and poors and moody's
in two separate meetings to talk
through our upcoming twenty
twenty three bond insurance
that's for the senior lean bonds
that be bonds um we do writing
presentations every time we have
an upcoming issue and this time
they came out for that and we
were then also able to talk to
them about the development of
our junior lean intention we
expect by the time the bonds are
sold and chip is here in october
that will be able to get some
indication as to how are junior
lean will eventually develop but
within every and ensure you
have.
You know certain bond capacity
tests in the wind which are
structuring that and we're
working through a couple of
different scenarios and we were
able to
uhm utilize some of the services
of moody's to give us some
indication as to how how much
comfort they would feel with any
of.
That program is coming on and I
would expect that by the spring
we'd be in a position to issue
our first series of i'm not sure
we need it by that early but
we'd certainly have everything
developed by that point.
Um.
You're going to hear in a couple
of minutes on some proposed
rules just just the drafts of
the two.
State small business credit and
initiative we've been working
very closely with mr collins and
others at the economic
development department as well
as talking to bank's credit
unions and c t f i's about how
to use that money the status
receiving seventy four million
dollars up to seventy four if we
hit all the insight of targets
that they've laid out for
socially and economically
disadvantaged individuals and
businesses and for very small
business.
If you hit a certain percentage
of our investments in the those
kinds of businesses
that's a lot of money for new
mexico and we are I think.
In a really good position to
offer many more tools than we
had in the past in the when it
first came out we have thirteen
million dollars in two thousand.
And very few people felt the the
impacts of the effects of that
because we had limited scope
with limited personnel
and limited dollars we now have
the potential for ventured
capital for long participations
for mister collins is really
successful program the
collateral assistance program
they call the cap.
Um as well as uh the capital
access program we won't call
that cap but others do.
Too many caps here but that for
tools that could hit a just a
range of business sizes and
needs an up to sixty five
million dollars seventy four
million dollars so we feel
really lucky to be in that
position and are excited about
what we're we may be able to
offer.
I'll be meeting with the
oversight committee next week to
run through some rules that
would um some improved rules as
well as the rules for this new
capital access program that's
the next um thing on the agenda
and we're going to just look to
see if that's something that
they're going to get comfortable
with.
I would note that if we're not
comfortable using federal
dollars for
this program I just don't think
the programs going to go forward
it's really it would be very
diff.
That it could that we can use
eight dollars for this problem
to guarantee program it might be
possible I don't want to make
our attorneys do those sorts of
mental chimnastics to get us
there if those federal dollars
are available um so we're hoping
that this is something that both
this board is comfortable with.
And that the oversight committee
board is comfortable with so
that we can make our application
to the department of treasury.
And would generally speak in and
we've gone through this I think
uhm over a couple of different a
couple of different moments but
the goal here is to try to serve
those businesses i'll just bring
up the chart those businesses
that are really too large for
micro lenders in new mexico.
Most micro lenders are fifty
thousand dollars or less
micro loans we have a least one
pretty good micro lender but
he's there they're relatively
small and scale that will do
more than a hundred million a
hundred thousand dollars so most
businesses that are around a
hundred thousand to about two
hundred and fifty thousand
because that's almost the point
at which it's starting to become
reasonable for commercial banker
credit union to make that loan.
Like there's that gap in the
middle and our capital
landscape calls that no man's
land so greater than most micro
lenders will make and smaller
than most banks are interested
in making so hundred thousand
and two hundred and fifty.
We would argue that it might
even be up to five hundred
thousand is the part the hardest
part for a bank or a micro
lender to serve those needs and
that's critical because
about seventy five percent of
our businesses in new mexico.
Only twenty five percent of the
businesses actually have
employees and about seventy five
percent of the employees come
from businesses that have.
Uhm.
Ten or fewer employees so that
meets our very small businesses
two thirds of our sensors tracks
in new mexico qualify under the
socially and economically
disadvantaged individual
criteria so you're saying a huge
number of businesses that have
this need.
And this is the place where
cdfires and banks have a very
hard time and credit unions have
a very hard time serving that
need either because they're the
regulations may get not very
cost effective or it's simply
outside the scope of what micro
lenders do.
So what we're hoping to do is
this again this capital access
program I think we're looking to
call it a pulled money guarantee
fund so that we can keep it
separate from some of the other
naming conventions we have for
programs um but what it allows
us to do is to create almost
like a low loss reserve frankly
it could be considered a low
loss reserve within each.
Qualified and and approved um
lender.
So we would be able to
underwrite loans a lenders as
opposed to lounge look at their
front office make sure they have
enough folks to serve the kinds
of targets that we're talking
about that they don't
predominantly serve large
commercial businesses but that
they have a market and some
focus to be able to hit those
folks that are got those loans
in that.
Quote for no man's land so we
want to be sure that they've got
that presence.
And that they've got the back
office to really oversee these
laws professionally incorrectly
so that's the underwriting we
would do those are that's what
you would all would be approving
is that uhm a lender once
they're approved.
They can then make loans and as
soon as they document to us show
us that they're qualified under
the program we would then
contribute a percentage of that
loan to the loan lost reserve
that they create in their
agency.
So we use our federal dollars to
make a match they match those
dollars the lender matches those
dollars and then the business
puts in something as well under
the rules it's at least fifty
basis points
and up to three and a half
percent so you know you would
obviously the smaller than loan
the more disadvantage the border
with a more likely you'd want to
have that be at the fifty basis
point level
um we don't want to close off
businesses because they're in
the wrong census track or
because they're slightly larger
than our targets but we also.
Subsidize that contribution so
you'd have a sliding scale that
we would determine pursuing the
policy but then ultimately you
would have.
The federal ssbc match the
lenders match and the borrowers
match being contributed to the
support as you'll see on the
chart.
The very rudimentary chart you
know as you start to make more
of these loans that pool gets
bigger so while you might only
cover.
Ten or fifteen percent alt.
As you start to make more of
those loans if one of those
small loans goes bad you can get
covered for any deficiencies of
your collateral through that
program and so that's the goal
we're targeting this to be a
program that would where the
were the state would keep
control of those funds some
states make the match over there
and then the the lender gets to
continue that program on you
know for as long as the the long
last reserve holds out arable
here is to take the money's back
when no.
So that we can use them for
other.
We need to have this seventy
four million dollars stay in the
economy before as long as
possible so our ability to use
those dollars to replenish other
programs will I think it help us
meet those targets so that's the
overall goal here the draft
rules that you have a head of
you.
Go through how we're going to
accept banks and a colon bank's
lenders I apologize but how will
underwrite lenders uh how will
monitor them it really
incorporates it large amount of
what can assess bco money to be
used for what they can't be used
for so there's a big long list
of prohibited things because
that's how federal programs
work.
But it really does get into.
Puts up the framework that there
will be a minimum contribution
that we continue to own the
asset even though they're ho.
Fa and of the state ultimately
it talks through you know kind
of uh.
Business mac you know the map
per business that can qualify
what we don't have in here now
is any max per lender.
Um right now as we do with sort
of all of our economic
development fund rules the
maximum loan is five million
dollars and that's in here I
think we'll probably not have
ratchet that back fairly
significantly five million seems
like a pretty big stretch even
though it's consistent with
other things it's probably
bigger than we want to allow for
and it's possible that we could
have the maximum loan saving a
two million dollars
but still max out our
contribution at c seventy five
thousand dollars you know so we
don't have to continue to make
that match it maybe a seven
percent match but on a million
dollars we may not want to go.
Of seventy thousand dollars so
it would be able to cap that so
they could still enroll it but
we would cap our participation
so those are the things we're
still we're finding this it's a
big program for the state to
take on we've never considered
something like this before but
what we do know is that.
The from the ssbc I one point
back from two thousand eleven
states that implemented this had
higher levels of lending to
those small businesses those
under two hundred and fifty
thousand
so we we have a lot of hope that
this will be both operationally
very efficient for mf as well as
for the lenders because they
don't have to wait for a improve
every loan.
Um so that all allowed them to
you know but process these
things much more quickly in
it'll likely encourage the
participation with the program
um as a result.
And you know just be fewer
things for us to ultimately
monitor will be monitoring the
portfolios we can use the
technology that out and johnson
and his team have available for
automated reporting and so that
we can you know really stay on
top of this and brands team has
really good people to help
monitor that portfolio as well
so we feel like we're in a very
good.
Two thousand eleven this is not
something that john interests
and I could have done um but I
think now given the different
programs the difference skill
sets and the technology we have
this is really something that I
think we can tackle with a lot
of success.
So with that manager i've used
up to agenda items please cram
demal into one but i'm certainly
happy to answer questions this
will we're gonna predict this
uh
the oversight committee next
week.
They may actually be in a
position to approve it since we
spent a lot of time talking
about this over the last two
sessions I was in silver city
last week i'm talking to the
economic and rural development
policy committee.
And we spent about an hour and
fifteen minutes on this program.
And um we've when we were in
senatory set the very beginning
of the month.
This program and it's potential
so they may actually feel
comfortable approving it will
make the modifications that
we've been discussing but would
love your feedback in the
meantime if you have it and.
This would put us you know if we
get it done by the end of by our
october meeting.
Will be in a position of that.
It's to turn around.
The.
Statistics.
So a new program.
So we're hoping to be able to
do.
The.
Without or stop and be happy to
answer any questions you might
have
any qu.
The.
The.
A quick question after you take
a drink
that was more about the timing
of the rules
they out for us for.
Certainly typically what we do
is a
provide for you a draft of the
rules and we do it at usually
the board level so that we have
war.
Have.
It'll then go as it said to the
oversight committee um you know
we talked to them in concept
before we ever give them rules
so we would hope that their
board meeting isn't their next
meeting as next week.
Um.
They may feel comfortable
depending again on who shows up
and how much uhm.
Understanding they have the
program beforehand but our goal
would be to have them at least
have on their agenda the option
to approve rules and then it
comes back to the finance
authority for rules and again if
they make a change that you
don't like we still have time
then in early november two
represent them to the oversight
committee might under the state
white economic development
finance act.
The same set of rules has to be
approved by both the other.
Instances in which we've had to
found.
Try to do it at the staff level
by introducing the concepts and
then building up to a final set
of rules so we we try to build
the knowledge based before we
give you a final service so.
If everything goes as we hoped
we would.
Manager but we do have time on
the policies which ultimately
would guide how this works what
we are comfortable with in these
parameter rules in the way we
typically set the markets you
know what's the minimum
contribution what the maximum
contribution and then to direct
apology how we'd make the
different how we differentiate
those so there are really just.
As you'll see in the rules
themselves is bare bones uh
parameters for.
You know how what someone had
what lender has to do to um.
Make it.
So there's not a lot.
Yes there's a lot here and we're
not required to do public rules
we certainly.
This inform- this is um an
information item only no action
requirement on it so if no one
else has a new comm.
Reading any questions or
comments that they have it were
very happy to have one on one
conversations john ryan um brian
they've been talking directly
with the cdfis with the credit
union.
Sam and john made a presentation
to the independ.
Pretty excited about a new to.
Offers that it offers a lot of
portability and ease of use so
i.
Thank you.
The.
And for the overview of the car
force.
Next on the agenda is there
publ.
Think you madam chair are the
public lending committee met on
september twentieth and we had a
forum and we reviewed two
planning grant applications and
recommended both for approval
and those are both on the
consent agenda today we also
reviewed
clones infrastructure board app
recommendation to change the
pledged revenue for two loans we
recommended approval of their
change and that project is also
in the consent agenda in
additionally reviewed on
drinking water state revolving
loan fund application a request
for an amended and restarted
loan.
We recommended that projects for
approval and that is on the
regular agenda.
We also reviewed five people
pprf projects it was a claim
that can recommend all them to
the board for approval um
one item is on the consent
agenda and the others are on the
regular agenda.
And then staff also presented an
overview of five water trustport
projects that were recommended
to animal for the second funding
words for the twenty twenty
three application cycle and the
committee recommended approval
of all five of those projects
that conclude the report thank
you.
Thank you.
Any question.
Five.
Members of the board um today we
had two projects for the local
going planning fund item seven
point one is for the city of
grants and it's for a
comprehensive plan with the
leader update they qualified for
fifty thousand.
The second item for the local
plenty is item seven point two
and it's the village of quaestor
may also apply to our program
for comprehensive plan with a
leader update they qualify for
fifty thousand.
And with that I am willing to
stand for any questions.
Thank you madame chair continue
the consensus agenda we have a
harding county and it is for a
twenty twenty three fire loan it
does have both the tax example
disadvantage tax component so
will a total loan amount of two
thirty seven one twenty eight
alan will be ten years are net
interest zero point eight four
and we do have on page forty
eight the project description.
Our next item before you is the
uh gamerco townseight modern
sanitation district and we're
just asking to amend their loan
agreement to allow an early
payer of ppr five seven three oh
both a and b.
And that this loan do close in
september twenty twenty two and
we would like to amend the call
date and they would like to pay
it off early and then our last
item for
your consideration today is the
village of tool rosa the village
of tolerator has two colonious
lounge about fifty seven ninety
eight and sixty one forty seven
and they would like us to go
ahead and change their pledge
revenue currently the pledge
revenue is water and we would
like to change it to a state
chair g or tea this does
increase their debt service
reserve fund and then there's no
need for usda approval when we
change the pledge revenue and
with that staff recommends
approval for questions.
Any questions on the c.
So.
Some of the manager should made
by member small so is there a
second second manager.
Second phone number as far as.
Um.
Is there any discussion.
If not all in favor see i.
Next on the agenda is regular
agenda um.
And projects before the.
Publiclined in committee.
Again thank you madame chairman
so our first request today is
the village of max well and we
would like to amend and restate
their loan agreement and this is
to increase both their loan and
their drinking water subsidy so
we have a new loan I knew
project excuse me a new project
fund of two million two hundred
and sixty thousand this will be
a twenty two year term state
share g or table service our
pledge revenue for the one point
two two nine.
Coverage ratio if you look on
page sixty two we do have the
project scope which is not
changing and again by extending
a higher subsidy amount and loan
amount no other drinking water
projects will be affected or by
this request and on page sixty
three we do have our original
amount of this funding package
it was one nine seven hundred
and sixty and our new increase
funding again is the two million
two hundred sixty thousand.
That's why this project is
shovel ready this is the second
time it's beard before the board
and staff does recommend
approval and I stand for
questions.
The.
I consolidated schools thank you
matter chairman so before you
today we do have the masobistic
consolidated schools shared it's
for a twenty twenty three at
techno and if you look on page
seventy we do have the project
description of what the funds
and proceeds will be used for
this loan does have both the tax
exempt in disadvantage tax
example component and that is a
total five hundred thousand they
have a very short two year term
that interest cost is two point
two seven unmodified twenty
twenty two
I added three finding staff
recommends approval and again I
do stand for questions.
Madam chair members of the board
below again hundred dictor has
applied to prepare for a loan
amount of one million one or
forty five thousand dollars but
before I diven i'm gonna welcome
the mare of dexter merdobber if
you're online.
Welcome.
But maybe he is trying to
muted.
The.
Okay could you hear me now
we got
we got to
help
you more board members on behalf
the chat like to thank you for
allowing us the opportunity to
secure the loan which the town
says.
Desperately needs so appreciate
it very much thank you.
Thank you mate.
So with that the loan will be
for a term of thirty years with
an editor's cause this is
performed two percent you will
see that it is a taxable loan
town dead or request for some
more flexibility.
The pledge revenue will be gross
receipts tax courage three point
nine two times the town added
she'll be using these funds to
purchase land and more
importantly water the land is
one hundred eighty five acres
the occasional shallow
supplemental water rights prices
one hundred and sixty four acres
they will be using water for the
town its prosperity in health
but they also be using the land
person commercial purposes to
help bring more revenue to the
town the pledge revenue as I
said is your tea more
specifically it's a state
schedule to the town will be
contributing one point four
million dollars in the form of
capital
you will see an additional
twenty five basis points on top
of our traditional centimeter
business points this is for that
anytime call that I mentioned
they would like to be able to
pay after someone sooner they
believe that me has a more funds
available in the near future and
as I said they will be using the
start for commercial purposes so
that I wasn't to do that as well
private closing the towel me any
further requirements and
political requirements and ms
before slowness provided any
dipide the assan page eighty if
you want to read any more into
that.
Strength for the loan include
that the future source of water
for the town in its residence
which was they said will
maintain how safety air
prosperity for the town.
Witnesses the town has two
repeated mature weathers that
have shown up in previous audits
as well I will talk about those
you're momentarily the last
complete audit was in twenty two
it was on my fight there were
four findings the two findings
that I for two earlier consist
of deficiencies in internal
controls as well as cash
internal control the
efficiencies in funding
counting.
The gist of this is that the are
currently using excel for the
record keeping their auditor has
recommended that they moved to a
more sophisticated software that
is more applicable and more
appropriate for a town their
size the town data provide a
credit action plan they did
start to do this in twenty
twenty due to covered loss of
staff they were unable to fully
implement this system but they
have hired an outside consultant
to help them get on board and
get time rolling forward
sleeping available to create a
pretty soon with that this is
the first time that this can be
for the board staff recommends a
province after questions are
comments.
Can we take.
Projects eight.
Yeah that most matter to approve
the items eight point one to
eight point three as present
by member stores there are
second.
Second mention.
First
is there any discussion on the
motion.
If not all those in favor
selling
are very supposed.
Mostly case.
Thank you and will move on to
water trust for a project.
The.
The.
Page ninety three thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you very much
bored members I bring before
you.
A
second will recoin the second
iteration from the water
transport on five projects that
the board approved in august now
the water project financed the
act provides that the finance
authority may make grounds and
loans of projects recommended by
the water trustport and
authorized by the legislature it
is in annual application prices
on may through the water
transport awarded forty seven
projects in the amount of over a
hundred and twenty three million
we had seven projects or a seven
applicants that the board could
not award and and certify the
funding due to them not meeting
regulatory complaints we had six
that had audit issues and one
they had a regulatory compliance
with the office of the state
engineer so due to the timing of
the water trust for decision the
board extended that compliance
deadline until july fifth so
that those applicants could meet
that compliance and then later
be determined whether
depending on federal
availability whether they would
be awarded.
So the decision that the seven
of the seven applicants we have
four applicants that made that
compliance which amounted to the
five projects coming forward
staff on the way it's listed it
is prioritised on the scores
that were actually given to
these applicants in the fall of
twenty twenty two so in august
tenth the water trust board
approved the projects of someone
so water conservation district a
via water alliance when it is to
meet you domestic water
consumers association and two of
the city of anthony's projects
now the policies of the water
trust board required that
project supported by repaint
constituency brewed quite a take
on a loan between ten to forty
percent and that is determined
by the finance authority using a
three year history determined
and the amount of debt a system
can support.
There is also a requirement that
the applicants have to
demonstrate a commitment in the
form of a minimum local match
and the match is dependent is
based on the project type the
size and the introduced medium
household income for those
entities that have non rate pain
projects they can take on or any
tribal applicants they can take
on an additional match in low of
the long so they are awarded
amount would be a hundred
percent grapped in addition the
policies also allow that
entities who may not have a
match can take on an additional
loan in lou of that match in
august of last year the only
trustpool did make some changes
to the policies and so and it is
in in if their effort to
hopefully help entities that um
to become fiscally sustainable
and provide opportunities for
applicants to receive funding in
a hundred percent grand so that
they can be better prepared for
to come out for construction
dollars so one of the changes is
that you can provide the
policies allow for entities to
get a hundred percent grant for
designed only projects in there
is some stipulations or criteria
criteria and as long as that
amount does not exceed that five
hundred thousand dollars the
second one is for small systems
that have fewer than five
hundred connections you can add
and have implemented and as it
management plan and have multi
fees projects that have already
been awarded by the water
transport they can take on the
loan only if that first fees and
ked qualify for a hundred
percent grant and the reason we
bring the background up to you
is because we have the five
projects we have sound one
toyota water conservation
district which is a not read
pain constituency so they are
being recommended four hundred
percent grant because they are
taking on it or bringing on in
the additional match in live
alone.
We have one of us immuted
domestic is also
coming in as a hundred percent
grant to the air coming in with
the design only project and
although we have the two city of
anthony's dead on their project
is flood prevention so they
don't have a rate paying cars
for their flat prevention but
they will qualify the but
they've as to do is provide
their match but they qualify for
the minimum of the ten percent
load out coming is the ninety
percent grad and that we have a
via water lions which the credit
analysis credit people in
public lenders have done their
does analysis on the structure
of those so these loans are the
two loans that we ever actually
the three loans that we have are
structured as construction loans
which allows up to twenty four
months for the project to be
completed prior to the
applicants being required for
their first loan payment.
Um we do have what we call it
readiness to proceed as required
by the finance authority and
it's just additional information
that we ask the um applicants so
that in order so that they can
come in and secure the funding
for this second group of of
applicants that reading is to
proceed deadline has been
extended from october september
of this year because they were
awarded at late till january
twelfth of next year.
The fees staff has determined
the appropriate grand and loan
components and this is based on
not only the and with a
procedures but the water trust
board policies the water trust
board recommends approval of the
five projects and if you have
any questions regarding the
process I will stand for
questioning if you have any
questions regarding the analysis
we have or lenders in our credit
staff thank you thank you some
manager I think angel is in a
great job summarizing kind of
where we got to today it's
unusual this is the first time
we've ever done two awards we
have always had more ready to go
project than money available and
so to get all the way through
the qualified list and still
have money sitting on the table
was an unusual place for the
water trustport I don't think
it'll ever happen again so this
will be the one moment in time
but we you know as a result of
this we've utilised.
The projects that did not meet
their january or july fifth
deadline I think still haven't
met it and they they haven't
finished their audits there's a
couple of them that are still
working through some things so
that means that every qualified
project that met you know the
guidelines and were authorized
by the legislature we're funded
by the water trustport and I
literally don't think that's
going to ever haven't happened
yet won't happen again so this
is of one moment in time I just
wanted to mention that um we are
while we're cleaning up this.
Twenty twenty three award I
would know that angela share and
michael and the board
administration team are already
under way for the next award
applications were submitted a
couple of weeks ago and there is
two full day water trust board
meet.
August and they get awarded and
about may or june so have the
second level of funding second
time was uhm.
You know not only unusual but
also.
Kind of inconvenient
we we like to stick with our
regular status but I wanted to
just mention how much work they
have to do to get to this point
and obviously they're supported
by their colleagues in the
lending and credit group who
could answer questions.
So I don't know if you'd like us
to go through one by one take
them as a whole.
Yeah.
With the import members be open
to voting on the projects from
the water transport is a slight
today.
Yes manager I would have no
problem moving that we approved
items nine point two to nine
point six percent thank you
pretty much and if there are
second
second manager member killed
seconds thank you for that any
discussion on the motion on the
projects
if not all in favor of say I i.
Graduate.
This.
Next to the update from the
economic development committee
from number calendars.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on page one
twelve is my report we met on
september twentieth um staff
reviewed.
Program monitoring report
spent a fair amount of time
discussing first choice
community.
Uhm
so.
That was that
working through
market tax credit and in the
venture capital investments for
the fa problem as well as the
and.
That's that's it.
Thank you for your report.
But next we'll consider.
Three projects.
Under economic development.
And given that they're very
they're unusual and different
from one another is that you
take those each individually i'm
going to find.
Um.
Starting first with our small
loan pool uh project
substitution for
seven or one century lsc it's a
small one.
Your computer is ready but it is
up on the big screen
yeah
morning men and chairing board
members so what we have here is
a small loan pool application
it's from an organization called
seven or one centual l l c and
they're located all the current
new mexico but before I start my
presentation i'd like to i'm
going to hand the sovereignty
item sovereign who happens to be
the managing member for several
incentive loc and also a vice
president for more else he could
be speaking on his organization
the project description and
financially request so I have
this over the right
matter chair and board members
i've never been so excited to be
a substitute my entire life
thank you for having me my
name's adam silverman is right
said i'm with seven or one
central c and gelt more local
government sees our our parent
company we hold each one of our
individual real estate assets
and in separate special purpose
entity so seven or one central c
is the project i'm talking about
today guiltmore is made up of my
father paul my brother david and
myself combined we have a ninety
years of experience in the
commercial state business uhm
and we actually are working on.
Economic development through our
real estate uh so i'm really
happy to be here today the
project that we are going to
discuss is i'm here to give you
projects on reseventy one
central is eleven thousand two
hundred square for building on
the corner of seventh and
central and downtown albuquerque
we acquired the building well
excuse me is a very long story
but i'll try to make it sure uh
the the project is actually
going to be leased by a brewery
called exnobody is located in
karalez new mexico right now
this will be their fourth
location they actually started
in oregon and the founders from
new mexico and you wanted to
move back to you mexico to raise
this family and and bring his
business so we were very excited
when he signed on board
we
uh actually noticed the property
come vacant in early twenty
twenty it was a former firestone
automotive uh which is crazy
because it was built for
firestone in nineteen thirty so
up until twenty twentieth it
always been occupied as a
firestone on motor center it's
got some great history it loses
up intensity and if you all have
been downtown you know that are
building stock doesn't have a
lot of real possas like appear
in santa fe so uh we were able
to work with presbyterian
foundation who was the seller
uhm through some personnel
changes we actually weren't able
to get into contract until two
thousand and twenty one uh
during our initial esa phase one
environmental study we realize
there is some contamination on
the property due to its prior
use we were able to work with
the new mexico environmental
department and some of our
consultants to get us into the
voluntary mediation program
uh that took a little longer
than we thought about fifty to
eighteen months and during that
time period uh when we went to
go finally close we had our our
project rebid by the contractor
in our cost increase about
twenty five percent so inflation
got us on that one uhm but
that's okay because you guys
have wonderful programs like
this so very happy to be here
today in applying for a small
business long.
The project itself will generate
about forty three jobs and
really looking forward to that
because what examples can you
create which we don't have and
downtown which is a qualified
since his track which will cover
more we don't family friendly
restaurants we don't have a
community place if you come down
town it has this bad stigma
right now and and we're trying
to slowly change that one
project to the time so I i'm
very excited about the
opportunity to have uh some
extra gap funding to finish this
off I also really excited we're
going to hopefully finish this
project by late next summer
uh which would be just in time
for the hundred year old version
of root sixty six which comes up
in twenty twenty six so we think
this is going to be a really
great show place for that
celebration.
Uhm
you know there is a a light of
things they have gone into this
and I before I turn it back over
to right and I really want to
think john brian jeff rick and
all the other staff for helping
us it it's been really fun and
quick process to get to this
point thank you very much and
i'm happy to stay in front.
So madam chair and board members
think you add on that I think
that was iraq a wonderful
summary of uh project in and we
appreciate it so diving into the
long description you'll see that
this is a one million two
hundred ninety thousand dollars
request in its first seven year
term and it has a three point
four five one percent interest
rate and the debt service
coverage ratio is going to be
one point seven three times the
clatter of that will be utilized
on this financing request will
be the commercial real estate at
the project location itself
there was an appraisal performed
in october of last year and they
gave it a value of four point
four million but we went ahead
and took a ten percent discount
on that and now the values three
million nine hundred sixty
thousand dollars with that in
mind we're going to take a
subordinately in position and
that's considering a senior lean
that held by sandier lab's
federal credit in regarding its
mortgage date of trust and
assignment of the seven one
central x noble chip on at least
the guarantors for this
particular financing request
will be adam sovereign in
himself joe gregory who the
owner of economic eleven and i'm
also action over bringing else
he has a corporate guarantee as
well
if you look on page one eighteen
you'll see the other new market
tax credit consideration which
this is this transaction will be
part of the second small ample
which has a q e I seven million
in this transaction is a
substitution transaction that
needs to close by november first
because of its one year q e I
timeline and so the long
description again is a one
million two hundred ninety
thousand dollars to seven and
one centual lsc it will be made
by finance new mexico investor
series and that's with capital
provided by usbank corps c c and
financial finance new mexico
service company.
If you look on page one nineteen
you'll be able to look at the
sources in uses so you'll see
the total project funding
altogether is five million six
hundred ninety thousand dollars
this long that we're discussing
today is one million two hundred
ninety thousand dollars the
existing loan on the books is
two million four hundred
thousand dollars and they also
have two million dollars with of
equity investments from other
cooking investors that are also
being part of this project so
the total uses also equals out
to the same amount of five
million six hundred and ninety
thousand dollars free review.
And then towards the end of the
year right up that you can see
here you'll see on page one
twenty eight you'll see the
management team buyers the first
one's written on adams over men
himself again he's a managing
member of seventy one century l
c and the vice president for
delta and occurred you encourage
you to read over his biography
for your review also his father
pause of her men who's a chief
executive offer for galmer scene
in encourage to read over that
as well
david silverman he's a managing
member of seven one century l c
and also a vice president for
see as well again and encourage
you to read over his biography
for your view and then of course
joe gregory himself who's the
owner of ex november in
and to read over his biography
as well so that includes our
presentation for this particular
project but staff does recommend
approval and myself in the
sovereign would be very happy to
answer any questions.
Yeah.
Not only the finance and fast
work to get this year we have to
have this thing closed by mid
october or the
for the new market tax credit
get very nervous because
penalties the potential for this
thing to actually go out of
compliance happens at the one
year mark so all of our loans
have to be made by within a year
of when they closed on the qi
and we were working very hard
with someone that just they had
um some turnover within the
organization and couldn't get.
We wanted to comment staff and
then also just to call out the
um.
A model of exnoble brewing and
which you see on one twenty one
drink here do good I you know
you know we don't get models
very often.
Thank you any other questions or
comments from.
That the executive director just
brought out the matter with this
guy that make motion
out of ten point two as
presented
as their second check
number two um.
Motion about number slash is
there any discussion.
If not all those in favor
of the post.
Project is approved thank you
graduation.
Manager list next two items
we've allowed it a little more
time on the agenda not only
because it's new to us but
because each of these
investments that will be making
will have different strategies
different approaches and unlike
some of our others they don't
fit necessarily into one more
there's a big portfolio here so
why is going to go through some
of the investment considerations
even um from ethernet samsung
from makita and his colleague or
here should you have questions
about their
process that they went through
and there's some information
also an outlook but it's got
three very separate pieces
because.
You know these are big decisions
and though it shows up and I
think a two page summary from
staff it is months of work to
get here so I just wanted to.
The.
Thank you i'm working on
thinking madam chair on really
excited to be here with you
today to present this
recommendation in the subsequent
recommendation
before you start with that I
just wanted to say I think we've
come a long way in the last year
with venture capital and and I
did want to think my colleagues
have been working internally on
supporting this program so
there's a venture capital
investment committee that
includes a brad flitch who met
earlier today in marklavata my
colleagues on our legal team sue
pettered brian or terror on john
brooks of course oscar rodriguez
and I are fearless leader market
a russell
and rick yavic
herman
and I also wanted to think
member collins for his teams
partnership on ssbci
you'll see the next
recommendation coming before you
to be funded from spcic equity
so it's been on it's been
a suspi as a complicated program
and so we've been working really
closely together and it's been a
good partnership
and i'd also like to think
consultants at mckitter you'll
hear from ethernet today he also
has four colleagues who've been
working i'm really closely with
myself also with the venture
capital investment committee
sourcing pipeline and also in
the due diligence on and
presentation of the venture
capital investment committee on
these recommendations which
really is very detailed they
produced investment memorandums
of thirty forty pages on that
the investment committee reviews
before advancing recommendations
to economic development and and
what is here before you today so
really excited and with that on.
Before you with this uh first
recommendation is an investment
commitment of seven million
dollars from the sbci funding to
tram wave interpartners three
in terms of our presentation of
these recommendations what i'd
like to do is give you an
overview of where we believe
this fits well within the
venture capital program i'll
i'll give you a highlight on of
the tram way organization their
investment strategy and the
economic development objectives
in their fit with our programs
mission and diversification
objectives on and then and then
really excited to hand it over
to three members of the tram way
team and they've prevered a
detailed presentation for you
all in particular they were
going to be able to tell you the
difference between bio
medical technology and health
care technologies much more
articulately than I can
um and i'm sure we'll share a
lot more that will be very
interesting for you on then
ethin's gonna join me and will
wrap up on some of the due
diligence findings that we
wanted to highlight for you and
then while stand for questions.
On.
So in terms of background
tremory ventures was founded in
twenty seventeen and albuquerque
by by one year to total on she
was unfortunately not here today
she had she is out of a board
meeting a portfolio company
board meeting but three of her
on t members will be presenting
to you shortly miss total prior
to founding tram way was the ceo
of southwest medical ventures
for over three decades on where
she found it and co founded a
multiple start ups and the buyer
signed sector on and I have to
say that um our reference checks
confirmed that mister totals are
reputation is really quite
unparalleled are both in her
sector and also here in new
mexico and the new mexico start
of space on and particularly in
their their sector on tremendous
you can raise their forty
million for their third fund so
they already manage
approximately fifteen million
and two funds that have invested
in local new mexico companies
are in there and the bio science
sectors that they focus on on to
help support investment activity
for fund three it's a larger
fund on one item has brought on
a two managing partners who you
are from today kitty race and
chris for **** both of them have
on experience in both health
care and the venture capital
sectors i'm in addition a joe
joseph wong at he's been with
tramway for six years and he's
been promoted to principle in
hill also be supporting one fund
three on investments i'm in
addition to that i'm investment
team of four there are three on.
Three gentlemen who were
initially cofounders of tram way
when the firm first started in
twenty seventeen bradville john
rockwell and stupid rose those
three all have additional
expertise in the sector also in
adventure capital on and also
here in new mexico and our local
ecosystem and there are going to
be supporting the investment
team on the investment committee
and was sourcing.
In terms of the investment
strategy so tremendous
investment early stage companies
are in the medical technology
bio technology and health care
technology sectors
i'd like to highlight that are
there typically investing in
where to called seat or series a
rounds so very early are capital
raising rounds for companies i'm
often times they're investing
companies that have not yet uhm
generated revenue i'm so there
and early development stages and
tremors often coming in as the
leader first institutional
investor with a larger
investment and will sit on the
companies board and really
support the companies early
stage business development.
I'm tramways first to funds were
solely investing in new mexico
businesses find the three does
have the ability to invest in
the broader southwest on the
fund three is targeting
approximately ninety percent of
of capital to be deployed to new
mexico businesses and the trying
way team believes that this
ability to
expand their scope in this
broader southwest region will
also help attract additional
investors to their portfolio
companies based here in new
mexico.
On page one twenty two of your
book
we have here
the projected mission and
diversification impact I pulled
this from the investment member
and i'm that makita prepared and
this is an analysis and this is
a free market you'll you'll see
on all the recommendations that
we bring before you
qualifying uh each investment
across the five different
economic development objectives
of the venture of capital
program so those five objectives
are contained in the policy are
creating an investing and
emerging local businesses
creating and retaining new
mexico jobs benefiting under
serve communities
supporting sector
diversification here in new
mexico and attracting additional
private investment to new mexico
based companies on so try my
fund three and particular is
going to be helping create an
invest local businesses and
alongside that jobs and on
the highest the highest
objective here is also
attracting additional private
investment so on the
recommendation here's for seven
million from ssbci as you might
recall ssbci requires a a one to
one match from private investors
so untramway believes that
they're going to be able to
raise seven million dollars from
private investors in fund
through to match the sbci funds
and that's a testament to their
credibility on with uhm local
institutional and or so high
network individuals on an uh and
a strength on so i'd also like
to highlight that the.
The two existing funds that they
are currently manage on they've
invested in five local
businesses and those local
businesses on have already
created thirty nine local jobs
and so with that I am going to
hand it over to kd christopher
and joseph and let them give
their presentation and on a
choose if you don't mind
advancing to the slides in the
book and.
That'd be great.
The.
The.
The.
A good morning man chair and uh
board members it's real honored
to meet all of you today
especially as a new relative new
cover to new mexico and right
and thank you for that terrific
introduction as you heard we're
of enter capital firm in new
mexico our focus is on health
care innovation specifically
medical technology by our
technology and health care
technology and will explain a
little bit in a moment uh
more about what that what that
means
we're all very vested in new
mexico real new mexico residents
and we really want to see the
sector flourish here and other
price of the country another
price of the world areas where
the built up the sector it's
created a tremendous capability
and a high tech jobs
manufacturing jobs
and and really raised the
profile above the state and in
the area
so this correct the next slide.
So again our focus is on these
three areas and typically things
like medical technology are
devices or machines or things
that may go into the body
biotechnology tends to focus
things on a bit more of the
cellular level of the farmer
level if you will and health
care technology is typically
defined as things more in the
software realm or air room which
is rapidly growing right now but
it's getting harder to define
one of the other there's so much
now overlap and i've worked in
this business for thirty years I
have never seen a moment where
there is so much innovation
everything from a I to assist
with diagnosis surgical robotics
personalized medicine
personalized therapies all these
things are going to hit us in
the next few years and it's
really change
the way health care is delivered
is going to improve clinical
outcomes for all of us potential
patients and it's also going to
take cost of the health care
system and I think for the areas
in the states that really focus
on this uh it'll be a real boom
to the local economy
and here new mexico we have all
the building blocks to do this
we have fantastic our delivers
like sandy and los alamos and
the capability u n
was really been I think missing
from this area is more venture
capital and putting more money
into the sector and as far as we
know I think we're the only
focused vc in this area there
are other french capital groups
that do invest in health care
but we're the only ones that
this is our pure play if you
will.
Figured what are the next slide.
Very quick introduction on our
team and I should point out
again you've you for the
introduction of when either are
founder and I think for
reputation proceeds here she is
very well known in new mexico uh
she's been in the biotech field
for a long time i'll be also
note that um we're very diverse
group we like to we're very
proud of the fact that three of
the four of us are women or plc
and we think that's really
important we think diversity is
huge a huge factor in uh success
of the company um and also in
doing right by our local
community so quick introduction
on me against I said i'm a new
cover to new mexico i'm
originally canadian uhm I spent
the past thirty to thirty five
years working in the metac and
biotech industries all over the
world i've always been following
job or career opportunity i've
been ceo of a couple major
companies including one publicly
listed company so I think I know
the field in the area pretty
well and and where we should be
investing in as a group
two years ago
um my wife and I decided instead
of always following career and
relocating to a city where it
was interested in working with
that well we're going to change
it and we're going to relocate
to where we want to live and we
decided to santa fe new mexico
we've always loved it here and
this is now our forever home
we're not moving again and i'm
really excited down to be part
of the state and I hope really
to do good things for the state
of new mexico in this field that
were working in a venture
capital
we need I think uh not much more
I can say we have a little bit
more later on what she's done
for
the state and for our adventure
group
but without let our other
members do a bit of a self
introduction of turn over there
to join one
good morning everyone my name is
joies along i'm a principle with
tremendous ventures and have had
the privilege of working with
the front for the past six
years.
My background is in life
sciences I worked at a cancer
research flat a pretty
university also for covenance
laboratories
a contract research organization
was part of a team that worked
with family companies during the
early and frequent affairs
attractive element.
A major life if that happened
and I decided life is too short
started to pivot and pursue an n
b a from washington university
and st lewis
was incredibly lucky I landed an
internship where toss health
investors which is a growth
equity health care focus vc
based in florida and it was
there that in that when you know
who was an advisor for the firm
at the time.
During the second year of my
program I
served as an analyst for a
coding capital which is an early
phase the c base since the lewis
they have multiple partnerships
worth universities in the
australian area washed you being
one of them.
And I would say it's a
combination of these two
experiences that provided me
with the foundation that enabled
me to hit the ground running
when I joined family ventures
and so later on in this
presentation you will hear from
katie who will talk about we'll
talk a little bit about the uh
traveling intership program
which is a program that is very
dear to me in large heart
because I have seen first hand
how point it is for something
like that to help someone like
me build the skills the
knowledge and the network to be
able to excel in my job.
Um but most appointmently it's
opportunities like this that
open opportunities to others
right and in in a sense creates
a cascading effect
and so.
I feel incredibly fortunate to
be here today I can say with a
high degree of confidence that I
will not be sitting here in
front of you all had those
opportunities and i've been
proce.
Okay
thank you thank you all for
having us today and katy race I
am a partner with tram wave
ventures.
Um I am not native to new mexico
either but I like to say that I
got here quickly as I could
i'm actually not need it to the
us i'm an immigrant I came over
here as a child.
Um.
And i've lived all over the
world in the new difference and
countries are but i've been here
now a long time i'm all over a
decade and i'm very rooted in
new mexico and i'm really proud
honestly to be living my
american dream here.
In
in new mexico raising my family
here and down.
And working on a dream career
here with with this amazing team
though I have over fifteen years
of experience in vintage capital
which means i've reviewed
hundreds of companies and i've
worked on dozens of companies
start ups.
Over the years and i'm also
attack entrepreneur myself i'm
the founder of page and in
mexico based venture backed
start up so I have.
Um.
As perspective and that I start
on both sides of the table both
as an entrepreneur raising money
from venture capital funds and
as a v c funding those start ups
which I think is really
important perspective for our
companies as we grow at time
way.
I'm also a very active member of
our
thriving eco system here in new
mexico
and very i've born many
different hats over the years or
done different boards and pushed
a lot of different initiatives
one i'll mention i'm very proud
of his on the founder of this
you have patched which for nine
years's brought investors from
all over the country to towers
new mexico and giving new
mexican founders is really nice
opportunity to make meaningful
connections with.
Investors and those many of
those investors came to new
mexico for the first time and
riskier and many of them
invested came back made
connections been really
beautiful to watch honestly.
And i'll talk more about a
vehicle system in a couple
slides but moving on to
the next slide.
You know I want to say I i'm
really proud of the team we have
um.
With one eight
and joey and myself
we bring a lot to the table as a
vc fund I like to think of it
as.
But of a dream team scenario and
that we have the investment
experience the corporate
experience that industry depth.
Um and also the entrepreneurial
experience and to run that out
or three advisory board members
are staying with us and their
key part of as well um bradvel
is a veteran vc on his basin
silicon valley he has a
tremendous network.
Within the investment worlds and
and the corporate world running
his own bc and also as a former
head of the.
Uhm investment of johnson and
johnson.
Um john rock well is um a serial
entrepreneur here in new mexico
with tremendous operational
experience armies built several
companies
here in our state and he brings
a ton of expertise than building
companies and building teams the
table sturos.
Not only has tremendous
backgrounds in bio
and that industry experience
that.
You know supports what we do but
he also is just a master
networker i'm he's a node with
hinhard he he himself is truly
unknown within the.
Um
the new mexico start up because
the stomach is is is a leader
within that community and so
we're very proud to happen
part of our team.
Uhm so moving to the magazine to
set bring up a bit more we've
talked about one either it's
unusual I think for not be here
but
the season I see that aboard
meeting uhm.
Serving one of our companies so
you know she went when I came to
tram way I
I just I couldn't imagine saying
no to working with one either
i've known her for her really
long time I would mired her for
a really long time I thought on
various boards.
And committees with her and she
said she has a tremendous
expertise and that she is built
companies she is run investment
firms but she's also open on the
board of one of the biggest.
Healthcare providers in the
country.
You know she
experienced is just really vast
and really valuable and more so
what I like to.
Reminds everyone is that the
ecosystem we have here today.
Across actually much of the tax
start up world a lot of it was a
lot of that was started by one
either over a couple decades ago
she was involved early on in
starting a lot of the groups i'm
including an ambio and others to
get entrepreneurs together to to
work on funding sources and
resources for entrepreneurs so
I bought a few thingful for
one isn't one it is involvement
in the state and where
obviously.
Really thrilled to be for her to
be a partner a tramway with with
them the two of us so moving on
to the next slide this is the
would be brought up.
Several times you know we
we will continue to call debate
and nurture this arm because
there's a mat's really important
for what we do um within a hall
tech biotech and tag but across
all of the start up worlds are
themselves will continue to
support initiatives like the
fewer purchase
and and buyout were active
within the angel community.
Uhm and we have some new
initiatives that will bring to
fruition including
the internet program which i'll
get to and one more slide but
but this is very important for
what we do and will continue to
all be active members
so the next side you know to
round out.
The investment experience and
the
very active participation and
growing the eco system we also.
Across thirteen
industry expertise and.
And really vast networks within
the industry
across the country and across
the world chris you know as you
heard in his bio has worked um
at some in a pretty amazing
company is any has a really
amazing network all of this is
really important as we as our
companies grill
pushed a market expand to
partner etc.
So chris's backgrounds my
background when he was
background and our three
advisory.
Uhm.
Partners are a you know really
well connected and this will be
very important as we grow.
They're moving on
this is that the new piece that
we are thrilled to be rolling
out
within our ecosystem and um we
want to
be doing this once.
Once we're often running.
The first close for fun three so
I think it's super important to
give braid new mexico college
students and opportunity to
access real world investment
experience i've seen this in
other areas of the country it's
worked particularly well and
utah where have some experience
and it's super important that we
do this we need to give.
Um
you know young college students
are really great reason to stay
here or come back here after
the.
Go onto new york silk on value
or someone um but give them a
reason to there come back here
to build companies and and our
work as seasoned investment
professionals so
and another very important piece
of this uhm will be focusing on
giving these internal
opportunities to women and
minorities and other
disadvantaged students with then
uhm.
It in new mexico.
And so we will plan to roll out
starting with you and am
and then the to work with all
three major universities.
To push this forward.
Though next slide um.
Oh i'm sorry went through both
of slide please excellent yes
thank you now it's.
And suggest the summaries where
we are today as.
Am tramley ventures you know I
think our team is a really
important part of the story
we're entrepreneurs.
Investment experience and deep
domain expertise.
We are
um heavily invested within the
personally interested within the
new mexico start if you guys are
similarly planned to
continue no training and
supporting that in big ways
including uh adding this college
visa entering program which were
separate excited about
and of course we also have
connections across the region
and the world which is really
important to growing successful
companies here in new mexico
so at an expired please so for
fun three as you know we are
raising a bigger fund we are
raising a forty million dollars.
Fund um in order to invest in a
higher number of companies
within my tech by attack and
held tack and even more
importantly we want to we will
be reserving a much bigger piece
for the follow on capital new
mexico has you know you must go
founder have more access than
ever to to early stage seeds
stage funding and resources but
there is still a big gap
um
making a very difficult for
these companies to raise.
Sometimes there are arounds with
certainly there be round so
forty percent of fun three will
be allocated for following
funding so that the company is
doing well are positioned really
well for success and um.
And and ultimately they are
positioned well to reach like
access.
Within the portfolio.
Chris gave you a greater review
of the segments we invest in and
of course ninety eight percent
are more of the fund will be
invested in new mexico.
Aslide please.
Um to summarize the the we're
very excited about fund three
we think the bigger fund is
really really important so that
we can invest in more companies
the pipeline is is more than big
enough for us to do that will
take.
Larger equity positions and
allow more following capitals so
that the company is doing while
our positions while for a
success and then of course the
larger fundamental allowance to
expand our team which we've
already started with a with
chris coming on board and.
And.
It will have the the bandwidth
to support to continue
supporting that very important
start up eco system and bringing
the programs to footage such as
that.
At college vc internet program
so some rights were extremely
excited about the future of tram
wave enters here in new mexico
um we are the leading tag held
by attack fund in the southwest
and will continue leading from
new mexico um and more than
anything were excited for those
are health tag medic and where
text start ups here new mexico
to grow and flourish way rap up
I just wanted to think of ryan
and her team and also the team
at michelle this was a really
thorough process as you know but
honestly they've been wonderful
to work where itself thank you
for we're working with us and.
Any questions.
I have a couple of quick
questions so
would you talk to us about how
many deals you think you can
source from a forty million
dollar fund and then secondly
knowing that a small percentage
of the phone will be outside in
a mexico is there a way that the
finance authorities dollars can
only be tied to the name.
The.
So the first question it'll be
about twelve to fifteen
companies
about and with the with about
five hundred k to one point five
million as the first investment.
Um and again the forty percent
meaning.
Be organized about how million
for a series and another sixteen
million for series be would be
for the the winners if you will
within the portfolio
and then they out of seat pieces
you know it I will let ryan
answer the the the second more
technical part
the location but you know we we
see it as were aiming to invest
at least ninety percent.
And I think some of the
reaching out to other parts of
the region I would like to.
Say that it's it's really great
for the companies here to have
those connections as well for it
for **** are ecosystem for
community and for the start ups
to be.
I'm strongly connected within
the region that's really
positive thing um as far as.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There are s.
Okay thank you.
Any other questions.
Thank you for your presentation
this morning.
Thank you.
That.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Madam chair if it's okay we just
wanted to wrap up I know we took
up a bunch of time but just
wanted to wrap up the rest
you've been had a couple
highlights from do diligence on
and we just wanted to show those
with manager if I could just we
have included in both of these
presentations the due diligence
process which i've got up on the
screen now I don't know that
that's a big focus of the
conversation but I just wanted
to make sure you understood kind
of.
But there's a lot of work that
gets into these two pages so.
We will have this each time we
do it so that there is a
reminder to you all uh what goes
on before you get a
recommendation for anyone else
that just asks for this amount
this presentation we want to
make sure it's fully captures
everything we.
Thanks thanks for your madam
chair and board members thanks
for having us and good morning
before I start and I will go
through
that the due dilderness part of
the presentation I just wanted
to quickly introduce my
colleagues charity crap who's
here in the room is based on
alberticky and then on zoom are
three of my college that it
really helped with both of the
deliberates processed this year
steve heart michael pellets and
spring and champagne so just
wanted to make sure you know who
appeal the making the team that
was supporting this effort.
And it looks like we've got the
board book pulled up to slide
one thirty seven which is great
I won't go through this with
every investment but because
these are the first two I
thought as market mentioned I
thought it would make sense to
talk about our process and what
make it is done on behalf of n
and for the board indulgence and
it's really been our standard
deals and process that make it
as you know we we advise on
about one point seven and
trillion dollars and assets and
so we follow very detailed
methodical process as we go
through and we follow that exact
same process here so that starts
with a review of all of the
dedicates materials that the
funds produce and we send out a
due to urgence question air that
goes to the to each of the funds
they fill it out it takes a few
weeks and when we get it back we
go through it and then we ask
additional follow up questions
then we start having multiple
mem- meetings with the team so
we like to meet each of the
investment professionals at the
team and what you follow up
meetings um often times with
staff so that we're getting to
know them we began a process of
reference calling both what we
call on reference less so we'll
get a reference list from the
fund and then will also try to
call off reference because
generally those are those are
useful conversations as well and
in this case with both of these
funds we talk to members of the
new mexico venture capital
ecosystem and god references
about many people that you'll be
hearing from today.
We also run third party
background checks and get those
and review them on at least two
members of the investment team
and then we have after we've
kind of assembled all that
information we have what we call
and on say do diligence day it
tends to be a few hours and in
some cases virtual depending on
how that works but.
We meet with the team we asked
follow questions we spent a lot
of time kind of going through
the investment strategy finally
after all that's done we write
our investment member which
tends to be kind of forty to
sixty pages that's been
presented to the vc investment
committee
that on orange and mckitter gets
reviewed by our private markets
research team
we essentially get grilled by
our own colleagues about what
we're presenting and they ask
questions really useful to be
and we update the memo and then
we presented that to the to the
committee so the work that
you're that's happening behind
the scenes here is quite
extensive and I just want to
make sure you you saw that to
this is a flow chart that shows
all what I what I just described
on that through it and if you go
to the next uh slide please.
You can see.
Under the steps that we go
through for each bays and.
If we hit a phase where we're
not satisfied with the diligence
of course that's where the
process would stop but in both
the cases for some mountain and
for a chamber we've gotten
through the fall due diligence
process today.
So.
I guess what i'll stop there for
a second and take questions on
processing and i'm i'll have a
couple of comments about train
way and then I can do the same
thing for so much and I won't
repeat myself on due dollars in
this process but it's the same.
The.
Great in terms of tram way i'll
just try to keep this very brief
but we highlighted a few
strengths and a few weaknesses
or considerations that our memo
that I would raise to the
board's attention in terms of
strengths the team build out as
you saw the tram way team has
expanded and we think that sort
that's a strength they also have
another strength is significant
experience and sector focus in
the health care space in new
mexico uh which as they
mentioned we've found in our
buildings is unusual and and
they're really the the leaders
in that space in the state.
They're also operating in in a
relatively underserved market
here there are not a lot of
venture capital investment
dollars flowing to the same
types of health care companies
so that's a real strength for
this opportunity.
In terms of considerations for
the board this will be a larger
fund than they previously raise
so they'd raise about fifteen
million between the there are
two funds and this is a forty
million dollar fund as a mid
again factor for that actually I
I think.
We call that consideration but I
think that's actually strength
that they're getting to a size
where they can have a built out
pack office where they can have
a built out team and deploy a
significant amount of capital to
the state so I think that that's
a double edge sword in some
sense.
In terms of another
consideration it's a relatively
new strategy's twenty seventeen
isn't that long ago for for
deploying capital until it's
hard to look back at the
investments in funds one into
and determine how they're going
to go this is a very long te-
investment cycle that will
happen and then it's a
relatively small firm were
encouraged that they've built
out the team and were encouraged
about the way they're planning
to build out the team but but it
is still a relatively small
group of folks investing so
those are strengths and
considerations for this
opportunity we are supportive
from a kito we've reviewed the
opportunity at our private
markets research committee and
we thank
it it's a reasonable investment
opportunity for an economic
development program.
The.
The.
So um of the areas that you
looked at the fun focus the
across the project mission and
diversification impact.
Would you talk about those areas
that um.
Are not the full circle rate so
creating and retaining the
mexico jobs and benefits for
underserved communities.
And how you came to.
Thank you madame chair all i'll
i'll share my thoughts and then
i'm sure ethan has a few
additional so on one thing about
just the we certainly looked to
and for size the strengths you
know in in terms of which
objectives this fund will will
achieve so
you know that's.
It's it's not for example sector
diversification I mean by your
sciences a target sector for
economic development and this
fund buyer to have concentrating
on that is going to help support
new mexico's you know economic
diversification overall on but
we didn't highlight that because
it's a focus strategy in terms
of it's not diversified itself
and relative to the other
objectives we thought those were
more more significant so and in
terms of benefits for
underserved communities this was
a discussion we had are
particularly because this is s
SB c I funding and there is a
study objective on and mandate
of that program on generally
speaking
were finding throughout the
country that on traditional vc
is challenging to reach said the
targets on because of the nature
of traditional v c and equity
relative to the capital needs of
many study business owners on
that's one reason for example
you'll see in future pipeline
coming through the venture
capital program mission driven
finance who we've been working
with our over the course of this
year to develop a fund that
really is a debt focus vehicle
on because of the new unit the
nature of the couple of needs
for study on businesses here in
new mexico so on.
What I would like so that's
that's one reason that that is a
you know kind of a forth a pie
you know that's that's all
that's less strong for this
particular on fund that said I
did want to highlight that one
of the five portfolio companies
that tremory has already
invested in is is on a study
owned and controlled the reason
I didn't highlight it here is
because it really isn't an
explicit focus of their strategy
you know and on honestly you'll
find that in the I it's
important that I think we have
integrity around which funds are
targeting
really underserved communities
and which ones it's it's kind of
it may be a measured impact but
not necessarily targeted by the
strategy on so that's why those
two in particular you know
carried less weight in this
analysis relative to the other
on the other three and
I do want to highlight that
there on uh ability to raise
private capital for a locally
focused fund on it in the amount
of seven million really is
unique relative to a lot of I
mean it's it's why we've talked
about this program exists
because they're not many
private investors that are
investing in local new mexico
businesses so.
The only thing I would add to
that as they think when you see
these opportunities come to you
over the next year or so you I
think we're what we're trying to
do is find a balance of not all
the groups are going to be
strong in all of the areas but
we're definitely making sure
that we're getting strong groups
in each of the areas so
I think what ryan said makes
like sense the other unjust job
creation I think in the
healthcare space there is just
math in terms of there are fewer
some of these companies just
need fewer employees up at at
these early stages as they scale
and grow hopefully they'll grow
larger and higher more people
and so I think that's why that's
only to half the pie.
That.
If there is no other questions
from board members still I hear
emotion.
Would make that motion.
Uhm motion from the first person
is there a second.
What second.
As taken from member sizer.
Any discussion on the motion.
I.
Although supposed.
Motion carries.
Congratulations we have our
first investment right
next on the agenda
is another commitment to the new
mexico opportunity fund.
Thank you madam chair and i'll
go ahead I just like the last
one and and give a brief
introduction and then ryan and
the anti and from some mountain
capital will come forward and
and give you AAA a presentation
of their um firm and strategy so
before you today is a
recommendation to commit ten
million from
the state funded portion of our
venture capital program the
fifty million on the came via
the legislature into the new
mexico opportunity fund this
isn't a new fund on that that
sunmountain capitals launching
and we've been working with them
over the course of this year to
really develop a strategy on
that would
uh really achieve some of the
objectives of our specific
program in terms of economic
development and I think the main
focus there is really unsector
diversification on to some
mountain capital is a locally
based firm they were founded in
two thousand six and did they've
advised on over seven hundred
million of assets primarily for
public institutions with
economic development mandates
investing locally and and a good
portion of that has been
investing here and locally in
new mexico
so they are a established firm I
hear locally with on significant
venture capital expertise
they've developed a strategy
that is explicitly targeting
sectors that have not been
historically targeted here by
the venture capital community
where that historically really
has emphasised on technology
commercialization from the labs
on as you all know that's a a
core focus of uhm the the state
investment council for their
their statutory mandate on and
not actually historically has
been wear son mountain has been
most active on despite that
based on their experience they
they believe that there are
opportunities also in other
sectors and because our program.
Has that differentiated mandate
we think that is an important
economic development objective
that we could achieve with this
fund on so in terms of strategy
you'll see in in the right up
there are nine industries here
that the sun mountain team has
identified where they they
believe that there are
opportunities
and i'll be
looking to lead investment
rounds on in in companies that
other local venture capital
investors are not targeting on
so in terms of that uh venture
capital program fit on this one
similarly has on focus on
investing in local businesses
and creating jobs and on you
know relatively stronger
emphasis on sector
diversification on opportunities
on benefits for underserved
communities that's not
highlighted because it really
isn't a target of the of the
strategy itself on and the only
reason additional private
investment is is where it's
there is just because this is an
untested uh strategy for private
investors here so there's less
visibility on demand on for this
for the specific strategy.
I think if it's okay I might
pass it over to the sun mountain
team to share a bit more and
then on even and I can come back
and and you can highlight the
diligence points and we could
take any questions.
The.
The.
Hi good morning
ryan for their introduction and
dark.
I I think before restart we just
like to say thank you for the
opportunity to present.
We are very excited about the
opportunity fund and believe it
really fits the need accurate
state.
My name is brian berg and when
the coffounders of some mountain
capital
i've been up working in enter
capital here in the states since
two thousand and six.
And of those seventeen years
we've learned quite a bit and
we're going to show some of that
with you today with me is damn
brooks is with the firm for what
ten years now ten years and is
one of our principles you're
going to talk about that you're
back on there yeah happy to give
a little bit of background as I
mentioned dan broke some native
new mexican born here and santa
fe new mexico went to university
of new mexico when I graduated
actually did a brief stand and
the department of finance and
administration here but new
mexico state government for
joining some mountain capital
and since that time have spent
the majority of the past ten
years focusing my efforts on
investing in my home state so
really happy to be here today
and excited to share this new
strategy with the committee.
Yeah so with them will take a
few minutes to walk through some
of the materials and then open a
lot for questions
like this others
will be the great.
Well as is
it as as we mention some
mountain was started in santa fe
in two thousand and six we got a
first investment mandate.
In two thousand and seven um and
we sort of some mountain capital
with a very specific investment
mandate and that was really
focused on designing a managing.
Geographically targeted mission
driven investment programs.
How we saw many states that had
interesting emotional property
that had a entrepreneurs but
there is this lack of a venture
capital and an at risk capital
and general and we thought there
is an opportunity to to ah
introduce a specialist program
and and management systems and
things to really help develop
because systems it in the state
and the mexico factor in mexico
state investment council and
what was our first industry and
they still are investor you know
seventeen years later.
Um that today we've been
fortunate so not in capital is
new mexico success story uh
we've only have over seven
hundred million dollars a passes
under management.
Um are main officers two box
away until gas part we walked
over here at this morning.
And
in addition we now have officers
in mexico city and also in
seattle.
In and finally one thing that I
think is important as a
fudiciary managing public funds
we are in sister registered
investment advisor which comes
to the higher standard of of
reporting diligence and care
that do we think it's important
for the stewards of public
money.
I have a better background let's
talk about new mexico.
Um as I mentioned we started in
two thousand and six today which
is fast for the clock we
actually manage
discretionary equity investment
programs which is the sse
congressman find so we've seen
some of the venture capital
early stage investing.
We manage a uh private death
fund which was in mexico
recovery fund.
And through that we've seen a
whole different art set of
industries and sectors which is
one of the reasons we think the
opportunity fund has a real
has a whole set of deal flow and
characteristics make it very
attractive.
And and finally we also manage
to fund the funds are the cats
find words of program that we
had worked with ssbci capital
back six or seven years ago in
fact family was one of our first
foreign investments where we
were like when they started
itself as the small environment.
Uhm.
Our current investors you know
in addition to the message of
state investment council and
mesco economic development
department we also have a number
of the institutional investors a
corporations here in the state
and a number of high network
family officers
and we've been
yeah because of the seventeen
years of experience we've had a
lot of experience helping
new mexico companies grow
understanding some of the
challenges they are that they
face and also we have very good
relationships with the um the
industry sector just because
we've been here so
with that.
Mister under the next page which
is just looking at our team I
won't spend a lot of time on
this
I would say we are very
fortunate that we have a world
class at team.
We have experience and an
expertise that there has been.
That that has been gain from
working literally around the
world and that that's all in
santa fe and and for companies
like morgan stanley and and
intel boss consulting group the
lloyd trinity capital camera cub
it's really in all star after in
were one of the reasons of her
success as that are artimas
qualified and and and
experience.
Um
now
turn or focus to
some of the observations we have
from investing in new mexico and
this is.
Um I I would say focus on not
only our venture capital
experience but also what we've
seen on the detained best thing
side right on the mexico cover
refund.
And you know after seventeen
years we've seen quite a bit and
I would categorize he is is
really a
two different general
observations that
that make us believe that there
is a real
a real need for the opportunity
fun that the first one is really
that there is this focus in
sectors in the state you know
the status is largely a rural
there are very few traditional
large you know fortune five
hundred type companies here.
Right and so the economic engine
are small and medium sized
businesses.
Right I mean that that's truly
what drives new mexico and
drives employment here.
Absolute any capital program has
to be focused on these smaller
medium sized businesses.
Uhm
and her husband programs in the
past like the same seat program
that's focused on these but
those programs have a very
specific legislative mandate
right and that legislative
mandate is technology
commercialization.
Going into the universities that
labs finding early stage
technology like a tram way would
and then investing money to
develop and then bringing those
companies you know to commercial
entities.
And the and that has gotten a
lot of traction and there is a
fair amount of capital focus
there.
Our observations at those
investments are typically
centered in a several different
economic sectors it important
sectors.
Uh but the new mexico economy is
much broader.
Rate a snat just these three
sectors it's a whole host of
sectors.
That we look at the smart medium
size companies that they can't
participate
their natwell suited participate
in these fence account per
program because of the nature of
their business.
They're still very fun the ball
and and then and and very you
know very high opportunity
companies.
But veteran capitalism a very
specific profile that is and
it's not a pride fit so one of
our.
Thoughts as we want to cast a
wider net where I would want to
bring more new mexico companies
about two capital they were can
be successfully deployed.
Avia the second thing we would
observe is that.
Because of the nature of venture
capital of early stage venture
capital where takes yours to
develop products and then you're
sit commercialise those.
Uhm there there has been not a
lot of liquidity that's gone
from the equity investors back
to
search from from the equity
funds back to the investors.
In the
common and we see
one of the challenges to build a
more robust ecosystem as having
that circulation the capital
increase rates for people can
take and reuse that capital and
to new investments.
Our experience
on the metal recurrifying
provider and interesting
contrast that.
They have only do we see a
number of these other economic
sectors are right as we are
looking at doubt a cast in this
wider net.
But also the the way that we
structure the investments that a
traffic job for the liquidity
and and specifically the names
of a court refund in in less
than four years has returned
over seventy percent of the
capital back to its investors.
And that's uhm and that that was
in a over sixty three million
dollars so it wasn't just a few
million dollars but it's just
substantial amount.
We realized a lot of this was
the structure and and how we
actually under road those
investments to these companies.
So if the opportunity found our
goals heard to again everyone
cast a wider net to some of
these smaller medium companies
that weren't good fits for the
bench of capital programs out
there and secondly to
to structure our investments in
a way that will increase the
capital circulation and
distributions back to investors.
So so how we're going to do that
i'm an ed turn over to dan and
talk through some of the details
and thank you for your time
right thank you brian I could
please go to the next slide
so as mentioned to address this
market need that we've observed
the new mexico sun mountain is
launching the new next car
opportunity fund which was
developing collaboration with
ryan and thirteen in terms of
strategy as brian mentioned the
focus of this fund is to invest
an early stage businesses but
get outside of those really well
travelled well invested
industries and expand access to
capital and new mexico.
You know they're really
sorry wrong page there.
So key issues that we've seen
investing where we've shifted
the strategy a bit which is in
new mexico in those tech heavy
industries there's a lot of
investment before a company can
even bring a product to market
right three four five six
million dollars many years we
would be looking in more
businesses that are either
currently generating revenue or
have a lot of visibility towards
generating revenue in the near
term future that could you know
service these different types of
investments and provide that
liquidity back to invest in
these sectors and companies we
would take a slightly more
flexible approach where we could
either invest using traditional
equity investments where we
purchase a piece of the company
and hold on to that a bit longer
term or look at using a quazi
equity or structured return type
investment structure where we
could get some types of
dividends or interest payments
in the short term the longer
term window for appreciation and
having that structure return is
important because as you can
appreciate into mexico there are
a lot of businesses that don't
fit the traditional venture
profile of a founder who wants
to start a company grow that
company and then sell it
preventure capital investors
that's a critical part of
achieving liquidity for your
investors you need those
companies to be sold so that you
can recoup your capital using
that because I equity
restructured return approach we
can work with family on
businesses or founders that want
to hold on to and manage those
businesses longer term where we
can over time exit from those
positions and they can maintain
control of that business and
perpetuity but we've achieved
the quidity for our investors
yeah III would I would said that
we see so money.
Of the most interesting
companies here are a family run
or your multi generational there
are not fits for venture capital
right because in order to pay
back to investors you have to
sell the company and allow the
businesses here that don't want
to do that right and and so we
have a what we think we have a a
an approach that allow them to
get the expansion capital you
know that that they need but
they don't have to actually
eventually sell the business in
in three or four years and to
their end the really important
feature of this fund will be the
ability for us to lead deals or
be the primary investor in deals
so that we can be a little bit
more flexible and creative and
how we underwrite and structure
these transactions I think a lot
of times bounders find a point
of frustration where they'll
meet a lot of investors who say
yeah we're going to invest but
we want to follow it we don't
want to leave the deal being
able to do that allows us to put
in place these different
structures and really find
solutions that work for these
boundaries that go maybe a
little bit outside of
traditional venture capital fair
way we think with this
combination of elements the fund
will be complementary to the
existing programs in new mexico
but also really expand access to
capital within the state.
They're shifting a little bit to
speak about the sectors that
we've targeted and collaboration
with animal faith we really
mapped out what we felt where
the key economic sectors in the
state of new mexico based on
contribution to gdp matched with
investment historically and we
identified seven clusters that
we think are a really good fit
for these non traditional
sectors just to go through a
couple examples here one is
looking at health care and we
think about this little bit
differently than maybe you heard
from tram way where they're
investing in the technology
developing the heart science
piece of that we look at health
care and say well that's really
great and there's a lot of
opportunity there but there are
also medical diagnostics labs or
facilities around the state that
provide health care services but
are not as heavily tech base
also looking at manufacturing we
think there's a lot of
opportunity in that sector with
businesses such as machining
businesses or even a peril and
you know goods consumer goods
type companies we also look at
you know arts entertainment and
food services which is abroad
while the businesses but it's
clustered into this
bucket because you look at
success stories in new mexico
like a mould for an electric
play house or a tasman energy
bar which now are really great
success stories earlier on
struggle to find capital because
they didn't fit that traditional
venture capital so we look at
these sectors is a really
exciting source of deal flow
already started meeting with
entrepreneurs and building a
pipeline across these sectors
and believe they're really is a
fishing opportunity for the
fund.
The.
Now when it comes to measuring
performance sunmount to our
management of these
geographically and mission
targeted programs has developed
a set of tools that we can use
to really report on what our
clients find important and
customise that solution we
probably put that into two
buckets the first is financial
metrics which we look at now
what's the funds overall
performance but then on a deeper
level how are the portfolio
companies performing then beyond
that how are we performing
relative the industry how can we
benchmark this against the asset
class and other performers
regionally nationally within the
asset class more broadly.
The second bucket is looking at
that economic development and
the economic metrics some of the
key things we look at in these
types of programs are you know
employment data payroll data
contribution to the state in
terms of spending or tax revenue
we've started working with ryan
and her team on building out
what metrics are going to be
most important frenament fatal
track so that we can build that
into the find and make sure that
we're evaluating our performance
against those goals.
To speak a little bit about what
those goals for economic
development are we really view
it as a few key areas the first
is we want to help create and
sustain successful long lasting
businesses for a sustainable
economic development you need
your companies to be winners you
need them to be able to grow
maintain a footprint in the
state and continue to spend in
the state.
With that we want to see the
creation of high skill high
paying jobs in new mexico that
you do see a lot of within these
tech industry clusters we want
to increase that quality of job
outside of those sectors more
broadly.
Also the contribution of these
companies to the state uh as I
mentioned in the form of taxes
spending uh tax contribution to
the general fund.
And then third the ability for
these businesses to uh meet
milestones and really grow the
business to a point where if
they need it they can raise
additional capital from
investors regionally and
nationally which really drives
direct investment into the state
of new mexico we've demonstrated
that we can perform successfully
across these metrics
historically in the state of new
mexico and least in three cases
as brian mentioned with the new
mexico state investment council
co investment fund the new
mexico catalyst fund the new
mexico recovery fund for
confident that this fund will be
able to perform against the
economic development goals that
we have outlined for the nmpat
alternate over to brian great
well well well thank you and.
I would just like to say you
know thank you for your time and
consideration we think that this
fund can fill an important
funding gap in in the state
specifically getting capital to
the small and medium size
companies which are the economic
engine of the state that are in
sector is that just are not good
fits for some of these
traditional eventual capital
funding programs.
And and then with that we say we
got thank you and opened up for
questions.
I i'd like to just first of all
see you I think a program that
uh leaves that that doesn't make
a business have to sell it at
the end of four years and
expantastic so we appreciate you
guys think that through and I
would have been energy to your
list of people but businesses
maybe should take a look into I
know the status is just going to
be born in here very very short
absolutely yeah there's a lot of
young businesses coming up to
that area yeah
familiar with the company.
The.
Any other questions.
Thank you for your presentation
today.
Alright thank you very much.
Yeah.
Madam chairman going to hand it
over to ethernet that's okay
just a highlight some other
findings during diligence
madam chair and board remembers.
I will get through the diligence
process again but you can rest
assured that we went through our
entire dollars and process a
mechanic
in terms of the sunmount and
opportunity i'll lay out a few
the strings and considerations
for you uhm some of the the
strings
this is an experience firm with
a long track record in the
economic development space and
and at least three products in
new mexico that have created
over four thousand jobs um
secondarily they have been
willing to work with the mfa
team to design a program that
really fits the needs of the
venture capital program as you
heard and really focused on
specific industries that have
been underserved by venture
capital historically in the
state which is the real strength
of the program and they believe
they've demonstrated a pipeline
particularly from their recovery
act fund of these small and
medium sized businesses
throughout the state that have
not been historically able to
access venture capital from
others.
In terms of considerations for
you the from a purely financial
perspective the performance of
some mountains prior funds has
not been in strong from an
economic development perspective
which a lot of the funds were
created for they have been
strong
and that's that's a mitigating
factor here because this is
an economic development related
program investment
in the end those earlier
investments have had limited
realizations mid getting that is
that many of the other uh funds
investing in the mexico have had
similar results.
There is a lack of a dedicated
team to this structure which is
a consideration but that's part
and and as a sunmountain mention
they've got several other
strategies that they're
investing in but that's
partially mitigated by the fact
that most of those strategies
are through their investment
period so this would actually be
kind of the center of attention
for some mountain at this time.
Um and it's a new strategy for
the firm directly investing
whereas many of their other
funds were call investment
programs or otherwise and that's
mitigated by the fact that a
conversation program that
they've run is very similar to
the direct investment program
that you're looking at today.
So in summary the key to most of
our group reviewed this
opportunity and believes it to
be a reasonable investment uh
for an economic development
related program.
Questions.
The.
A quick question that I wanted
to follow up on was again when
we look at crossure project
mission and diversification
impact
the benefits for underserved
communities I just
i'm interested in no kind of how
you came to that assessment this
feels like to me the opportunity
to make some investments in
understand communities really
around the state of new mexico
whereas our traditional venture
seems to be really albuquer.
Make investment.
But it's still not scoring very
high honor list
yeah madam chair I mean I think.
There's an opportunity with this
fund and the new mexico
opportunity fund her but for it
for that and that's certainly in
the perview of the strategy but
it is not an explicit focus and
so
honestly I think we're trying to
be really um
clear around if we give a fund
of a high ranking in that
category on you know investing
in city on businesses might be
part of the strategy investing
in businesses located and rural
communities might be part of the
strategy or directly related to
the sector focus of that
strategy and so it's a great
opportunity and I know the sun
non team is is casting that wide
nut and looking to invest in
businesses based on rural were
potentially sationed or owned by
underserved communities
individuals runners but it's not
explicit focused and and at the
same time on it is also a
strategy if you look at the
targeted I r it's in the high
single digits on a net basis two
investors you know and and part
of that is to you know they're
they're seeking to raise a
ten million and anchor from an
mfa and then possibly ten
million from private investors
and so some mountains had to try
and balance you know on kind of
the risk return profile and
economic development objectives
for the private investors
they'll be looking to raise
matching capital from.
On and that might mean that
there are some opportunities to
invest in businesses that don't
meet those risk return
requirements on for the fund
that they might not be able to
advance
so those are some of the reasons
that this this one sits where it
is i'm certainly we'd love to
come back to you as we report on
the performance on and show that
the actual
you know the actual perfor- the
the impact has been higher in
that category and that is a
possibility I think you know we
certainly don't want to
present something that we don't
yet have conviction it's gonna
you know focus on that objective
so.
The.
If no other questions from board
members do I hear emotion that
motion manager motion is by
members why as ID.
If not all in favour.
Most.
Again we really appreciate the
boards
consideration of these that they
takes us a wilder I think learn
new programs those that were
back here when we did new
markets might recall that they
were like to present
because there was math involved
a lot
of again really appreciate that
the boards type.
Time to day on that and
everything from here on start to
l.
Next on the agenda finance and
disclosure committee.
Yeah.
Thank you chairs as usual I will
be very brief finance and
disclosure committed me on nine
twenty we could have a quarm
we had a presentation of the
investment report and in august
thirty first twenty twenty three
we also listened to condition
forecast report for more details
on either one of those you can
look at page one fifty six
board work we also approved and
recommended to the court board
the authorising and delegating
resolution for the senior lean
public project we've all been
fond revenue bonds serious
twenty twenty four preliminary
official statement which we have
constant back to introduce his
his people and and which is next
time you can check with my
report.
Not and chair members of the
board thank you and good morning
with us today we have some
special guests this is our first
in person people of bond cell
since before their pandemic so
everything's been done on zoom
and with us today um as you know
we use nationally recognized
disclosure council and band
council uhm with us today is
tailorement from or accountant
psychothere cyclifier disclosure
council and she also seed out
from gilmore and bell our bond
council I believe bread
patterson from gomornbill might
be on the phone listening in
chip piers are cheap financial
strategist is one is going to
walk through this I will be
bringing up uh taylor in channel
again there they're the ones
that protect the finance
authority you know from so many
different things we have a a
myriad of federal securities
laws that we have to do so we
essentially get the set uh
inside you know the animal gets
that makes me the cloud fish but
let's not go there
so we'll get uh checked to
describe the the underlying
projects that are going to be in
this bond series and then we'll
walk through the PO s then the
authorising and delegating
resolution that is the
instrument that at this board is
going to be asked to approve
which includes all the approvals
necessarily for us to go out to
market for the bonds and one of
the things will also ask is
that.
One of the members of the board
hopefully volunteers to be a
designated officer marquita will
be one will need one other one
that person will then sit
through listen to some of the
calls that go through with with
the underwriters uh in the
finance team through the bond
sale and then will be asked to
sign up the final term
certificate which are the
parameters that the board is
going to authorize today in the
resolution that the cell must
stay within so I think with that
will turn it over to chip and
then we'll just uh continue on.
Great thanks damn.
I'm looking a little blown out
here
mind i'll just give you a quick
overview of the transaction that
we're looking at it's
the two thousand twenty three b
bonds we'll be reimbursing
twenty one loans that have been
made previously.
And then our largest bar or to
this transaction as the alberta
burned leo county water utility
authority they requested the
hundred and twenty one point
five million dollars loan which
will be sold simultaneously with
the bonds a total issue size
were looking at is around a
hundred and sixty million
the expectation is that these
will be sold
probably with mostly five
percent could bar and so there
will be a.
A decent sized premium
associated with a bond issue
so right now we're waiting for
the rating agencies to get a
readings back to us were
expecting those are today and
tomorrow once we have that we
will have a new diligence called
with the thing it's team on
monday.
After that stun will have a will
post the perspectives that
official statement which will be
talking about here in a few
minutes post that to the
internet on tuesday then for the
next two weeks after that the
underwritings indicate of morgan
stanley jeffreys and steephole
will do the premarketing for the
transaction
the expectations that will sell
the week of october sixteenth.
And then now the plan is that
the bonds will close on
october thirty first you won't
call it halloween with this
collector were thirty first so
without it i'm
think that sort of gives you a
brought over view and I will I
will turn it over to the the
folks who
have been working diligently on
the year the disclosure
document.
Mancher i'll turn over the
tailor.
Good morning madam chair board
members thank you for having me
as down mentioned and with or
accountant in such lift
disclosure council to the
authority.
I am going to very quickly run
through the pos that starts on
page when sixty of the board
book and just want to know that
this is substantially similar to
the twenty twenty three a pos
that was issued earlier this
year
you'll see on the cover includes
the estimated principle amount
which is a hundred and fifty
nine million it includes the
designation of the bonds as well
as the underwriters that chip
mentioned a lead underwriter
morgan stanley and then co
underwriter stevel and jeffrey.
And the next page you'll see the
performance
that surveys at the bonds and
this will be updated pricing.
A going on a page one sixty five
of the board book this will be
the initial cover page of the PO
s of the body and on the next
few pages it just goes into some
summaries of the more complete
descriptions that you'll see of
the major captions in the pos
are not hit um on the page when
sixty eight of the board this
first major subcaption is the
serious twenty twenty three p
bonds and this just sets forth
the basic terms and conditions
for the issues such as the
payment dates and the reduction
provisions.
Please turn the page on seventy
and that will be the security
and sources of payments for the
balance and that's probably the
most important section of the
offering document it really
focuses on the agreement
revenues and the g r t revenues
uhm and if you turn the page one
seventy two
of the world this will set forth
the table of the uh agreement
revenues broken down by types of
securities that the entities
will use to repay the ones and
on the next page there's a table
that shows the largest agreement
revenue payers which is updated
for each insurance.
The.
On page one seventy five you'll
see a table that shows the five
year revenue history of the
guarantee revenues and you can
see that fiscal year twenty
twenty three was added from the
prior PS this year
next page one eighty four you'll
see the plan of financing i'm in
this sources and use this table
will be updated at pricing
on the next page you'll see the
performer service requirements
you'll see the requirements for
the bins which be updated at
pricing and then you see that it
also includes the outstanding
parity balance and the total.
Umm this information is also
included on page one eighty
seven which is the table showing
the coverage ratio.
On page one eighty eight this is
a new mexico finance authority
disclosure which that's worth
information regarding the powers
programs and activities of new
mexico finance authority um as
well as the key management on
page one ninety.
The last two sections in the
post that I will hit on or on
page one ninety nine.
As should mention their ratings
are expected to come in soon and
they're left linked for now but
we don't expect them to be any
different from what they've been
in the past.
And lastly the investment
considerations there's really
been no change of subsidiary
changes from the last issue and
but we are closely monitoring
the cover disclosure.
Uhm a panics a start on page two
o three there's only three
disclosures in the section the
first table on page two or four
shows the governmental units
that obtain funding from the
bonds to a six shows the
purposes for which such entities
will use a long proceeds.
And then on page two or seven it
shows a largest repayment
obligations.
On page two oh nine you'll see a
panic fee which are um
extracts of certain provisions
of the indenture and then on.
Two thirty two it's certain I
append exceed certain economic
and demographic information
relating to the state and that's
updated each time
appendix day is a former opinion
of van council which skill more
about would be issuing and
that's very important to
investors and that's updated for
each issue
last two tendencies are panicked
on page to forty eight that's a
dtc provision summaries and the
panics are on page two forty two
and the audited financials will
be included after that page and
we will be using fiscal year
twenty twenty two as they don't
expect twenty twenty three
audited financials to be
available at the time it's
posted.
I am happy to answer any
questions I know I want to get
very quickly.
Madame chairman members of the
board one of the things we
always include in your board
materials on page one fifty nine
is a spreadsheet that outlines
the various sections we
understand that the PO s is a
difficult document to get
through so we've gone through
and highlighted those sections
for a quick reference should you
want to go to any particular
section.
This.
And if there are no questions we
will bring snow up to go through
the authorizing and delegating
resolution.
Good morning madam chair and
board and she also see the with
gilmore bell which is european
council for this issue of the
twenty twenty three but deep
balance
in the board packet page two
forty three starts the
authorizing and delegating
resolution this resolution
outlines the parameters under
which the ones can be issued so
if you look at a section six on
page two forty nine those
parameters include a not to
exceed amount of one hundred and
eighty million million which
is above um the amount disclosed
in the post but that gives a
little bit of flexibility
depending on the market uh the
final maturity date as june
first twenty forty eight.
Moving on to page to fifty uhm
we have been.
Discount maximum at three
percent and underwriters
discount maximum a point seventy
five percent.
Um I did skip over on the
previous page the true interest
interest cost of a maximum of
five percent with a coupon of a
fixed interest rate maximum of
five point five percent and this
resolution also authorizes the
officers eh to who will approve
the documents that are shown as
exhibits to this resolution
which are extensive and take
about uh I think it's to sixty
to three fifty six of the board
packet there is any questions on
those exhibits i'm happy to
answer answer questions about
that but those are approved
documents such as the one
hundred and tenth supplemental
indenture a bond purchase
agreement that will be executed
with the underwriters uhm
certain continuing disclosure
agreements.
And the like so i'm happy to
answer questions if there are
any.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you madame chair we would
ask the board to approve the
authorising and delegating
resolution which again approves
all the things necessary for us
to post the pos has chip
described go forward with the
sale and then report back to you
next month and again what ask if
possible at this time we could
get a designated officer
identified at the board that
would help us line up our calls
and make sure you have the
information necessary to walk us
and get used through to the
bonus.
This.
So should we take out a motion
first on the authorizing end of
delegating resolution
measures made by member collins
is there a second second.
Second maid by member sizer is
there any discussion on the
motion to approve.
If not others in favor say i.
So I think that second item is a
request for a representative
from the board.
Correct.
You're already in the market is
actually kind of fun I don't
have you to want it but one
quick question and dan when are
you guys scheduled to price
cause I won't be available the
afternoon of the nineteenth or
the twentieth so I don't want to
impact you guys pricing on those
days because i'm selling on the
I below double check with chip I
believe it's the eighteenth
yeah I mean right right now
ma'am chairboard the the
the plan is the week of the
sixteenth and we typically if we
the market is receptive we would
prefer to price earlier in the
week so I would not think that
we're going to be pricing any
later than the eighteenth so I
think I think we be okay with
that
you know the
assuming that so nineteenth and
twenty fifth will probably be
outside of our pricing window.
Welcome back again
thank you for that thank you.
Next up is the report from the
audit committee.
And.
Madam chair members of the board
let me clear method for a second
data committee
on the twentieth we had a core
several agenda items we heard
um.
Or for had a require.
Mm.
Assurance engagement.
Yeah.
We also heard a report kind of
related to internal audit on our
interprized risk assessment
refresh which was the work video
uh completed this year.
And.
One of the things i'd like to
highlight is the s.
Participated uh on the survey
related to the.
Compressive
contribution the number of.
Overall positive.
Comments about the progress made
in adoption of the.
Prioritise key risks uh
mitigation strategies including
management group and if.
We also heard.
Had an agenda item on our
financial.
Uh with the exception of an
adjustment.
Not a material entry but.
And this is where staff force
come even bring.
But we.
We with the exception.
We also heard brief.
Yeah.
And we heard a free report on
our new office building project
and.
We're.
It's from the s.
Yeah.
Thank you.
So we now need a motion to have
the board convenient in it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Some of the manager.
Motion is made by members and is
there a second second i'm
checking.
I will they all right
motion has been made and
secondly I will entertain the
motion for the mfa board of
directors to go into executive
session to hold the exit
conference for the fy two
thousand and twenty three audit.
As protected by the
