We're gonna give it just a
couple minutes to be pretty
quick agenda today.
Order.
Seriously to do rock or please.
Press.
President.
Present never help.
Present.
Thank you because reason the
stamination most of approval the
agenda that motion please.
Some of the mister chair thank
you members have second.
Second mister chair you can
remember to hear those with
every since I was an eye alright
the opposition.
The disapproved taken as the
line item number three
who have the board minutes about
members of trust you've had a
chance to read them when it's of
so can have most of the proof.
So
thank you motion to have a
second
second mister chair thank you
and most of the second results
in paper approval of minutes are
significant so i'll be saying I
opposition it's our approved
taking us the line I don't
number four report mercy thank
you mister chairman and members
this is typically the time where
I introduce some staff members
that you haven't seen before
haven't met before so you'll be
hearing from adam in his team
and a little bit but I also
wanted to introduce our credit
team but because I
who titles with some regularity
now i'm going to just ask rick
herman who is our managing
director of credit got that one
right to stand up and introduce
his team or have the team
introduced themselves if you
would please
chair.
At the end of the.
Today.
So mister chairman thank you for
any history of you'll see their
names quite a bit but you don't
hear their voices very often
that often means that they've
done their job and it sitting in
the analysis but you see before
so I wanted to make sure you all
had an opportunity to actually
hear their voices and see that
and see them in person so thank
you
I think with that I will allow
adam to do his team in the.
Right now before he introduces
before he goes into his
presentation
for members.
So they'll be going through
their overview of their
department to charter in a
minute I just wanted to mention
a few things that you'll see to
day on on today's agenda at home
you just stay right there and
won't take that long but you'll
see three different policy sets
today one is the first
operational policy that we've
been able to bring to the
finished line we've been working
on a number of them and they're
all quite close but today you'll
see the procurement policy which
really hasn't had any
significant updates for quite
some time the last time this
board approved an update was in
two thousand and sixteen and
before that you have the numbers
the dollar amounts that are in
the really put in place around
two thousand and six maybe just
slightly before so we've been
working under a fairly old set
of paul procurement policies
what you're seeing today as an
amendment to to tie the
procurement policy more closely
to our budget so that of those
folks that have budgetary
authority and are controlling
the expenditures that you all
approved in a budget actually
have a role in the procurement
process they have been
disconnected thus far I would
mention that the door I see the
bucker who's are um chief
administrative officer got that
right
is now will serve as the
procurement officer hurt her
department will oversee the
implementation of this policy so
I wanted to make sure you are
understood why you were seeing
that there will be more
operating policies coming
because we've been working on
them pretty closely so worked in
a bring a number of them either
as a review or as an approval
item over the next several
months there are two program
amendments today policy
amendments the first is for the
drinking water you'll see that
under the public lending program
and the real purpose there is to
update the policies you all
implemented last year to account
for new funding grants that are
being made available through the
epa as part of the bipartisan
infrastructure of the bill and
they have new rules associated
with that it will s.
See the need to try that that
funding out over the next
several years and we need it to
accommodate our policies to
allow for that the it won't make
any other substantive changes to
the policies but I would mention
that the changes you made last
year have resulted in two
hundred more severely
disadvantaged areas of the state
and a hundred and seventy five
additional sensors tracks and
senses designate a place as
became qualified under the
disadvantage community program
and that just means that they
can get grant like terms under
the federal funding so that was
an important change you won't
see any changes to that element
but I wanted to make sure you
knew that it was having deep
impact though it didn't seem
like a significant change last
year and the last week last
month you saw the venture
capital investment policy and
the rules we had an
administrative error in those
rules that we're going to seek
to fix today we had a
requirement that there was a one
to one
match which is frankly what's
required under the state small
business creditness should have
funding that the spedible dollar
superior ministering but the
rules we intended to have just
limited to a requirement of a
match but to have the policies
then dictate the amount so
that's the first change you'll
see in the policies why will go
through them later but we are
reducing some of the barriers of
for local fund managers those
managers that intend to invest
at least ninety percent of our
funding in new mexico and there
were some what we thought
barriers will be heard from
others would be significant
barriers in their ability to
timely invest those dollars so
we're making some changes to day
to accommodate that.
And the lastly.
I guess an early september first
in the first week of september
we have a few things going on we
have a rating agencies showing
up actually to animal fa for the
first time in many years so that
will do our rating presentations
in front in our own conference
room they'll be able to see.
You know where we operate and
and meet some more folks other
than those that typically appear
on those rating presentations so
i'm excited about that and then
at the end of that week will be
incentive to resupport oversight
committee the biggest new item
that will be talking about we we
we hit the topic last month
which is how we're going to
seek to implement the states
more business credit initiative
as you know currently it's all
wrapped up in venture capital
which is not nearly as
advantageous as our statements
are capital of program and so we
are looking to utilize those
funds in other ways to help
small businesses so that's what
we will be talking about in
particular with that and the
group
you heard last month from
on the capital landscape there
are some big highlights here
that I would that i've included
I won't read to you but
generally speaking small
businesses are being left out of
the traditional credit markets
and this is what we're seeking
to help the one place for sure
that we want to look out is
shifting several of those
dollars at least forty five from
our venture capital equity fund
into
two new programs when we
operated ten years ago which is
participation program
that will help temporary
um
or small lacks of capital served
someone's got permanent funding
lined up but they don't have
their construction funding lined
up this is a really good place
for us to help them get over
that that little hurdle and get
to their permanent funding and
the second is a new capital
access program which really
serves as a low most reserved
within each of those banks that
participate that really helps
the smallest of businesses
nationwide that's what you see
so those are the things we'll be
talking about next month i'm
sorry yeah in early september
and I think with that I will
ask.
If you have any questions or
allow adam to move forward or
membership questions in our
comments you see.
Okay he
will move forward before he
thought i'd like to take up just
a moment to introduce our newest
thank you for joining us they
had less you're working with in
a couple of committees it's been
has been nice and the board.
Okay moving out the line item
number five over the operations
innovative department and adam
you're there already let's go
good morning mister chairman I
think I got the mike on can
everybody hear me okay.
Um
thanks for having us this
morning today i'd like to share
with you this newly created a
unit within the finance
authority in my way of
background the finance thirty
over the last three years like
so many of your organizations
has constantly had to adapt we
had to adapt quite a bit to
bring on new programs as a
result of that we acquired a lot
of new talent we acquired a lot
of new tools and now we have
discovered or have discovered
over the last year that we have
a lot of opportunity with all of
those at that tower and tools
and as we know market is great
leadership and the support of
all of this great team we
regularly change so that we can
be ready for the next challenge
out of us and success be gets
more requests I would say
and so as that
adaptation evolved what was
clear was the jb very much
deserved a promotion and needed
to help split the work and so jb
became cheap programs took over
the daily operations and
transactions and I spun off to
work on the many processes along
with the support of it that we
are need to continue to change
an improve upon with all of this
great time and tools and so
that's the background on page
seventeen you see a little bit
about the team.
Their talents and skills are
including mister spino who's
active in his community as both
a wrestler and a wrestling coach
mr george next to him in his
tools and his background is
application development he also
likes the fish
and then lastly entering sober
whose background is in database
management data structure and he
is nab sportsman.
Okay got that
added title
sports some of the tools that we
have I won't go over all
advanced to page eighteen a
little bit about what makes us
tick our mission as to innovate
animal face operational
processes to increase meaningful
work decrease monotonous tasks
and create effective systems so
the whole agency can focus more
keyword i'm positively impacting
the people of new mexico our
pillars and values and team
spirit where i'll post from
other folks that do this better
than I
but we all very much align with
unpage twenty.
We I talk a little bit about the
framework that we used to do our
work it's called scrumb
it is a process that's one of a
few processes that came out of a
framework called agile some of
the key attributes of scrambers
that we deliver working
solutions often we work in short
cycles we inspect an adapt
constantly to the users are
clients which is our staff and
also the clients of the finance
authority are we pause the team
effort we all pull together we
all work on everything and we
are constantly committed to
continual improvement uhm.
I'd like to try to differentiate
ourselves from it because I
think it's rather confusing who
we are in addition to right you
team but i'd like to think of it
as we sit under their umbrella
paul and sean the call us
privileged users we have a
little bit of extra access to
other folks don't have but the
monitor is closely as we do our
work in the various systems are
projects are obviously new
programs right now we have been
working on the opportunity
enterprise
you'll be seen activity coming
from that
in the following probably
october board meeting we work to
innovate this in programs as
some of that work recently
included creating a process for
the clients of the small
business recovery long fund to
request extensions to those
loans and then we're looking at
system improvements and
integrations on page twenty a
little bit just about our
initial priorities as as many of
you folks have been on various
community meetings have seen a
few of the gaps within the
systems that we have
particularly found uhm with some
of the long closing audit work
that was done we're gonna be
working diligently on improving
enable
with the bullets that I provided
there I won't go through it in
detail but I have that for the
record for you all we're also
working on data management to
take control of all of our data
and understand it well and
improve it and then also use
that to improve our reporting
for both our clients and for our
staff and then lastly work on
automation and work flow tools
and create processes to develop
reports that are repetitive and
predictable.
And with that i'm mostly known
for speaking really fast and for
questions
or members and he questions that
our comments from mister johnson
mr terminal just wanted to
mention we've been really lucky
to have the talent this didn't
come as a result of the change
didn't come because we thought
while we just need this we saw
some incredible talent that if
we focused it and gave it enough
run away we could accomplish a
lot in a very short period of
time and said this was an
organic process to get to this
team but the work that's coming
out of it really is filling
the issues as they come up
rather than having a five year
plan which was kind of well we
thought we'd start we'd do all
our so peace find all our gaps
then go look for a system that
was perfect who find that
uniform we know that now doesn't
exist because business processes
and systems are evolving faster
than we can plan for so this
little swap team approach is
really what's going to get us to
the point where we you know can
ultimately have a forever
process in a forever system so
it is there they are short um.
Yeah I think there's a think
it's african parable that says
if you want to go fast go by
yourself if you want to go far
go in a team and this combines
both of those things because the
the journeys are short I by
purpose they're able to get
there very quickly and to do
deep meaningful work in a short
period of time so I just really
wanted to commend this team
they're bringing new things to
the table not only tools and
talents but the approach and
it's going to change really the
wind which we operate and then
leave john's hands all the day
to day work in all the clients
in a action he's responsible
ultimately or that the clients
experience with animal fa both
at a project development level
on the customer service level so
this has been as I said in
organic process but it really is
working for animathing now and I
just wanted to commend the team
and to thank john who hiding in
the back
of war taking on the challenge
of picking up what we had to
offload us with adam so that we
could allow him to do this new
project so really excited about
both efforts but wanted to give
you a little more background and
thank you maps you anything else
because
moving on item six update on or
but then the committee that you
share I was.
Yeah mister chairman I will say
member forty
okay well so I guess number for
that they are.
All.
And those pauls.
The.
Then they.
And five year old.
Thank you
moving on to a item a six point
two presentation of the member
drinking water statement bobbing
on one management policies and I
think
these is the before monthly
consent agenda this is the
committee will go ahead and act
on on that one at the end of
this and then we'll work on the
consent agenda and it's totality
so
michael europe
thank you mister chairman and
good morning members of the
board michael vonder height
managing director of public
programs and i'm joined by tajo
hanson who's our senior program
administrator for the drinking
water program as market and
mentioned we amended our
drinking water policies last
year that was a heavier left in
terms of the affordability
criteria that we used to
identify disadvantage
communities and that allows them
to receive higher levels of
subsidy under this drinking
water program that was again the
first year of implementation of
the bipartisan infrastructure
law were entering or two of the
biparis and infrastructure law
we have these two new programs
emerging contaminants in the
lead service line replacement
program these are two grads that
nfa has applied for we are
awaiting delivery of those
awards the emerging contaminance
is about seven and a half
million dollars the lead service
line grant is little over twenty
eight million dollars that is a
hundred percent federal funding
so the state is not required to
provide any state match for
those they do come with some
differing requirements which is
the reason for the proposed
amendments to the policies the
lead service line grant requires
that forty nine percent of that
twenty eight million delivered
at subsidy or principle for
given us to communities that
meet the disadvantage community
criteria that we amended last
year.
The emergency contaminants
requires that a hundred percent
of the funding be delivered on
great like terms we are
proposing loans with a hundred
percent principle for given us
to any drinking water eligible
recipient for that program up
again the policy changes in july
of twenty twenty two amended our
affordability criteria which you
see on page two of the memo
as marquita said earlier that
has been a win win for
communities in new mexico and
for the program that's allowed
more subsidy federal subsidy to
be delivered to communities so
the affordability there are no
proposed changes to that the
change was that we last year we
had always historically looked
at a communities m h I in
comparison to the state the
average we change that to
looking at comparing to the
national average is a national
program we felt that was
appropriate so that is not
changing what also is not
changing is the levels of
principle for given this for
construction projects whereby
disadvantage community would
receive fifty percent principle
for give decision really
disadvantaged seventy five
percent for those construction
projects in a zero percent
interest rate at that over
include lead service line
replacement construction
projects but we've also had to
look at non construction
projects particularly for the
lead service I replacement
program is initial projects or
for that program will be
basically inventories and
surveys to see if there are lead
service line service lines
present within that community so
we're proposing a little bit of
a different breakdown on the
subsidy for those whereby a
disadvantaged community would
receive thirty percent sixty
percent for a severely
disadvantaged community and then
we're looking at smaller systems
to provide some additional
subside to them at twenty five
percent those will be
communities that serve a
population of less than one
thousand they would also receive
a zero percent interest rate
the emergency contaminates I
think it's pretty
straightforward and that we'd be
looking at a hundred percent
principle for given this.
For those projects a pine
completion of their project
I should mention that we've
included a red line version of
the policies within the board
book that include some new
definitions and the requirement
served for these two new
programs
some other clarifications end
and clean up that we did from
last year this reviews becoming
sort of an annual event for this
program with the catches of the
bipartisan infrastructure law
the policy do go through two
rounds with our internal credit
committee and of course
represent it to the public
lending committee last week and
I think with that mister
chairman
staff would recommend approval
of the amended drinking water
policies and todd and I are
happy to answer any questions
the board may have
thank you
michael
okay here none this point reader
in emotion for approval of the
moment says present have that
motion please.
Thank you member card second.
Are all second that thank you
members reasonable cover please.
Yes
yes
yes member calling yes
yes you're yes
yes.
Thank you
but takes us to a line that
number seven and the
consent the agenda.
I would present an item seven
point one through seven point
eight and will take them in
there motivity.
Beginning
some point one the donate and
mutual domestic water consumers
association susan good morning
or right by mister chairman
members of the board could send
agenda items numbers one the
seven point one excuse me
through seven point five were
reviewed and recommended by the
public lending committee.
At the donate animature domestic
water consumers association.
The second project is also
predonant and a mutual domestic
water consumers association and
that is for a waste water master
plan that um they also call
fight for fifty thousand
the third item or the third
project is yeah mother mutual
domestic water consumers
association they came to our
program for a primary
engineering report and that was
for fifty thousand
custo christian mutual domestic
water constitutes association
has come to her program for a
premium engineering part and
they copy for fifty thousand on
that project.
And the final local government
planning project was for real
and much of domestic water
consumers association for it
another preliminary engineer
report they qualify for fifty
thousand and i'd be happy to
answer any questions on any of
these projects this time working
so the questions are comments
for suitable okay even though
right I get some point six ron
sorry
directors continuing on with the
consent agenda items and point
six to simply need which were
also reviewed and recommended by
the public committee item seven
point six as a loan on behalf of
the city of bayer who has
applied for financing of live
for smith vehicles the loneless
the amount of a hundred and
forty three thousand five
hundred and fifty all of the
disadvantage rate of zero
percent based on the city same
high the pledge revenue for this
is the law enforcement
protection fund and against them
four point one five times
coverage item seven point seven
is for the town of dexter and
they're looking to purchase a
fire truck with and respect of
equipment this is the tax
attempt in the amount of three
hundred twelve thousand with a
ten year term in the statefire
protection funds will service
purchased revenue and the final
item is item seven point eight
this on behalf of the hemis
valley public school district
they're requesting approval to
finance the purchase of
educational technology equipment
for a district white projects.
This has been presented today at
a tax
taxable loan in the amount of
three hundred thousand with a
short five year term I will
mention that the final parmout
may include some tax exempt
proceeds as determined by bond
council for the district and the
learn property tax for service
the patch remember for this
project.
Would that mature chair members
of the committee.
I'll bought a directors on story
asked about recommends approval
and we stand for any question
thank you my apologies again
nameral
comments for
this time
to prove the consent the agenda
mine and some point one through
seven point eight and that
motion please.
The.
Some of the problems they give
him most you have second
second even the
reasonable copies
yes my birth are yes number nine
yes member collins yes never
killed yes
yes number.
The
yeah I couldn't hear apologized
yes.
Thank you so he's taking us the
line item number eight the
consent agenda and items eight
point one through eight point
five which were bolked again in
their earth totality
beginning with the it went one
the dexter consolidated schools.
Good morning mr chairman good
morning board members so what
you see here funding to use
products to consolidate the
school district this is a
serious twenty twenty three
general obligation on and they
have a taxi simple on requesting
it's for seven hundred thousand
dollars it's for a fourteen year
term in this with the three
point sixty five percent net
interest cost and the coverage
is one point zero times as
required so i'm november two
thousand eighteen to just
receive voter approval for two
million five hundred thousand
dollars and it was your
recommended equipment for an
install buildings and this
approval is valid for a period
of four years so they just will
issue general obligation bonds
the amount of seven hundred
thousand dollars which in human
fee will purchase with the
period.
And the process will be used for
but are not limited to to the
products that are provided for
you here on the project
description you'll notice that
here in your board book on page
ninety one and strength include
that major taxpayers equal
eighteen point one eight percent
of the total assessed valuation
which is reflecting a little
concentration risk for the tax
base.
When it comes to weaknesses the
dish did have one repeated
significant deficiency that was
identified in their fiscal year
twenty twenty two audit but they
did provide us a correct
debation plan that was provided
to address the repeaters medical
deficiency that specific
repeater significant deficiency
was for ped cash reports.
So the pd cash report that was
submitted by the dish at the
year and did not probably
reflect the june thirtieth
twenty twenty two artist at cash
balance with the corrective
action plan that was provided to
us does remediate the finding.
And it states that the dish is
working with the auditors to
address the journal entries to
ensure that these fines are not
repeated this is the first time
that this project has appeared
before the end of a board staff
does recommend approval and am
happy to stand for any questions
or not so the questions in our
comments right.
The real right.
And that we have the real
criminal.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the new mexico finance and
thirty four so today we have our
second hammers their public
school district loan this loan
is for one million three hundred
thousand we do have a twelve
year term internet interest cost
of three point five though is
noted on page one of three we do
have a project description
mostly school improvements
district wide school
improvements
so the district did have two
material weaknesses and they did
provide a corrective action plan
they did remediate both of the
material weaknesses one through
budget adjustment and the other
through creating their capital
asset listing.
Also a strength there's always
noted that the new school
provides will advance the
physical
in safety conditions for the
students as well as enhanced
their environmental experience.
With that staff recommends
approval and they do stand for
questions
the questions are comments in
him as well.
Okay and moving on the item of
eight point three.
The match were municipal school
district mark.
Good morning mr chair members of
the board today we have maximum
school the **** they have come
to the ppf or a lonely amount of
one point one million they do
qualify for disadvantage fending
a zero percent on ten percent of
the long it will carry a
thirteen year term at two point
seven one percent it is a
general obligation bind.
In a special election on me in
may of twenty twenty three the
district to receive one point
one million dollars of approval
for our extra to dishes our
projects which are included on
page one nineteen I could repair
and replacement of the buildings
in the buildings district and
this includes maximum high
school and administration
billing there have been
foundation issues that have been
identified but this is a safety
concern as well as each factory
person to district venice object
security and see away.
Strength will don't include that
on average the assessor will
have increased by one percent
over the past five years we also
have the de guarantee in place
here weaknesses major taxpayers
equal sixty two point seventy
three percent of the total
assess valuation which does
effect a high artificiarist
however these main contributors
are a roller in electric and
electricity company utility
companies we feel that that's
mitigated quite a bit last
complete it was in twenty twenty
two every single on my
unmodified opinion and an
amazing zero findings are staff
those recommendative one is
temperature questions on
maximum.
Thank you center comments from
our.
It's a constitution which is
either.
The continuer.
They can respect all right.
Next is telstra's for school
dished they have come to the
prepared for alone in the amount
of three point three million
dollars however I do want to
highlight that after our legal
council externally go council
has talked with the clients bond
council it has been identified
out all the funds will be
taxable there will be no
disadvantage to right here and
please revenue will be a general
obligation but as much more
scored a **** has applied they
said to the parents or loan and
the the project description will
be on page one thirty two and
this is actually an ad techno so
these will be used for education
technology for students teachers
in the classroom this does
include it inforshucture support
services and software
subjects to the loan include
that it process valuation
has increased by two point four
percent unaveraged since two
thousand eighteen major
taxpayers equal three point zero
three percent which is a low
contractuation risk and
education technology not usually
carol short turn up to exceed
five years with the sister and
not to know last computer it was
in twenty twenty two I modified
there were twelve findings and I
do have a estimation of those on
the next page the first was
purchased orders
um this was a repeater
significant efficiency
essentially the.
The.
The district created pose after
services were rendered which is
we all know is no number and
then second was peril checks
this issue to x employees are
too employees were continued to
receive paychecks after they had
left a district this was a
amount less than three thousand
dollars according to this pretty
actually planned at the dished
it provide they have would step
in place which include a new
software system and the insure
and pure department out working
more in tandem to kind of
address these issues going for
it
with that I do recommend a pool
and I stephanie questions are
comments on telstra.
Or nurse which is at a common
subtest.
Okay you're not i'll make point
five again that you mark thank
you
all right gets an independent
school dished has come to the be
parentful honor in that amount
of nine point five million
dollars will be attacked as
employee ten years at three
point four three percent.
In twenty twenty two november
twenty twenty two the addition
to receive approval for thirty
eight million dollars for
projects rather district.
This is part of that bond
insurance
period will purchase nine point
five dollars million dollars
with the bonds and I have
included a list of projects that
these proceeds will use for on
age of one forty six of the
board book.
Strengthened alone include over
salutions for gadsting have
stearly grown over the past five
years the diship will be paying
a significant portion of the
balance within the first two
years I actually send to all
percent of the principle of
balance major taskers equal
thirteen point twenty percent
wished as reflected low
contritution risk and we also
had the dear figure into you in
place as well because there are
not to know this complete art it
was in twenty twenty two it was
on modified and there were three
findings however none of them
rose to the level of significant
efficiently or material weakness
and with that I do stand for any
questions or comments and I do
recommend a couple thank you
very much in the questions in
our comments and gets.
Okay
here in this point we would meet
in motion for approval of items
eight point one through eight
point five is presented to have
that motion please.
They can remember nichols to
have a second okay mister thank
you member to you we have motion
we have a second series rock or
please
yes
person yes
yes
yes
yes number two yes and member.
And.
Yes
thank you member.
A bank is restaking us the line
item number nine the economic
development committee a bit on
activities member calls europe.
Good morning mister chairman
the economic development
committee met on august fifteen
firm
john brooks gave a great report
on the average loans.
And then as as a market and
mentioned
they discussed rules and policy
related to the.
That's next on the gender so
it's been in more time what
they become so be that night
nine point two recommendation of
a visions to rules government in
the venture capital
welcome.
Morning mr chair members of the
board as market and and remember
collins mentioned we'd
identified a mismatch between
the board the rules at the board
approved at its july meeting and
the statute which was amended in
the twenty twenty three session
which and it is specific to
removal of the match requirement
for
the venture capital funds and if
you we so what we did was we
just removed that language on
page one sixty one of your
board book and the reason we
removed them that the matter to
remove was you remove any
barriers that are local funds
had with raising private capital
on a 1 1 basis
ryan is going to go through the
changes in the policy that
identify the parameters for how
inamerica will determine the
match that is required for our
our funds in so with that we
will just ask that the boy
approved the uh will change and
this will not
affect the ssbci portion of the
the venture capital funds.
That require a federal one to
one match.
Thank you very much the
questions in our comments for
constitute.
Every note of the standard of
the emotion or approval rich of
the provisions to rules
government the bench of the
program.
The member stores are doing.
Emotionally have a second
response
yes.
Yes
yes and member for
yes.
Thank you sure he's taking us
line item nine point three
recommendations of revisions to
the end of it they venture
capital investment policy right
good morning mr chairman thank
you and thinking members of the
board so as soon mentioned I we
are proposing some
changes particularly to the
match requirement in the venture
capital investment policy that
you all approved last month and
just a bit of background the
original venture capital program
act approved in twenty twenty
two did have a one to one match
requirement and you all were
recall this year that match
requirement was removed in the
twenty twenty three session
staff does believe that a match
requirement is important for a
few reasons first and foremost
on a match requirement is
indicative of a fund attracting
additional private sector
investors to local businesses
and we have seen that that's
particularly important for
release do the businesses that
are trying to raise subsequent
rounds of investment as their
growing um so we do think a
match requirement does make
sense and assume mentioned on
remembing the rules accordingly
are and then detailing and
policy on what that match
requirement could could look
like
secondly the ssbci program does
require one to one match also
particularly from private
investors so that the policy is
written as such
and lastly the ability of a fund
manager to raise capital from
private investors on is
indicative of that the
credibility of that fund.
So for all those reasons we are
including a match requirement in
the policy on as market marquita
and soo mentioned on we did
receive feedback particularly
from managers of local funds on
targeting new mexico businesses
that and and to be frank the
reason this program exists is to
help satisfy that capital got
for new mexico businesses that
are right now private investors
are not deploying capital to
early stage businesses in new
mexico so it makes sense that
when you have managers that have
strategies targeting new mexico
businesses their university
potential investors is just
smaller
and
as market put it you know that
is a barrier for them in terms
of capital raising so we got
that feedback after we approved
the policy in july from a number
of managers and of and have
looked to incorporate some
changes to help alleviate those
couple raising challenges so are
proposal is that overall we
reduce that requirement from a
one to one to seventy percent so
for every dollar that and mse
would deploy to an underweighing
fund that fund manager would be
required to raise on seventy
cents on that dollar from
matching investors were also
allowing for state funds that
are other new mexico public
sector institutional investors
that may want to deploy to those
funds on that counts towards the
the match towards the state
funds that is not something we
can change for the s SB c I
money on but for
local funds that are are reason
potenti.
On
we also have arm included in the
the the policy so for those
local funds well so for those
local funds were able to close
on an initial commitment on and
make that commitment in the fund
even if they haven't yet raised
that match capital amount on
that will allow those managers
to have that initial commitment
and go out and try and raise
capitol on the back of our are
commitment on we do however are
require that if a manager is
looking to call our capital so
that they can make investments
and underlying businesses.
They do have to have raised the
match in order to actually fund
those investments so when an mfa
dollars are being deployed in
local companies those dollars
will have matching capital
alongside them and animal fa
will not be a soul invest.
The.
I'm and we're also giving fund
managers up to twelve months to
raise.
There's some additional changes
just to bring the rest of the
policy in line with those those
changes so right now we can only
be
for the july policy only fifty
percent of a local funds and
because the match requirement is
being proposed to be reduced to
seventy percent we would need to
be able to be sixty percent of a
local fund on if a fund manager
only raises
a seventy percent match on and
we're also proposing in a
further alignment with ssbci
policy there's a a
jurisdictional requirement
overall in the program that
ssbcifunds are deployed ninety
percent in new mexico across the
spci we had initially included
eighty percent as are
effective definition of funds
funds that are investing in new
mexico with that focus and we
just thought it prudent to go
ahead and raise that to know.
I'm in last but not least we
tweak the death initiative rural
just said that it's a lining
with definitions we have another
policies but both it and i'm fa
and also some of the work we do
with an immediate.
So
that's my summary of of the
changes I you can see those
implemented in the red line
version then um
before you and.
I would be very happy and
certainly questions burners and
a questions in our comments for
right
okay here we get the
entertainment motion to accept
the revisions to the internet
they bench a capital investment
policy as a present have that
motion please.
Sure they can member sports who
have a second.
Thank you member nicholson
motion we have a second reason
we have a roll call please
yes
yes.
Yes
yes never turkey yes try to
bring out a coaching voice
member for
yes.
Thank you serious taking a start
line item ten year finance and
disclosure
uh committee
we did meet on august sixteenth
we did it back the
form in addition to approving
the items ten point two and ten
point three that you'll be
hearing in just the second we
also approved the
award of a contract at buried
done back the own parker lc to
provide data and the document
management advisory services we
heard other notifications as
presented
accordingly
so that stakes as the item then
point two approval of the animal
face amended and we stated
procurement policy are
honourable see
you mister chairman as I
mentioned in my opening remarks
we have not updated this in a
very long time the biggest
change is to go from a fifty
thousand dollars limit for a
small procurement up to seventy
five thousand
and we are also
looking to more directly connect
this to our budgeting process so
very specifically implementation
of this as I mentioned earlier
will fall to our chief
administrative officer she will
ensure that all of the policy
elements here are being it here
to
including the definition of a
main street and project into
make certain that are we have
given our best efforts to
solicit procure and purchase
goods then services from those
local vendors
we are adding some additional
levels in there so that the ceo
is not responsible for all
procurement sign offs and so if
they're
less than fifteen thousand
dollars they meet the authorized
by the sea level staffer whose
budget that item appears in
and mentioned early that.
The micro purchases over a
thousand to five thousand
we go from sixty to seventy five
thousand on small purchases and
we provide for office applies to
only be administered authorized
by the cao for technology to
only be authorized by the chief
technology officer
and then to provide for a more
streamlined procurement of
software licenses and we will be
streamlining the reporting so
not as not all the projects not
all the procurements will be
reported to the financial
disclosure committee which is
currently what happens and then
we've added a conflict section
so those really are the updates
they're not significant but they
will really streamline both the
name face procurements and our
reporting to use of the choicing
just the bigger picture of
things that all that may fall
outside the budget specifically
or that are emergency curements
like that so with that mister
chairman we can go through the
policy I know that brian
are deputy council and
complaints officer drafted this
with the work of door up behind
it and other staff members if
you have specific questions on
it i'm certain he can answer it
but without we would certainly
recommend approval the beginning
and see aboard members any
questions in our comments for
ceo and door right.
Okay yeah
this point would entertain most
of the approval of the animal
based amended and restated
procurement policy as presented
today I do have that motion
please so thank you because we
have a certain second you have a
second make a better to hear she
respond please
yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes
thank you should reason texas to
item ten point three
presentation and acceptance up
for acceptance of the fiscal
year twenty twenty twenty twenty
three year budget performance
report the one and only oscar
rodriguez is before
mr chairman I am seeing a
disconnected our items here.
Yeah you will see number ten
point three i'm sorry I think I
might just put up the run.
It is not in.
We're not seeing the budget
performance reporting here
mister chairman so I think
the financial statements are in
here they are very closely
aligned if you could ask we
don't have this item I don't
know what happened because I
know that it was in there before
I apologize there has been.
The.
So what they're closely related
maybe you can prefer just
present yes mister chairman if
we could don't have to mean the
agenda correct I I think that's
right because you don't have the
items in front of you so
mister chairman I would
recommend we go to the audit
committee report we go to the
financial statements and then
oscar enormous if you could
highlight the budget performance
and will include it next month
ultimately in the documents that
go against will have one more
attempt at the budget
performance exceptions
performance glad to do that and
i'm just looking for because
I might not this morning.
From branches and so like
he's prepared to do it matters
it's not it isn't there it's on
when
that is the financial
that's actually the financial
performance report
that's not it I think it's in
granicas and I think we hit
confidential and it did not
actually appear in the documents
that is my sense i'm
technologies amazing what it
when when I do the right thing.
It looks as if it is showing up
only in a confidential manner
yeah I do I can't find it it's
only a gender.
Dan
can I bring it up on
is it on the agenda it was
it was publicly noticed mister
chairman.
You know here
and the board can that would be
my opinion mr chairman if I
could just bring it up very
quickly
my policies this week
might be fine as if you tell us
a little bit about the building
while I do this i'd be happy to
have to you about the building
effect yesterday
the guy chairman
excuse me
to do order please and oscar
going those but the buildings
get ready to serve
this is this will touch a little
bit on the report in the article
but this is him a year of
president both committees at
that time we were we reported to
the to the committee that we're
waiting for the final prices
from the contractor and we were
awaiting a winning
their response with the cross
fingers hoping that what came in
was going to be under budget and
so we got those final prices
last night and they are under
under budget and and so I will
be able to proceed hope to issue
a notice of received here in the
next few days and get that
project going the last year
heard from the city and that is
a significant milestone here to
get a building permanent and the
city has notified us that they
think it will be able to issue
it the first of the second week
of september which will then
allow us to begin demolition and
maybe even next week so that
project is about to about that
to keep castle the way I live
the last time we're waiting for
critical information we got it
it's acceptable we can move
forward
thank you so it is good news or
members any questions and
economics for oscar on building
it's been a long time coming so
good news and good that we came
in under budget so just
you know we don't.
Just single back and stop
sharing i'll get the new and on
there my apologies but I did
find it we've all included in
next month's board materials
will actually email it out to
you this afternoon so that you
have that as well but.
Right.
With that we have the
presentation of the budget
performance reports
to get that just like.
Right
not an oscar apologies I
wouldn't thank you and and for
the record as counselor often
said this was this was it was
with daughter says and
oscar please see you sir.
Well as we do it requarter the
present to you how
the actuals compared to what was
budgeted.
And
with this report they would
present to you how we ended up
the whole year etc and so
just I won't repeat what the
detail that I put in the mid
mobile I would give you a big a
headlines of what happened
first of all
that revenues exceeded we we got
more revenues than we had
budgeted and then had to do
primarily with
some fifty million dollars that
we got at the last minute from
early childhood again economic
development but it already
childhood and education
education and care department
are programs also a number of
the grant revenues it
came in a way above would be
expected in terms of a budget so
we came in some ten point two
million dollars in revenue
above what we expected our
expenditures though came in some
twenty seven and a half billion
dollars and forty percent below
where we had budget the the vest
almost all that has to do with
the non operating part of our
expenditures and that is our
blind program that we have
budgeted for a four band issues
me ended up making only two as a
result our expenditure zero way
down we also had expected some
twenty million dollars in past
through
it can pass through our
our expenditures that occur when
we do simultaneous loan and bond
closings where we will see
premium as we would be issue
those are bind loans
and so we we just passed also on
through well it turns out that
was there was only one small one
there as a result that you
almost at twenty we said in
within the old was was taken up
by that twenty million dollars
in the enough past.
The
super I went out to you as a is
is something it's very
interesting to ask for watching
any work it make sure we
understand that.
And that is
a the progress of a lot of our
construction well what a
construction programs are there
we're seeing them be a lot
slower than expected and
expected to there to be a lot
more expenditures and we were
way off the mark there up for
and it does a long listen to
some of those
heard here and dealt with here
supply change interruptions
a cost increases made people are
reasonable projects that have
been rethought some of those
projects have come back here to
ask more money in order for them
to continue sarah and so that
that's
changed in our budget so are in
in that regard we came in almost
well in in some cases some
eighty percent but less than
what we had budget budget.
In the case of a drink of water
programs for example came in up
by eighty eighty four percent
less improvement budgeted and
likewise with our expenditures I
mean revenues grant revenue is
sort of almost a mirror of grad
expenditures and so they they
can come in the same way in
terms of our operating budget.
Are twenty million dollars
operating budget
we
we came in some we
some one point eight million
dollars less than what had been
budgeted and almost all of that
one point four million dollars
had to do with with legal
services and a significant part
of that at the majority
certainly one of the ceremonies
was a significant slow down in
in ppr
which by the way mirrors what we
were seen across the country
both in the state and across the
country
the with interest rates started
to rise up winter before last
a lot of
um
localities local entities have
had been thinking more slowly
and I think more slowly under
projects I think what we're
seeing now is just only the most
critical ones of once it just
have to go forward
for those that have discretioned
it hold off a little bit with
thinking those people are
holding off an also refinancing
opportunities when interest
rates go up the definite
refinancing opportunities go
away and so we saw slow down
there as well as something we
measured we've mentioned to you
now for a couple of years and
that is the flow of federal
money and gratmany coming and
even the expectation of that
money has
been a lot of her rule borrowers
just hesitate a little bit
perhaps waiting for that a great
many to come through and at the
same time waiting for in.
And there's also one other very
significant change up that it
will be seen from now on and
that is a week we saw it just a
dirt of a fire
loans
the structurally theirs is very
different now the way the money
flows now they're able to buy
those those vehicles spread
ahead.
And so as a result of that
traffic with significant.
So i've been harping on this a
little bit simply stated and and
madame see if you can jump in
the drop in the ppr if money is
basically lots of lots of free
money basically and it's
probably hopefully short term
and will be in the short term
and are and we'll still see
talk to a colleagues out in the
field that money really has not
flowed yet I mean in fact really
the big impact is the
expectation is going to soon and
we'd have not yet seen exactly
how it's going to flow through
we we anticipate or these were
you're ready to to respond to
the situation they may need very
short term borrowing you to get
the track to order the truck you
have to one of those
about the unit and so you like
they may need that that have
your short turn on that they can
pay off when the actual.
In mister chairman I would add I
think we're certainly not alone
new mexico as in with the rest
of the nation the scene which is
decreased being a support that
insurances so we you know we are
in line with that we had about a
third less
were pepirous loans and then we
saw last year and they were
primarily in the areas of chris
receipts tax backed bonds and
those are you know the cities
and the counties that have now
access to
and president levels of
capital outlet and federal
dollars the anticipation of
federal dollars so high interest
rates a lot of federal money a
lot of state money
I think that's what we're seeing
is temporarily decreasing our
demand you're going to continue
to see as we did today school
district bonds
and we continue to play an
important role in in lowering
the borrowing costs for those
school district loans interest
rates as high as they are that's
an important factor or
disadvantage funding access to a
market rates that's not
something that typically most of
our school districts can get on
their own so we continue to play
an important role there are
expansion of our pprf will hit
other underserved markets so
while there is this temporary
law potentially in refundings or
uhm
g r t back loans we anticipate
the power of the pprf to
continue to add value to the
mexico communities
with some of the expansions that
we're looking at but you know
that's he peer effort for the
last three or four years has
been less of our activity
generally speaking largely
because we had all that new
recovery money coming in and now
because the market conditions
are such that borrowing
particularly now interest rates
it's just not as attractive so
will see it come back and but it
will look different yeah yeah
indeed and one other factor that
that's driving this is as you
know.
Based on the headlines even as
of yesterday there's just a lot
of couple outlet as well as a
lot of communities are
tapping those all of those
different funding sources in
order to not have to not have to
borrow some mister chairman that
some of the things you're seeing
also in the drawdowns of our
funds so what we saw for sure
impacting them as well is turn
over at the local level i'm so
during the pandemic when there
was smart particularly in the
smaller communities or that
turnover we are now having to re
interdue ourselves educate folks
about the public project
revolving fund at the
particularly smaller municipal
levels in county levels a lot of
turn over there that's what
happened somewhat with our water
projects turnover
supply chain demands the slow up
of those projects those are the
two things that impacted our
water were also seeing it impact
and of the
understanding of what the piper
from the animal they can do for
folks so when are lending foots
you see the more notting I got
it right
so when you see them out your
communities this reintroduction
of animal fee is some you know
somewhat because we've just been
behind screens for a while but
also because they've just never
met us before so those county
tours the all the conferences
that are coming up were taking
great advantage of everything
that the municipal league and
the counties are doing so that
we can introduce what we do to
the communities but it it's the
significant turnover as also
impacted the volume.
The.
Continue oscar
will I would live with their
chairman a quick summary
revenues came in higher than we
had budgeted expenditures came
in lower than we had budgeted.
And a lot of it driven just by a
lower activity
there's more loans there's more
expenditures and so and when
local communities are have the
capacity to to manage the the
projects etcetera those project
is moving and also outlets
disbursement for grants or also
higher and all that slow down
this year that's the basic
conclusion that I would.
What membership on this.
Okay yeah you're not we would
end in most into accept the
fiscal year twenty twenty three
year and budget performance
report as presented today they
have that motion please.
So move for a problem thank you
member to hear the have a second
second this is member thank you
member birth and member nichols
thank you
should respond please
yes
yes.
Yes
yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Thank you serious taking us the
item number eleven the audit
committee report chamber.
Thank you cherish was the other
committee made on august
sixteenth twenty twenty three a
corner was present we had four
agenda items the first was
hearing for from our external
auditors from finance new mexico
november in company on our
financial statement results are
independent audit again for
finance new mexico it was an
informational item
no concerns were brought forward
our second item was
approval of the financial
statements and financial
performance indicators that
asked her will go over and we
approve them for the full boards
approval today i've noted that
position continues to increase
as the budget information
indicated and our total assets I
reach three billion
the third item was a report from
our external auditor from moss
adams on the comprehensive
financial statements
and they noted and appreciated
in a misa staff
you know ability to to put
together and submit the
necessary documentation into to
get the art done in so will be
hearing about that
I believe our next meeting was
an informational item and then
oscar talked a bit about the new
office building project update
the only thing
i've noted is that the
anticipated completion is
january twenty twenty five.
And with that
we can move on if you so wish.
Thank you chairman born was a
question of comments which.
Okay
takes us left item eleven point
two presentation of the fiscal
year twenty twenty three euro
financial statements and
financial performance indicators
oscar.
Just sir chuman members of more
we are very happy we are myself
and are controller norman will
seek we're pretty happy to
present to you are year and
financial statements these will
the financial savings will be
presented that they have already
been presented to the auditors
up but they were not official
until this board accepts on it
being the traditio.
Like all our our financial
statement all monthly financial
statements we close the year
within thirty days and that
you're reader financial
statements.
Are and so this was with no
exception.
We had to do a number of things
knew this year including a
amount in our soft are her
software yeah it's a new rule
and the government account is
standards board it took us quite
a bit effort to finally get
those numbers in change things
about fifty six thousand dollars
in our your three billion
dollars but balance she but
anyway everything is there we
believe every dollar that you
see in our financial statements
are to be accurate we expect
like every year for there to be
no change at all to any of our
numbers here were very proud of
that and we expect that to be
the same with the financial
statements as they do also at
the end of the year I highlight
perhaps one of the biggest
transactions or.
Group of transactions that occur
at the end of the year and that
is flow through
at the beginning of the year
what happens is it
borrowers ps in our for the long
that we've made to them.
And then we that money gathers
and then we use that money to
pay off the bonds or pay excuse
me to pay a desert on the bonds
that the money that we receive
is always up until now it's
always greater than what
actually goes out so that money
then
then flows from the funds where
the debt service it's holding
the desert's payment closed in
finally to the the loan fund and
so I provided to you the table
of all of those the forecast
gade of of low through at the
end of some fifty six million
dollars to distax point two
million dollars approximately a
flow through with that so excess
revenues including grt so
grt is part of the
other cask
we receive it we hold it to just
make sure that there's no
possibility will be short at the
end of the year and then it from
there it flows into the year
into the long phone anyways I
was fifty six billion dollars in
ultimately floated
every everything that we
expected for june as well as
everything we expected for the
entire fiscal year we feel is a
fairly rear reflected here we we
we look at that very closely
over in over it or again the
year in financial statements and
everything we expected is all
there bottom online is it our
net position increased by about
hundred and seventy one million
dollars p.
Increase.
And in law that had to do you
heard earlier earlier about that
how the ppr you know slow down a
libertar most that increase was
not because of people everything
but because of other programs
this year it was because of the
small business recovery long and
so we do have a lot of those not
response we see when i'm
starting to stick that we've
been watching and I thought we
would have crossed it by and out
but but for the slow down in in
the people everything that we
would have crossed the two
billion dollars laws receivable
two billion dollars
worth of loans out there and
we're very close to that about
two million dollars away from
that so maybe for the next
financial statement you get will
be a
two billion dollars
beyond that mister chairman I I
stand back for any questions you
may have
tried to put as much analysis as
because we can
into the the memorial so i'm
happy to answer any questions
with.
And you have on the memorial the
financial statements otherwise
ask him any questions in our
comments.
You know ask I just like the
actually say from where we were
when I came on board and and
started to where we are today
it's night and a couples of
course to
co's always at the home and you
and your team are financially
just improved drastically I
would say
from when I came on board so
once again a great job or audits
are or now in early they're
coming in beautiful beautifully
and
it's just a different day.
Thank you else
okay
that actually takes us to line
item
acceptance of that so that we
can actually tell our auditors
that they have been approved by
the board forgot
that we we gave him actually is
there is the middle man
thank you at this time it would
have been emotioned to
accept an approved fiscal year
twenty twenty three year and
financial statements and
financial performance indicators
as presented they have that
motion please.
The.
Member work i'll make that
motion and also
you know appreciate the staff
they make being the auto
committee chair much easier than
it could be.
Well said jammer do I have a
second please
thank you members that serious
rocket
yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes motion.
Thank you to reserve a park I
got a little bit ahead of myself
asking were approved thank you
taking this to line item number
twelve or next up work meeting
looks like it's scheduled for
september twenty eighth at
thirteen nine am in room the
capital three o nine so without
the further do that concludes
our agenda for today may have
motions for german please
have a second second mistake in
february sixth I
we thank you all very much.
Yeah.
