Save as possible and they're
doing an excellent job sometimes
it to break a few things to make
it work and telling you we're
going to be in great shape so I
appreciate of them being here
today and.
Again they're all very new
registered with us since last
April and also in this last June
in there the two veterans in the
group the rest of the world the
much brand we have one more
person.
Trying to bring in to fill the
rest of that roster.
So that is of of that's our
staff discussion we also would
be meeting tomorrow with our
legislative oversight committee
we have a couple of things we'll
be talking about one of them is
of the potential reallocation of
state small business credit
initiative funding S. S. B. C.
I'd those are the that's the M.
O. A. that we entered into with
the Economic Development
Department very recently of
questions on the money will stay
in venture capital which is
where the initially directed
their efforts for about sixty
million of it which leads us
approximately thinking twenty
million will stay in that
initiative and about forty
million would then be made
available for other uses and so
what we're looking at is the
things that are eligible under
the federal SS BCI guidelines in
that which is eligible under our
state the statewide
sweat for a statewide economic
development finance act and
that's the act under which we do
our private lending for the most
part so we're we're doing an
overlay of the two in trying to
determine where the best use of
funds as relative to the the
market what are the needs of the
market one of them that we have
identified initially is a
capital access program we are
working to see whether our
guarantee mechanism in in sweat
as we call it is of will support
capital access but that
basically is of a loan loss
reserve that set up in a
participating banks in for each
of the rules loans and loans
have to meet some basic criteria
in terms of the type of our word
is the type of project it is and
the kind of loans money that
needs to be extended to them
we would put in a portion of in
some percentage of those funds
and the bank would match it and
so this tool with all these new
rules loans would throw a loss
reserves that they can tap so it
is a first loss guarantee.
If you will and so we are trying
to work that out now we working
with the roadie for to see if we
can get those rules aligned if
successful we're able to get
those rules online we would be
hoping to bring that to our
oversight committee in early
September so that we could make
an application to the treasury
to start utilizing some of those
funds you have to have
everything lined up before
they'll accept an application so
rules supporting that program
would be really key to that.
collateral support programs
include which is another
eligible use the economic
development department is
currently running one so we
don't anticipate wanting to
double their efforts made up
traditional loan guarantees much
like the SBA currently offers
and USDA again we don't see that
as a need but that is a
possibility both under our state
program in under the federal
guidelines.
Last time we were able to have
these funds we participate we
use them for low participations
we made about sixteen loans
ultimately and that's successful
but it really.
At least two of the two thousand
eleven efforts because we were
dealing so little money we did a
really creative program that was
easy for people to come to we
were able to do several really
nice deals but they were it
wasn't a program that folks
could gear up for so that's
definitely an option for us to
continue but we really want to.
Think through how much of the
funds we use for that purpose.
and then lastly the equity or
venture capital programs again
wealth swept it doesn't support
those our New Mexico venture
capital act does and frankly
statewide law has a lot more
flexibility than the federal
laws so we may end up you know
utilizing our state dollars more
than the federal dollars and
programs so those are the things
that we have ahead of us there's
a team set up of the EDD folks
and NMFA folks to make a final
recommendation on the right
strategy I wanted to make you
aware that we were looking at
these various tools
So that we can make an
application to the treasury as I
mentioned will be at the scene
and campus tomorrow for
oversight committee meeting it's
basically economic development.
We could be really interesting
we'll hear of.
Presentation was here several
presentations today that the
oversight committee will also
here tomorrow so that I will
tell you too much more because
you'll be hearing this but I'm
really pleased about the agenda
that will be presenting and the
folks that will be presenting
them for us
Including economic development
so I think that's really all I
wanted to set the stage for is
today's
presentation from our our
partners and next streets in
mission driven finance will have
a lot of economic development
so simple to use the cost
overruns we'll see that later on
the agenda as well Mr chairman
that is all I have thank you
madam sealed borders with
questions comments.
There is no one to live and I
have a presentation of the New
Mexico small business ecosystem
landscape of we have miss Kate
right.
This institution yes your your
people.
Absolutely.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thanks so much for
having us my name is Katie
Robbins I'm a partner and head
of strategy and design for next
three and accompanied by a large
crowd and who is with mission
driven finance at one of our
partners in this work as you
might recall thanks so much for
for having us here and for your
commitment to serving
entrepreneurs in New Mexico as
you remember we're working on a
project to assess the capitol
landscape for entrepreneurs
within the state with the hope
of informing fund designed for
those entrepreneurs and
hopefully attracting even more
capital out for.
NMFA's capital here so.
Attended a little bit of a
project overview of what we were
going on and say we're here to
share some of our research
findings and implications given
timing but a lot of time on the
slide a kind of hit some of the
key highlights that we save some
time for Q. and a at the end but
please feel free you know if
there are any questions please
do let us know.
With that just recap quickly the
research methodology here as a
reminder for folks
Really the main point here are
that we used information is
already available within within
various reports really got I've
broadly escape interviews to get
community input and expertise
from the local market and
leveraged radio different data
sources from SBA lending to
census data and so on to inform
this work and right now we're
currently I'm doing small
business focus groups to better
understand that experience we've
already spoken with over thirty
entrepreneurs throughout the
state on a variety of different
issues and topics so with that
would love to just go ahead and
dive into our research findings.
The
time on fly I but usually when
highly to because I think it's
just really points to the
opportunity for the state of New
Mexico with respect to small
business and the just here is
that New Mexico lags both
national averages in pure
averages for basically the small
business representation within
the state so both in terms of
employment by small businesses
and the number of small
businesses capital flags those
appears to really think about
increasing that throughout the
state just really point system
of economic opportunity to how
how these businesses can
contribute to the state and
we're we're talking about here
are just a talking about routes
and regional peers as well as
peers based on population and
economy throughout the country
so really just love to point out
how important a small businesses
are to the economy I'm on the
next slide we'll see that while
that is true New Mexico is
actually.
Is actually much better than its
peers and national averages with
respect to start ups so we can
make sure that the start ups are
successful just well on your way
to taking advantage of the
opportunity for the small
business contribution to the
overall economy what's gonna
time more time on the site but
to just want to highlight one of
the key thing if we three around
the industry make up for small
businesses locally
disproportionate kind of around
what we refer to as these main
street businesses of restaurants
retail construction this is the
really make up the fabric of our
communities are really
Representative with and then New
Mexico small business landscape
so opportunities to nurture
those businesses as well as
continue to diversify the types
of small businesses within the
landscape.
On the next slide we'll just
spend a minute talking about you
know beyond just capitol there
are there's a lot that goes into
reaching small businesses and
providing the services that they
need to be successful the key
complications that sometimes
come up our small businesses
navigating resources if anyone
else remembers PPP and.
Our our S. and all of those
words that acronym salads of a
few years ago just imagine being
an entrepreneur out there and
trying to figure out what you
need to make your businesses
successful so navigating those
resources is top especially if
your world business with
potentially bandwidth issues are
otherwise it may not have those
relationships with institutions
to have access to some of those
businesses other other
communities make similarly but
not have sufficient access to
institutions especially
native and communities to me up
and systematically sort of
left out of those institutional
access in the past so you know
may have some trust issues
there.
and so just as we think about
designing capital solutions we
want to think about providing
broader access to capital
services to businesses that may
not have had access in the past
and really are businesses with
Rep vibrant futures.
So let's talk a little bit more
about that funding availability
on the next slide the switch
what we talk a little bit about
a couple different pieces
especially with respect to bank
financing it's a SBA lending has
decreased since the eight
recession and never fully
rebounded and the loans that
businesses are getting access to
are much larger so if you think
about that that means the
smaller businesses really aren't
getting access to that credit in
important ways and so how do we
sort of help build them up over
time into these top you know
growth businesses and provide
them with this wealth building
and community building
opportunities
and you know further I see it as
we look to the next slide you
can see that the Lente is also
disproportionately within the
metro areas of Albuquerque and
Santa Fe so again as we think
about rural access this huge
swath of businesses who could
have better access to small
business financing
opportunities.
And finally as we think about
how did this play out during
some of the COVID funding
looking at PPP data is really
interesting for what types of
institutions these businesses
access and so banks I did really
well feels look at that sort of
thanks
the high thirty three percent
their bar did really well
especially on the smaller and
credit unions all did very well
and then CFI is we're sort of on
for with NAC national averages
but definitely of room to grow
for both New Mexico and national
with respect to see if eyes
though a great work here locally
by during spring and others to
make sure that businesses have
access to this PPP capital but
as we think about different
channels for small businesses
access but we continue to sort
of promote those apple access
channels so those are some of
the key findings around the
funding but what is no meat so
as we're looking to design some
of the capitol as sources
themselves.
Yes I was eleven and twelve
given time really just spend
some time on thirteen walking
through it
so I'm my thirteen.
We.
We really have from left to
right we play out different if
you go one way down I had
different page numbers.
Perfect from left to right
you'll see that we're looking at
different size businesses so on
the left hand side really
starting from the idea in seed
stage no revenue yet really
looking at an initial idea and
team building all the way over
to mature businesses on the far
right with revenues maybe even
over five million they're really
looking to increasingly have
product market fit and scale
their businesses and of course
the capital needs across these
types of businesses is really
different and they're different
capital providers who serve
those needs at different stages
and so
you know you'll see here on the
page that we have broken out New
Mexico capital options for high
growth industries and the New
Mexico have options for other
industries because there is sort
of and there have been a number
of industries that have been
sort of put forth by a number of
different groups that have some
capital access there so if
you're in this high growth
industry about sort of stage
there is a little bit more
capital available but in this
other industry start up capital
and often what we call sort of
friends and family capital is
not available there similarly
there are there's some early
stage funding available for both
but some gaps that exist between
early stage in our growth stage
that have that we could be
filling in with respect impact
the State Capitol and overall
sort of alternative growth
products that can help hello
folks get from that more micro
to that more commercial capital
options and then finally some
late stage venture capital that
could be helpful and really
getting beyond that five million
and overall really just wanting
restorative capital and and the
potential to
have more tracks across the
state the spectrum that you
focus on to the roll in need of
communities just given some of
the that high transaction costs
for those groups.
So I'm as we think about
designing different fund options
it's obviously a lot of assets
here but also a lot of gaps that
we could potentially fill in and
so this likely won't just be one
product to sell that all and and
I know also appeared over to
leverage talk a little bit about
mission driven finance and and
some of their efforts and also
our hope is that broadly some of
this research might galvanize
additional funds for small
businesses locally as we've seen
this play out a number of other
communities are done this type
of eight PP assessment across
the country so head over right
thank you Katie and thank you at
four into based.
expanding a little bit on what
Katie was sharing we are
launching a strategy called
advanced New Mexico that first
and foremost is intended to
center the term from treasury
study socially economically
disadvantaged individuals in
order to interrupt this self
reinforcing cycle of where
capitol has been going and
continuing.
Create he's bifurcations in
access and opportunity we want
to interrupt that and support
inclusive long term economic
growth and stability for the
state and also intentionally
structure this to aggregate
capital from a variety of
sources I know it is a full at
the New Mexico finance authority
to attract other capital to co
invest alongside and that is
why.
Together capital vehicles that
address the different needs of
different types of stakeholders
we have worked with banks we
have worked with private
investors we have worked with
foundations of local and
national sizes and they all have
different requirements of what
they are looking for in their
goals and and opportunities and
we are intentionally building
this in a way that they can
participate so that and meet
their different expectations
whether for banks that's
community reinvestment act
capabilities for foundations
that have program related
investment targets we can handle
all of that and ensure that
there is not any structural
reason that they can't
participate.
Our intention is to care as
Katie was looting to with that
at the capitol get assets and
gaps in the space is to be
additive to the fantastic
ecosystem that does exist in New
Mexico we heard some beautiful
bright spots of how things have
been growing since two thousand
seven we want to augment that
and help with gasoline capital
it also this should of right
right capital in the right size
at the right time and in right
relationship that last piece is
one that is particularly
important for centering those
socially economically
disadvantaged individuals as
their has been broken trust with
financial institutions in the
past so by putting this together
we intend to have to add to
strategies within the overall
advance Mexico program one being
this restorative capital that
will be a credit product and I'm
missing middle gap filling drugs
that we actually and these allow
for different types of
investments to support.
Particularly what we've seen
from backstreets research of
what kinds of businesses are
here what kind of growth
profiles they have and how these
overlap with the demographic to.
Without getting too far into
details just let you know where
we are in terms of status and
that is that we've presented
this information to New Mexico
finance authority stakeholders
and investment committee for
sharing with you a bit today and
how are working into preliminary
indicative terms and we'll move
forward in diligence with that
outside counsel contractually
what they're he referred to make
sure that who supports that
investment and due diligence
from there we'll move into
actually confirming the legal
subscription package make sure
that and New Mexico finance
authority as the intended
increased faster of this
actually feels good about this
and from there.
Get into the capital raise with
philanthropic impact investors
augments your position.
Again this is predicated on
getting through due diligence
but preliminary direction of
this restorative credit product
of.
Six million target four million
from New Mexico finance
authority and a missing that all
gas filling equity product the
six million dollars commitment
from the New Mexico finance
authority that's the higher
growth equity that would be
augmented with another forty
eight no.
State.
No I know we might be a little
bit later time so happy to vote
to questions if there are any
questions or comments for
educators law.
Mr chairman I have one question
could you are particularly the
kinds of partners you expect to
bring to New Mexico as the as
the match absolutely so we
we want to work with those when
we are focused on this deep
impact and again being very
clear and focused on serving
socially economically
disadvantaged individuals and
tailoring the right size and and
rates of capital for them that
is setting the maximum return
profile so that we maintain that
affordability and with that in
mind we really do need to target
those that care about the
economic growth and stability of
New Mexico and target folks that
are coming from an impact
perspective
very likely are a few of
national foundations will
already are involved in grant
making in the state of New
Mexico I do know that it's
several of the community
foundations have growing impact
investment practices as well so
being able to work through the
local community foundations
local existing foundations
particularly for that
restorative products that also
allows for community foundations
some high net worth individuals
to participate through donor
advised funds and that is a
large portion of the investment
capabilities in the state as we
know from the venture community
these are high net worth family
offices and many of them have a
charitable vehicle and we intend
to use those pools of capital or
or address them with those for
that specific product for the
middle equity gap filling that
does have a slightly higher
intended return profile as those
underlying investments will be
into higher growth companies a
quarter into adventure positions
and so that is.
A wider set of people who like
to earn money.
And so we will circulate that
with what broader networks that
that just our venture oriented.
Thank you for that want to
mention that Mr Chairman the
change that we had made to the
state law that allows us to make
these investments has broadened
the number of investors that can
participate in the right which
they participate so it was a
really important piece for us to
be able to serve
those intended targets so when
they set the law they said that
the meet these targets and they
didn't give us the vehicle to do
that and so the changes that the
legislature passed last year
really allows us to do what they
asked us to do and I think this
is just ridiculous should that
so thank you for for provided
additional coming here and I I
have to applaud you and and I'm
at a gauging legislature to look
at that
to reflect the full population
of the state.
And then record it is something
else the numbers.
Thank you thank you.
with all of the one item number
six the committee report of the
committee but thank you.
the public committee met on July
nineteenth and I chaired that
meeting the committee reviewed
three planning grant
applications and recommended all
three projects to the full board
for approval and those are on
the consent agenda
the committee also reviewed free
water for projects the first one
that really CEO was recommended
for approval and that's on the
consent agenda and the other two
cater to my doctor and see if
Gallup were spent restructuring
and we recommended approval
those will be on the regular.
And then in addition the
committee reviewed nine ERS
requests and recommended all
nine projects to the board for
approval and three of those are
on the consent agenda and the
other six would be on a regular
tend up and then staff also
presented to the committee
request for three month
moratorium on payments for you
County on behalf of you county
General Hospital three loans for
the hospital we recommended
approval on that and that's a
regular job thank you Mr.
He goes well done questions that
accounts for members but.
Okay is thank you Mr line item
seven the consent agenda and
local seven point one two seven
point seven hello the.
The presentations so let's go
with the seven point one the
lower Arroyo Hondo M. D. W. C.
M. S. W. A. relatives.
These.
Susan good morning good morning
Mr chairman members of the board
consent agenda items seven point
one three seven point three were
used and recommended by.
Item seven point one is a water
planetary engineer report for
lower volume time do mutual
domestic water consumers and.
state qualified.
Item seven point two waste.
Also.
You to domestic water consumers
in mutual.
They qualify for fifty thousand
and the final of the committee
planning funds application is
for metropolitan redevelopment
Act Plan and that is for the
village of Ruidoso they qualify
for fifty thousand and with that
I'd be happy to answer any
questions you might have.
We're members which is that
opponents.
This content.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the New Mexico
finance authority I will read
for the record I am seven point
four through seven point seven
our first is a funding increase
recommendation for real estate
at Rio CEO domestic water
consumer association that is
water projects fund fifty four
thirty two and with that we
would like additional funding of
two hundred fifty thousand six
eighty six that would be a ten
percent loan and a ninety
percent grant for water project
on five four three two our next
item is the ability of Magdalena
and that is for a disadvantage
tax exempt loan of fifty four
thousand three fifty eight
eighty five we have a five year
term our net interest cost of
zero law enforcement protection
fund will serve as our pledge
revenue for the purchase the
echo our next item is San Miguel
County on behalf of date is
canyon fire department
purchasing fire equipment as
well disadvantage tax exempt
loan amount of one thirty nine
an eight year terms and interest
cost of zero and the seven point
oh nine and a coverage.
And our last item today is going
to be Guadalupe County this is
for command control equipment we
have both the tax exempt in a
disadvantage tax exempt loan
component five hundred forty
three thousand three thirty four
is our total loan amount press
receipts tax there's a place
revenue it's a short three year
term the net interest cost of
two point two L. and our
coverage of our coverage is one
point four three and with that
that concludes our consent
agenda.
What questions or comments to
the editors at.
Here in a in a motion for
approval item seven point one
through seven point seven.
The movie here the motion to
have a second second motion
second what members all favor
signify by saying aye thank the
opposition.
None of the approved thank you
Mr a line item number eight the
regular agenda beginning with I
don't point one and the as
stated before will work on it
eight point one two eight point
nine.
What.
Thank you Mr chair and board
members ring the for you the
project actually a couple who
will start with the reader to my
only treatments to water
consumers association this
project was awarded by the water
trust would beginning of me and
was approved by the NMFA board
Indian of may for a financial
structure of sixty forty sixty
percent grant in.
Eighty percent loan at the time
and just as as clarification
anytime that the analysts do the
water trust board per the water
transport policies they require
that projects supported by right
paying constituencies we work
hard to take a loan between ten
to forty percent and that's
determined by the plants
Authority using a three year
history to determine the amount
of the debt the system can
support the structure of the
forty percent gold was based on
the increased revenues provided
by the association's financials
and what they've found out is
that one time or that increase
was a one time grant procreation
so the credit analyst went back
in we do the analysts finest the
analysis minus the
the one time grant appropriation
the analysis was then went from
the two point nine one time to
reduce to one point seven eight
times which provides that
financial structure to change to
a twenty percent no so at this
time staff recommends modifying
the financial structure from
that sixty percent graph forty
percent loan to in eighty
percent Representative twenty
percent loan for the reader to
my own Mr welcome to
resuscitation on you water
transport project number five
nine six one with that I stand
for any question.
One question on.
Okay this.
The next one we have is this
this is a two part.
Presentation will start off with
they were awarded in a similar
to the greater two mile in two
thousand or in B. four eighty
ten point eight million dollar
reward and he came in as a sixty
forty sixty percent
Representative forty percent of
so little bit of background on
the City of Gallup the previous
awards from the water trust
board is we're based on the
sixty forty because it is a
state sponsored project for the
Navajo Gallup park pipelines and
the sixty forty the city decided
to or recommended that they take
that off because it was federal
funds involved so there was a
state match and the city match
so with the ten point eight
although it still is involved
with the national Gallup there
is no federal funds combined
with that so staff went in we
looked at that and I I the fact
that part of the analysis that
was done prior was on the joint
utility funds and so the city of
Gallup because they don't have
any use federal funds coming in
asked the credit analysis to
come back and take part the
gentility Fund in only to look
at the water enterprise fund so
with that the analysis came back
and the joint utility fund or
when the only look at the water
analysis funds our water in
price but it would from the five
point one times coverage to one
point eight six times so that
allowed the analysis of the
financial structure to them come
from the sixty forty sixty
percent Representative forty
percent loan to a nine percent
grant ten percent of and that
would be the restructuring of
their twenty twenty three
project fifty nine fifty nine
the second part is we have the
City of Gallup was awarded in
twenty twenty one and at the
time of the there submitted
application the.
Request a little over four point
six million dollars again that
was part of Navajo the federal
funded project the one
transports off with probably the
first time in a long time that
they had more money than the
have request so staff reached
out to communities at that time
applicants at that time to see
if there were any that required
additional funding city of kelp
was one of those so they
received an additional three
point six million dollars in
front of including their four
point six which is a total of
seven point seven million they
came back and similar to the
previous times what the city of
Gallup is asking is there during
initial request the four point
six million remaining at that
sixty forty but that NMFA we
look at the analysis are just
the end of the water enterprise
fund for that additional Matt so
with that
the the structure then for that
additional amount that three
point six million has to choose
to the nineteen so staff is
recommending that you might
fight the fight the structure of
the twenty twenty three award
fifty nine of fifty nine to a
ten percent loan ninety percent
graft and the additional funding
from the twenty twenty one
project fifty four twenty four
of that three point six million
again restructuring it from the
sixty forty to the ninety
percent correct ten percent well
and with that Mr chair I will
stand for any question if you
have any questions in the
analysis thank you question Mr
chairman I just added a little
bit of additional color we have
to what we call of regional
projects that receive federal
funds in the state one is
eastern New Mexico and the other
is Gallup as part of the federal
funding the the local government
is required to put.
At the.
The local match and there's a
state match what Gallup has been
doing is utilizing its forty
percent grant sixty percent loan
the forty percent loan would be
this the local match and the
sixty percent accrues to the
state portion and so that's been
working out really well because
it's an incredibly attractive
loan for them to take on so they
were happy with the forty sixty
after the Feds stop giving money
to the project that forty
percent loan was and was not
worth their time they don't have
the revenues to support it and
it doesn't count for anything
more so they hope they requested
that we begin looking at it just
as a water utility and they're
forty percent loan had been
supported with the electric
funds so this is a much clearer
and better alignment of their
project and and and that's how
we get to the ninety tents so
they if we just use those water
funds in the past it would have
always been ninety ten with the
needed the additional loan to
approve for their local match
and so there and then usual
client typically this as soon as
someone's given forty percent
loan we're just automatically to
renew it review it and they were
happy to take that on until very
recently and I don't know if
Rick has any additional color
you're doing a great job market
our first time at the podium try
to recruit this lady to the
credit.
The sense that so it's an
unusual circumstance but
certainly warranted to to
consider that but we're not.
Representative for most of the
questions on.
Okay thank you.
Thank you thanks to the line
item eight point three four
members of one of that is a
hundred twenty one million three
to five well loan madam.
But it gives some clarity on
that before we get started no I
think I'll just turn it over
right now to run into error
thank you madam CEO of rock good
morning Mr chairman.
Board of directors of the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water authority what a utility
authority will refer to it has a
forty I have applied to the PPRF
for various kinds of capital
improvement would be today if
they're in
an advisor utility and he'll be
available to answer questions
the total loan amount is a
hundred twenty one million three
hundred twenty five thousand
this will carry twenty five year
term and the listening to
revenue of the utility will
services pledged Revenue
so I'll refer you to page eighty
two of the board book today
which there's a brief background
of who the authority service and
the make up of the authority.
Proceeds of the of for the
project will be used for but are
not limited to items that have
been identified in the that the
plan of the that the authority
has published office they're
twenty two to thirty one the out
of the plan outlines party
renewal projects such as of
Senator sewer pipelines drinking
water there's some or control
facilities automated meter
infrastructure and some low
income water and sewer
connections so starting on page
eighty two in continuing to the
bottom of eighty three there's
more detailed project listing
for you to review on the use of
the of the problem proceeds are
once again pledge for this loan
will be the next system revenue
of joint utility which is
consistent with the resolution
and other outstanding debt the
did receive a rating from S. and
P. in twenty twenty one.
Just get the twenty twenty and
twenty one of which is a double
a plus of this typically means
that the power has the ability
to meet their off debt
obligations and since have
sufficient staff and timely
management of loan payments
therefore no debt service
reserve is with is required and
we will also allow for some
money payments in addition this
loan is presented without the
seventy five basis points in the
interest rate which means the
system will need to achieve
coverage requirements at the
then current interest rates when
this loan is up with the final
debt service for this loan is
prepared we do have some
strengths and that is that the
funding will assist them in the
renewal full segments of aging
pipes we do have the S. and P.
rating at double eight plus and
we do have a weakness madam and
that is that the loan carries a
twenty five year term relying on
IT systems revenue as its
revenue source however this is
mitigated by the fact the
covenants for senior obligation
which states that the water
utility will charge rates which
will be sufficient to cover the
one point the the one thirty
three times the annual debt
service requirements on its
outstanding senior obligations
there twenty twenty two I was on
modified it has finding this
first time this project appears
before this board the staff does
recommend approval with the Eric
and I can stand for questions or
the water utility thank you for
members of the question about.
The one item eight point four.
So all right is attending a
conference today read also saw
cover his to loans before you
the first one is for the test
regional landfill aboard so
Mister chair members of the
board the tells regional
landfill board has applied to
the PPRF to construct a new
landfill cell.
Of the regional board is made up
of the joint powers agreement
between the county of tells
town tells those requests the
ledge of review red river
village of eagle nest and go to
the house of task you value and
they also serve various
communities throughout the
region of the state of that part
of the state this total loan
amount is for two million
seventy four thousand with ten
percent of proceeds at the
disadvantaged rate of two
percent and will carry a ten
year term.
The board will pledge it's
listening to revenue of the
utility of they are requesting
this loan because the current
cell of the at the house
regional lab field is near
capacity without this facility
of the economic impact would be
detrimental because users that
have to travel a great distance
to dispose of their waste of the
strength of this loan include
that the landfill is important
for health and health and
welfare of the community the new
landfill will allow for
uninterrupted service and we do
have a full we funded debt
service reserve on the small
there are no witnesses to
mention their twenty two audit
was on modified with one finding
of no material weaknesses or
significant deficiencies in this
first time this project appears
before this board and staff does
recommend approval and Eric is
also the financial visor for
House which.
Yes.
Yes you Mr.
Your is is this going to be a
modification to the existing
footprint of the facility or
will this be entirely new
permitting through NMED for the
last.
chairman and members are here in
RBC capital markets so my
understanding is that this will
be for a new cell
but I don't know I can't answer
that for you know for.
Yes okay.
It should answer.
Thank you members plus
depreciated.
It was okay it's going to item
eight point I will follow up of
forty stores.
Of it when I don't we can.
So Mister chairman members of
the board directors guild
McKinley school district has
applied to the PPRF to fund
projects within the district the
did receive voter approval in
November twenty twenty one this
proceeds will be used for but
are not limited to construction
at various schools as well as an
H. back in roof replacement.
and demolishing of existing
football soft ball and baseball
fields and track and see one of
these projects for the detail on
page one of six of the boardwalk
we do have some strings madam
and that is that the majority
taxpayers equal twenty six point
four five of total assessed
valuation which reflects a low
concentration risks to the tax
base however the majority of
these up major taxpayers are
utilities and infrastructure we
also have the statutory
guarantee the faces to guarantee
should the school default the
last audit was in twenty twenty
two it was on modified it did
have to findings but no material
weaknesses or significant
deficiencies again this is the
first time this project appears
before the board and staff
recommends approval but that
will stand for questions I'm
sorry Eric is also the.
When it's a thank you Mr
president on eight point six
okay.
You're in I'm sorry point five
eight six.
And looks like you have more
completely.
Good morning chairman members of
the board for the item rose
sorry about that.
Danny public missile school
district has applied for a loan
in the amount of three million
dollars as you'll see on page
one nineteen there's a tax
exempt component as well as a
disadvantage deployment I do
want to mention that the bond
counsel for the district.
Has identified some taxable
items so at time of closing the
Same at one time's coverage of
the district will be using these
proceeds or various items which
I have listed on page one
nineteen as well they were
approved to spend five million
dollars to district by voters in
November twenty twenty one.
This will be the first time that
this borrow comes to PPR F.
which is exciting and there's
also the statue from DFA in
place weaknesses are known to
know.
The last audit was completed
twenty twenty two it was on
modified there if I findings but
these are not feel weaknesses
nor significant efficiencies
with that I do stand for any
questions or comments on this
on.
Thank you for the question
comments.
Okay continue please eight point
seven thank you chairman.
Cuba Independent School District
has come to the PPRF along the
amount of one point eight
million dollars will carry a
twenty year term at three point
eighty four percent interest
cost it wouldn't be an
appropriation revenue based of
pledge the coverage will be five
point five three times.
Project description these
proceeds will be used to finance
the construction of two new
teachers and to refurbished
renovate six existing teachers
or built back in the sixties.
A little background about the
district the district has
limited ability to raise funds
to property tax due to a lot of
their students coming from
tribal lands so they don't have
that source of funding so the
federal impact aid was put in
place to help districts that
have this issue
the federal exams so I think
that it will be reimbursed to
the schools or all these costs
and I do want to mention a
weakness that the Congress could
at some time choose not to fund
this program however it has not
done that and it is on Matthew
renewing on the year to year
basis and automatic through
those by itself if it does not
get approval Shane Saloni
creating the Congress as funny
as programs as nineteen fifty
this funding will assist with
the teachers housing as I
mentioned above and there's also
debtservice a fund in place the
that's the autos in twenty
twenty two it was on modified
we're for findings notion if
efficiency is no murder
weaknesses this is the first
time this project comes before
the board and I do Stephanie
questions or comments.
Okay thank you miss on the item
eight point eight thousand the
school district and promote.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the New Mexico financed
Authority board chair thank you
for sitting with me so the
school district has a twenty
twenty three general obligation
bond today it is four hundred
million dollars it's a thirteen
year term and our net interest
cost of three point six three on
page one forty sections to the
project description which does
describe what the funds will be
used for district wide group
this.
The new school prevents as
stressful and advance the
physical safety conditions of
the students and also enhance
their educational experience
twenty twenty two on modified
audit to findings staff
recommends approval that Eric
and I will answer any questions.
Orders.
Okay hearing none of taxes to
the very interesting eight point
nine west with three moratorium
from Union County all on behalf
of in county General Hospital
Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman so I do
believe we may have some yes on
soon to date so it looks like we
we do have Randy Thompson who is
Union County Madam it looks like
Tammy stamp is on and possibly
Melissa so let's that granted a
into any CEO and CFO
respectively and I'm wondering
if clay Q. slate is on you may
or may not be on the the county
commissioner and of course our
chief of lending and credit has
joined me as well Mr Bracks so
before you today we have a
request to cost three NMFA.
PPRF in the fear of three one
four five if you're of three
three eight four in PPRF four
nine three one.
Currently all of these loans are
in good standing and payments
have been made through at July
to it today through through
today and what we're asking is
to pause this repayments to give
both the county and hospital a
chance to work with the NMFA.
And find a solution how we may
further serve the needs of the
hospital and you County with
respect to these three loans.
And they're also working with
the state for options as well.
And it's it's quite simple the
request we will be making the
November first twenty twenty
three payment if we look
On our in our board and if we do
the.
On.
Forgive me for not having the
page handy fifty seven one fifty
seven thank you madam
and then Sierra we do see that
there's there are plenty of
funds in their debtservice
account to make the November
payment and there's plenty of
funds in their debt service
reserve I can't and with that I
will turn it over to Randy
Thompson issue would like to
make a comment or speak to this
at all.
Stops.
Good morning Mr chair and board
of we we come to you humbly
requesting that you consider our
request to have a three month
moratorium on these three loans
on behalf of the U. county
General Hospital we stand for
any questions of the board may
have regarding this request.
Thank you Mr.
This point board members the
questions and comments on
proposed a treatment.
So madam the Mr chairman I would
just note that three months
gives us time to figure out what
the next best step is the the
the payments as currently
contemplated are not sustainable
from the revenues that we had
initially identified which of
the revenues coming from the
hospital and with the back up
pledge from the gross receipts
tax so we are really trying to
find the right solution for both
the county and the hospital in
keeping our PPRF whole so that's
what this gives us additional
time for its potentially that
they might have to go before
state board of finance given
that timing so we wanted to get
three months here we'll be back
at the end of three months with
the solid recommendations for
another request with the US so
that we can find a good solution
here
and I don't know if the hospital
has any comments if they'd like
to make.
Hi this is Tammy stomp on the
CEO I just wanted to say thank
you very much for your
consideration this we are
working really hard to make sure
that
we can get back up on our feet
However secondary to some issues
out of our control with the
federal and state changes
This this is really been
difficult for us but we are
starting new services we had new
services starting this week and
we have another new service
starting next week and I am
hoping that that will set us so
that in the future that we will
be able to sustain these loans
on our own.
Thank you.
orders thank on a point nine or
anything on eight point one
through eight point.
Okay you're not at this point in
motion for approval of items
eight point one through eight
point nine have a motion please.
Mr chair on May motion thank you
members for the second straight
year second member Trujillo us
recently to roll call please.
Yes.
Yes.
Member enables yes member ko yes
member of the office yes and
it's forcing yes Russian passes.
All members for.
Yes thank you for.
Passes.
Thank thank you this point I'd
like to note that both for those
who don't already know
chairwoman Keith was in a bit of
an auto accident she has taken
is up to the hospital to make
sure she's okay our prayers and
thoughts are with their so
you'll have to bear with me for
the rest meeting but the we hope
that the the back in back and
ready to go pretty quickly.
thank you Mr I remember nine
economic development the
committee report on that
member the card is out this week
and we were hoping to have
member homes here but these
absence mentioned that there was
a review of the private of
programs monitoring report on
that's the report that we give
monthly that talks about in the
issues of existing loans as well
as portfolio information on
were two recommendations made by
our credit team with the new
market tax credit projects these
were actually recommendations
because they're under finance in
Mexico recommendations made to
me that within a presented as
information items and the first
was for this house mountain
Energy foods project and that
was they are going to be
changing the control and
substituting the guarantee of
that company that's a.
And to allow for three hundred
thousand dollar unsecured loans
so that's all related to the.
We capitalization the second it
was for the energy real estate
again there they have cost over
runs this is you see that's been
the theme of the amendment last
several meetings so they've
requested our consent to a five
hundred thousand dollars
subordinate loan from enterprise
bank and trust which we have
consented to so those are both
informational items and we've
already signed off on that the
ticket dispersed particularly
transactions and then Ryan of
went through the venture capital
program.
John within the Sir.
Mr chair Marquita you didn't
miss anything.
This time this time.
Love love the characters.
I like the.
Referred.
this is in the this is the other
questions that are problems like
point one will go on to the nine
point two recommendation the
proposed rules governing the
venture capital program.
And it looks like we have Ryan.
This is part and so is thank you
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the board I'm here
with my colleague Susan Pittard
associate counsel and it's our
pleasure to present to you today
rules for your approval for the
venture capital program.
you reviewed back in the April
at the April board meeting the
draft of these rules that will
govern program administration
and implementation since then
over may and June the draft
rules were posted on the NMFA
website and we sought public
comment on full time the rules
themselves and also economic
development objectives of the
venture capital program we
received of public comments the
full content of those public
comments were included in your
meeting materials for today and
obviously summarized some of
those and how they were
cooperated into the revisions.
Venture capital investment
committee made additional
revisions and earlier this month
approved the proposed rules of
recommendation to the NMFA
economic development committee
and last week the economic
development committee reviewed
the proposed draft and approved
them for recommendation to offer
approval.
on page of hundred sixty of your
book we have just a brief
summary of the public comments
received I'll just highlight
received comments from three
three different entities one a
for profit business located in
the Albuquerque area the second
to came from founded Santa Fe
based organizations one a
nonprofit on economic
development organization and the
second attack technical
assistance provider working with
small businesses in in the Santa
Fe area and generally speaking
there was
and an emphasis on and need for
start up start up capital
working capital growth expansion
capital both equity and debt
challenges that entrepreneurs
face were cited as the limited
pool of local VC and angel
investors
high cost of living being a
challenge for entrepreneurs a
lack of incubation acceleration
mentorship capacity competition
from larger local businesses
inability to meet our credit the
credit score requirements or
collateral requirements from
local lenders and a lack of
smaller lending products
available and alongside those
some of the relevant metrics
that the stakeholders would like
to see incorporated or targets
around creating new businesses
creating jobs and at the size
across all three stakeholders
was an emphasis on minority and
underserved business ownership
And on investing in businesses
owned by under under
Representative founders namely
women people of color people
with disabilities.
and I'll go through how we
addressed some of these comments
on in the red line that's
contains in your materials and I
apologize if it was a little bit
confusing because they're
actually to read lines but one
red line was received as part of
those public comments so that's
the first red line you see
that's included in your
materials but what I'll go
through and the red line that is
your for your consideration and
recommended for your approval
starts on page one hundred and
eighty one and is actually Green
Line Fund so on one eighty two
we incorporated some changes
relatively minor but
highlighting and section one
the NMFA of pursuant to the
venture capital programme Act is
granted authority to make false
investments and differential
right vestments that was one of
the amendments that was passed
earlier this year during the
session
as you move through the document
there are a few more kind of
grammatical and formatting
changes that I want highlights
specifically the next revision
all highlight is in section
three eligibility for
investment.
we removed New Mexico businesses
as you all know the venture
capital programme Act authorizes
NMFA to make investments in both
venture private equity funds and
also direct investments in New
Mexico businesses at this time
we are focusing on investments
in venture private equity funds
and so in order to make that
ever more clear we removed
references to New Mexico
businesses as being eligible and
then throughout the throughout
the document you also see in
addition eligibility for
investment just a and every
offices on on the focus on
investments that have the
potential to create or expand
economic opportunities and that
that was that was suggested for
some of the public comments we
received
on page one hundred eighty four
all highlight section five
investment parameters
your new subsection a anyone
venture private equity fund
cannot exceed twenty percent of
the balance of the fund at the
time of investment approval that
was initially thirty percent
we've brought that down and that
is also in line with you'll see
the the proposed similar
parameter in the investment
policy
And I think.
The last
The last revision I would like
to bring to your attention in
section five subsection F. is
the requirement that venture
private equity funds raise a
match matching commitment at
least equal to the investment
from the venture capital program
fund as Europe as you will
recall during the session
earlier this year that
requirement was lifted so this
is not actually a statutory
requirement anymore however we
believe it it's and it is an
important mechanism particularly
for helping attract additional
private private sector
investment in local New Mexico
businesses so that will be
required for venture capital
funds they're seeking a raise
investment from the fund.
And I think Mr chairman and
members of the board that
concludes the highlights from
the revisions that I wanted to
bring to your attention on
myself and sewer happy to stand
for any questions thank you what
what is the question of COVID
for either items but.
Okay here in the this time would
entertain a motion to approve
the proposed rules governing the
venture capital program as
presented have a motion please.
The member Nichols that second
second Mr chair thank you member
to hill service available
yes.
You just never know who's yes
hello yes but yes resources yes
and members are.
Yes most.
Thank you service thank you Mr I
don't of the nine point three
recommendation of the proposed
venture capital investment
policy right thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the board
and see was kindly agreed to
stay up here with me
Or she's actually honor of New.
On and I'd also like to just
bring your attention to some new
faces both in the run and also
on the screen so last month you
all approved no word of a
professional services contract
to make you to the aspen group
they are investment in
supporting on the venture
capital program supporting NMFA
and for capital investments so
here with us today are even
Sampson injured product here is
actually based in Albuquerque
anything space in our Portland
office and then they have three
three colleagues on the on the
on the screen there Steven Hart
base in California Serena Champa
who's based in Boston and
Michael pellets who's who's
based in Portland and those I
are dedicated to our account
have been supporting since early
this month we were thankful to
have the opportunity to include
their feedback on the proposed
investment policy yes before you
today and we're really excited
to be working with them going
forward on the program so I we
did not include the money the
agenda item today they're here
to answer any questions if you
have any and on you can expect
to see them that.
so before you today that the
venture capital investment
policy on is a draft for your
approval this accompanies the
rules and provides on the
substantially more guidance in
detail particularly around
specific parameters that the
venture capital investment
committee with the support of
staff and Nikita will use to
evaluate those potential
investments for recommendation
to the board for approval
what I wanted to highlight to
you all today in terms of some
of the key
first just let someone
investment parameters and more
on qualitative mission
and objectives of the of the
program itself on page one
ninety one so first and foremost
we've included throughout an
emphasis on underserved
communities and actually a
definition of that
and you'll see that.
You'll see the okay I'll go
ahead and read it just it's it
was hard to find on a good
definition that says simply.
Captures and includes all
communities but we did our best
and so as we've defined it here
underserved communities or
populations sharing a particular
characteristic as well as
geographic communities that have
been systematically denied a
full opportunity to participate
in aspects of economic social
and civic life such as black
Latino and indigenous and native
American persons Asian Americans
and Pacific islanders and other
persons of color members of
religious minorities lesbian gay
bisexual transgender and queer
persons persons with
disabilities persons who live in
rural areas and persons
otherwise adversely affected by
persistent poverty or
inequality.
So we have defined this term on
this definition we found
broadly consistent also with the
socially economically
disadvantaged a definition which
is is included under SS BCI as a
Marquita described earlier the
venture capital equity funds
component of that funding will
be executed under the venture
capital program Fund and under
this policy and so we sought to
align
this definition with with the
study definition and I hope I
hope that that accomplishes that
and just last point on that that
throughout the document you'll
see that one of the clear
objectives of the program is to
increase access to capital to
underserved communities
throughout the state.
In terms of mission and
diversification objectives so we
sought to articulate a bit more
clearly the specific objectives
that venture private equity
funds will need to demonstrate
that they will
hopefully accomplish and the
requirement is that they advance
these two of these so creation
and our retention of new and or
early stage businesses here in
New Mexico investing in emerging
and expanding businesses here in
New Mexico creating and or
retaining quality jobs for New
Mexicans increasing access to
capital for businesses owned by
entrepreneurs from or benefiting
underserved communities and last
but not least attract additional
private sector investment in
early stage and emerging
businesses hearing.
In terms of the differentiated
strategy and return profile so
the venture capital program act
does are a late foundation for
what we consider differentiated
or alternative venture capital
program one key distinguishing
characteristic is the ability to
invest in debt of New Mexico
businesses and not solely
utilize traditional equity
instruments the venture capital
program act does highlights uses
uses of investment funds
targeting start up expansion
product market development the
capitalization and early stage
business development activities
overall we are going to seek and
initially target a portfolio of
potentially five to ten
investments in venture private
the funds and expect each of
those funds to have different
different diversified strategy
whether they're targeting
different sectors whether
they're targeting investments in
different communities and by
virtue of that diversification
are hoping to generate a more
balanced on financial return on
a macro portfolio basis
certainly relative to
traditional venture capital
portfolios and how those are
constructed
as this is an economic
development first initiative we
do expect that targeted
financial returns are on an
absolute basis will be lower
than what traditional venture
capital funds target we did
noted the policy that oftentimes
those targets are not realized
however we do want to be clear
that we are not targeting a
twenty plus percent returns on
our invested.
also differentiated from
traditional venture capital and
as highlighted by ms Robbins on
a earlier in her report on the
small business ecosystem
landscape we will be explicitly
seeking to support small
businesses throughout New Mexico
on the policy also highlights
that addition to sectors with
high growth of business models
this program will be seeking to
invest in businesses operating
in across diverse sectors
throughout the state and there's
a fairly extensive list here
including agriculture
accommodation food service arts
entertainment construction
education and early child care
environmental businesses
Services health care information
technology manufacturing outdoor
recreation I renewable energy
retail trade and transfer are
all eligible industries for
investment.
and last but not least we
emphasize that the vegetable
program fund will seek to
address capital gaps facing
entrepreneurs representing and
located in underserved
communities and seek to attract
additional private sector
investment in New.
On I'd like to draw your
attention to that specific
investment guidelines and
restrictions outlined in the
policy so in terms of venture
capital venture private equity
funds and their fund managers on
through the due diligence
process which is led by Mickey
to investment group and on
various members of staff also
supporting fund managers must
demonstrate various
qualifications including but not
limited to adequate investment
expertise team capacity best
practices on on across their
operations and compliance also
operational sustainability and
emerging fund managers maybe
these qualifications are based
on verifiable past experience we
do expect to be I potentially
recommending for your approval
investments in what are
considered emerging fund
managers so the relatively early
stage in their organizations
inception and maybe fun one fund
to as opposed to a fund ten or
eleven that an organization is
raising.
In terms of investments outside
of New Mexico so venture private
equity funds that also invest
outside of New Mexico are
eligible on they do have to meet
the matching capital
requirements and
when we are sourcing on
potential managers that meet
this category the expectation is
that they have either made
investments in New Mexico
businesses before or interested
in deploying to New Mexico
businesses on and the reason we
would select managers with this
type of profile is because of
the sector expertise that they
might bring to the ecosystem or
their potential to bring their
investors to invest in welcome
to my.
In terms of an investment amount
of concentration limits as I
mentioned before will initially
seek to target forcefully in
five to ten venture private
equity funds we expect
investments to range between two
and ten million the two funds
that the key does started
looking at where we may
potentially anchor investment
those have been earmarked for
ten million dollar allocations
those funds themselves are very
much focused on investing solely
in New Mexico businesses we
expect funds that might invest
in other geographies are
invested sizes might be smaller
investment sizes also may be
smaller if the fund itself.
in terms of limits so an
investment in a single fund
cannot exceed twenty percent of
the balance of the program fund
not as consistent with the
parameter in rural
The funds cannot be more than
fifty percent of the total
commitments in a single of fund
if the fund is investing
substantially in New Mexico and
the limit is twenty percent of
total commitments into a fund
that fund is also investing
outside of New Mexico
substantially investments in one
New Mexico Mexico business shall
not exceed ten percent the
balance of the venture capital
program fund and we expect to
achieve that through our overall
diversification into underlying
funds that are also deploying
different strategies and then
also where underlying funds
themselves have a concentration
limits that concentration limit
and the next full it is expected
to be within fifteen percent of
their fund portfolios.
Private equity funds investing
equity are expected to seek
minority non controlling
interests
investments in anyone New Mexico
business shall not exceed fifty
one percent of the total
investment capital in the
business this is.
this is the primary included in
the venture capital program act
but but as per the the prior
bull if we are not looking to.
build controlling positions in
any New Mexico.
investments in any one industry
shall not exceed thirty percent
the balance of the program funds
that's also in statute
investment commitments are not
to exceed fifteen years
including all will fund
extensions
the next bullet is the match
requirement so we have written
into policy the venture private
equity funds are required to
investor secure investment by
private third party.
and we may make a commitment to
a funds are contingent on them
raising them sh and that is a
mechanism that we hope will help
particularly the two funds that
were anchoring raise additional
matching capital for those on
strategies that are dedicated to
New Mexico.
there are parameters around the
deployment process BCI federal
funding that we will be doing in
partnership with the New Mexico
economic development department
and we have provisions
requiring funds in their
respective managers to comply
with all relevant regulatory
requirements including
as of local registration with
the securities and exchange
commission legal documents are
shown corporate terms no less
favourable than those outlined
by the institutional limited
partners association and all the
old documents show also provides
the NMFA has all eligible for
remedies available at law or in
equity
and that and as as Fund as the
fund balance is committed and
investments are funded cast
ballots in the funds itself will
be managed according to the
separate and MFA investment
process policy and consistent
with our our percent or cash
management practices and last
but not least monitoring and
reporting so we have various
requirements here outlined both
for quarterly reporting
requirements and then also evil
on any one particular one clued
on economic impacts information
that we will then also report
out tools to the NMFA board and
various legislative committees
as as requested.
I will stand for questions I.
yeah thank you well the.
We're members the question
Senator.
Okay here and at this point we
would entertain a motion of
approval of the proposed venture
capital investment policy as
presented.
Mr Chairman make that person
thank you members of all such
as.
Thank you members of this
promotion have a second US
regional call
yes
yes yes
yes under the law yes members
forcing yes.
Yes.
Thank you she raised thank you
Mr line item and the finance
disclosure committee report of
all the that report we did meet
on July the nineteenth we were
in court we heard a presentation
of the investment in port and in
June thirtieth twenty twenty
three by a Mr what the market
what though he be presenting
here just a moment we also
heard recommended to the full
board the approval of the fiscal
year twenty twenty four PPRF and
conduit bond underwriter pool of
we approve the issuance of our
the for the sales force
integration consulting services
we approve the issuance of an
RFP for the scrum master
consulting services we heard
other notices and businesses as
presented and we adjourned
accordingly that concludes the
my report thank you Mr
any question.
Thank goodness the item ten
point two presentation of the
investment portrait and the June
thirtieth twenty twenty three Mr
about twelve.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of work when it's page two oh
nine.
we have to the funds that are
invested we have the finest
thirty funds that totaled nine
hundred thirty four million
census to thirtieth we also hold
some DOT funds which total two
hundred thirty three point eight
million a total of invested
funds of almost two billion.
The kids on on both of those
well for full is combined is for
football I.
Our kids is that I live with
three.
On the next page.
Right down that nine hundred
thirty four million which of the
NMFA portfolio.
Starting at the top of the
longest portfolio we have a debt
service reserve we is there a
five year benchmark we have five
fifty five point seven million
in that fund the kids up to
eleven the current marquee of
the forty five compared to the
end except for eighty seven.
Duration is two point zero two
six compared to the benchmark at
two point zero five one.
Next we have our operating funds
uses their three year benchmark
on those funds.
The market value was three
hundred eighty almost eighty two
million the kids three point
eight four marchio the five
point one zero compares the
index up five point one zero.
Duration is point four three to
the index at one point three
four eight am I will mention
that that duration is really
pull down.
to the fence marks for a number
of reasons
towards the end of the year
mainly the last week in may and
then through June we received
them quite a bit of funds of
which remained at that point
when invested ordered in the
money market fund we had eighty
one million from our two
thousand twenty three eighty one
eighty two months that closed.
Seventy million for the
opportunity enterprise a program
similar for charter schools
program fifty million for the
venture capital we have fifty
six million come into that one
for our annual flow through
which happens after senior and
subordinate lien bonds were
paid.
Let's the next group of funds.
We have our to program or
project details of the program
funds in the two year program
funds we also have our to
reserve funds Madam at services
there which is dedicated to our
senior lien bonds in the
supplementary reserve which is
dedicated to our support and we
bought.
That group health four hundred
sixty four million with the book
you are three eighty nine of our
kids of five point two four
compared to the index up five
point three seal the duration is
eight seven three three compared
to the index at like four nine
two.
Finally a service group of funds
meaning that service type funds
is there to three months
yes welcome those funds at
thirty two point six million
dollars with the bulk of the
five one oh two in the current
market you know that I wanted to
compare to the index that I put.
The overall again after nine
hundred thirty four point three
million dollars in the budget
for full is within we haven't of
book yield of three point seven
eight three the current market
the five point one four nine
compared to the index at five
eight one nine eight.
We're going to the next page.
The bottom is the the net income
for the full fiscal year twenty
three we had almost twenty one
million of earnings compared
with the year twenty to the
earnings of three point seven
the four hundred sixty six
percent increase.
Seven analysts it would finish.
The question.
here in again well the thank you
yes but what you guys would this
keep it up thank you thank you
I think it is the item ten the
ten point three the
recommendation for approval of
the school year twenty twenty
four PPRF and conduit bond
underwriter.
It appears on the screen up
there.
Very tiny to their in state high
I need to
the.
Mr chairman board
I policy the the board approves
the underwriter selection and
maximum take downs and for that
end we issued an RFP for
underwriter on June first
Again again the proposers of
months to prepare.
Proposals and we did receive
fifteen proposals by June
thirtieth deadline.
There were four for folks who do
the review three NMFA staff
members and our municipal
advisor from PFM.
we you see the results of the
scoring there on the sheet
yeah I think that we got there
so we got fifteen proposals the
the scoring was remarkably I
think hi thanks for the the the
selection of the six firms that
we identified is senior managers
and then to firms as
alternatives co managers.
The.
I think we can so yeah we can
roll it the other thing that the
policy requires approval of the
Maximo takedowns that the table
they're just list the weighted
average take down the beach the
proposals Representative and
then our other down the page is
the actual take down by by
maturity take down is just
basically the concessions that
the underwriters get for selling
the bonds so it's it's a it's
the largest portion of their
Commission earlier there
compensation for oration at
that.
So with that we've identified
the six firms New Mexico the
next stage we were just them
in order so the way we we do
this is that the top scoring
firm will be the senior manager
on the first issue in fiscal
twenty four followed by the the
two account managers there which
scored six
When that we just sort of go
through the list depending I
mean if we issued as many as six
font issues each of the firms we
get a chance to to do a senior
managed transaction and
everybody would get an
opportunity to participate in
three of the issues the two
alternative call managers are
Jeff's Jefferies and Citigroup
and they participate to the
extent that
one of the managers in a
transaction is conflicted out we
we if if right if the firm is
representing and one of our
underlying borrowers that were
either funding on a
the simultaneous basis or on a
reimbursement basis we they are
not going to participate in.
In the extremes action and as
you may have noticed from Eric
here in this participation this
morning the RBCs for will will
not be participating in the next
issue but they will be
participating in spirit
budgeting and advisors are
orders.
So with that we would recommend
the approval of the twenty at
the school twenty twenty four
under writer school assignments
might be happy to answer any
questions about the process that
we went through.
Thank you for members and
present a concert yet.
hearing done here in the at this
point that we would entertain a
motion for approval of the FY
twenty twenty four PPRF a
conduit bond underwriting or as
presented to have a motion.
That
was a second thank you number
two here we have a motion to
have the second series we have a
roll call please parents also
yes you yes but yes Senator
Campos yes member what those yes
as far.
Yes member.
Yes.
He has a seven.
Thank you series of taking us to
a line item number eleven of
update on activity other
committee member.
Thank you shares laws though
The audit committee met on July
nineteenth the twenty twenty
three we did not have a quorum
but staff did brief myself and
and member Lobato we had three
items we were briefed on the
financial statements and
financial performance indicators
for may
really the only significant.
Mention was cash transfers from
the state for seventy million
for the opportunity inner price
program and ten million for the
charter schools program we also
heard from staff on progress
with our external audit for for
a
fiscal year twenty twenty two
Very
twenty twenty three Lori Lori
tuition of moss Adams gave us an
updated eight updated
highlighted that the audit
exercise is was on schedule at
that time and significantly
ahead of where it was last year
we also heard
An update on our new office
building project we've got an
agenda item
to amend the capitol.
A budget for that project I
would just note that the
architectural drawings for the
project hundred percent
complete
and there's plans to submit the
building permit to the City of
Santa Fe you know given the
approval of the budget the
budget is being requested to to
be increased by two million
dollars to reflect market demand
and inflated prices for
construction.
as well as the most significant
ticket item within the budget as
you might might imagine is the
heating ventilation and air
conditioning for the building
and
you know given current prices
and the need to update it to
meet LEED standards and of
future efficiencies for for both
lower lower impact on the
environment and cost
efficiencies
the that's kind of the major
ticket items in the building
You know once once completed
will be the space needs of NMFA
into the foreseeable future
given that the mission of of
NMFA is not significantly
changed.
with that all.
Turn it over to Oscar for rural
approval from.
Request for the capital budget.
Oscar.
Good morning Mr chairman yes as
member Burke went out we're
asking for a million dollars for
this project we take it from an
eight million dollar project to
an eight million dollar
construction project including
architecture costs and L. E. D.
a silver improvements would take
it from eight million dollars to
ten million dollar project.
and would also increase what at
this point is up to percent
construction.
A contingency budget to a a five
percent a contingency a budget.
as member Brooke also mentioned
This so that the increases is is
almost entirely due to just
increases of just inflation.
And of the the rare construction
permit that's out there right
now post comment of we've seen
this with other projects that we
finance elsewhere you you see
some these projects brought to
you to increase budgets that and
so we're caught in that same.
That same effect up so with that
I'll just I'll just stand by for
the question to me is developed
for you what's the cost of doing
business that we see it all over
all over New Mexico we see it
basically all of the country
right now it's just the price
materials of state the so it's
not surprising Mr chairman I
know that when we came up with
the budget we obviously didn't
have a design we were doing it
based on what we anticipated.
Costs would be you know at the
time that was I think we made
those estimates in January
twenty twenty two and we
estimated two hundred dollars a
square foot I think you can see
on page.
Two seventeen and where the
costs are now so we're now
looking at the we're finished
construction three sixty square
foot so just and that is within
the market range unfortunately.
Really when this listening we're
building the Taj Mahal it just
costs.
Actually.
In that case.
And you say that so that that is
and again I will mention our
final budget then is including
furniture technology lead
acquisition is fourteen point
nine million dollars so that
takes us you know are are twelve
point nine which was the
modified budgets in may which
included the furniture
technology
so we're up.
Two million dollars so.
Is Mr chairman Taj Mahal's cost
a lot more money.
Is a little bit more
of a question Mr Oscar.
Okay at this time we would
entertain the motion to amend
the capital budget for the you
NMFA at quarters as presented I
do have a motion please make
this recall make that motion
thank you.
And we have a second by members
for this reason we have a roll
call on that please
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank you.
At this time we with the we're
moving on to the next item on
the.
the agenda we're going to move
it it's just session I would
motion for the NMFA board of
directors to go to the executive
session as matter so do pretty
good with.
Pertaining to threatened or
pending litigation of one the
both the proposed reduction Dona
Ana County regionals spaceport
receipts tax up to Zack
DiGregorio Services New Mexico
spaceport Authority and others a
case number one C. B. twenty
twenty two that zero zero zero
