Centre do hick.
Center diagnose
sent our army
center hiki
center low best
center my estes here.
center neighbor
center onion.
Central tease peanut
senator pidea.
Center sanchez
center smithies.
center steinborn
senator stewart senator tom in
senator worth
add today by very own reverend
father richard aneuci
senate the state senate chaplan
will stay uh please remain
standing for the pledgeably just
Good morning everyone are you
marathons for my last night in
those who those who were here
with the
god bless you for showing up
us beyond our own great state to
a world that seems to have
become on more politically
spiritually
sometimes all we can do and all
this left for us to offer for a
world.
watching the headlines and
reading what's happening out
there.
Yeah.
Have any father we pray for the
power to be general.
Any endorance of the son to
accept the consequences of
holding on to what we know and
believe to be right and true and
good.
the faith to believe in a world
emancipated from violence of any
kind a new world where fears
show no longer lead men or women
here and right now
praying always for the
inspiration in the power to
fulfil the destiny for which we
in all men and women were
Oh
deliver to the.
Once again we like to welcome
each of you here this afternoon
all yield to senate majority
business announcements
misleading us thank you mister
president thank you for the
wreck for your words this
morning
about us kind of focused on our
own local.
All the issues that were dealing
with here day to day but
realizing that there is a huge
the local level that we all need
to be sending our thoughts to
happen on the national and world
level as well so thank you so
much for that.
Are so mister president we just
president you don't consent to
excuse i'm sorry to allow
cameras on the senate floor in
the senate gallery here in no
objection cameras are allowed
both in the gallery and in the
senate chamber.
They consider michael for the
awareness that order business
announcements in miscellaneous
senator comes on is thank you
mister president them uh i'd
like to request permission to be
able to remove our jackets and
maybe just what the members
might have a a little bit of a
for them thank you for your
service and see now.
Objection
sorted thank you senator woods
I think mister president I just
protecting us and being back to
help us
thank you for spreading centre
with senator had a meal.
They give mister president
the university of new mexico los
alamos she graduated from u n LA
with a thirty credit certificate
in business marketing two weeks
the capital to study the five
point six million dollars worth
of beautiful artwork as part of
the capital art collection as an
assignment for an art history
clash currently taking at
Thank you had a meal.
Thank you mister president and
in where we're getting my guess
seated now but my neighbor came
back today she liked it so much
yesterday and she brought a
friend with her
rancho so if you want need a
place to get really good pat
food uh some specialty pat foods
then she's right there on
southern and rear rancher
and uh was just starting her
business since so this welcome
her with us today and then and
hope that the the snow don't get
too bad so they can get back
home but if you'll join me and
welcoming them thank you
thank you center
you mister president so just
before a week kind of move the
work up on the table off and
roll the clock I just I want to
let the members know what we're
order and then will do item
number eight
so i'll just go through those
one is center handling senate
but two thirty six to a senator
stewart and nevel sent about one
subsuper senate bill one ninety
five is sent about one forty two
center money off and then will
do item number eight which is
this evenings or late afternoon
session where we will do item
number seven I excuse me not
seven we will do item number
nine a house you just should
m senate will come to order
mr president I ask you dance
consent that the rules be
suspended and if the journals
show all those president in this
morning session are present in
judiciary committee saying no
objection it is ordered center
michael by the thank you very
much mister president asking in
consent that we excuse senator
linda lopez until she returns
president unamazing set we go
that are business messages from
the house here in no objection
we are in that order business
messages from the house
mr president I am directed to
clerk journal show that the
message from the house has been
received.
Send a majority florida their
peter worths take us to that
next order of businesses.
I thank you mister president you
know makes that we go there a
bill on forty eight has had it
under consideration and report
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted senator elizabeth list
the fannics chair
they were acted upon
individually hearing no
objection.
The reader to read the senate
memorial eight recommendation
that it do pass respect to the
significant I thought was a
posing a the eyes have at the
community part is been adopted
in the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
the reader will read mr
respectly submitted senator
george monos chair
production of the committee
reports and that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually saying
objection the reader to read
of the committee report then
there's there's a motion to drop
community report all those in
favor signified by saying I was
opposed to
the
eyes have it the current
president your amazon site we go
that our business announcement
mislanded hearing no objection
where in that order of business
announcements misleading a
senator peter worth thank you
mister president so again we're
going to go
thank you senator seen objection
where on that order business
third reading legislation sent
hamlet to explain the bill thank
you mister president mister
president center body senate
bill to thirty six is a fix to
forty two to zero I was very
honored to have senator brand
and former senator kernin as co
sponsors of this bill senate
bill two fifty one from last
year enabled local jurisdictions
to collect up to seventy five
bringing this bill forward today
is that when tax and revenue
attempted to implement the m r a
from last year they brought to
our attention that we needed to
make some technical changes in
these changes in this bill will
boundaries and then notify tax
and revenue that allows texts
and revenue to set up supporting
code and collect data for twelve
months to determine grt payments
in the area and then tax and
With local businesses and
residents in the area according
to secretary shardon clark
although we are waiting a year
to gather the grt information
the comfort that I find from
forward to the discussion that
will come from this body senator
center is very debating senate
bill two thirty six.
The.
The.
See no debate the center
opportunity to begin working on
improving those areas while the
state tax and revenue department
gathers the necessary data so
mister president I move that
senate bill to thirty six do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand
senator morris vodino
Send us share voting now senator
mccatch and voda now
sender guy goes volume now
senator bert vodino
senator neighbor voting now.
But I have a lot of twenty in
the affirmative nine in the
that's going to be senator
stewart.
Mrperiod president I ask in
They just initially see no
objection if you'll explain what
the buildings.
Thank you mister president my
corresponds are on this assent
that we've had for over fifty
years in the first thirty years
of that fifty or we produced a
thousand projects totalling
that that are highest priority
this phone has built rodeos and
parks and helped with other
local match and taking it upon
the fund itself to provide that
match secondly we're no longer
requiring that land and water
the funding uh themselves and
we've acreased the population
limit so this is designed to
help us administer this phone to
in almost a billion dollars
recurring every year and are out
of the great american outdoors
fund which phones this and
mister president I would like to
Santaville thank you mister
president my involvement in this
came about because of my concern
about a rating that farmington
realize that the i'd realize
finally later is that they were
talking about the farmington m s
the metropolitan statistical
area which includes all of
sandwich and county farmington
participate in but that's not
the case for ship rock and to
hatchy and crown point at all of
those rural communities that are
around us those were part of the
need these kind of facilities at
this that program provides this
is despite its name this is
about parks and rodeo reiners
and all kinds of outdoor
few things mister president
where
part of the purpose is to make
it easier to get these funds so
every year and for the last
several years since twenty
nineteen when these funds were
made available we've lost out on
three point two million dollars
To put into this fund so we
stand for questions mister
president.
Thank you center store as
senators are debate in senate
bill one sixty nine is twice
Miss president as hoping the
sponsor would deal in a steer
deal
yes.
And center I just wanted to ask
you to just real quick questions
president statewide that's how
much money we could get from the
federal government every year
for these projects every year
and we used to do that forty
every county harding rodeo
reiner butterfield trail
shooting range martinez town
park and ball fields spring
river park in roswell it just
required them to have their own
local match that hasn't happened
well we're taking away that
requirement a racing the
the projects so that's the idea
behind the bill to make it use
your first to administer so we
can get that three point two
million dollars every year from
our community and also for a
youth ffa we've talked to the
governor's office in past mayor
marty chavers was able to get
have further debate senator
brandly.
Thank you mr president what the
sponsor please yelt center steer
happy deal and around thank you
Thank you mister president so to
clarify none of the agencies
including game in fish would be
able to access these phones for
we've got all over the place or
uh for some lake park bosky open
space chamber river fishing
access these are all things that
the communities want and that's
where it comes from thank you
president thank you I just want
to rise in support and thank the
sponsored her work on this issue
the
leather not
mister president my district
each side of the the the other
on this of my district hugs the
real good on the on the west
side of the river there and
albuquerque and it's some
had been learning a lot about
the bosco lately the human
north valley and old town
and now we realize we can do a
lot more we can put money into
bosco restoration put money into
the state parks to enhance the
code by this in law and put this
fund in law and and get some
funding in it because we have
more bank for the book we don't
have to buy landlord enough to
build buildings but to do these
We do have centered hambling.
Mr president and I don't need
the sponsor to or they just want
to make a comment and I would
new mexico where they have ned
halk park this is like the
central park of clovis it is
amazing a amazing area where
there are races there are radio
with support from the land and
water conservation fund the
folks out there and just for
full transparency I got to do
this road trip as part of my job
to show the economic benefits of
areas that we have in protected
already but they want to expand
it then we're gonna go to the
other side of the state we're
going to go to columbus new
mexico where they are partial
via state park which has been
supported by the land and water
been funded by the land and
water conservation fund now
we're going to go up to the
hills up and roy does so and
cloud craft we're going to get
out of the miscale patchy
reservation they have this
silver like recreation area
we're gonna head on down the
hill to almost gordon they've
got this incredible skate park
there for the youth to go ahead
and write their skeep boards and
do all sorts of little tricks
and ride up on the rails and all
sorts of stuff but there's also
landing water conservation fund
there's also smoky bear state
park.
Which there's a tiny little
hotel in their run by a lovely
gentleman if it weren't for
which had money from the land
and water conservation fund and
I have to tell you in october of
twenty thirteen we're better
remember my university my wife
and I were we're able to get
married in front of two hundred
senate body I rise in support of
this and i'm thankful for the
sponsor for bringing it forward
thank you center handling.
to center novel who understands
d play and was a good sponsor
although I called him arm candy
once I hope you forget
just to your seats please we are
voting if you wish to vote
please raise your hand.
The.
members of the center thank you
very good I got item number
three that's going to be senate
bill two forty one with
emergency class and i'll be able
to senate how to meal mister
president I ask you daniel is
consent of this the net that the
to debate amendment or
substitution thank you sender
had a meal seen no objection.
Guide and explain the bill
mister president the aging and
long services department has
to go into vulnerable
individuals living spaces and
requires access to sensitive
information mister president
with this bill does is it six to
give the aging in long term
of legislation is bottled after
the authority of CYFD and e c e
c d as each of these agencies
are vulnerable populations.
Senator neighborhood thank you
mister president well the
sponsor
yield
mister president dailed
mrperiod president.
suspenser if indeed some of that
material is public record
senator had a meal mister
president so the background
checks are not going to be
public record.
without unanimous consent to
bring in my expert witness
cabinet secretary gen paul
shoulder.
Seen no objection surgeon roams
will be a please escort
to also allow an estation are in
him part of legal council
objection sergeant artists
please escort our expert with us
into the chamber.
records that can't be access
that are through the f b a
although some other public
records could be access seven
center nightmare and mr
president wouldn't some of those
of public safety websites mr
president that is correct in mr
president
I do not see an exception for
public records that are
Senator had a meal.
Mister president the way it's
written in the statute if it
would not be public record.
acquisition but but you're
making it a crime for someone to
reveal information that is
otherwise public are you not
well I generally support what
they're trying to do it seems to
me that there needs to be a
public record exception because
holding somebody criminally
liable for
this bill thank you mister
president thank you center night
we do have further debates.
Any further debate senators.
gotten middle at this trade
thank you
see no further debate
center had a meal to close on
the bill mister president I
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands also is to your
seats please mare voting before
I go and call the vote I want to
yield to send it a brand.
Thank you mister president
for mission to excuse senator
schneedees except for the
your wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
Sender neighborhood voda now.
But I voted thirty two
informative six in the negative
senate bill two forty one.
to meal we're gonna go on to I
don't number four
that's going to be center
judiciary committee substitute
for senate bill one ninety and I
yield to senator I was thought
of thank you very much as
president mister president
asking and I was considered the
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution see no objection
are year to send it a ran to
explain the bill thank you
mister president appreciate the
uh yield in this this bill is
this compiles them all into one
act making it a lot easier for
judges and lawyers to be on the
fine where everything's at to be
able to know exactly what's
going on with DWI mean also
court case was that court case
called again sir I be so
barsfield berks filled
to be able we have a process now
and so if you get pulled over
and you
are driving erratically and
there's probable cause and you
to draw blood and so that's a
big portion of what this does
but mainly
really just kind of cleans up
very helpful for both law
enforcement and people that want
to have one drink now I don't
ever have any drinks and get
behind the will I just don't do
it
more explanation and and for a
questions on the bill thank you
senator ran sender every subtle
thank you very much mister
president
rental police department from
the berlin of county sheriffs
office
the loss of public fenders has
expressed neutrality on this
the defense can get ah a sample
of the blood as well so they can
do their own analysis
independently
and that there are aspects of
that that are very helpful in
act the dwi act then after that
the boating well intoxicated
back bwi then after that the
implied consent to act was that
applies to both boating and
driving and then finally the
I will begin with center share
thank you mister president at
will
I don't know the republican
sponsor yield thank you center
This present senator that's the
case today
that you are you you continue to
look at the person in and do
drugs that's moving to a point
oh five if I didn't explain that
correctly then i'll ask my co
sponsor to help me with it.
Senator every settle very much
or above is presumed to be
intoxicated by alcohol point one
six or above is presumed to be
aggravated by alcohol point of
there's just reminder to remain
with I contact to the president
of sir center brand new thank
you mister president my other
expert witness who's actually
done this in the field you know
it was talking about to me about
already probable cause because
of some how you were driving
you'll go and across the line
are going really really slow
that's one of the signs not
Came into the shelter when I ran
the salvation army shelter if
they came in I spelled alcohol
i'd say blow
I didn't have to approval cause
because I want to resting and
might just wasn't a lot of stay
there if they were drunk and so
a very big difference and I
really appreciate a
representative of ream
explaining how they do that to
me as i've actually never had to
chamber representative center
share you still have the floor
thank you mister president so
i'm trying to
make all this make sense to me
so i'm not to disconvoluted
something in there that says now
we presume that it's aggravated.
No I still got it wrong ok so
In now it sounds like we're
lowing it to point zero four
but.
information all purposes senator
brant was swissed in his head
off to
singer every sunday thank you
very much mister president thank
you for yielding to us so we
point one six or above was and
is in this bell aggravated dwi
point o eight and above was and
it is.
We've we've always maintained
mispresident and center share
we've always had a
arrange where you're where
considered to be drunk and
alcohol affects other people in
a different way and they may not
be considered to be drunk and so
there's mispresident and center
share there's so there's no
presumption of non intoxication
mister president center chair so
the presumption
that within the spell of non
also as long as your point zero
one point zero two as long as
you're not a minor your
considered and if if your minor
you're considered to be
you are legally considered not
to be intoxicated
point oh four miss president
center share if you're driving a
commercial motor vehicle you're
driving a motor vehicle and
you're not a minor your legally
considered under this bill not
to be in tax gave it.
Um.
easy button to push to say yes
or not
and so miss president center
chair when I was a DWI
prosecutor
behaviour as to whether or not
they were would be considered to
be impaired to the slightest
degree and that and we'd have to
prove that not only the impaired
by the slightest agree but that
and and and that is the state of
the law that has been the state
of the law and under this build
that continues to be stay in the
even more discombobulated why
did we even bring this up mister
president if it didn't change
anything in the law
miss president and it's because
the the other sites expert
witness and every success
thank you as president uh mister
president uh uh the citizen so
the south in this build one of
prosecuted at a point oh four
for alcohol only.
And and so and so we we we then
however if somebody is presumed
to be non intoxicated by alcohol
but their behaviour shows
tremendous impairment.
four and they're showing
tremendous impairments but they
are a legally not in tax get a
balcony.
That's the point at which then
well first of all they they can
ask somebody under the pick of
sent act
may we get a sample of your
blood and if the process has no
can inform the person I have a
warrant mister president center
share I have a warrant for your
blood
now that I have a warn for your
blood
simply aggravate them the the
charge of DWI
guess center every day center
share so so much president.
do even have to start with a
breath leiser I mean if there
cause it appears to me what
we're trying to get to is how do
Driving while stoned
is by starting with a breath of
item
enforcement as well as several
colleagues
we felt like he was essential to
eliminate alcohol as the cause
for impairment
the breathalizer we don't know
what you're
watch your alcohol impairment is
there are certain alcohols that
don't emit an older
impairment we want to eliminate
that as the cause of the
impairment
once we've eliminated that is
the cause of impairment
then we can consider whether not
would this only include
illegal drugs or could it
include also over the counter
whatever you get over the
counter today
Mister president and center
share there are over the counter
drugs that say do not operate
heavy equipment when you're
taking these drugs they are so
there are some over the counter
drugs mister president center
alcohol and that is where you
could have somebody who's on
legal drugs
who might say come in at a point
oh three a low level vacal but
effect on someone's impairment
and that would in fact then
result in them being under this
bell charged under what would be
okay missed president.
Do we have a standard for
canabas intoxication.
presumptive level on on drugs
and and so one of the things
that we've done in this bill
actually which I think is really
going to help law enforcement
and it's really going to help
the prosecutors
whatever we we haven't printed
up in a bill like this
what what what we've done is is
that we've actually separated
three driving while under the
influence of drugs and mister
president center share the the
reason for breaking it out is
precisely because with alcohol
connects our water soluble
and and the water solubility of
that of those dark products
means that the presence at the
time the test was taken
water soluble so the presidents
in your system does not
necessarily indicate impairment
and thus that is that is where
come in from the body one camera
of the officer as well and uh
miss president center share up
this is also the reason why.
in this bell we require those
cases to go to district court
precisely because we're gonna
end up with a battle of the
experts we're gonna end up with
blood mean
and what is the significance of
it we we want to make sure that
we have a record
officer in all cases we want to
make sure that there is a a an
attorney hoping to defend in all
cases
and that and that there is
missed president center share we
recognize the reality that today
when there's blood and right now
mister president center share
there's five reasons why there
gives their their blood under
the pipe of sentence if somebody
has passed out and their consent
is presumed not to be withdrawn
we simply take the blood from
them and let them know after the
wake up
and so and so those five reasons
currently exist
are under two of those five
scenarios though.
and order to the bus feel
effects requiring it to be
after after eliminating our call
is the reason
and getting the warrant what
we're doing though is in all
Mister president senator
I want safe roads I hope
nobody's misunderstanding here I
that we're combining these laws
so that there there are easy to
find it in one place I think
that's great idea too
umm
there are a couple things that
there three point three those
those are the people that are
going down the interstate the
wrong way in crash and into
buildings and things like that
um that doesn't mean that
point one two point oh eight
point zero four
that's that's not getting at the
the problem
the problem is the person it's
The.
Impairment
don't have any idea how much t h
c is in most of this anymore
because it's well now it's gmos
who were making it really really
have a field sobriety test but
if i'm wandering all over the
road
don't have all call even if I do
you smoke or or how many gummies
you eight.
It's how much the hc was in that
why do we not have a a standard
for that in this bill or
anywhere else for them.
the streets as far as one is a
teaching itself is not water
solid but so so therefore it
stays in your system longer
and and it stays in your system
long enough that that it's
and and some other drugs that
are more water soluble and whose
presence indicates
is is more directly related to
it has causing the impairment
and then it gets flushed out of
your system
we we don't we don't have that
same dynamic with t c
does secretaries because federal
government has classified
canabas as a class one narcotic
that is inhibited research from
as results of that that is
inhibited us from being able to
identify if there is a way of of
reaching a presumptive level of
from being able to to do
research on one narcotics under
federal.
Wow mister president I didn't
and it realized that we were not
So is is a listen to this why is
not the the field sobridy test
sufficient I mean if I can't
if I can't function outside the
need in there we say we don't
know what uh soul all will
really testing for his alcohol
so you can't walk in there's
little bit of alcohol in you
that not all by itself the
issue.
To as president center total so
the seven degree it is actually
we don't give someone the the
breathtest we don't seek the
warrant for
test the the fields ready tests
the standardized filter brady
taste the the three standard
rights filled spreadsheet as of
the horizon is nice tag must the
walk in turn in the one like
stand were developed by an
optimal just by the name of
all done on the labor for a
cond- uh conditions but they're
all generally accepted although
in new mexico under case by the
name state for saturdays there
were not allowed to use the
the nonclue elements of the when
you're given the acn as evidence
the you can however with regard
to what in turn there's a clues
those indicate impairment are
those are absolutely admissible
in court you could also use
other other things that you
observe in that process in
they're able to do additional.
Are testing that is that a
specifically designed to figure
Which are probably best
highlighted by the movie LA
story
we also in addition to that we
have
reached the level of theories
and so and so that is what goes
into the investigation
the problem that happens is that
if you get somebody that blows
below when they do blow if you
get somebody that blows below
Is that what you take that
person to trial you got the
officer say well I I detected
these signs of impairment.
And then and then the defense is
scientific evidence you have
observational evidence but you
have no scientific evidence as
to my clients
intoxication.
But observationally impaired we
need to have this other tool to
be able to proceed with an
investigation with other
scientific evidence.
they're rested they give blood
and it's it's pretty clear at
least observationally that they
are intoxicated with something.
sold
are they still then not
convicted because scientifically
we can't prove that the the sea
did it even though it might have
solves any any problem because
we can't measure for the hc
accurately
so we're going to presume that
they're intoxicated because they
they were driving
In all we have as observation
then what are this bill
accomplish other than putting
everything in one spot
thank you center shares center
every sort of thank you very
someone's impairment second of
all if if somebody has very
blood shop watery eyes has an
odor that is consistent with t h
c
somebody is speaking and a very
shall we say a slow careas man
as they're talking to the
officer
and it and then of course they
debunks a denial
edit and it actually creates a
consistency of of the
with not at that mumbered persa
but other of a pattern and
practice that is consistent with
with the observations at that
moment.
Thank you for the nervous other
center share
to go and where we want to go we
want people that are stoned off
the road the same way was want
people that are drunk off the
roads and
smoke in it in three weeks and
so i'm not i'm not high right
now or at least I can claim i'm
not because
while it may be in my system it
another standard in that we're
going to uh
blow into the breath leiser
while we're on the side of the
road.
but there may be something there
in so I just don't.
we're going to if we're going to
actually arrest somebody and I
don't think we have the
scientific evidence in in in the
case of canada's maybe in the
different in then alcohol in in
canabas because all calling
canada are legal
and soul I think that makes it a
different standard I can drink
the t h c level and how much I
had to drink
so.
If we're truly trying to get.
and the truly stoned the people
that are on method fenal and
can't hardly function at all as
humans think we could them off
the street I think we can get
that point that I just don't
think we're we're getting to
with this bill I am going to
vote for it but.
We have to find some better way
debate on this we have center by
the followed by senator stewart
then said this is the old office
center by the thank you very
much mister president you know
it's consent to excuse senators
hamble and do hig code him hill
Thank mr president I wonder if
sooner I was total with deal to
two questions at the deal mister
president i'll be more than
happy to center stewart mister
will the good senator just
explained briefly worries
briefly what those repeals are.
eight one o two is the current
law on DWI which is laid out in
different sections in this bill
sixty six one oh eight one o
laid out in this bill but
they're broken up in the
separate sections and then
finally sixty six thirteen dash
1 through sixty six thirteen
dash three is the current
Thank you center every so though
center stewart er mister
president senator thank you for
that so I have noticed that this
bill is ninety one pages long
center center like this other
certainly so if you
so if you look at
being conducted by the traffic
saturday actually what are them
is regarding insurance levels
for drivers subject to the
ignition interlock act right now
However this president center
short that car insurance is
reported to the state
bike by the vehicle not by the
have in there is that there is
there are there's a lot of
paperwork in for for police
officers to do dwi's and and
we're asking for a study to see
um blood draw we are we are
having a
split sample done so that the
defence can get a sample as well
That's on page.
The.
Sixty
six I think it is
the blood so those I think her
the hidden aspects of the bill.
A mispresent what thank you
we're gonna hold you to that
data I don't hear two years from
senator thank you center stewart
we have senators several offers.
Thank you mr president I raise
we got rid of all of those all
of those fees
well come to find out that
there are consequences of
getting rid of those fees and
one of them is kind of tracing
consequence of getting that fee
is almost to the mvd suspense
fund the state road fun and the
agencies be held harmless
center sale of his center every
sort of mispresident and center
city of office so
we've had conversation with
fund
from policy perspective having
people trying to reinstate their
license after all the other fees
that they have done
fund and the invite suspense
fund and I think some of that
may be double counted actually
between the suspense fund and
the road fund
but but again that is a part of
having a policy of eliminating
fees not fines mister president
center of city olives.
and and that's a that's that's a
policy that that this
legislature has engaged in and
it's one that that frank that
we're going to continue to do to
pursue I think.
been blips just this time with
trying to restore those fees and
because they worry media's
worried about what it does to a
suspense fund my understanding
whereas I win a dwi bill or or
or intoxication bill reduces the
consequences for the behaviour
behaviour and so from a policy
perspective reducing the fees in
this context will try to reduce
the consequences of the of the
and please briefly
the the taxation and revenue
talked about allowing for video
there was a change but the
question is
that the language pertaining to
judicial turn determination that
the use of videota- testimony
statement smith case in the
court of appeals
and so uhm can you briefly
address that because again I
don't want to give.
Folks away
A technicality I know I hate
that word when talk about
constitutional rates but.
You know based on something that
could be fixed in the bill.
and uh what you'll see there is
that before any tax called just
or laboratory technician can
testify via video
it is it is always done on
motion of a party
and then are the
what is considered first of all
is that the test one is provided
that paragraph is that a lot of
times when you have someone who
travels
you get someone who's a
supervisor or or or someone
tested the blood what we're
doing here is we're saying but
if you're going to have the
convenience of video taste of
money
then we're requiring it has to
heightening to do process and
then the second is what what
they're talking about the court
determines that permitting the
video testimony of the tax
colleges or laboratory
technicians does not aggregate
conflict is but that's but
that's for the languages right
there in the bill thank you
center I saw the center city all
of us thank you my concern mr
president is that.
We know.
talking about the
the actual blood testing when
you're talking about a video
performance but at least i'm i'm
aware that in the criminal
courts those are the courts that
you know after covered him kind
of continued but I know the
criminal courts have actually
because of the confrontation
class.
I do understand when you're
talking about a standard the
talks about showing this
necessity is a very different
way that's necessity aggregating
the rights is a more generalized
well you know he had the
opportunity to cross exam or you
know you have that they're
the what are the principles that
we try to observe and the
drafting process is actually not
to
take the specific language from
rights that that that attached
to a defendant those those
writes.
The
continue to be the same standard
the necessary standard might not
continue to be the same standard
going forward mister president
center several of us it is
Instead what is important is to
ensure that that the that we
that we advise that the courts
need to make sure that they
the think of this president to
to the extent that there is a
necessary standard
that is still applicable then
part of ensuring that the
if the supreme court and
basketball changes that standard
and apply something else then
then ensuring that the
defendants rights are not
aggregated would be applying
Is what would be applied thank
you thank you center every so
that's interesting mr president
wouldn't you agree that we have
the authority to set the
constitution mister president
and your center sail up a center
over and and actually miss
president and senator city of
office under the american case
broadcasting the supreme court
made very clear that court
procedure is
under separation powers is
the state extra
I remember the defense name
versus blackmar
the the supreme court in that
case specifically within a
fact mister president senator
civil uppers we do not have the
right to set the standard of of
what of what of
procedural question however it
is setting the standard which we
can set the standard for uhm
between adequate showing a
necessity
look through our criminal law
when we set a standard and give
defendants rights
and as long as they're not it
it's as long as we don't intrude
are they the court differs to us
and so my question is is do you
want is that was that your
intention to make that change
and it sounds like it was the
much mister president uh center
city office it was it was the
intention not to ensure upon the
province of the of the of the
court and not to violate
separation of uh powers in in in
that program.
of of powers only because I I do
believe that it is something
that we could do although you
know I think it is arguable has
has
a sponsor stated um.
the FIR and some they're not has
big to me but some other people
may may want to raise them I
think my biggest concern is the
fee issue and the fact that
pretty big break to people to
cut the fees by a hundred and
two dollars
so I do still have that concern
but now it's too fault it's
our are restoring those funds
and I know who we're floating in
a lot of money I know you know
every says that and we can we
can do it I I think we just need
for the time where the massive
oil and gas revenues will go
away uhm because in addition to
the history of having them go up
and down we know that the
president and I will listen to
debate thank you make your
center sale offers.
See no further debate
excuse me we do have sent their
on the first part of the debate
then I don't know if the senate
would like to comment on
comment on would I have to say
understand where three hundred
million when we talk about
sure was over two hundred dwice
the program through the year has
been maxed out are this three
have treatment we didn't have it
available one of the criteria
is that it had to be available
for miles
present an undo burden upon the
person if you're program is not
available in that area are you
gonna have to come all the way
to albert cricket are they going
children the parent does the the
classes are there do they have
to come all the way down the
cricket
are they gonna find that
so that infrastructure from the
And yet some of the programs
that I have in my area
they still are still growing
they don't get the funding
there's been mistakes of them
So understand consolidating this
but I think there's a lot of if
counseling then it should be
available to them all those
barriers should not be
there you have to be separated
then that enough to get senator
would like to comment on their
thing gets more of a question
but more of what we're
uh so the the uh
the only enhancement that is
contained in this bill is the
requirement of parenting classes
if you have a minor in the
vehicle
and and so as as a result
while I recognize that there are
some struggles in in the rural
that internet access is an issue
as well
right but it is up that is
pregnant and no value in terms
center pintel on that issue as
we move forward because I do
agree uh if we are going to
mandate that people take certain
classes and do certain things
four to forty five that's simply
the punishment for a first
offence DWI all the things
somebody has to do is par-
it's available not just in the
metro where is but throughout
the entire state thank you
center every sort of.
Center bucker.
as we can all see hahaha i'm so
if I center i've you thought
that would please yield
yes
center bucket.
let's see here page sixty nine I
believe.
Yeah miss president are the so
the sort of thinking as was
there was a what we were
informed was that
was that
there was
no one
that was being
yeah page sixty nine
and then because we were
also ensuring that the
for the non toxication from a
point of three to point oh four
that both protects people who
are on alcohol only
in terms of not having to do
an an additional tool for law
enforcement for people who are
mixing drugs with our alcohol
with other drugs
also thank you mister president
thank you senator for that
answer so.
greater protection for those
people who are on intoxicating
liquor since we're not
prosecuting at point four anyway
I guess my neck the next
question to be asked with bag
would be
Senator every sub thank you very
much but as president center are
brand win- when when somebody
shows the sufficient signs of
interest
there are prosperous that take
place to rare but there are
prosecutions that take place at
that level.
taking place essentially for
intoxicating liquor or if they
are they're rare based on
behavior executive circumstances
things like that I guess at
Mister president center back up
there are more prosecutions
do we know how many more mister
president or is this just
opposition at this point do you
have a number.
prosecutors this was seen as a
correction by by making making
that change between point or
three and point four
thank you mister president it
been happening in albuquerque as
of recent i'm so I I would say
that that that's a little bit
squishy is that the word will
from point four two point five p
five for a for intoxicating
liquor and so I guess what ties
this together with the rest of
it gives a series of requisites
to draw blood those are you have
to have a breath test it's below
the presumption which is now
point five instead of point
four.
And all that officer has to do
is right now for david and now
mr president he gets a warrant
At miss president back up no
actually it's not accurate it's
instead of put out three point
four not instead of put a four
point five so you so you're up
by one
you are there is there is no
presumation of of non
intoxication appointment that is
not the case and I want to make
that perfectly clear
impairment that the person is
exhibiting and the person then
blows a sufficient for the
person to be arrested.
Because remember the arrest
comes first and then the person
blows at a level of presumptive
by conservative blood test of
the first refuses gives them the
option then of writing
to a judge requesting a warrant
body body warn camera and based
on the the rest of the
investigation
then that warned ultimately will
be will be under and frankly
Thank you mr president thank you
senator for that very expensive
answer so to summarise
I think I was accurate the
those three things okay so i'm
gonna go on to my next question
then now that we've established
that and I think me and you
point five I refuse the blood
draw the officer filled out his
form for the effort david and
whispered away to the judge and
very much mister president so
mister president center bucket
once they get the warrant if the
person decides that they are
still don't want to get the
blood the offserve them under
the blood so so they don't have
to struck them down on a gurning
in stick a needle and then while
they're struggling in the whole
bit so the person still refuses
to give their blood they could
with an aggravated dwi mister
president and I I will ask this
mister president center i've
sort of does here implied
you're looking at on page a
sixty nine those are all part of
the implied consent act sold you
cannot you cannot get there from
here without going through the
specifically says a warrant
issued person to the terms of
the implication act senator
bucker so mister president
senator in your opinion under
This other thing mr president uh
sold under the implement consent
act if somebody is.
test then they have uh for the
first funds they they have a one
year revocation
if somebody if somebody is
convicted of a DWI the first
third offense they're looking at
a one year ravication that
license for the criminal
conviction regardless
and if they get three d after
after the thirty w I or if they
and so the so the so the so the
administrative hearings office
process is actually
happens
be yes the
mister president is revoked
mister president I have not
yielded the floor my sister you
do have the floor and so let me
paint out a scenario for you
here mister president.
Poor weather this is a real
scenario poor weather
and maybe now for david is
dropped on him and let's face it
we've seen the videos I mean
there everyone gets heated
within with a presumed less than
a presumed nondriving under the
influence so they're presumed to
be sober at that time under the
corruption now is what's been
alleged now the kirki was some
police officers and i'll tell
you where I stand up here side
by sidewood law enforcement and
that might do the wrong thing
There are some people out there
and all it takes it's not going
to be this longer written thing
of an affidavit it's going to be
a form and their skin have to
this thing because there is some
good stuff in here I like the
way it recompiles it I like the
organization I like that we're
trying to do something with the
units and and that we heard in c
c j this summer that not one
conviction has been made for
driving phone.
president i'm an have a hard
time voting against this thing
i'm not sure what i'm going to
do but I do not like that over
each I think that's an overreach
in and search around until they
find some boots something wrong
maybe they don't like the guy
they don't like the girl may be
that person's being abuse of a
sober at the time it just seems
a bit heavy handed to me and so
I have that I have that issue
we made mistakes a lot of us
when we are growing up might
have been well documented i'm
sure
broad so do we want to do that
to people do we want to suspend
drivers licenses do we wanna
do that sort of thing do we want
to switch presumptions from
have to listen more and see what
I decide they keep mister
president thank you good senator
for answering my questions to
thank you.
See no further debate.
Senator rat thank you president
I understand that you know any
time we dig into these types of
things in your recompiling
everything it can get a little
bit confusing
How many people have we last we
have some of the weakest dwi
laws in the country.
can get three d w is before it's
a felony on the fourth
every other state
here's a second or a third when
it's a felony.
fourth offence as a second third
offence
instead of actually going to the
felony.
Those are the types of things
that have got to be dealt with
A couple years ago where well
what some of us dead by
legalizing marijuana
when we were trying to deal with
the dre
certified officers and things
like that to try to keep the d u
i's
olds are getting nailed with d u
i's because of the driving under
the influence of marijuana at
huge rates.
If you're gonna be under the
influence of drugs if you're
going to be under the influence
of alcohol
please don't get behind well the
car
Allowing law enforcement to be
able to take that next step of
being able to get blood
evidence.
So I do us my colleagues to join
with us to pass this bill to
strengthen our DWI d u I laws
and I guarantee it won't be the
last time we're looking at this
issue.
recognize our house co sponsors
on this bill
of representative and chair day
hawkman vehicle
to charge the transportation
committee in the house or so
representatives are bell rame
and uh andrea rib
representative ream who of
course retired law enforcement a
and and in both of them with a
literative names
and this has been a a group
effort amongst the five of us
and with that mispresident I
further in the permit of except
for those voting in the negative
by show of house and incentive
something before I call for the
volta on yield to center the end
center rant.
For an excuse.
Earlier thank you mister
president you know it's consent
to excuse senators defanix until
she returns to the chamber
etcetera for the purposes of a
Center ceo lop is faulty now
senator pinto body now.
Send them us voting now.
The.
Senator sanchez voda now.
The.
By vote of twenty six of the
affirmative aim the negative
synergy district committee
substitute percent of bill one
to go on to I don't number five
that senate bill one forty two
to senator when us
thank you miss president has
considered the senate the record
show that all action for placing
you mister president this came
up last year passed I think you
nationally moved over the house
and time got it but this is
where we have this problem in in
new mex corn in galpa maybe even
allow him to call talk to
anybody and then once you get
them used in the medicaid they
thrown back out on the streets
and and they got to call the
phoenix please sir wherever it's
more of a border issue for us
tim johnson is a state please
should volunteer out and got
their license plane really
didn't know what was happening
but then the community around
the start of seeing this little
day and a hotel a remodel hotel
in premature and locked in
hostages considered kidnapping
and so all this does is require
our wishes and the facilities
required to make immediate and
continued efforts to contact a
family member.
And that's all does mister
president thank you send her
president uh senator I know that
the issue was folks will be
transported to arizona this is a
state law mister president how
mister president if they pick
those people up when they're
highly intoxicated on drugs in
say the boundaries and new
mexico they must do this by new
they got a notify someone then
it will start to set up the
process of okay we didn't notify
now we can con we can charge him
with kidnapping and so it just
but we have no enforcement
mechanism.
The.
As a stay law if it's an arizona
health facility mister president
mister president center so if
facility was located in
the mexico this law was
certainly apply but if the
facility is located arizona my
question mister president is.
new mexico I believe so because
if you're on a medicaid program
in new mexico that medicaid
program follows you to other
states and so once they apply
center schedule thank you mister
president uh uh if if that's the
case then there will be great
because I think you know a lot
where this is a huge issue
center senders we do have
further debate
center pinto do you wish to
debate.
Center pinto.
Thank mister president members
of the body and again another
situation.
If the
person the case we talk about
statute so they take a person
out of new mexico by there with
out there will and consent
that's kidnapping
educating thank you said anyone
reservation starter entailed
with in the state of new mexico
of that jurisdiction.
Sending us.
if that
being taken occurs on the
reservation
how would that play out of
department then the f b I has
jurisdiction over that they
bring the charges and they can
bring complaints but this is a
medicaid situation.
the incidents that happened
happened in gallop.
But what if it happens right
outside of their
single some of the centers might
I or something of the sort of
that the tribes nations of
published can opt into to
address
some of this.
in certain places there already
has some with state police the
tribe can call the state police
and there's agreements there
they can also call in the feds
say air window rock and you're
one side of the line and you go
to cac
over there and come back in
somebody grabs you there's a
jurisdicional issue with between
is anyone else senator pinto and
mister president in members of
the body what if it's the better
broad health facility the
you know and their taken that
somebody needs to notify the
family where they're at if
they're taken to jail and you
know this sometimes people call
notify a family member so if the
if they're not in the hospital
facility
that they're incorherent to do
notify her tell him with their
much taken and locked up in a
room to give us all your
information when apply for
medicaid and we're going to use
your medicaid dollars to make
money.
is located on the reservation
how will re enforce that can
going back to work senator
schender was leaning towards
center in us
your need of the cid card rain
and it'll that identify them we
know that they'll do their best
to try to have notified the
family to tell where they're at
cause they're all part of family
have to notify but if they don't
if they just use them for
treatment they won't have to
notify them.
Senator printer and mr president
members of the body and reason
especially when we talk about
someone missing or someone
that's better or some you know
really trying to find a trail of
where they're at because.
state in the mexico if they were
taken from here but what if they
were in arizona citizen and then
their tape they were in new
mexico and got taken
we get pushed back when they're
instances when we try to resolve
some of these issues but I think
the good senator for bringing
this fort to really raise an
elevate dale some of the things
that were attract to tackle in
that single one forty two do now
pass in man's consider the
senate the record show the roles
being called in all present
voting affirmative except for
those voting in the negative by
show hands thank you all
synamous you know mister
president I appreciate the body
for doing this because you don't
know what it's like when someone
disappears
problem with this even in this
last week in so I I just
appreciate the body carrying for
people and that's what this is
about thank you they guess
and I yield to center servant
thank you mister president I
asking and was considered the
senate that the rules be
suspended and the record show
that all actions in this serve
thank you mister president
mister president at this house
version of the bill is now
identical with amendments to the
bill which passed the senate
previously on a vote of thirty
four to five this relates to
and from the hearings the
committee I would want members
to know that recently and lost
cruises we had a federal
magistrate position opening
that's the lowest level of the
were four applicants as opposed
to forty and two of those had
been previously deemed not
qualified by the review process
we need to make state salaries
comport with federal salaries
without mispresidential stand
Mister president I will notice
the good sponsored a year he
knows what i'm gonna say i've
Is that we're gonna raise
salaries here with no
expectation of more work closer
the the the same man a work
globe with the no expection of
Criminals being arrested three
or four times
being rested released rested
really interested then released
but.
and get 'em off the street
permanently or at least for a
for a while when it is
continually or
they seem to be falling further
back if I hard someone I would
expect and give them a raise I
present thank you for the
sponsor yield for just a couple
of questions.
Miss president sponsorer and I
guess I do have problem with
politicized as president center
gaga centers around us miss
president center universal
unique and something we can be
proud of where we've taken a lot
out of the politics for our
judiciary so for example we do
originally selected by a
governor so they don't have to
run against opponents in a party
process but but it's not
entirely nonpartisan in the
initial proceeding the judges
election against all takers that
is open times involving some
political process and then
ultimately the retention is on a
ballot and they're identified
have you looked at emergency
mexico by chance their website
here in the mixer
center gave a similar
surrounders and mispresent are
you asked me if i've looked at
the emerge website.
has present center I guess i'll
one let you know that I think
we're more politicising you
would intend or believe in their
merchants or website for new
graduates but seven of ten
of the pellet court judges are
also on emerge and just um
and i'm just panting mispresent
very politically left and also
an opposition to this because I
don't think i've got like quite
a few bills before the courts
and have never been heard I just
don't understand how we continue
Thank you mister president will
the senator yield to a question.
Oh you want us this resident
center are we doing this
because
so mr president etcetera so
we're saying that people need to
make a good living in order to
do public service people have to
pay their bills and that's an
important component in public
service sometimes.
judiciary on the bench could
make far more in private
practice and
then in comparison to what
they're making as public
servants mister president
that would be an initial
question
yes sometimes I I would imagine
yes
what without a humorous item
sure all of us could spend this
time earning something I is a
lawyer could certainly be
spending my time practing law
this thicard I mean when we hear
bills where we're asked to raise
a public official salary to two
hundred plus thousand dollars
and ask to feel sorry for either
dollars budget solved some of
the most vaxing problems in
society.
And not pay anything and how
just kind of add that is and I
hope we recognize that we need
marginalize the legislator
branch
what are we doing.
Other than keeping a very weak
legislator branch and being
exclusionary per the last
question could some people
Hey a living wage to people more
legislated branch so that we can
Ah thank you very much mister
president if the sponsor would
deal for just a question or two
center but the center
thank you mister president just
just you know the sponsor you've
know under water and figuring
how do we resolve this I know
that your initial attempts on
this was to tie this to a
federal salary what well what
was that and that what was that
strategy but then also why did
you make the decision not to do
that i've put on the governor's
desk last couple years would tie
the state of highest salaries
and there was the supreme court
our highest court
unfortunately that this bill has
these efforts have been
repeatedly be towed by the
governor and the only reason
that i've eliminated that tie
between state and federal
salaries is hopefully the third
in the federal system that's the
that's the market place you're a
businessman sender you
understand how this works if you
have forty applicants in los
cruises for a federal matters of
vacancy the lowest level of the
positions in los cruises in the
same place for the federal
judiciary that you do the state
it's sour and so it would make
sense for us to tire state
salaries to federal salaries so
we're competitive in the
a resaleries if we tied
ourselves to the feds we
wouldn't be doing that and we'd
eliminate this disparity between
state and federal salaries for
the same job.
Thank you center survived the
legislation and the strategy you
know as he mentioned mister
president here are both
businessmen in when we finish up
something I like to get it off
my desk and not have to deal
with it again and if we have a
efficient and a smart way of
Thank you mister president
members of the body
couple of questions that the
coming in our below proficiency.
Mister president and center no I
wouldn't accept that and I don't
certainly mean to imply that we
screening process and we put
together a commission that has
lay individuals and over its non
lawyers as well as a members of
the bar and appointees from the
legislature so that there once
again is some political process
pinto and mr president members
of the body in senator so is
dairy shortage of judges are in
vacancies in that case.
Senator servant mrperiod
have enough applicants the the
explanation is either understand
we have thirteen judicial
districts in the state when we
have a vacancy and say santa fe
or albuquerque we have a number
hard to find attorneys in those
communities anyway much less
those who are prepared to
abandon a private practice in
what the earning and private
practice to take the branch so
in rural new mexico there is a
this is what happens on the
federal bench and the federal
bench lawyers will move are all
around the state to take a
federal vacancy in federal
position principle because the
pay is so much higher than
state.
for teachers it wasn't just
about the salary it was about
having housing it was about
having access you know to social
events there's something or
of albert cricket into the rule
area to fill this public servant
position that.
because you know you are not
going to get paid you know
you're not going to do these
things and now it sounds like
this particular
something that would
help her people and now you can
come in down that or
leave it as is but thank you
senator monus until the returns
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call hearing no
objection seen no more debate.
Mister rosen senator mister
president as a point of order I
she should be sensitive as thank
you mister president and I asked
unanimous consent to be excused
from this vote.
Thank you see no objection thank
you senator sino further debate
about politics and let me just
remind members that are in our
own experience this chamber
represented by certain senators
who I think need to be
the role of the executive and
and the courts
in justices who are appointed by
this governor ruled for the
constitutional process and
post truth world where true
doesn't seem to matter we have
alternate facts or we cannot
accept things that are right in
front of us I got to tell you as
arguments and have the courage
to decide things on truth and so
mister president i'd re
emphasize the importance of our
judiciary by moving that house
bill one forty one as a men to
you center survived as all
senators to your seats please we
are voting
if you wished about no please
raise your hand where sender
pinto body now
Senator greegs volley now.
The.
yield to san majority of
learning your peter where to
take a set next order of
business thank you mister
president unamazing saying we go
that are business announcements
mislanes see no objection where
I visited with the committee
chairs and there's no
desire to do a committee meeting
in between here today so we're
going to visit with senator
barca we're going to go right
we will have a dinner tonight at
five thirty from picalinos which
is of terrific can italian food
with center backer for members
when the food comes will just
kind of step off the floor to
get food and uh will i'll be
mislenious senator tissue thank
you mister president and mister
president as unanimous consent
to be able to to introduce some
guests today
a peter who is a south more
sandia high school and margaret
who's in the fifth grade it
command she elementary with the
members help me welcome my my
Thank you mister president here
with me on the floor today is my
name sake my son roman backer
please help me welcome me my son
to the chamber floor.
wish one of our own a happy
birthday happy birthday videos
if you don't mind just signing
hold you are today I would
appreciate that.
i'll tell you we appreciate you
venture you do in our office and
and help in helping me all
things together sometimes we
you.
The anz.
Thank you senator backer
further announcement senators
then a stewart then sent her my
assess center story mister
worst chief of staff there in
montoya and nine senders more
than three of them have worked
very regularly on the committees
committee work and they
so happy birthday and thank you
for such being such a great
chairman.
Thank you center center my
assist
thank you very much mister
they've been inducting members
of into the new mexico sports
halloween the brian are lackers
bobby unsers your johnny topics
you name it
sports any highlighted many many
high school players throughout
the year's coaches communities
are so i'm gonna have yield to
and my dad was from biggest went
to west and went to highlands on
Mr president I do yield.
Send out a campus
ladies and gentlemen mccourse to
you mister president members of
he went on and he continued as a
sports writer always gathering
information this individual went
throughout the state to ensure
that that information was not
this individual what we talk
about is a man who has heart a
man who continued to go ahead
and work and represent his
community the las vegas west
last vegas
ensure that sports was always
there and he was always at the
top of his game this man.
It's going to be inducted.
whole bunch of people around a
table that have a cup of coffee
they might assured a few stories
but this man continued to ensure
our senator sent around tony of
my s that's continues with his
legacy you see
here in new mexico from one
a sports writer
a person who insured that each
and every one of us would be
able to read about those rising
sports stars here in new mexico.
this yes mister president the
ladies and gentlemen
the person who is going to be
inducted into the new mexico
sports holifare.
The.
All right hey thank you for that
mister president members it's a
great day for my family folks
from bagest writers all over the
journal one of the first letting
no sport traders in the country
had a fame career and a such a
fame career belongs in the hall
of fame so we're we're just
happy thank you mister president
about frank mysters when I was
at the university of new mexico
I was for one year I was a
sports senator at the daily
lowball and frank masterson is
by coverage of low votes for
that that year in the new mexico
daily lowball was really
influenced so much by frank and
thank you thank you for bringing
the opportunity to us thank you
center of disappearance center
period
and thank you mister president I
just wanted it to announce the
body as well as it being vincent
him in the game as president I
think maybe next year the
strategy should should have sued
up and I get that clip board and
lead the senate to victory as
any further announcement
senators.
Senator repeater words take a
set next order business thank
you mister president unamazed
consent we go that our business
messages from the house no
objection where in that order
business message on the house
the reader will read.
committee substitute for house
bill two eleven as amended by
the house house bill two oh
seven as amended by the house
from the house has been
received.
Send a majority florida to peter
worth six at next order business
thank you mister president you
mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill thirty three as amended has
thank you mister president
asking animals considered the
senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
two has been referred at senate
bill at two thirty do pass as
amended.
Senate bill at three oh seven do
Senate memorial five do paths.
Senate memorial twelve due pass
committee report senders we have
a motion to do the community
report all those in favor
significantly saying I will
suppose the eyes have at the
current report has been adopted
five has it has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Just go with the others I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the june a
reflect that they were acted
Senate bill to at seventeen do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator george monos
chair senator thank you and move
journal to show they were acted
upon individually
said a major deferred interpeter
worth will take a set next order
business and I think you must
present in amazon that we go
House bill two oh seven
introduced by
school capital outlay fund for
release assistance making an
appropriation house bill two oh
seven house bill two seven
haven't been read twice by title
is.
by senator herrera and act
relating to finance prioritizing
the water project fund projects
that are urgent to address
public health and safety
capabilities of qualifying
entities and determined costs of
originating at grants and loans
removing their requirements that
eligible entities conduct an
from items that are eligible for
grants and loans reducing the
amount of water project funds
distributed by the state to the
straight state engineer allowing
the water project fund may be
used to a higher contractors to
provide technical assistance
changing the date that the water
trust board is is required to
committee that's house bill to
eleven.
businesses are thank you mister
president you know ms we go that
are business announcements and
misleading.
See no objection senator worth I
thank you mister president now
being eleven fifty nine am I
morning session are present in
this afternoon session here in
no objection it is so ordered mr
president I ask you to consent
that the rules be suspended that
the record show that the
we're going to go are back to
third reading singing and is
concerned we go that our
business third reading of
legislation I yield to senator
servantes for item number nine
president mister president I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
that the rules be suspended the
wrecker show that all actions
for placing house judiciary
committee substance for a house
for mister reserve members of
the senate this is a piece of
legislation that I know we've
all heard radio about seeing
much in committees and in the
press this bill were joined
those states in the country
that waiting period to seven
days and mister president
without all stanford questions.
Thank you so mister president
there should be a floor
amendment come around that's
correct center so I just thank
bill one twenty nine as amended.
Amendment sponsored by senator
sarvantes in his advantage to
nine for a floor amendment and
will explain the amendment to
send it to go ahead
thank you mister president
mister president there is a
complication when we talk about
waiting periods in the entire
background check process at the
federal level so when an
individual applies for a
background check there are
various scenarios one scenario
as they clear the background
check immediately in the gun
fire for three days and then if
they don't hear anything back
from the feds after three days
the sale is effectively complete
of the gun is released but the
background check process
continues and then after thirty
potential for a sale never been
released never been completed in
the senate judiciary can be we
felt that that would likely lead
to a strike of the law as i'm
firearm the difficulty this
created is that you would have
had the thirty days being a
released after the thirtieth aid
but the federal background check
would be abandoned at the
and there was the firearm would
be released on the twenty days
of post of thirtieth day.
That avoids the the conflict in
in the counting of days between
the federal background check and
makes a workable purchase for
firms assuming the bill passes
and becomes law it makes a
workable transaction possible
especially nor sample questions
thank you mister president
mister president I move that we
adopt senate floor moment number
one to house judiciary committee
substitute for house bell one
twenty nine as a minute and ask
for this is always what senders
The senate for amendment number
one has been adopted
where back on the bill.
Send it as we are back on the
bill.
mister president will the
sponsor please yield survive is
dealt almost president up for a
minute a had you guys
think it's a historical senator
slide by quite so quickly I do
have a question this bill
originally started at a a
fortnight
mister president and then and
then it went to seven days I
believe on the house floor
center survivors were
mispresident you asked with
anyone can explain its let me be
the one to do so I think you're
you have to meet a year so
senator I first introduced a
the issue of gun long in the
second amendment is a moving
target for us as I think we're
all aware of the united states
supreme court has recently come
so or even in recent decisions
the district will be the sort of
the circuit courts the courts
right below the supreme court
begin to try and interpret that
as it applies to various laws
that are adopted in the several
not been deemed unconstitutional
by any supreme court prior
decision so that would suggest
to me that wait periods would be
constitutional with the court so
I began there
constitutional that seemed like
a good place to begin an effort
of dialogue and discussion
recognizing that there might be
compromise from fourteen days
colleagues here with us I think
she had a wait period that was I
think seven days in that last
session and so I recognize all
long center there would be
constitutional.
And mister president senator I
appreciate that because what
what i've been looking for
have found some some information
for for
firearms at work traceable had
some type of traceability were
purchased through a legitimate
seven day waiting period i'm
actually doing any good but I do
find it interesting that we
bring up hawaii not not saying
you know anything bad about
it's unique for them it works
for them because it's hard for
them to to go to a neighboring
state within the united states
it's it's quite the plane ride
they can send a personal center
servant is senator someone who
is present miss president center
when you say me
the distance from my residence
my personal residence to the
types of policies there's going
to be unintended consequences
because anybody that lives in
los crucials or or in that area
And so when we look at that
issue the unintended consequence
being neighbors two texas in
arizona who still believe in
freedom and and love to
that live in raw carls bad jal
clayton all the way down the
west side of the state
that's what's going to happen.
your words mister president
senator and both both committee
hearings that they don't hit on
on hollow wood
I want to be a part of the
but there's many of us here and
I I consider myself one of
those.
ill doing of of others
I don't think if we are having
the dwi bill argument earlier
and there was a section
within that bill that said if
got a DWI because they're not
responsible
and I think essentially that's
what this does is it it says
well there's there's some
individuals in the state of new
mexico
who are irresponsible.
from legitimate sources like you
and I do.
The.
Majority of these would probably
not pass of an instant
background check if if they
tried to they have a felony or
some other issue that will pop
up.
that gets most of of my
constituents and I I do
appreciate mister president
senator putting in the consiler
carry language
i've never had the desire to
for fort with
but
there's many people in my area
that don't understand why this
rifle to take their kid or
hunting are they not going to be
able to buy a weapon when
they've been good citizens
strong citizens of the state of
new mexico their entire life.
that we don't want people to do
they've followed the rules.
And hunting
shooting sports is something
rural central new mexico that
because of just a few areas
where we're crime is out of
control because of of bad policy
that they're going to be
In a way that I i'm necessarily
proud of but I do believe that
it got me too a point of of
emotion that I don't regret
seeing what I said
This is the fuel that will
continue
to fuel the flame of the divide
within this state.
makes people not want to look at
each other when they're stopped
at a stop light
these are the issues that keep
being brought forward and
basically thrown in the citizens
of this state's face.
This is a straight attack on
culture if you look in the
constitution it's it's very
clear it's actually quite strong
about the outdoor lifestyle
I know it's something that that
my family believes in
it's something that I enjoy
doing with my three kids.
Because I take them out I show
them responsibility I show them
how to handle the firearm I show
them how to respect the firearm
and we go harvest the deer and
then they love nothing more than
And I just feel mister president
that when we bring bills like
this
we essentially send a message to
state is essentially going to
dictate two the more rural areas
how they will live their lives
and I think that's a part that
just continues to to make me
most concern is
they get the proceed.
Message back like ninety percent
of the people that go through
this process.
And I can purchase a virun
another one maybe a smaller
caliber because my my kiddoes
are coming up in in age or a
different caliber to go home a
different animal or maybe I just
want one because it's the new
Singled out.
These are the people that are
being punished and yet
whenever they show up mad and
They're mining their own
business that's the thing about
the more conservative people is
they like to sit back in mind
their own business just leave us
and so I I know there's not much
of a question there
but again this this is what
gives me the most part is that
we are going to punish.
because all it's going to do is
shut down our local businesses
in the state and people were
gonna drive the texas drive to
arizona and continue to purchase
their far arms there and just
another.
Thank you mister president will
the sponsor yield.
Yes how you.
court decisions to uh kind of
guy I guess the words that we
now see on this paper
mcdonald of decision in the brew
and decision
the
decision that we see uh
few years ago and district of
right to carry a firearm for
their
own protection or or self
firearms myself my own hand guns
myself I am a consilicary permit
holder i've done the training
and so yes I do believe in that
constitutional right love
defense.
that right in article two and
our bill of rights
we have a couple provisions
one is article two section four
bear arms then it goes into a
let me of of things and purposes
but i'd like to draw the
attention of this body to
rights of enjoying and defending
life and liberty of acquiring
and possessing and protecting
property end of seeking and i'll
aren't rights that the
government grants to the people
there and alienable.
that we obtained from our
creator
so
the rights that were talking
about
the people but it's really right
that we receive
well before even government was
created by virtue of the
constitution
respect of these types of bills
this type of legislation when
we're dealing with rights in the
courts have gone on uh
to the united states can't or to
the people uhm limited the
ability of the united states
congress to deal with it but
also recognize that it applied
Alright miss president yes that
the sponsor will address whether
our red mcdonald correctly
that's chris that's a great
reading.
second amendment is one that is
a subject matter of these
decisions not the new mexico
state car institution which I
would submit to this body is
constitution
and then finally we have new
york state rival and pistol
association versus bruin
does a does several things that
were pointed out maybe earlier
today
in committee
firearms within the united
states with respect to the
second amendment
and I believe that that
when government.
and specifically people's rights
guaranteed under the second
amendment
government has to do so in a
very narrow way.
extremely important it asked me
well articulated
the
articulated purpose it has to be
narrow as I believe it possibly
can be and so when we look at
these
column gun bills are or anti
trying to achieve and we have to
narrowly tailor the language to
make sure that it is as narrow
as possible
the other thing that I believe
ruined as is it it basically
says that with respect to the
limitations of constitutional
state to prove that it's a law
is consistent where the
wider than necessary.
So looking at the legislation
before us
states that have seven day
waiting periods and I might ask
uh the spanish or if
it is aware of which states have
Center servant is no yes mister
president I do and I have
answers i'll just start with
these in alphabetic order
because that's the list I have
california and acted it's
waiting period back in nineteen
ninety six
colorado and acted it's waiting
period in last year and twenty
twenty three and it's a little
more complicated says the lesser
of three days are until the
background check is completed
to do map but that's what about
six years or so ago doing that
on the fly florida has a three
day waiting period hawaii as
we've discussed and acted it's
waiting period in nineteen
ninety four that's a forty
to save that's before some of
the members of this chamber were
born
maryland and acted is waiting
period in twenty thirteen that's
purchases they enacted that back
in nineteen seventy seven
you do the math there said her
electric quickly but we're
talking about decades of laws in
well before some of the members
in this chamber were born
we're talking about
but the johnson error in the
nixon era nineteen sixty six
Waiting period three days back
in twenty eighteen and the state
of washington inacted attendee
waiting period in twenty
nineteen I believe that
and mr president and
senator sarvante is
with respect to those waiting
you would acknowledge that most
states do not have a waiting
period.
I'm as present and sooner than
it's great.
In mr president
federal laws if a person is not.
Immediately approved the the fbi
has to
us having to start going through
the failings of our congress but
the federal law does not require
that three days what happens is
that three days the the
fulfilled or whoever the dealers
have a default and the default
is we didn't get the background
check done so we're going to
give you the gun anyway
it's an absurd process in
procedure but but that's the
the gun is delivered and then
the person receiving delivery of
again does not clear the
background check that's
ultimately done there's a
procedure to retrieve that gun
is or not.
background check process is
abandoned after the thirtieth
day so again the scenario is you
go in you buy a gun you're
flagged for some reason
complete and still in process
and then you're right if the
identify an issue that
disqualifies a purchase there is
a procedure by which the gun can
check and the gun is in the hand
of the person and the background
check is really never completed
it's a it's an absurd process.
Thank you center servant as
I believe it's important for us
as a body to identify
exactly what um
purpose we're trying to
it was at least argued with
respect to another bill that was
similar and nature that the
purpose of this legislation is
to.
gan to then do harm to another
and to provide what I recall is
a quote cooling off period
vvmarkquote
Thank you center night center
mister president center those
are among the
objectives of this legislation
and there is again per review
data and studies to support the
i'm i'm certainly I i've done
some research and and I think
there's research across the
board as to whether or not this
type of legislation actually
the crimes because most guns are
sold to gun owners who already
own guns and so if they were
intending to
commit to the side
goal if it is to reduce
likewise these
regevants are
the person is in that fit of
raging and looks like they are
going to use utilise out weapon
expectation you have somebody
who's interested in trying to
sell something it's not going to
go back to our drive through
windows debate of a couple of
days ago but you have you are
Center niver and mister
president
suggested but i'm also concerned
at the other end of the spectrum
with the person who has received
threats
rights to protect themselves
and go to a local gun store
pass the background check and
seven days of lapses that person
is not able to protect
themselves and something
horrific happens
revantages if my hypothetical
were to occur and that person is
killed as a result of uh the
of the persons silver rights
under legislation we passed
several years ago against the
state of new mexico.
Senator servantes and miss
survive a motion to dismiss
right away probably not you'd
have to show causation which you
are well understand the standon
so you'd have to show that the
services center nine mister
president and center survived is
I do agree that there are number
of hurdles there
but I also
may may have resulted and it may
have been foreseeable for that
person to
be subject to such a crime and
their inability to protect
with respect to
this sir waiting period it looks
to me like we have to do some
And one would argue and I think
the senator would would argue
that no it's not a prohibition
because
they're going to get the gun in
seven days.
mechanism by which they can
defend themselves for a period
of time
and i'm not sure that that
I need my bar arm sooner than
that because of an existing
threat.
I see some other exceptions but
I don't see an exception where
mediate access to that to that
weapon
I think we all recognize that
there may be other means legal
and illegal to
bad they can maybe borrow one
from someone but they certainly
couldn't buy one at a at a
retail store from the f f l
whether or not the waiting
period.
Or what does the the
legislation do to.
A person that is need
I thank you mini instances it's
not going to accomplish the
result because
we have
majority of gun purchases are
purchases of people who have
already have those uh firearms
so I think we really need to
prohibition albeit for a
one week period and I hope we
never see the
right that's afforded in two
provisions of our constitution
not just one.
maybe cars too shown and you
have noted that a number of
these waiting periods have been
on the books in certain states
for substantial links of time
they ever
uh pinned an opinion dealing
with waiting periods.
Misresident center now they have
not.
the next number of years as as
maybe our state now their states
are in ad this type of
legislation along with the the
that may make their way up to
the supreme court.
The.
statement was made today in
committee that
kind of struck instruct me as
i'd
and that was that
Moving the way that the majority
of people would want them to
move and and and wes virginia
versus
barnetta
controversy and a place in
beyond the reach of the
majorities and officials and to
establish sim as legal
principles to be applied by the
courts.
have to recognize that the
rights guaranteed and to the
people
are in violent
but
even the majority.
and that the right to the
minority have to be defended in
our form of government and I
think that's a beauty of our
In government is basically the
people that government cannot
take these things from the
individual those things were
government and tell us how we
are to
act as a public body and and the
united states constitution but
in our new mexico constitution
and for that reason mister
president and senator I
worthy cause and and you know I
think everyone in this body
recognizes that new mexico
firearm yet they seem to have on
hand unfortunately they're using
them at the
employees and and doing things
that so with their mister
president uh
senator savantes I appreciate
the discussion thank you center
nightmare we do
we do have a floor amendment.
The.
perl thank you senator purdle to
move an explain the amendment.
Move senate four minute number
two to house judicial judiciary
committee substitute for house
the sponsors of this legislation
want to be
it goes ahead and allows for the
individuals such as myself and
other responsible gun owners to
this amendment
mister president is that
compromise that we're always
looking for it insurers that the
law bining citizen will continue
do and be responsible and then
it takes all that whenever they
go through the background check
and and the f f l gets that
message delay
there seven days
regardless of if they get a
which is less than ten percent
so this is going to insure and
protect those individuals such
as myself that go in
single shot twenty two and you
should have seen her face mister
president whenever whenever I
took her out shooting for the
first time.
And I think that's what we're
talking about here having that
moment with our children.
The same moments that we had
with our parents or or our uncle
And so there's a minimum gets us
to that point it gets us to the
place that I think we all want
to be
that ensures that the
responsible gun owner is not
punished and those that have
proceed after a short period of
time then the f l can go ahead
and transfer the fire on.
Thank you center partial
senators where debate incentive
floor member number two and I
yield to the sponsors in the
but this would effectively avoid
a seven day waiting period in
certain circumstances and the
issues are distinct the reasons
for this bill and a seven day
waiting period or distinct from
the ability to pass a background
check there
Oh thank you mister president if
the sponsor of the amendment
would yield a minute senator
perel dealed a mister president
are you center woods and I have
talking about now say that i'm
someone there don't particularly
care for guards back dears i'm
scared to death.
And I inherit one his fires a
pistol.
And.
I want to get rid of that thing
How would this how would this
acception help me to do that or
without this exception.
How would I get that done.
you found somebody and you went
to or through someone with an
ffl and they ran a background
check in the individual that you
wanted to to sell this
they would be able to take
possession immediately otherwise
if if the f f l is not willing
to take possession for you hold
it for you then you wouldn't
was wondering I mean if some
people you know our I understand
here constantly they're scared
to death guns.
quick as they can so I can see
how your amendment would be
an acception to get that done so
I think i'm in favor of your
Thank you mister president so
just to clarify if the sponsor
the amendment we yield.
Senator pertal dealed.
They're allowed to move forward
with their life is it that at
least purchasing a firearm
interpretal and think him as
president and think you senator
for that question correct so
everything and you get a proceed
message.
And so these are individuals
that that have proven throughout
their life to be responsible
a message that says delay it
doesn't mean the person is about
individual or that they've done
anything wrong it just says need
a little more time.
that person had gone through if
they have a similar name to
somebody who has a worn out for
their arrest or something along
those lines then then those very
rare instances would there would
individuals who instantly pass
there's absolutely not a blimish
on their record they're not a
threat to society they shouldn't
have to wait seven days and this
somewhere about instant vetting
for certain people
and then they were allowed to to
move on into this country
veteran instantly so is it
technological world
you know it's it's quite scary
what they can do instantly now
we all receive those those
marketing
things on our our apps they know
course senators meetings wasn't
but some of forty one of us do
from time to time
but yes it's it's it's possible
it's twenty twenty four
many president in
I just find it interesting that
we have this big push in in the
in the same session.
The very same session to say.
we can't check ourselves the the
f b I can't check on us in less
than seven days to see if we're
potential criminals
but at the same time earlier in
had a legitimate identification.
So it is it seems like this is a
perfectly fine amendment here
sounds like
for whatever reason fine so be
it so I think this is a
perfectly sound amendment if if
you we can look at your
background and say no you don't
but he certainly opened it up to
allow the vetting of of
americans to be quick thank you
then you send a share we do have
further debate we're still in
center floor amendment number
were you aware that I used to uh
frequent
your local mcdonalds in roswell
and a regular basis.
Signal
thank you mister president not
in and we thank you to the tune
That's right you heard that
doctor moving out of stay and so
I that left a gap in our are
and I would often stop out the
mcdonalds in your district and
do you know what I would would
order at the mcdonald's.
I really like me done its car
mister president
but did you know senator
that highly processed foods or
III have a a better knowledge of
of this
and and I do understand what we
eat matters but I want to I want
to hear more mister president
brought it up if I didn't think
is relevant
you know this this bill that
i've been told by the sponsor
one of the objectives is to
and so you know me donalds came
up I just thought I would just
say that that we have high
quality evidence that highly
processed food intake is
associated with worse than
suicide i've really enjoyed this
body's discussion on behavioral
health and suicide
you know I I really enjoyed
the uh the majority
and so i'm gonna offer some
things later but um on the on
the topic of mental health
mister president and i'd like to
if they go ahead and let's say
that they pass the background
check right away but i'd like to
ask what what if that person is
is suicidal if they they they
pass the background check but
what are they within their
rights to do or
the individual themselves.
Mister president center I I
think the individual themselves
outward signs of of
any many problems
there's no outward signs of
suicidal audition but but in
fact they are considering
and thank you mister president
center I I guess I don't really
understand that the question but
you know as as individuals we
all have the the responsibility
to
And in as individuals
you know it's it's in coming on
us to do so and so
if if there's a little more
Sinners rather now you
fagumers present center is is is
that one of your concern I i'm
i'm assuming I just want to I
this amendment that that they
pass the background check but
then they
because they don't have a
criminal record but they go
ahead and take the firearm and
harm that harm themselves is
Miss president center yes that's
that's one of the concerns
although let's be clear because
I could keep hearing what I
think is inaccurate information
which is a background check is
just not for a criminal record
issues are completely distinct
in other words of a person's
ability to pass that background
check and not have any
They miss president and so
that's that's really
one of one of my cause I i'm
supportive of this amendment but
i'm i'm concerned with that with
process
you know often people will go in
and out of suicide audiation I
think the sponsors point that
I I have what i'm hearing is
that people seem to think that
this in and they talk about the
cooling off period
for suicide but it it you know
risk of suicide for for years
and so that's why I just don't
see a a seven day waiting period
having a
this amendment because I I don't
I don't see a concern in in in
the in this you know when when
the buyers is is actively
success because I don't see the
policy actually preventing
amendment and I look forward to
you know listening to more than
debate thank you center smith.
Senators were still on center
for amendment number two.
amendment center provider close
any amount.
out of them by a spouse or
partner.
And becomes a strange.
They have the ability to to go
and do what they deem necessary
just
Are able to exercise a right
that they've gone overseas and
and being shot out and risk
their lives for
Bonding doing the thing said
that rural people like to do
other.
This amendment insurers that
we don't step or interfere with
with the rights of those
Currently whenever someone goes
through a background check if if
there is a flag of
mental health issues it comes up
and there's a delay
so these individuals are
captured.
weight seven days which is what
the desire is of this body
so this amendment actually does
what the intent of the
not in fringing on the rights of
responsible people within the
state of new mexico
in fact yesterday the hallway
was quite fine I didn't expect
and we couldn't be on more polar
opposite sides of this subject I
guarantee you if there was a
room i'd be against one while
she would be on the other wall
just laid it all out there put
my put my heart out there
and she came to me and she said
you know because of your debate
Or are fearful when they don't
have a weapon to protect
themselves just as I am fearful
I understand your side I
understand why you stand up I
understand why you say the
things that you were saying we
have to work to protect both.
This one person
so whether or not whatever
happens with this amendment you
know what i've convinced one
person so I feel like the last
thirty days or that whenever
mexico rural america.
And so i'm i'm gonna consider
that a victory
whether this amendment goes on
move senate floor amendment
number two to house judiciary
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty nine as thris
amended roll call thank you say
Senator barca send your barcode
votes yes senator branch
center brand boats yes center
is centered servant is vote snow
senator do hick.
Centre do hick.
Center greg's votes yes center
hamlin center handling boat snow
center handpile.
Center in hampel votes now
Central low best votes now
signature my estimate centre my
estimate spots now sent her
micro
Sentiments sender minors votes
yes centre never.
Sention over boats yes
centrality the peanut votes now
centre bad dear centre video
votes now center pinto.
Center pinto votes now center
perton.
Center per vote cs center poet.
Senator sanchez votes yes center
meetings.
Center sminnies votes yes
interest the dlops no center
Center sauce votes now center
stephanics interested banks
votes now center steinborn
senator steinbern votes no
sinter stewart.
worth center worth votes no
senator woods center wood both
cs.
negative center floor amendment
number two has failed to pass
the senate senator period
thank you mister president thank
you members of the body we do
have another floor amendment.
We do have another floor
amendment.
I'll wait for the.
Attendees to hand that out.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
three to house judiciary
Thank you send your back to move
and explain the amendment
I move center floor amendment
number three to house judiciary
committee substitute for house
bill one two nine as amended
those who have sacrificed an are
currently sacrificing the most
in our good country all it would
do would add an exemption in to
of new mexico these are the
people that are currently
protecting us arm in hand
overseas from all threats
certainly we can trust them to
Bucker we are debated center for
my number three and i'll yell to
center sir wanters.
The mispresent this is an
unfriendly amendment I would
urge members to reject it the
in which this bill is intended
to address we discuss is at some
legal committee and there's good
centers aware of a very clear
example within the last six
make a sender survived to send
it as we are debate in senate
florida member number three and
I you know to send a share
center to the lopes and center
to product centershire.
Thank you mister president.
And the big argument to make it
eighteen was
if you are old enough to carry a
rifle into battle you should be
old enough to vote
and that was.
that were old enough to carry a
rifle into battle.
They should be allowed to vote.
On whether we go to war not.
The.
rifle whether it's in battle or
not because most soldiers are
not in battle.
But if you are have the the
you're old enough to do that
Four of us have.
If you are capable of doing that
and yet in this particular bill
of the sponsor the bill has said
no no.
If you were in the armed forces
complete reversal of what the
democrats wanted before they
wanted it if you could if you
could should all enough to carry
firearm in the battle you could
vote now it's just the opposite
doesn't matter how old you are
Two members of our armed forces
have problems yesterday.
Maybe even politicians.
And so why are we picking on on
but serve the nation to protect
the nation to protect liberty.
And now all of a certain nope
that particular group of people
I'd like I can't get over the
idea.
It only.
do we need to help our service
members.
Absolutely.
Absolutely service members who
have been under fire.
As we told that our veterans are
fair apartment that they needed
more money while we were trying
to hold everybody else to flap
Because it's not so much that
there's mental issues right off
the bed it's that the the the
the migration
It's been a long time since I
wore a name taken around can I
still want to know who you are
with the name take it right just
makes it clear to me.
How insultive how insult.
If you were bold enough to serve
Think thank you mister president
I and I know everyone in this
body has enormous respect for
our veterans but in addition to
problems is suicide another
proposed amendment and
I I think that the point was
well made by the sponsor.
Would you have further debate
we're still on senate floor map
number three.
we're having this discussion
about um veterans and
or active military I believe is
what what the amendment does and
whenever american invade
enormously it was called a
suicide mission.
The.
Because it was.
They were willing to die
commit suicide essentially.
For us to be here today.
After doing what they did.
The.
And I will tell you my my
grandfather although he wasn't
Became a a pair trooper which
had a very very high rate of
death.
And were worth.
tell that generation handled
most of that in you know it will
have to respect that there's
nothing we can do about it now
is is since passed on.
If when he was willing to lie
about his age.
Jump out of an airplane with a
thirty caliber rifle.
I risked.
The legacy of.
that we could then infringe on
on one of the things that.
Felt passionately about.
Fortunately mr president we we
And it would just seem strange
if if we went back to to that
era and he was active military
kind of a a bad **** mister
you're gonna have to wait seven
days sir.
Forget all the things you did
you know this is one person
there's millions.
Millions of people that have
done this.
This mr president you know the
last amendment was a pretty
great a minute.
But this one I just I can't wrap
That's what this does you might
as well walk right up to the
next uniform person you see and
just slap him in the face and
say you know what.
No.
You're less.
Mr president.
I don't know what else to say
we have a state police officer
That's what you're fixing to do.
imagine what the votes can be is
going to be very similar to the
one we did before
and it said.
The.
It's gonna be probably
leave a very sour sour taste in
your mouth and I i'm
unfortunately I think this is
going to be one but I challenged
the body.
To stand up and see no we
three and i'll yell to center
gagas.
Mr president thank you asking
the
partner of the men and would
you.
retired after twenty two years
in the military I don't know the
difference between the navy and
the army but his treasure for
carson there in colorado when he
we all had a buddy system
I had to take care of my brother
two hundred and so if someone's
missing or lost my job to make
used in the taught them to be
able to have someone to go to in
case of an issue.
In an earlier estate that
because they maintained stable
in the in the navy did you guys
have any want to confident to go
to in a point time when
something may have happened bad
absolutely we did I spent three
and a half years out of chase to
face with six thousand other man
and so I can tell you the
chaplains in in superiors that
uh were were always on the look
out for you and always had an
times you might be scared those
are the people you have next to
you
now I love interest a lot of
people in here but that's a
in contact with and they would
be here for me and I for them.
And so I appreciate that because
a lot of the comments are here
president thank you for that and
just want to go through that
because I think my dad had ptsd
uh they didn't have it named
back then it was sort of you
just work your way through it
and they came three of the four
came to his funeral in car out
of when we buried
but I do know that that bonding
is important
national guard or not suitable
to be able to receive a firearm
immediately
is pretty sad I remember
right now where we are now we
have a lot of pride.
In our military and I would
think that this body would look
at this and say ok they've been
highly trained they're very
skilled.
take their kids hunting up to
teach them to oh my dad taught
us but it wouldn't for the front
of the hunt who was action for
the food but it's just one
their selves in harms way of
brought up earlier our state
police here who put themselves
in here to protect us I totally
trust these people are we gonna
they have been trying to protect
us
and what they've learned in the
military and or in the police
force
what the sponsor of the
amendment yield senator answers
to i'm sorry center bucket are
you
mr president center market do
you know if there is an
of where the other few states
that are even doing this at all
have on the books
and apple.
Thank you mr president
greatest generation world were
two we're talking about when
it's all sent down we're talking
about sacrifice.
And.
Of society of our community.
They deal with the same issues
that are everyone deals with in
our state.
They're trying to dealing with
self medicating themselves with
substance in alcohol right.
And once again that's not to say
When it comes to what we're
doing here.
You know this is not an attack
on veterans on one of them.
I don't want to do that.
It's not what we're doing here.
Those them for is that they
carry those m nines.
When they get down with duty
they don't take them home.
they're being put away.
So they're being responsible
now those who are going owners
their governors they have guns.
They're going to be able to keep
And so.
I'm gonna be opposing this
amendment.
I just want to think the sponsor
about sacrifices.
It's about teamwork it's about
stepping up.
To help our community our nation
our state
still are on senate floor
amendment number three and i'll
yell to sandra near.
Thank you mr president and I
don't need the sponsor of the
amendment to yield other than
passion those of us incentive to
dischery were
moved to say the least by his by
his enter you know deeply felt
vote against this amendment it
doesn't mean that I disrespect
that the good people that have
given up their lives for and and
that are currently serving their
identify high risk populations
in and i'm looking in a
statistics here every day
seventeen veterans die by
good senator feels but you know
i'm looking at a lot of
exemptions here I will point out
that my good friend from roswell
uh was wrong it's the state
police guy that he reference can
maybe i'm not even in you know
believing that this is really
about suicide prevention I think
it is and you know we had this
passion it discussed you know we
suicide that we know it's so I
just think to come to me it's
like.
Somehow conflating this well
intention bill
know it's deeply felt it's just
the um I just have a hard time
with some with with not with
somehow being put in the
arms service people so that's
all I have to say thank you.
Thank you center nil send it a
rent.
Center rent.
In this chamber.
But I was one of the veterans
who actually.
Yeah.
I do think that it is insulting.
we always talk about in here
that everyone wants everyone to
do
we've done.
To make sure that we know how to
safely handle the fire.
supposably about suicide
presents and i'm gonna say
supposedly because when we get
on the bill i'll talk about
that.
But when this is supposedly
about suicide prevention.
Then any other member of
society.
We do have some veterans.
But maybe we have a look at why
Maybe we could talk about how
they were treated in vietnam
and what talk about why veterans
are more likely to commit
Like our president continues to
put our troops at risk for in
the middle east because he does
nothing to dress the people
those be treated properly.
The.
Depends on how lucky you get in
the draw of what doctor you get
at the va.
The treatment of the is a crap
shoot at best.
But I know i've been being
treated by the va since nineteen
ninety three.
even told me and you get around
a lot better than it's cause I
got a good team right now
good team and doctors for the
last two years.
We don't treat our veterans.
The.
Pain issues from the way we
should we don't treat our
veterans ptsd the way we should
God restore so.
But he did three tours in
vietnam serving this country he
had severe p t s d
do you know that he was on his
Been never treated it.
Since vietnam.
Only to some you can't do three
tours in combat in vietnam
without having some p t s d.
Some time at all the other ones
all the ones that.
You don't even know about.
Those better.
Aren't going to be saved.
There's done save anyone's lives
it just takes away the rights.
A men and women this amendment
tries to restore those rights at
Is bill violates the rights of
every citizen in a state in new
mexico
and every citizen in the state
of our country who will move to
the mexico.
for those serving us.
But I was trying to keep us
safe.
I'm not going to take a personal
offence.
I might take one at the domestic
violence one.
Because to insinuate.
There's four in this chamber who
know what it's like to serve
this country.
sorry I wish I could you know
maybe if I was spark and could
do a brain melder eight then you
could actually experience it but
i'm not spark he's not actually
real.
It's really difficult.
The brotherhood
But I messaged all the time.
The.
You never trust anyone the way
you trust your brothers and
arms.
The.
No one.
little mental signs there's all
signs of someone getting
depressed in the get them the
help they need.
When it comes to our veterans
there's no one there for them
anymore.
next month.
There's no family our churches
as family.
It's pretty awesome talking to
someone who was actually there.
Been able to spend time with
someone who was actually there.
And the two of us have a bond
because we both served.
So I hope that chamber will
adopt this amendment.
And at least give that respect
to a batteries in tour military
thank you mister president he
sent her rent.
See no further debate.
Miss president yes i'd like to
debate.
Senator survanters just must
present I believe it's proper
you know miss president last
session we had multiple hearings
during the session on the issue
of guns during the inner on the
very first hearing that I had
brilliant lawyers in our country
cannot agree on how to interpret
and apply the second amendment
this is a complicated issue
and i've embraced the complexity
everyone in those community
means during both sides of the
issues because I embraced the
complexity and the dignity that
this issue deserves
and i'm hoping that tonight we
adversary begins to
raise ad harmony and read
hearings and be smart me and
i'll remind members
at political consequences no
doubt
the day after the governor
and house and executive order to
band guns I publicly
show leadership and leadership
requires integrity
and integrity means being true
for with ourselves and the
issues and recognizing and
embracing the complexity of
those issues and it means
this is not about slapping the
face of veterans
self respect knows this is not
about being anti fatherhood
self respect knows this debate
recognized them into suggests
that law enforcement are being
treated less or veterans or
treat less
is being either respect for
ourselves.
Let's recognize the complexity
of the law and try and find true
debate on the issues in hand
rather than trying to make this
an emotional attack on veterans
we should treat veterans better
than everyone else.
The suggestion was made earlier
that this bill is about
punishing someone
long periods of time at the
airport
for the good of the whole
I stand in border patrol check
points and inconvenience myself
there as well like at the
but we do it for the society the
protection of all of us.
Veterans don't get the password
security at the airport petrols
I employed us tonight however
long this debate requires and
how long i'll stand here with
all you please respect the level
In any way but i'm anti law
enforcement or that i'm anti
veteran would they mount a
fatherhood
understand how it's hard not to
feel a little offense
when the level of this argument
is beneath us.
Thank you mister center servant
is resecond time sender rent.
See no further debate senator
back at a close and they moment.
Thank you mister president
in the current bill in its
current forum.
federal firearms license buyer
who called valid new mexico
concealed hanging license
a line forcement agency
this builder less than every
class listed in that exception.
That's what I think we've said.
Self respect requires that we do
examine ourselves.
This document is disrespectful
to veterans the level of
dialogue.
The.
That they have issues with
domestic violence at some higher
rate than other people.
Offended or you should not take
that as a slight against
veterans
that's exactly what it is mister
president so we can
that it might sound in speech to
cover up what we're really doing
here.
Because that's all it is.
It's frosting over a damaged
You're right it's not about guns
I heard a one of my colleagues
say that this is not about going
to
about these
bear these arms and if we cannot
protect that right for our
veterans.
An equivocate them to these
other classes are you exempted
here.
choice this is only active duty.
It's a small slice and a small
And without mister president I
moved center floor minute three
to house judiciary committee
Rock thank you centers we are
voting on send a floor amendment
number three i'll send us to
your seats.
The clerk to call the role.
brantley center brantley boats
yes interview
center birth volts yes center
compus center compos words yes
Center guy echoes would see a
centre gonzales no centre
gonzales votes now senator
gregs.
Center gregs votes yes center
Center hiki votes no santa I saw
them.
Senator hermeo center armio
votes no santa locus.
Center lopez votes no centre my
estes.
boat cs intermitchenna no sent a
mechanic vote snow center more
excused.
Centremen yours
centremen your sports yes
international
since teasipino center tease
pino boat snow centre bideas.
Centre video boats now centre
pinto.
Centre rodriguez voda know
senator sanchez center sanchez
boats yes center cimities
center cities voucs interested
low best.
senator share center share boats
yes center shandow center
shandow boat cs center cells
center sales votes knows an
interestiphonics.
Center stewart votes no senator
tomorrow no senator tom and boat
snow senator worth center worth
votes no sinner woods center
centers the love is to explain
thank you mister president again
I want to repeat I have enormous
respect for the military but
lived on base and the military
he was court marshalled and and
sentenced to eighteen years for
beating up his wife.
I do not believe that the
military necessarily have any
more domestic violence than
anyone else and I did not mean
when they see this happening or
with respect to court marshalls
and because this does happen
among our most distinguished
veterans they should not be
which I read very carefully I
know that it can happen with
them just has it can happen with
anyone else.
And again I just want to say I
mr president colleagues who are.
Any senate bucker would you have
another floor amendment.
The reader will read
amendment sponsored by senator
brantley senator branded move
and explain the moment thank you
mister president I moved to
senate for a minute number four
to house judiciary committee
frustrating to beating these
high profile
polarizing issues and I don't
polarizing sides of the issue
computer keyboard warriors
that will make comments on
room for compromise zero
compromise but I will see this
as legislators we have a greater
responsibility
the sponsor who brought this
forward because it's not always
a black and white issue and it's
difficult to say that but it's
not
and we have a responsibility is
legislators on both sides of the
isle and on both sides of this
particular issue to come forward
and identifying ways to address.
of the bill is to reduce suicide
rates
and so because of that I
understand that the previous
amendments that were brought
forward.
sponsor intends to protect
themselves from.
I would ask him to please
consider this although this
if we could simply ask for an
exemption for a small number of
people likely women to be
exempted for a buyer who is
obtained in order of protection
danger of someone else in fact
in order to meet those standards
the court would have to
determine that the restraint
party presents credible threat
population to make sure that in
an effort of protecting people
who may be at it a serious risk
of harming themselves that we
don't put those that are in risk
of being harmed by others in
Miss president i'd consider this
to be an unfriendly amendment
again this would avoid the
waiting period altogether by
to purchase a higher home
immediately and avoid the seven
day would have an unintended
effect of bringing more people
in the court system by my
potentially false reasons for
all again all over again
last night if I recall right I
know I know what wasn't paying
that much attention last night
that an advocate could sign off
saying that this woman could
take paid time off paid family
medical leave
advocate.
Because it was so important
because we didn't want her to
get hurt and I agree with that
but now we're arguing
that
the same woman
so yesterday we needed to
protect women and today we need
to make sure they wait seven
days and whatever happens in
those seven days old well
And it's
almost exact same argument
of why women so the the argument
President protem argued there
are women they need to protect
themselves.
Today however.
Sometimes running in hiding snot
enough mister president
sometimes running and hiding is
not enough.
Even when we had our what to do
But if the abusers there
you need to fight it used to be
and we don't use this anymore.
sudden with cornell colts
inventions
we had firearms.
That the weakest humans could
use to defend themselves from
the strongest.
And now we want to say well no
not really.
Because she can run.
think it would be useful to us
thank you mister president.
I do have further debate where
on send a format number four and
I have senator greeks.
the staff that the I
was also going to bring up
because lash night in the debate
on senate bill three on paid
ever is bothering you you don't
know they know where you work
and you can you can get away and
be shame.
Michel president in in senators
because you have to wait seven
days to acquire
and michel president in the
senators I would submit to you
that you're not.
Which you're not.
We're trying to say today
no.
You can't be is safe as you
might partially we could be and
Level of shavedy vad and
individual might feel like they
need and I I appreciate your
But it doesn't seem there are
i'm hopeful.
Michel president and center
brandly that the body will adopt
your amendment.
they're still going to be dish
agreement on
i'm not sure the did seven days
is going to do due to leave from
duly squat for anybody.
we adopt it
in order to provide the
protection to the to the folks
that needed to most and
communities with military basis
and our support of the of the
really noticed and recognized by
the community al gore got the
alticiard which does recognize
us who are here in this body
that recognize and appreciate
your service the things you have
done four ash and the things you
continue to do for a
for those reasons that i've
spoken of that last night we
spoke of and I believe that
those are the reasons why we
need to we need to choose to
support your amendment so thank
Miss president center do you
think in any way
that a woman
who most little has be honest
mostly
Protection order.
Just to get a gun without a
waiting period do you think a
woman would ever do that.
intent of the bill if the entire
intent of the bill is to address
suicide rates and yet we say
women who have a court issued
have been recognized by the
only so that they can then
fraudulently abuse this statute
by going to buy a hand gun
Thank you very rarely so the
brand is
mrperiod president center I was
honestly all shot.
correctly.
The.
To say are to insinuate.
That the reason you want accept
this amendment is because it
might.
To get an order of protection.
The.
sometimes you put your foot in
your mouth
because I don't know why else
you would say something like
that.
Why else you would insinuate
something like that.
Of a husband who abused her.
I think they'd be actually more
out to go down to central by one
out of the trunk of a car and
forget about this entire bs
So that they could get away get
around a seven day waiting
period when they can drive two
hours to texas and pick up a gun
and not even have to worry about
that.
situation would do that.
And.
I hope that the sponsor was
misspoken.
The.
Miss president with the spot to
the amendment yield for a
question center brand new deal I
do.
Senator gave us.
it's it's a family member I mean
the the the perpetrator they
abuser is someone they know it's
not someone off the street
the people that you you are
going to be able to protect
yourself if you think that would
be a deterrent in further abuse
to the show lady thank you
center gaga center branding mr
has obtained who has already in
past tenth who has obtained an
order of protection issued
pursuant to the family violence
determined that the restrained
party does present credible
threat to the physical safety
after that court process has
been obtained
rejection of this amendment and
i'm going to be very direct as
surprising to me because it's a
small population but it's a
small population of likely women
recognizing an identifying their
claims to be valid to accuse
victims that perhaps they made
it all up.
They made it all up.
appreciate that now I can hear
the passion your voice are in a
and i'm grateful that you
brought out that it's a court
process not the individual's
Do you know how long it takes to
get the family violence
protection act in in order to go
through the court process is
that something that takes them
the backlog of the individual
court unfortunately I was
reading on some articles and in
some state it takes up to thirty
days depending on how fast the
court is processing that I I
president center that's exactly
what I was looking on looked on
fate on facebook on the computer
my phone I noticed ten to thirty
that it takes for the courts to
go through the process you could
have been ordered thirty seven
days but when it comes down to
the point that are the the
calculations of the uh exception
if that was figured in because
if you look at the court process
and we've just proven from two
different sources that it could
take between ten and thirty days
president senator obtaining one
of these protection orders is
not instant in fact the the it
seems that the length of time to
put paying the protection order
is even longer than just waiting
may not have that seven days
we've already identified them is
being in immediate threat of
physical harm the courts of
already identified so if that if
thank you senator brantley
center gagas thank you miss
president thank you for that
center of cut just a a comment I
was given a shivery or this year
Amendment thank you I yield
thank you center gagas center
per.
Thank you mister president and I
stand and strong support of this
amendment and
don't have to rehash it but it's
funny before the debate on every
single amendment there is
something said
that is absolutely beneath this
body.
But.
To essentially start off in
laugh and scoff
beneath the member representing
it representing it.
That's offensive that's
offensive talk.
just gonna be run out getting
tros like like cheekily.
of domestic violence than others
and then the very next amendment
is an amendment to help those to
protect themselves.
And I wonder where the votes
gonna be missed president.
president to get to fifteen.
And it's just unfortunate we're
here domestic violence is real
i've experienced it.
imagine what they're going
through feeling like they have
no other way they have no escape
they have no help they can't go
anywhere they have a piece of
paper
have a piece of paper because
it's not going to do a damned
thing when somebody that wants
to do you harm comes and finds
you to do harm.
And it is ridiculous they were
are most vulnerable.
I've heard people in this body
talk about these issues and I
tell you what i've learned a lot
about it mister president i've
learned first hand.
What will let those go.
But this one it's it's almost
one that I I just don't
been presented to a judge that
we just gave a raise to.
To look through the facts and
determine that yes this person
still incentive florida number
four now year two sender woods.
Thank you miss german
wow.
This is gonna what I say to this
Obtained an order a protection
issued percent are the family
Wow his all i've got to say
mister.
That's a while thank you center
woods.
voice my original objective I
didn't turn this into a gender
issue I didn't mention mail or
female realize that massive
violence or is can be obtained
by men
and so my concern initially was
that this might prompt
individuals to obtain an order
of protection in order to avoid
amendments anti vet anti father
anti america and are you law
enforcement
i'm used to these arguments
no that
well over and a decade or more
ago I was the deciding vote in
the house a representatives on
the sponsor accepted an
amendment my amendment was to
require that as a condition for
maintaining a conceal carry
license that the licensee would
go back and get a refresher
proficiency we do it with an
automobile license
that was the condition for my
vote
refresher every two years
and we pass the consiler carry
it's irresponsible for me to
have a firearm and a conceal
carry per permit without knowing
that i'm proficient i'm more
dangerous without going on to
everyone i'm inspired to fire
arm they go out to the farm just
like my good colleague talks
about we should it cans we shoot
at bottles.
probability is in a crisis in an
instant of crisis they're more
likely to have that gun used on
them to have that gun taken from
them or to make a mistake in it
probability is an individual who
gets a domestic violence order
who's in our household crisis in
an emotional protect potential
their children in the adjoining
rooms
or inadvertently their neighbors
or others
it's really unrealistic
ten realistic
males might pressure their
partners to file the domestic
wireless order to obtain a gun
they might otherwise be barred
from obtaining
itself which just says the gun
will be released to a buyer male
or female and it ignores the
fact that I have felt for years
the importance if you're going
to own a gun and use a gun you
in a firefight and emergency
circumstances
and i've seen a train marine
sharpshooter
at close range miss every shot.
shooting back at you at point
blank range.
This falls back to the old
argument the best thing for a
bad guy with a gun is a good guy
with a gun
violence was shoots
you believe that support this
member otherwise I urge you to
reject it.
Thank you savantes were still on
sentiment number four and I
yield to center sale of us.
of data to it from again the the
twenty twenty three and the
report on the new mexico
item intimate partner death
review team
So it is five times more likely
if there is domestic violence in
the presence of gun again in the
home that there will be a death
perpetrator that gets killed I
don't think it's good public
policy to increase homicides
whether it's a victim or a
perpetrator
of intimate partner violence or
sexual assault if you were
recall that is the year
that um senators advantage led
firearms to to uhm surrender
those firearms after a finding
of the credible threat a
judicial finding of credible
threat I want to share that in
perpetrators so there was a
difference and that
is really important to note
thank you mister president
center sale up is we are
incentive amendment number four
nil two centers meetings.
doesn't have to do with with
gender I mean it's it's about
ninety percent mis president
ninety percent of these domestic
violence restraingress are given
a woman
and so while it's a true
a demographic fact we're back to
the same reasoning back to our
last gun bill and when someone
is trying to make an argument
that this is not going to affect
certain classes of people when
people are pointing out they're
not jumping to the mail or the
female side.
This is just a a fact
unfortunately and very sadly
mister president.
It's very hard to talk about
man are supposed to love their
wives in a self sacrificial way
that's the design
by the way the definition of red
hearing argument okay it's it's
a defined logical fall see
that's commonly used commonly
employed in debate and it is
That's what a red hairing
argument is.
And so I don't I don't see why
any of these are red hearings
it's once again demographic fact
It's in transit.
You cannot separate the debate
we're having.
And I I just.
You know I I don't know I i'm
i'm also shocked.
I'm shocked at that the argument
that was presented.
wish we I wish nobody needed
them I wish we weren't violent.
Not just our society but every
society all the way back to the
origin of people have been
violent.
but it's it's often you know in
this situation the firearm is
referred to is the great
equalizer people that aren't as
physically strong people
disabilities.
Every situation is different.
I'm not saying that everyone who
would go get a far arm
hearing argument is and i'm very
very
supportive of this amendment
thank you thank you finished me.
that somehow we don't need to
risk increasing homicides for
victims or perpetrators
I have a restraining order there
will be a homicide.
To imply that this is in a
women's issue is ridiculous
ninety percent of restraining
paid family medical center but
they'll likely abuse this system
they're going to take thirty
days to go restraining order so
that they can circumvent a seven
polarized people and it's
somewhere there is compromise
and I am very since here when I
tell you that we are shocked
that this one was not accepted.
This is victim shaming all over
the time of that temporary
restraining order if the orders
lifted they can no longer
circumvent this weight.
I want to close it's a story of
two days after checking with the
police and the day that she had
had her security cameras
installed.
They caught her being stabbed to
death by the boyfriend in the
is that the intent is fraud this
intent is no longer about
suicide because we're not saving
these women from themselves we
are saving them from someone
else who was already been
is out the window by rejecting
this amendment.
We've also decided that we can't
accept my own amendment for
military
service men but the very next
amendment that would help those
to that doesn't domestic
violence
victims is completely dismissed
I thought had room for a
reasonable and benefit I urge
the other side read the bill
just carefully consider what
this might or amendment is doing
for house bill one twenty nine
is three times amended do not
pass and a request as four
times.
Said amendment number four
request a roll call that you
send it really singers we're
voting on senator member number
four
to your seats.
The clerk to call the role.
brantley center brantley votes
yes center birth senator birth
boats yes senator compos center
Center care hospital centre
gonzalez no sentence as well
snow senator gregs center gregs
hakey center hake boats now sent
her I saw them
said driving certain votes now
center her mill center her meal
votes know senator lopus.
cs center mckenna nope the
mechanic votes no centre morris
excused centremen yours.
centre or the peanut center to
the peanut boards no senator
padea.
Centre per dear vote snow
senator pinto.
Centre penda votes know center
period.
sanchez center sanchez well cs
interest mirrors.
Centre smith's votes yes center
city lopez.
soles center sales words know
center stephanies interested in
experts no senator steinborn
center steinburn votes now
centers do were.
senator words center word vote
cs.
the senate center for your time
mister president thank you brown
the center is where back on the
bill.
Senators meetings.
center i'd like to
connect go over some of the
discussion we had again I think
we beneficial for the floor that
we had in committee and I had
asked you
with those nations historic
tradition
on firearm regulation and I I
just I would like to ask you
again I just want to make sure
position hasn't changed on that
do you think a waiting period is
good understanding of where the
supreme court is today I believe
in committee I probably would
have told you that I don't know
over historic tradition with
regard to waiting period and I
don't although i've seen some
example have a gun in certain
towns and certain saloons or
whatever it may be historic
tradition but what I did suggest
you also in committee is I think
court very shortly because the
court has put itself in a box
the last discussion was on
domestic violence and we
prohibit guns from being put in
the hands of individuals with a
is no historic tradition of up
holding guns in domestic
violence cases going back to the
founding fathers so the supreme
court will have to make a
decision they'll either have to
decide to hold on to the bruin
test test.
violence I don't think the court
is going to do that thank you
center servant as center thing
mister president center I
respectfully disagree with that
they're out argue there's a very
a pretty easy one for me that I
think the court will will just
be fine they'll be fine with
that you know you have a history
violence you have a history of
violating someone else's rights
we we've been doing that for
I i'll be honest
I have really enjoyed listening
to to the debate i've learned a
lot listening to you about the
was interesting and and quite
frankly
really caught me off guard
because I I thought that that
you would respond with with
because how how I hear that I
want to be careful very careful
not putting words in your mouth
or or trying to mischaracterize
your your position I have no I
mean III don't ever want to do
that anybody on this for but
to make that argument that I was
carrying a bill
and and I you know someone asked
me well can you tell me how this
is constitutional I don't so
well that that united states the
mister president and so I I
it it it seems to imply that
we're just going to ignore or
question the legible the
or are are you questioning the
legitimacy of the united states
supreme court.
Thank you center servant is
mispresident and center of
course not not or not what I
suggested the result of their
the example I would give you is
that are we banned machine guns
and there's no question about it
we banned basucas and rocket
propel green aids there's no
be able to ban automatic machine
guns we wouldn't be able to pan
basucas and rocket propel grades
will be able to do any of that
because there is no historic
president that the court has put
center mispresident in center I
say this with all the respect I
had I i've read the bureau
decision that that that topic is
sharked that topic that that
supposedly is just going to
cause a problem is addressed
specifically about unusual
weapons that's that's right
there in the bruin decision I
that opinion clares thomas and
all the other concrete you know
any bear road in their cabinet
wrote where to concrete in and
it is specifically in the bruin
decision i've read it.
very fascinating to me goes to
the history of a farm regulation
they they say there is a
historical precedent for banning
machine guns it's in the bruin
it it this is not complicated
so benning benning guns taking
way guns from violent criminals
that's in bruin unusual weapons
consequences.
So if you're gonna make the
argument that i'm not
questioning the legitimacy of
the court
but i'm just questioning the
supreme court did not consider
the consequences of writing a
you know two hundred page
document in his six three
decision I I find there to be
consider
uhm it's it's consequences in a
very thorough and thoughtful
decision
very thoughtful all the counter
arguments tonight therein bruin
and they have been carefully
considered by the supreme court
allowed you allowing people have
machine guns no they've already
said it they've already opined
in that document please read it.
argument to just somehow imply
that our highest court is is is
not doing the job or is not
thoughtful or is not considering
the consequences of of their
the purposeful ambiguities in
the buring decision any barrett
did this and her concurring
opinion is short it's about two
thoughtful they were because in
it in in in looking at the law
that brewery assessed they were
talking about you know this this
this permitting issue and amy
barrett says you know what we've
one was adopted in eighteen
sixty eight.
And it's a purposeful ambiguity
they say you know what the court
is not taking a position on
purposely being ambiguous
because we're just addressing
this new york law that's
unconstitutional so the court is
not trying to you know be
that has helped thoughtful the
united states supreme court was
when they wrote that massive
decision.
So I just I just right right
reject all those arguments
mister president
Mainly for for the purpose of
not not persuading but just
because we have the opportunity
to talk about such a serious
issue I I don't think anyone's
going to disagree with me on
twenty one thirty percent of
high school girls had suicidal
idiation or our my members the
body what was going on in that
time frame.
I think we all know.
recent metanalysis that looked
and pulled that they screen over
four hundred and twenty sturdies
on mental health and they only
took the highest quality studies
screen time lack of exercise was
was associated highly associated
with the pressure
and so really III I just don't
want to miss this opportunity to
I think it's the breakdown of
the the family unit I think is
our our lifestyle our food
supply.
Carl are loneliness or addiction
High quality studies showing a
six to eighteen percent increase
clearly is associated with a
suicide we have other policy
physician assisted suicide that
is associated with increased
suicide in those states.
The.
mister president the root
causes.
We just don't value life enough.
Our society is breaking down
because we do not value life
Cc has has more data on their
suicide rates are are going up.
The.
So just thought i'd mention
those root cause issues mister
president that that if we you
know if we and I and I just I
see us making the problem worse
I see is making the problem
worse and we bring it up in this
bill that in my opinion is not
going to affect suicide in and
i'd like to give the examples of
Very strict gun control ****
very strict.
So somehow that we're gonna make
a make a dent suicide III
disagree
I don't question the sincerity
of some of the folks on the
What's what's wrong with their
countries loneliness they're the
most lonely countries mister
president that that's what's
so so that's all I have to say I
I just III would like to just
once again just remind remind
the body how precise and how
thought for the bruin decision
I think it's very very big news
if if you didn't hear
they said well and this is a
quote they said the spirit of a
low hard clashes with a
federally mandated lifestyle to
disagree with the decision
whatever it is.
This this attitude of rejecting
bruins application to this bill
start questioning the legitimacy
of
the executive the judiciary the
legislative branch our country
questioning the legitimacy of
different branches of government
it's dangerous it is very
dangerous for our country.
Thank you mister president.
so senators meetings as usual
brilliant guy took my first
talking point
but mister president
the united states by far has
country's got about sixty firms
per person so I mean per hundred
people sorry not proposing for
hundred people
But that's not true that's not
true so hundred and twenty fire
arms per
per hundred people
in our homicide rate is six
so.
Are our murder rate by firearms
is four hundred thousand.
The senate said south korea
virtually zero fire arms in
civilian hands in south korea
none.
twenty one point four suicides.
In south korea per hundred
thousand no firearms at all so
somehow they figured out how to
in afghar july geographically
big but but eritreous of fairly
small country in africa and they
have almost no firearms.
They have some.
Their murder rate by firearms
zero.
The rarely far arms no murders
by farms but their murder rate
murdered with the car or a
hammer or knife strangulation.
Murder by anything six point
four
point three per hundred thousand
people
so we buy far by far have more
firearms than any and any other
nation anywhere ever.
And so when we talk about this
being a suicide bill
obviously people can figure out
how to commit suicide if they
want to
but in new mexico
two point one million people in
the state.
So that rate is point zero zero
zero two five.
Point zero zero zero two five.
Fifty three percent of those
were committed with a firearm.
How did the other forty seven
percent commit suicide.
This is a step toward toward
more gun control.
Hidden in the trial meaning here
what we're really trying to
the king the emperor the empress
whoever whatever you called the
the person on the top of the
pile
In anybody you don't trust
doesn't get a weapon because
they're disloyal they're not
They would take and they do
today.
They do today south korea is an
example no south korean owns a
fire but south greens got a
mighty army.
forth and say go ye out there
and die for me.
And after the battles done they
clicked up the weapons they put
him back in the arms room.
the people can no longer fight
against the king.
The magna carter.
Which is where the.
In the reason that could work is
because the nobles had weapons
and the king didn't have an army
without the nobles that they
And this is really all about
powering control.
powering control who has it
in all through america today the
united states today we've got
all of these gun control things
But nowhere near the top of the
pile
internationally suicides are
terrible but nowhere near the
top of the pile
internationally.
deal gone bad that's how people
kill each other
it's not most of us most of us
are not going to be involved in
a in a gang battle most of us
almost all related to that are
there other murders yes.
Not saying all of them but most
of our six point four murders
out of a hundred thousand
people.
and yet we're going to use that
for power and control of the
state that's what this is about
for power and control of the
state we're going to use the
You don't stop crime by taking
guns away from people that
aren't criminals
we stop crime by a dealing with
the criminals.
you don't have you don't have to
ask.
The king or the governor
to be armed you just armed she
want to be you're not if you
have a constitutional right to
carry a firearm.
In a specifically says but we
don't have a right to carry it
concealed we have a law that
If you're hiding your firearm
you must be doing something
nefarious you must be weak you
problem but now if we carry it
openly half the people in this
room lose blatter control when
they see it.
Until that's why we can see
them.
So constitutional carry has been
argued that
murder rates increase but this
is according to the cdc so this
isn't some advocacy group this
The total murder rate for all of
the states combined in some of
them are a lot worse than others
six point nine per hundred
constitutional carry but again
not all murders are committed
with firearms.
The murder rate in
that or want to have points of
that is something besides the
firearm.
In the states that don't have
constitutional carrier it's five
point nine.
about
good guys out there the people
are going to work and taking
care of their family in during
all those kind of things.
month waiting period or seven
second waiting period they don't
care at all then affect them.
data this is fourteen days it's
any better than fourteen years
and we don't have any scientific
data this is seven days is good
versus three.
seven fourteen or anything else
has anything to do with it
what we do have evidence of is
that the background check system
that we have.
thousand people were not allowed
to buy a firearm last year out
of two point five million that
were.
So it did pick pick out some
Now when we see that there's all
i'm gonna i'm going to report
this because my my data shows
this.
Get polling that they want.
Argument groups can say that
eighty five percent of
businesses want something or no
percent of businesses want
i'm get my statistics from the
cdc
they're not in average group for
either side.
The average time
comes into possession of of
civilian till the time it used
in a crime is nine years.
crime.
When we look at this most gun
owners
But most people that own
firearms own more than one own
one to own more than one today
so if there's going to be some
rash thing to do
Don't need to go out and buy
one.
If they were going to do
something rush.
They can do it.
really about suicide
I don't see it in here I don't
think the data shows it advocacy
data certainly does
Well it's a cost to the citizens
of new mexico
which apparently we really like
to beat up on.
To cost to them is it a cost any
suicide will be stopped by this
bill.
And then we have to compare this
to what.
Well I say compared to the
constitutional carrier states.
And I know that there is a few
attorneys in this room who may
have heard this at some point
i'm not sure.
you don't have rights for seven
days even though both the US
constitution and the new mexico
constitution says you have
rights today.
But we don't any more.
So with that missed president I
do not think this bill complex
is what it's
are
who fear free people.
I think it accomplishes what
they want it's a step towards.
Whoever that is
because if we have this right
the chances of us every meeting
it are almost none.
and we can look at all countries
all over the world that have no
liberties like we have
and they also have no weapons.
Thank you mister president.
Thank you mister president
center on sir until it is you
know I had a great discussion in
all arguments hold water I think
we've hold many I think we've
heard many great arguments this
evening do hold water in that
are extremely valid
Thank you and my current center
is revinted mister president I
hope you were in you and all
good orders would understand the
respect my god being non
to new mexico ffl had a
background check before and the
answer your question is yes
center my catcher thank you
mister president thank you so
survanted so we know you have at
that you've got least one hand
gun and we're not going to get
into how many firearms you may
or may not possess
during this session i'll all
expose myself a little bit more
also in eighteen eighty six uh
winchester and so you know those
guns are a little bit rare and
when they show up you just you
just kind of have to act when
after you win the bid we know
that we
negotiate back and forth on
accessories or or ammunition or
whatever it is and that takes
another three or four days I
know that you're aware of the
formed the seller wishes and
usually on that particular side
it's in the form of the money
order so you send them a money
order which is a pain but that's
the system so after the purchase
access to it again under this
bill we would then.
After the gun arrives at the f f
l we would then have to wait
another seven days that's after
I believe i'm trying to take
your hypothetical your example
center I think you're correct
senator mccatcher mister
president thank you so it is
okay I I think I think we can we
can probably say that isn't an
purchasing these guides for
you know whether it's a a
collection purpose or or hunting
which is which is also
on and on the list of
i'm not sure that this bill
would buy like my constitutional
right for that however
if I don't want to wait seven
days being that these are long
guns I can just ship these guns
specifying a lot longer than
believe that's right my catcher
thank you mister president
social round as that is that is
correct I can I can send them
texas and I can go pick them up
hit extremely hard because
they'll pass it was right there
we're gonna have hobs hit
extremely hard because similar
is right there and we've got
areas in the western part of the
state along with it you know
not really the argument I don't
I don't think that actually
you know that actually holds it
actually holds water on this we
were talking earlier about all
the states that have made laws.
senator service senator starters
mister president there now.
Senator recognition.
Thank you mister president thank
you sir she wanted
if we're going to compare silver
to other states which
uhm
you know maybe that's good maybe
that's not good but it does give
us some jurish prudence so.
and defense now i'm gonna read
on just a little bit and show
you why I don't think me waiting
on gun broker to send my games
in in a few extra days for these
carry so I don't think that this
would impede my ability to hurt
and I don't think this would
impede my ability for
recreational satisfaction
however
defence because we know that
that could be needed in an
instant
we know that
by taking people's guns away
citizens to keep in bear armed
for security or defense so we're
not going to read colorado
because that was actually not
settled yet that want to still
navigation california their
Florida
right at the people to keep in
bear arms the defense of
themselves and of lawful
authorities states should not be
infringed except the manner
consider florida's state
constitution to be stronger or
weaker than in mexico's center
or cutting center servant mister
president sir i've not compared
our constitution to florida been
tell me if our constitution is
stronger or weaker than hawish
constitution has a fourteen day
waiting period again to remind
the body are says no law shell a
of a free state at the right of
the people to keep in their arms
shall not be infringed is new
mexico constitution stronger or
weaker than he was considered my
curtain center servant.
on the fly i've avoided in all
of the gun a debate discussions
all the work i've done i've
avoided rash impetuous decision
making her but it with thought
to keep in bear arms would be
weaker than a state that does
have the second amendment of the
federal bill of rights and also
bill.
Santa market.
Mister president of others we
could do
we could go on and read all of
a really fun trip we went you
know mexico and went to
guatemalan I was talking to my
father about it I said hey
this is this this is all right I
can like these places.
or believes or mexico and spin
quite a bit of time
and I had so he said i'm not
interested in that.
And I said why would you not be
interested in that he said
and I raised my right under the
square
and I swore that I would defend
the state of new mexico
constitution and the federal
But I can read and I can tell
that right here we are bridging
the right of citizens to protect
themselves.
And I refuse to participate in
this consider servant
yourself and yet you seem to
take that right away from those
who cannot do so currently.
The.
I poses.
I pose this bill with everything
Senator brand.
Thank you mister president
i've been send here listening
present so i'm not gonna ask the
center yield yet we can till I
decide whether not i'm an asking
questions.
First of all I want to thanks
there were catching
Me in the the group.
That came in together.
were in the fifty six the one
right now
the bottom half.
Of the fifty six legislature
And so many times you know we we
talk about and and I know that
everyone say no here we go again
sir cuts in stronger than the US
constitution on this particular
right
is the new mexican state
constitution.
a bridge it
what does it mean.
What is that what does that mean
And the right for what
according to our constitution
the right.
Because i'll just be honest with
the immense hundred and.
I see and fifty five now.
Last time I went honey with my
dad I was probably seventeen.
Particularly enjoy doing it.
Try a minute go out in the words
and shoot something it used to
be i'd take my camera.
Is that what I enjoy.
Or some dear
i'm not nothing against hunting
go do it enjoy it enjoy yourself
but for me.
the right of a citizen to keep
and bear arms for security and
defense.
You're just a couple of weeks
ago I asked the protem
Over some of the statements that
I had been making.
And some of the reactions I had
been getting.
so now no
reason I don't care about your
right
for security and defence.
The.
constitutional I wish someone
would hurry up and sue.
There's no it's not even a law
when we didn't even
Reading passenger
thing is the minimum you'd have
to do
to regulate it.
But I think this pretty clearly
a bridges
the right of a citizen
to keep in bear arms for
security and defence.
these who I I didn't realize he
had gone to law school and I
really appreciate that because
it sounds like he knows more
about bruin than the lawyers in
this room.
defend it knowing it's probably
going to take several years
before it's completely defended
before we get through court.
Because it is a civil right.
first amendment right that is
that next folks the next
well not the right to free
speeds because you know we all
want to get a pair talk so we
What about the third you know
the third we actually really
don't use but what if the
government decided you know
we can't really afford to house
about how about the fourth
amendment right that's one that
the lawyers really like
the fourth amendment you know
The shall not be violated except
for a seven day waiting period
to change that one.
Excess bale real we decide in
this state we don't want any
bale just like prisoners walk
through.
states what's not directly given
to the federal government
belongs to the states.
So maybe we don't care about the
constitution anymore.
Right.
This was a crying bill this was
part of the crime package
that the other side is bringing.
not one thing i've i've heard
about maybe possibly someone
said it might stop suicide
that they think it will
assume glad they didn't put
covered in our
the shots in our system based on
that kind of a study.
we can rush
bills through that will take
away people's constitutional
rights to bear arms
be so to have two different
approaches to trying to slow
down at least the revolving door
it and shut the door but it
might have slowed it down a
little bit
we know this what is but we'll
do it anyway.
in a committee for weeks and
weeks and weeks.
The.
That's how serious we are about
crime in this body.
And let the criminals go free
that's our idea
aren't safe.
Because we'll give lip service
acting
and passing bills it will deal
with crime
now we don't want to hear about
it.
and now our state has the worst
crime problem in the nation
per capita.
let's tell people they can have
again when they got awake seven
days to be able to protect
themselves
when we know that even though
The beat cop is securing the
scene why we wait for the
detectives to come and find out
through our votes up here we
told them we don't care about
them.
And so they're left.
Is to violate the rights of our
citizens.
I don't know if we're getting a
kick back on the crime or
something
is there something coming into
the state coffers that we have
legislators don't want to deal
We started the session almost
thirty days ago thank god it's
been almost thirty days and
we're almost done.
Because you guys are tired to
hear in me this year.
had worked with the district
attorneys association.
I work with secretary boey.
But the only thing we want to
pass.
We want to ban i'm from people
being able to protect themselves
of the pulling place
the has no off for can I be i'm
carrying it.
And then we want to do this one.
background to check.
That can show that there are
they've been a good citizen
we want to make them wait.
Have the deal with another seven
days of momentory being in there
in there inventory room
them to keep up with all that
stuff we're not worried about
any of that.
Every town that we did it.
So give us our campaign checks.
Center bucker.
Thank you mister president my
colleagues did a good job
Protection this isn't about
solutions this isn't about
any of that this isn't about
that.
This is all about taking one
oriented about this the data's
light
yet we heard the good doctor
earlier go for the bruin case
with the a certain
articulateness that he can only
So
i'm excited and I went over and
I talked to senator to worse
than I told him hey senator make
sure all of your people are here
it's time to account to the
people of new mexico
some of us don't want to go back
and tell their constitution
until they voted
some of of don't want to go back
and tell their party how they
voted
Say no further debate senator
servant is to close on the bill
thank you mister president the
president was reminded me that
I am I I think it's important to
maybe take this in the in the
proper frame I I wanted to
appreciate first of all the the
combinations for center
ruling result absurd
you've got to ask yourself
how does this small town last
you suggested the court was a
six three decision but it wasn't
so I appreciate you reading the
case but i've read it too
and the actual decision was for
and just sush roberts and those
justices
have left themselves a lot of
room
and we're going to see the
supreme court soon I believe
take that rumour so we don't
when he joined the majority
opinion of four of the nine by
limited concurrence where he
said
and with justice roberts joining
properly interpreted the second
amendment allows a variety of
gun regulations and then he
quoted justice scalia.
like most rights like most
rates.
The rights secured by the second
moment is not limited.
From blackstone through the
nineteenth century cases
commentators and courts
routinely explain the right is
not a right to keep in carry any
weapon what so ever in any
manner whatsoever
and for whatever purpose.
Nothing in our opinion should be
break the quote here to note
this capital being a sensitive
place
blaws for bidding the carrying a
firm's sense of places such as
schools and government
buildings.
Acknowledging that historically
there are laws imposing
conditions in qualifications on
the commercial sale of arms and
will take a few more minutes to
recognize that in recent mass
shootings the chesapeake
virginia walmart shooter killed
six in the injury seven he
bought the gun the same day it
was used
In the louisville bank shooting
case fifth five were killed the
gun was about six days earlier
charleston south carolina
shooting killed nine the gun was
purchased three days earlier
I heard my learned center
And in fact one individual who
was name doesn't warrant
mention.
Held off for one hour three
hundred and sixty seven law
enforcement officers in the
Yes guns can be the great
equaliser
there should be no debate
tonight i'm not prose labory.
Some suggested this is the move
it gives a special
considerations and exemptions to
law enforcement.
Night out I fatherhood i've had
a gun in my house every day that
I've ever experienced it's been
expressed about the joy of
sharing that with our children
i've shared that.
I'm not anti fatherhood
suggestion that somehow this
bill is anti woman again is
laughable and am certainly not
anti mcdonald's black coffee as
was suggested in the earlier
debate.
As a lifetime gun owner.
And is somebody who respects the
second amendment in my rates
And I heard a lot of no tonight.
My door is always open in the
interim in this session and
see me promoting gun legislation
in this session that I knows
clearly on constitutional I
don't need the headlines
and i'm not issued that I
mission real solutions and those
my two law partners and I have
our office in or parcel.
The.
Those are viewed from donated
county know what it was to live
in a community where an
of texas to a wallmark where he
knew he would find plenty of
mexicans and then proceeded in
mold them down.
The.
Imagine what they did to our
community.
After that there were lots of
thoughts in prayers after every
masculine there's lots of
thoughts in prayers.
this problem of mass killings at
all but we do know the
statistics show we will make an
impact on suicide deaths and we
To join together and not make
this your side as was in the
debate your side versus my side.
And it's regrettable that I know
this fault will probably line up
on partisan lines.
Let's look with some admiration
of those who can truly cross
party lines
and find solutions so that.
If there is sadly another
Mister president I moved that
house judiciary could be
substitute for house but one
twenty nine as amended
repeatedly three times to do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
of the senate the record show
votes no senator brand center
brant boat snow santa brantley
no centre brandly both snow
senator birth senator birth
Centre do hake boat cs.
Santa garaco's.
Santa garaco's votes know centre
gonzales yes centre gonzales
boats yes center hampile center
headbill boats know senator
hickey.
Sender hiki boats yes and
driving though.
Sent drive you thought about cs
center armio.
estes yes sent to my estimates
worth cs intermittential centre
mccanchen boats know center in
kenna yes center mckenna boats
Centre novel boat snow center
neighbor send her nibert votes
no senator only.
Central neil boat cs sent our
tissie pino.
pento sent your pinto cs center
period center per vote snow
senator poe yes center poke boat
Center cities votes now center
city low best yes center theater
developers votes yes center
share center share votes now
experts yes center steinborn.
Center steinborn votes yes
center stewart center stewart
both cs senator thomas.
By vote of twenty three the
affirmative eighteen and
negative telstra industry
committee substitute for
hospital one twenty nine is
three times amended has passed
the senate center in my cution
to explain his vote thank you
president in and you know
i'm gonna take some stories
really quickly explaining my
voter and only have one or two
minutes but the girl that died
at the gave a gift for shooting
not going to change when people
want access to gun they're going
to get access to gun as quickly
and easily as they can get if I
wanted to go by one tonight i'd
would track me for that and that
would not change sometimes
common sense should be there but
it's not there anymore sometimes
children should be spanked and
wept and learned a respect
but the way the comments were to
the good center that was
debating the gun bill I I
completely disagree with that is
not right that's not the place
that we're here this is not
where we're going to go in this
you a senator for carrying this
bill I partially agree with
senator moonels that this isn't
really going to have much of an
impact and the number of guns
great idea why doesn't more
countries have this.
Americans own four is senator
sure said americans on forty six
by americans
but what senator shere forgot to
tell you.
Is that yeah we have we don't
countries which includes have
you canada parts of south
america all of europe australia
new zealand japan south america
In all the the high number again
so we have certainly doesn't
make a safer united states ranks
first.
For the rates of firearm
homicides among modern
fact it makes us less safe I can
show you studies that households
with guns are more likely to be
shot or killed and households
without guns that's why I myers
to get shot think about it
somebody comes into your house.
They know they know you don't
have a gun so they're less
that's three minutes has a
better chance of getting shocked
themselves and if they do that
as that's a good three minutes
up already yes there's the
fastest three minutes in my life
business thank you again senator
savantos even though this worth
take us that next order business
thank you mister president I was
that we go there our business
messages from the house.
informed the senate that they do
that the duly enrolled and
engrossed copy of house bill one
forty at one as amended has been
mechanic chief clerk house of
representatives the journal show
that the message of the house
has been received.
two house bill one o two as
amended by the house house
judiciary committee substitute
for a house bill three sixteen
and request the concurrence of
the senate respectfully
mr president I am directed to
informed the senate that the
house has passed house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for a house
house bill two seventy one as
amended by the house and request
the concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted lisa in
or tease mecution chief clerk.
order business I think you miss
present you know mister said we
go that are business committee
reports and no objection where
in that order business committee
reports.
Mister president you're
same has been duly enrolled and
in grossed prepared preparation
a two at signing by the offers
officers of the senate
adoption of the committee report
because we have a motion to
adopt community report all those
Send a majority floridator peter
worth takes a next order of
business thank you mister
president in amazon we go on our
business introduction of
legislation there in no
objection
The reader to read.
Senate memorial fifteen
introduced by senator pidea
woods ways to facilitate and
streamline the development of
broadband to all residents of
new mexico senate memorial
senate memorial sixteen
introduced by senator pento
a memorial requesting the
senate memorial sixteen at
memorial sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate health public affairs
introduced by representative
chandler
and actory at leading it to
court of appeals repealing
sections thirty five thirteen
two thirty five at thirteen
three
nineteen seventy five chapter
two forty two section ten laws
nineteen sixty eight ch after
sixty two section one fifty one
and las eighteen sixty five
twice by title is ordered is
referred to the senate judiciary
committee that's house bill one
zero two.
The.
Introduced by rapid residential
senior
requirements for child care
programs or facilities licensed
or certified by the united
states department of defense or
united states coast guard
msa nineteen seventy eight to
add space force to the
definition of armed forces and
uniforms services that involve
referred to the senate health
and public affairs committee
that's house bill three o two.
House bill three sixteen
representative introduced by
representative rim
arm or destructive device to
five years in prisonment adding
a new crime of felon in
possession of a fire arm or
destructive device for a second
or destructive device to nine
years imprisonment
house bill three sixteen.
As bill three sixteen haven't
president you know is consent we
go that a business announcements
and miscellaneous.
Seen the objection on that order
business senator worth I thank
you mister ideal to senator
barca on announcements and
if you'll remember that.
Tomorrow was born in rural so
township louisiana on february
personality dry with and became
a master occasion colonary arts
and official auto of music
especially for guitar which he
played with style and also
tons polymath brilliant showed
as he completed a masters and
electrical engineering in power
from university of colorado and
mba finance from the university
a long a lifelong focus in that.
He began this career and
distribution engineering and
something I did in holding your
near dear to my heart with the
he was elected in nineteen
ninety three in the new mexico
states and it did what was the
district twenty one and was the
energy expert of that body he
was author of the country's
something that I practiced in in
trading energy into california
another independent service
operators he survived by his
wife's stephanie ray his son
tailor
Please join me in a moment of
silence for senator regular
senator barca we can please
stand
for a moment of silence.
Center stephanie
mr president arm thank you
senator
reserved an eye introduced the
first retail wheeling bill in
our state legislature that was
not understood or accepted and
even though we introduced it he
Thank you senator stevenix
senator senator shindow.
third reading of legislation
ideally senator gonzalez for
senate bill one sixty five here
in the objection where that
order business direct reading
legislation similar comes on us
passage has been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendments or substitution.
percent to
the legislation that was though
i've done last year and with
that i'll stay for a question
thank you senator debating
senate bill one sixty five
do now pass and I ask unanimous
concern of the service that the
record shows that the rule has
been called and that all those
The.
Send their poll voting now.
Send us to the alop is very now.
negative senate bill one sixty
five has passed the senate
senator
dollars
thank you mister president thank
you members and majority florida
to peter worth takes that next
order business thank you mister
announcements about tomorrow we
will be coming in at one o'clock
on the floor again I don't
envision
very long floor session we are
things on the table once we get
through that thank you senator
where it said you shandow thank
you mister president you're
senator express the
transportation committee will
thank you center schedule sender
thank you mister president the
senate rules committee will be
meeting at eleven thirty
tomorrow in room three twenty
memorial fourteen from the rules
committee the title is oil and
gas facilities set back study.
There's been a senator doing can
you please apologize I was on
the phone can you please restate
that sure mister president I ask
unanimous consent to release
senate memorial fourteen oil and
Sort of.
Thank you mister president
center thank you mister
president said in finance will
eleven like you did last weekend
but the red lights are on in the
ropes they had them priest had
him corner and they were smoke
coming out that room I know it's
going to be
Center bargain
is invited
the mispresent we've had a long
week here everybody is a little
to recognize our staff
legislative legislative council
service legislative finance
committee legislative education
study committee let us slate a
the sergeant arms and all the
attendance the committee
analysts and committee
attendance as well telephone
operators members secretaries up
room staff and of course is
always lorian standards events
who helpless keep it rolling and
of course we want to thank you
mister president what a great
job you've done all weekend
minority and we appreciate it
very much as does the other side
i'm sure thank you thank you
cleaner by unanimous consent to
expand the committee report on
senate bill two thirty when it
was read in ah the additional
referral to judiciary committee
thirty centers there's a
unanimous consent request seen
no objection so ordered senate
majority florida to peter worth
thank you mister president we go
that our business committee
has been referred senate bill
two thirty has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
senator tesa pino.
I move the adoption of the
committee resented as we have a
motion to that the committee
mister president in amazon we go
there business announcements and
misleading objection where in
that order of business announces
mistaken is senator worth I
thank you mister president just
one final announcement for
coordinate with the other sides
of just keep an eye out on that
are with that mister president
just thanks to the body for two
two long days and with that
